

22 jobs switch as Tory pack is reshuffled
Major rewards backbenchers overlooked in Thatcher years
By GEORGE JONES
MR MAJOR took full advantage last night of his election mandate to carry out the most extensive Government reshuffle since the Conservatives came to power 13 years ago.
But his efforts to bring more women into his administration suffered an unexpected setback when Mrs Edwina Currie, who resigned over the salmonella-in-eggs controversy in 1988, turned down a senior position at the Home Office.
Mrs Currie, an ardent self-publicist, had been keen to return to ministerial office.
Her decision to decline the Home Office job — which was promotion from her previous junior role at the Health Department — surprised her colleagues at Westminster.
It was seen by MPs as spelling the end of any career in government.
In a significant break with his predecessor, Mr Major offered junior and middle-ranking ministerial posts to several senior backbenchers who had been overlooked by Mrs Thatcher or had been kept out of her government.
Officials said the Prime Minister wanted to ‘unlock talent from all parts of the party’ in completing the reshaping of his administration.
One of the most colourful Tory backbenchers, Mr Nicholas Soames, MP for Crawley and a grandson of Winston Churchill, becomes a junior minister at the Ministry of Agriculture.
His father, the late Lord (Christopher) Soames, was a former Agriculture Minister and the last Governor of Rhodesia.
Mr Michael Mates, MP for East Hampshire, who led an unsuccessful attempt to relate the poll tax to ability to pay and was Mr Michael Heseltine's campaign manager during the leadership struggle, becomes Minister of State for Northern Ireland.
Mr Mates, a former Lieut Col in the Queen's Dragoon Guards, was chairman of the Commons Select Committee on Defence and has been an MP for nearly 18 years.
Mr Jonathan Aitken, MP for Thanet South and a leading Euro-sceptic, becomes a Minister of State for Defence.
After 16 years on the backbenches, Mr Nigel Forman, MP for Carshalton and Wallington, becomes Under-Secretary at the Department of Education and Science.
Mr Forman served as Parliamentary Private Secretary to the former Chancellor, Mr Nigel Lawson, but has gained a reputation as a critic of Mrs Thatcher's style of government.
All told, 22 ministers — about a quarter of the Government — have been replaced, either as a result of their own decision to stand down, losing their seats in Thursday's general election or being asked by Mr Major to relinquish their posts.
Three ministers announced that they were leaving the Government at their own request: Lord Belstead (Ulster); Mr Tim Renton (Arts Minister); and Mr Alan Howarth (Education).
There is a considerable shake-up at the Northern Ireland Office, where Sir Patrick Mayhew has already taken over from Mr Peter Brooke as Secretary of State.
Two long-serving ministers, Dr Brian Mawhinney, who has been there since 1986, and Mr Richard Needham, since 1985, both return to senior posts in mainland ministries.
Dr Mawhinney becomes Health Minister while Mr Needham becomes a minister at the Department of Trade and Industry.
The new Northern Ireland Ministers are Mr Mates and Mr Robert Atkins, the former Sports Minister.
The Treasury, where two ministers were election casualties, receives an infusion of new blood.
The appointment last week of the Thatcherite Mr Michael Portillo as Treasury Secretary has been balanced by Mr Stephen Dorrell, a prominent ‘wet’, switching from Health to become Financial Secretary.
Mr Anthony Nelson (Chichester), a former merchant banker, also ends his exile on the backbenches by becoming Economic Secretary at the Treasury.
The Treasury team is completed with the appointment of Sir John Cope as Paymaster General.
Sir John is succeeded as deputy chairman of the Conservative Party by Mrs Angela Rumbold, who leaves the Home Office and becomes a Dame.
Mr Heseltine, who has achieved his ambition of heading an enlarged Department of Trade and Industry, has been given as a junior minister Mr Neil Hamilton (Tatton), a Right-winger who is regarded as a keeper of the Thatcherite flame.
The Right will clearly expect Mr Hamilton to keep in check some of Mr Heseltine's more interventionist policies.
The former ‘dry’ emphasis of the DTI has been considerably diluted with the appointment as Ministers of State of Mr Needham, a leading ‘wet’, and Mr Tim Eggar, formerly at Education.
There is promotion for three women in the Lords.
The former racing driver and industrialist Lady Denton — who entered the Lords last year — becomes a junior minister at the Department of Trade and Industry; Lady Blatch moves from Environment to Minister of State for Education; and Baroness Cumberlege becomes a junior minister at Health.
All told, 10 backbenchers were brought into the Government, including Mr Alistair Burt (Bury North) who becomes junior minister at Social Security; Mr Steve Norris (Epping Forest), Parliamentary Private Secretary to the former Home Secretary, Mr Kenneth Baker, becomes Under-Secretary at the Transport Department; and Mr Gwylim Jones (Cardiff North) becomes Welsh Under-Secretary.
Mr Charles Wardle (Bexhill and Battle) becomes a junior Home Office minister while Mr Robin Squire (Hornchurch), who was PPS to the defeated Tory Party chairman, Mr Patten, becomes a junior environment minister.
The quickest entry to Government is by Mr Derek Spencer, QC, who was elected MP for Brighton Pavilion on Thursday.
He becomes Solicitor General.
At the Scottish Office, the veteran MP for Dumfries and former minister, Sir Hector Monro, returns as Under-Secretary.
Lord Fraser of Carmyllie switches from the post of Lord Advocate to become No 2 in the Scottish Office, replacing Mr Michael Forsyth, the Right-wing anti-devolutionist MP for Stirling, who becomes Minister of State for Employment.
At the new Department of National Heritage, dubbed the ‘Ministry of Fun’ because it includes responsibilities for sport and the arts, Mr Robert Key becomes Parliamentary Under-Secretary.
The Secretary of State is Mr David Mellor.
Patten ‘offered Hong Kong job’
By Philip Johnston Political Correspondent
MR CHRIS Patten, the Conservative Party chairman whose defeat in Bath last week marred the Prime Minister's election triumph, is considering an offer of the governorship of Hong Kong.
Whitehall insiders confirmed last night that the option to oversee the hand-over of the colony to China in 1997 was open to Mr Patten if he chose to exercise it.
Mr Patten is considering his future after rejecting any question of a by-election being created to return him to Westminster forthwith; he has also so far declined a move to the House of Lords.
But Mr Patten — who would earn a tax-free salary of £140,000 — would be expected to remain in office until the handover in 1997, taking him out of mainstream politics for five years.
Sanctions sever Libyan air links
By Michael Smith and Barbara Smit
COMMERCIAL air links with Libya are to be severed today as United Nations sanctions against Col Gaddafi's refusal to hand over two men suspected of involvement in the Lockerbie bombing come into force.
The offices of Libyan Arab Airlines will be shut, the country's diplomatic missions around the world will be ‘significantly reduced’ and there will be an embargo on the sale of military equipment to the Tripoli regime.
The International Court of Justice in The Hague yesterday rejected Col Gaddafi's request for an injunction to prevent Britain, the United States and France from putting pressure on Libya to hand over the two suspects.
Earlier, all three countries dismissed an offer to hand over the two men to Malta.
Abdel Basset Mohammad al-Megrahi and Al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah are accused of planting the bomb that blew up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie in December 1988, killing 270 people.
Libya barricaded itself off from the outside world yesterday to ‘mourn’ the sixth anniversary of the American air raids on Tripoli and Benghazi, mounted in retaliation for alleged Libyan involvement in the bombing of a Berlin night club in which two American soldiers died.
Mr Edward Fenech Adami, the Maltese Prime Minister, said his country was willing to accept the Lockerbie suspects.
However, investigators believe the men placed the bomb on a plane at Valletta's Luqa airport, giving the Maltese authorities an obvious interest in seeing Libya absolved of blame.
Mr Shigeru Oda, the International Court of Justice's Japanese vice-president, said it had decided by 11 votes to five that it was not competent to issue an injunction to protect Libya from British and American measures.
Britain, the US and France warned Iraq yesterday of ‘serious consequences’ if it did not remove anti-aircraft missiles threatening UN aircraft searching for nuclear and chemical weapons.
Explosives found after two arrests
By Neil Darbyshire, Crime Correspondent
A CACHE of suspected IRA arms and explosives was uncovered in London yesterday less than 24 hours after the arrest of a man and a woman suspected of involvement in terrorism.
Anti-terrorist detectives were unwilling to discuss the exact location and size of the haul but it is understood to have been found in a lock-up garage ‘within a few miles’ of Northolt, north-west London, where the arrests were made.
The couple, arrested after a lengthy intelligence operation, are being held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
They are being questioned about recent bomb attacks in mainland Britain.
Neighbours of the middle-aged couple, whom they knew as Audrey and Jimmy, said yesterday that they were held by about 20 armed officers in plain clothes at their home in Islip Gardens, Northolt, on Monday night.
They were made to don white overalls and had plastic bags placed over their hands to preserve any relevant scientific evidence, before being taken in separate cars to Paddington Green police station.
They can be held for 48 hours without charge under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and for a further five days at the discretion of the Home Secretary.
One female neighbour described the couple as ‘quiet and ordinary’.
She said the woman had lived in the house for about nine years and the man for about two.
Describing the arrest, she said: ‘We got up and looked out of the window, and saw police were gathering by the minute — loads of them with rifles and guns — and we got quite frightened.
‘My husband came out to see what was wrong, and a very authoritative voice shouted: ‘Get back inside, please, immediately; right inside and close the door’.’
A 46-year-old married man was shot dead early today as he drove up to his home in Grahamsbridge Road, Dundonald, on the edge of Protestant east Belfast.
Edwina Currie says no to job offer by Major
By Philip Johnston Political Correspondent
EDWINA CURRIE turned down the offer of a job in Mr Major's Government yesterday, saying that someone else could do the job far better than she could.
After visiting No 10, the outspoken MP for Derbyshire South and former junior health minister, said: ‘The Prime Minister and I had a long and friendly discussion, and I was very honoured to be asked to join his Government.
However, I felt that someone else could do the job far better than I, so I have declined.’
Her decision to reject an offer of a senior ministerial post in the Home Office will confirm the prejudices of those who regard her unpredictability and wilfulness as more than a match for her flair for promoting ideas.
Mrs Currie, 45, resigned from the Department of Health in December 1988 after the salmonella-in-eggs row.
At the culmination of what became known as the ‘Eggwina’ crisis, she infuriated egg producers by claiming that most British egg production was infected by salmonella.
It is understood that Mr Major wanted her to be prisons minister, and there was speculation last night that she might have been reluctant to be back in harness with Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Home Secretary, who was her boss at the Health Department during the eggs affair.
Ever since she brandished a pair of handcuffs during a debate on law and order at the Conservative Party conference in 1981, Mrs Currie has demonstrated an irrepressible ability to draw attention to herself.
She criticised Mr Major's election soap-box as ‘naff’ during the recent campaign, but the Prime Minister was prepared to overlook that and countenance her rehabilitation.
Her detractors, of whom there are many, gave warning of the dangers involved in bringing her back, and will feel vindicated by the rebuff Mr Major has suffered.
Mrs Currie was the only Government representative when Aids first became an issue to go on television and demonstrate — with her hands — the way to put on a condom.
Gould and Smith split over tax
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
A THREE-MONTH campaign for the Labour leadership got under way last night when both Mr John Smith and Mr Bryan Gould formally declared their candidacy and a compromise was reached over the timing of the election.
The contest will be held on Saturday July 18 — three weeks after the date favoured by Mr Kinnock, who will remain in the post until his successor is chosen.
The opening shots of the campaign were fired when Mr Gould — who is also standing for the deputy leadership along with Mr John Prescott, transport spokesman — implicitly criticised the tax policies which formed the centrepiece of his adversary's pre-election shadow Budget.
Mr Smith's plans to increase the top rate of tax to 50 per cent and abolish the ceiling on National Insurance contributions are increasingly being seen by Labour MPs as a major contribution to the party's fourth consecutive defeat.
Their disproportionate impact on voters in the South was acknowledged by Mr Gould, who is MP for Dagenham.
He said he was not out to attribute blame or indulge in recriminations for last week's ‘grievous defeat’, but added: ‘I think it fair to say that our tax proposals show perhaps less than total sensitivity to some of the interests of the voters in the South of England in particular, whose support we need.
‘If we find ourselves, as we did, unable to campaign, to argue, to debate on the great issues of economic policy, we are left with a very narrow terrain on which to fight economic issues.
‘That terrain was tax, and I believe it was not the best territory for us to choose.’
Mr Smith, who is generally regarded as the clear favourite for the leadership, suggested that the ‘misrepresentation’ of Labour's tax policy might well have caused some people not to support it.
‘I have in mind the fact that it was not seriously disputed, at any stage during the election, that eight out of 10 families would gain as a result of Labour's tax and spending proposals; and yet a number of people who would undoubtedly be beneficiaries of what we were proposing appear not to have recognised that.’
A further point of issue between Mr Gould and Mr Smith is the European exchange rate mechanism.
While Mr Gould said membership of the ERM was ‘not in play’, he nevertheless believed the rate at which sterling was taken in was indefensible and gave little room to develop a coherent economic strategy.
During the election campaign Mr Smith made defending the parity of the pound within the ERM the cornerstone of his attempts to convince the City of Labour's anti-inflationary convictions.
Labour's National Executive Committee agreed last night that the leadership contest should take place at a special conference on July 18.
Mr Kinnock's preference for his successor to be in place by the end of June proved impossible to meet, as the party's rules decree that there must be at least 12 weeks in which to consult the three groups that make up the electoral college — MPs, constituency activists and the unions.
Vandals loot blacked-out town's shops
By Ben Fenton
VANDALS looted shops in the centre of Walsall after arsonists attacked an electricity sub-station and left 30,000 homes in the West Midlands town without power, police said yesterday.
More than 20 shops were looted, some by hooligans who threw stones and bricks through windows.
At two stores, cars were used unsuccessfully as battering rams to breach security shutters.
The black-out happened on Monday night when vandals crawled down a 100-yard tunnel which carried eight 33,000-volt mains cables, dragging a lorry tyre which they then set on fire.
But police do not think the arson attack was a deliberate attempt to put out lights in the town so that the looting could take place.
Insp Michael Tinsley said: ‘A criminal minority seized their opportunity when the lights went out.’
A Midlands Electricity Board spokesman said power supplies would be affected until tomorrow.
Ulster post for poll tax rebel Mates
By Alan Osborn, Political Staff
MR MICHAEL MATES, 57, appointed Minister of State Northern Ireland Office, is a close associate of Mr Heseltine and managed his attempt to win the Tory leadership election in 1990.
He proposed an amendment to the poll tax to take account of ability to pay and split the Conservative Party in 1988.
As a result, he was dropped as secretary and member of the executive of the 1922 Committee and lost his seat on the Conservative Home Affairs Committee.
Thatcher loyalists in his East Hampshire constituency attempted to have him deselected as MP because of his support for Mr Heseltine in the leadership contest.
In 1990, he was accused of a conflict of interests between his role as chairman of the Commons Defence Committee and his business ventures.
The Select Committee on Members' Interests found he was in ‘clear breach of the terms and the spirit’ of the rules on declaration of interests for failing to tell other committee members of his links with a company making flight simulators.
From 1974–81 he was secretary and vice-chairman of the Conservative Northern Ireland Committee.
He has been chairman of the all-party Anglo-Irish Group since 1979.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, 40, former junior Health Minister, who becomes Financial Secretary to the Treasury, can be classed as a ‘one-nation’ Tory in the mould of Mr Peter Walker, placing him at odds with the Conservative government of the day on tighter immigration rules, restrictions on unemployment benefits, early membership of the European Monetary System and monetarism.
He has a record of consistent and fierce opposition to racialism, the death penalty and, in 1981, the Government's ‘economically divisive’ policy.
He is part-owner of a Tiger Moth.
Mr Jonathan Aitken, 49, one of the Government's most troublesome backbenchers throughout the Thatcher years, when he spoke against the poll tax, official secrecy, newspaper monopolies, the Channel Tunnel and City frauds, becomes Minister of State Defence.
He has been one of the inspirations behind the anti-EC Conservative European Reform Group.
Mr Nicholas Soames, 44, appointed Parliamentary Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheriers and Food, is the embodiment of good lunching and banter with friend and foe alike in the Commons.
He is a grandson of Sir Winston Churchill and has served as Parliamentary Private Secretary to Mr Nicholas Ridley and Mr John Gummer.
He voted for Mr Heseltine rather than Mrs Thatcher in the 1990 leadership contest.
He was a critic of last year's infantry cuts.
Mr Anthony Nelson, 43, the new Treasury Economic Secretary, is a graduate of the Bow Group and has a merchant banking background.
He was an early enthusiast for British membership of the European Monetary System and was on the council of the Howard League for Penal Reform from 1977 to 1983.
Mr Derek Spencer, QC, 56, a Crown Court recorder, appointed Solicitor-General, is also knighted.
He was MP for Leicester South in 1983, majority seven, lost his seat in 1987 and was returned as MP for Brighton Pavilion last Thursday.
He was educated at Clitheroe Royal Grammar School and Oxford University and was a barrister in the chambers of the late Lord Havers in the 1960s.
During his first period as an MP, he was Parliamentary Private Secretary to Mr David Mellor, now Minister for National Heritage.
Mr John Redwood, 40, who moves from Trade and Industry to become Minister of State Environment, is a member of the No Turning Back Group, dedicated to the pursuit of Mrs Thatcher's policies.
He is the author of numerous books and pamphlets on capitalism, industry and the enterprise culture.
Mr Steve Norris, 46, a self-made millionaire representing the wealthy Essex constituency of Epping Forest, who went to school with two of the Beatles, becomes Parliamentary Under Secretary Transport.
He opposed the Government over the Official Secrets Act in 1989 and has consistently backed the cause of freedom of information.
Mr Robin Squire, 47, Parliamentary Under Secretary Environment, favours increasing child benefit, proportional representation and stricter road safety.
He has opposed the poll tax in its original form, discrimination against homosexuals and capital punishment.
He was Parliamentary Private Secretary to Mr Chris Patten, party chairman, and is a chartered accountant who has been a radio presenter.
Vandals loot blacked-out town's shops
Vandals looted shops in the centre of Walsall after arsonists attacked an electricity sub-station and left 30,000 homes in the West Midlands town without power, police said yesterday.
More than 20 shops were looted, some by hooligans who threw stones and bricks through windows.
At two stores, cars were used unsuccessfully as battering rams to breach security shutters.
The black-out happened on Monday night when vandals crawled down a 100-yard tunnel which carried eight 33,000-volt mains cables, dragging a lorry tyre which they then set on fire.
£108,000 for loss of mother killed by lorry
The family of a woman crushed by a lorry on a pedestrian crossing was awarded £108,749 damages at the High Court in London yesterday.
Mrs Saramma Sherratt, 38, died after the accident in St Albans Road, Watford, Herts, in 1988, but her baby daughter Susan, who was in a pushchair, was unharmed.
Her husband John, now 41, of Hatfield Road, Watford, gave up his sales career to look after Susan and her sister Sharon, now eight.
Judgment, with costs, was given against Mr Roy Cook, the driver, of Borehamwood, and Goodyear Great Britain, of Wolverhampton.
Both denied negligence.
Six years' jail for toothpaste blackmailer
Two men calling themselves Laurel and Hardy threatened to poison tubes of toothpaste unless Colgate handed over £170,000, the Old Bailey was told yesterday.
But the company and police trapped Portuguese-born Antonio Quintas, 37, a waiter, of Victoria Road, Portslade, East Sussex, who admitted blackmail and was jailed for six years.
Quintas told police he was recruited by a man in Brighton who has not been traced.
Third man guilty of prison riot
A third inmate of Strangeways Prison, Manchester, was yesterday found guilty of taking part in Britain's worst jail riot.
Sydney Doran, 25, was serving a sentence for robbery and theft at the time of the disturbance two years ago.
The jury at Manchester Crown Court has yet to reach verdicts on two other inmates.
National Trust shops face Sunday trading ban
By Robert Bedlow
THE NATIONAL Trust is being taken to the High Court in a test case that could halt all Sunday trading at its souvenir and garden centres.
An injunction from Broadland District Council, Norfolk, if successful, would mean the closure of more than 160 outlets and the loss of more than £3 million profit to the heritage charity.
The local authority has issued a writ after receiving complaints about the shops at 17th century Blickling Hall, Norfolk.
‘We must act on the complaints,’ said a spokesman for the council.
‘Of course we have sympathy, but the Sunday trading laws are still in force and we have to take action.
The law is the law.
‘The Trust is one of 16 businesses in the area, including supermarkets, which have been reported for trading illegally.’
Sunday trading laws allow fancy goods to be sold in souvenir shops, but the complaint against the Trust at Blickling is about the sale of clothing and plant holders.
Mr Paul Dickson, regional public affairs manager for the Trust said hundreds of people visited the hall's plant centre and shop each Sunday.
Peak Sunday income was around £5,000 at the plant centre and up to £3,000 at the shop.
‘We are mounting a defence.
The key thing from our point of view is that our trading activities are providing a service to visitors and all the profit is ploughed straight back into conservating the property,’ he said.
‘If the injunction did go through it would have serious consequences for the National Trust nationally.
‘It is interesting that a major conservation charity like the Trust has been served with a writ now, when we have been doing this for 30 years at Blickling,’ he added.
The council said its previous attempts to stop Sunday trading at a variety of businesses had been unsuccessful and the Trust would be allowed to trade until the High Court hearing which could be ‘months away.’
Police codes file seized in raid
Files containing details of police call signs and radio frequencies were recovered from a flat in Hounslow, west London, as police yesterday launched the latest phase of their continuing crackdown on burglary in the capital.
A further 57 people were detained bringing the number interviewed to more than 1,000 since Operation Bumblebee began in January.
Sergeant's murderers ‘not human’
The Irish National Liberation Army is interested more in violence itself than in nationalist aims
By David Graves
THE GIRLFRIEND of the Army recruiting sergeant shot in the head at point-blank range shortly after leaving work in the centre of Derby said last night that his murderers were ‘not human beings’ and his death would not help the Irish republican cause.
Fighting back tears, Ms Elizabeth Broadhurst, 28, who had lived with Sgt Michael Newman, 34, of the Royal Signals, for five years, said she felt ‘very angry’ about his killers and wanted them caught.
She appeared at a police press conference in Derby with the sergeant's mother, Mrs Joyce Newman, 58, after the Irish National Liberation Army admitted responsibility for the murder.
Last night the INLA gave a warning in a statement that it was ready to mount further attacks.
‘While the British continue to occupy our country and pursue a policy of repression, we reserve the right to attack those who actively participate in the British war machine.’
It said Sgt Newman, as an Army recruiting officer, had a vital role to play ‘in the British war machine’.
The murder by the INLA, whose last terrorist attack on the British mainland was in 1985, marked a serious new addition to the terror campaign by the IRA.
In its most spectacular mainland attack, the INLA killed the Conservative politician Mr Airey Neave in a car bombing at the Houses of Parliament in 1979.
Sgt Newman's father, Eric, 58, suffered a mild angina attack after being told of the shooting, and was being cared for by a neighbour last night.
Sgt Newman was gunned down by a man wearing a baseball cap as he walked to his car after leaving the Army careers office in Derby to which he had moved only 12 days ago to be nearer his home.
He died in Derbyshire Royal Infirmary at 10am yesterday, 17 hours after the shooting.
The murder of Sgt Newman also bore a striking similarity to the shooting 25 miles away of Pte Robert Davies, 19, the Army recruit killed at Lichfield City railway station in June 1990.
He was also shot in the head by a gunman wearing a baseball cap.
Sgt Newman, who was separated from his wife, Mrs Dawn Newman, had an eight-year-old daughter, Danielle.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the new Northern Ireland Secretary, said in Belfast yesterday that people in Britain would have to face terrorist attacks with the same resilience, stoicism and bravery shown by the people of Northern Ireland for more than 20 years.
Even within the ruthless world of Irish republican terrorism, INLA members are regarded as ‘crazies’, with more interest in violence for its own sake than in nationalist aims.
Formed in 1975 by disaffected members of the Official IRA, the INLA styled itself as a revolutionary socialist party and developed links with European anarchists, including the German Red Army Factions, the Italian Red Brigades and the French Action Directe.
The Provisional IRA has shunned such groups, believing them to be ‘trendy’ revolutionaries.
Among its leaders were Dessie O'Hare and Dominic McGlinchey, both now serving long prison sentences.
By 1987 the INLA was thought to have destroyed itself, but some of the fragments joined disillusioned Provisionals to form the Irish People's Liberation Organisation.
Aberdour back in court after conman claims she hid £½m
By John Steele, Courts Correspondent
BOGUS aristocrat Rosemary Aberdour was back at the Old Bailey yesterday in danger of having her sentence for stealing £2.7 million from a hospital charity increased.
Aberdour, 30, was jailed last month for four years for swindling the National Hospital Development Foundation.
A central plank of her mitigation, after she admitted 17 charges of theft and deception, had been that every penny had been spent.
But a confidence trickster, who is being investigated by Scotland Yard, is believed to have claimed that she had hidden £500,000 abroad.
The court heard that the allegations were made by an international conman called Barry Edward Gray, who operated under aliases and specialised in ‘stings’ in Britain and abroad.
Gray, in his late 50s, numbers the CIA, the FBI, major British companies, newspapers and television among his victims.
Though he lives on the French-Italian border, most of his frauds are perpetrated from Amsterdam.
Mr Brendan Finucane, who prosecuted in the Aberdour trial, told the hearing that Gray posed as a Mr Edouards and contacted the foundation, based at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery in Bloomsbury, London, where Aberdour was deputy director.
He claimed she had salted money away in Brazil, where she fled briefly before returning to be arrested, using Liberian companies and bank accounts in Monaco and Luxemburg.
It was also claimed she had sent to Brazil jewellery she said was lost.
The foundation's director, Mr Paul Meyer, went to Antwerp to meet Edouards, who asked for about £250.
Later an affadavit was presented to the High Court in London supporting an application by the foundation for injunctions freezing all Aberdour's assets to be extended to any overseas holdings.
The High Court judge alerted Mr Justice Leonard, who presided at her trial.
Aberdour was brought to the court from Holloway prison yesterday to hear Mr Finucane say she ‘was telling the truth and Mr Gray's allegations were entirely bogus’.
Mr Justice Leonard said he was satisfied the allegations were ‘a nonsense’.
But he added that they could have had serious consequences for her if they had been true.
South London-born Gray — known more commonly in one of his favourite hunting grounds, Fleet Street, as Joe Flynn — was jailed in Britain in 1979 for deceiving the FBI and the CIA with information about a Russian agent.
His most spectacular fraud, in 1976, was reportedly tricking a US paper out of £25,000 for a pair of shoes he claimed belonged to the murdered head of the Teamsters union, Jimmy Hoffa.
They did not.
He duped The Sunday Times into believing the Australian tycoon Alan Bond had spied on his rival Robert Holmes a Court and a senior director of Lonrho.
An example of his speciality of playing companies involved in take-over battles against each other was his false claims to Guinness and Argyll, bidding in 1986 for Distillers, that each was bugging the other's executives.
Last year the American author Seymour Hersh, who in a book accused Daily Mirror journalists of acting as Israeli spies, admitted he had received information from Flynn.
Hammer ‘maniac’ lures man to death
By Michael Fleet
THE business dealings of a £40,000-a-year financial consultant, who was lured to a bogus appointment in a wealthy Home Counties village before being battered to death with a claw hammer, were being studied by police yesterday.
Mr Paul Newman, 36, was beaten around the head with the hammer and left to die in a country lane in Eggington, near Leighton Buzzard, Beds, having gone there to discuss pension plans with a ‘prospective client’.
Villagers yesterday expressed their horror at the murder.
One of them, Mr Bob Monkhouse, the entertainer, said: ‘Nothing ever happens here and we never see the police unless our burglar alarm goes off unexpectedly.’
Mr Newman died on the night of the general election, but police released full details only yesterday after they identified him from dental records.
‘In 23 years as a police officer I have never seen such horrific injuries,’ said Det Supt Bill King.
It was a ‘maniacal’ beating around the head with a claw hammer.
He revealed that Mr Newman, an executive with Sun Life Assurance in Dunstable, had gone to the village after receiving a telephone appointment three days before his death to discuss pension plans with a ‘Mr John Haydon’ at an address in Charity Lane, Eggington.
‘He was suspicious of the call and drove to the village on Wednesday to see if the house existed.
He found it and obviously felt at ease enough to go ahead with the appointment,’ said Mr King.
The following night Mr Newman went to the address, but was ambushed as he left his car and attacked so violently that half his face was battered beyond recognition.
Police said the name John Haydon was fictitious, but the address was genuine.
A couple who live at the house have been interviewed and eliminated, said Mr King.
Mr Newman's body was discovered by his girlfriend, Miss Helen Thomas, who had been concerned when he did not return from the appointment and had driven to Eggington to look for him.
Mr Newman, of Emu Close, Heath and Reach, Beds, had set up home with Miss Thomas a month ago.
Police have already interviewed his wife, Jacqueline.
Body-in-lake killer's flatmate found murdered
A man whose name was linked to the killer of a police informer was found murdered at his home in Chapel Street, Stroud, Glos, early yesterday.
Mr Brian Hawkins, 26, was a friend and former flatmate of Danny Gardiner, a drug dealer sentenced to life in prison two weeks ago for the murder of Alan ‘Chalkey’ White whose body was found in a lake in Gloucestershire.
Mr White was killed after he revealed details of armed robberies to police.
Mr Hawkins's name arose during evidence in the trial, but yesterday friends insisted he had no connection with drugs.
Helmsley jail term confirmed
By Our New York Staff
Mrs Leona Helmsley, 71, the hotel entrepreneur known as Queen Meanie, is to be jailed today, the deadline for Americans to file their tax returns, after a judge refused to set aside her four-year sentence for tax evasion.
Her lawyers had asked for the sentence to be dropped in favour of community service because her health is failing.
Three children killed in fire
Two sisters and their brother died in their beds early yesterday as fire swept through their home in Forest Gate, east London.
One fireman was severely burned in a rescue attempt.
The bodies of Neesha Patel, nine, and her brother, Pritesh, seven, were found together in the back bedroom and their sister Neha, eight months, in a cot in her parents' room.
Mr Gobind Patel and his wife Nanbai escaped.
BT unions fear 80,000 more jobs may be lost
By Our Business Editor
British Telecom is planning more job cuts that could lead to the loss of 80,000 staff over five years, unions fear.
The company has dropped strong hints to union leaders that the current programme involving cuts of 24,000 over the next year will be followed by a further rundown, although at a lower rate.
But the National Communications Union believes BT will be forced to introduce compulsory redundancies for the first time this year because it will be unable to find enough volunteers.
BT believes it still has some way to go before it can match the performance of American telecommunications companies and is also anxious to stay ahead of European public sector rivals.
New Speaker likely to come from Conservative ranks
By GEORGE JONES
AS MPS began returning to Westminster yesterday, a behind-the-scenes battle over the new Speaker was already well under way, writes George Jones, Political Editor.
While Mr Major has signalled that he wants to leave the choice up to backbenchers, he is understood to favour the new Speaker coming from the Tory ranks, dashing Labour hopes that they might be able to nominate the next occupant of the Speaker's chair.
Although in recent Parliaments, Labour and Conservative Speakers have alternated, there is a much longer tradition that a new Speaker is chosen by the majority party.
The retiring Speaker, Bernard Weatherill, was a Tory MP.
So may be his successor who, custom dictates, should be dragged unwillingly to the Speaker's chair when Parliament resumes on April 27.
There are three leading Tory contenders.
The widely tipped favourite is Mr Peter Brooke, who stood down as Northern Ireland Secretary in the post-election Cabinet reshuffle.
He is well respected and popular, as was shown when Mr Major and the Commons voiced their confidence in him earlier this year when he apologised for singing on Irish TV hours after an IRA atrocity.
The Conservative establishment at Westminster — the 1922 Committee — is promoting Sir Giles Shaw, MP for Pudsey and a former Industry Minister.
He has strong support from Yorkshire Tories and is understood to have the backing of Mr Cranley Onslow, the committee's chairman.
The outsider is Mr Terence Higgins, MP for Worthing and chairman of the Commons Select Committee on the Treasury and Civil Service.
Although Mr Higgins was a Treasury Minister in the Heath Government in the 1970s, he is now one of the most experienced and active Conservative backbenchers.
He was also a leading member of Mr Major's successful campaign team for the Tory leadership 16 months ago.
While he is not a charismatic figure, his supporters say he would prove a worthy defender of the rights of backbenchers against increasing government power.
Labour's two front runners are two deputy Speakers, Mr Harold Walker and Miss Betty Boothroyd.
Miss Boothroyd is seeking to become the first woman speaker.
However, with a clear overall majority of 21, the Tories can insist on their nomination.
BA sues Virgin in tit-for-tat libel battle
British Airways is claiming libel damages from Mr Richard Branson and his rival Virgin Atlantic Airways in tit-for-tat court proceedings.
It alleges ‘untrue and defamatory’ allegations by Mr Branson and Virgin.
The writ was issued less than a month after Mr Branson and his airline began libel proceedings of their own against BA and Lord King, its chairman.
A week earlier, Virgin started legal action in America in connection with the same allegations.
Informal talks to seek a solution to avoid court action collapsed last month without agreement.
Mr Justice Drake, sitting in chambers at the High Court yesterday, said a full hearing of Virgin's action was likely by early July.
Share swindle man is jailed
An accountant who bought and sold shares worth £250,000 in various public flotations using false names and addresses was jailed for a year and fined £25,000 yesterday.
Richard John, 41, of Edith Grove, West Brompton, south-west London, was convicted of 12 specimen charges of deception at Southwark Crown Court.
He was also ordered to pay £25,000 costs.
Computer saves man from blaze
A disabled man who is unable to speak typed out a message on his computer to call the fire brigade when he woke to find a candle had caused a small fire in his bedroom.
Clifford Gettings, 61, a wheelchair-bound victim of multiple sclerosis of Birch's Close, Worthing, tapped ‘I need help.
There is a fire’ into his computer which is linked to emergency services.
Firemen arrived within minutes and he was not hurt.
Actress leaves portrait to Tate
Dame Peggy Ashcroft, who died last June, aged 83, left a portrait of herself in Venice by Walter Sickert to the Tate Gallery in her £900,000 will published yesterday.
River drowning of water baby
A boy who was one of the first British babies born under water in a ‘birthing tub’ drowned when he fell in the River Avon, a Plymouth inquest heard yesterday…
Benjamin B'Hahn — whose father, Abel pioneered underwater births — fell while playing on the river bank two months ago.
An accidental death verdict was recorded on Benjamin, five, of Higher Green, South Brent, Devon.
Soldier shot dead
Cpl John Neill, 35, of the Royal Army Medical Corps, was found shot dead yesterday at the Drumadd Army base in Armagh.
Crime was not suspected, police said.
He was from Colchester, Essex, and was married with a three-year-old son.
Dairy jobs to go
About 400 jobs will go with the closure of two dairies, it was announced yesterday.
Northern Foods said the Express Dairy at Morden, south London, would close in November and another at Cricklewood, north London, would shut in April next year.
Socialist intellectual high-flier in the mould of Anthony Crosland
By Our Political Correspondent
MR BRYAN GOULD, 53, the New Zealand-born contender for the Labour leadership, is the nearest the party still has in high office to a Socialist intellectual in the Anthony Crosland mould.
Successively a Rhodes scholar, Foreign Office mandarin, Oxford don, politician, TV current affairs reporter and politician again, he is unencumbered by the traditionalist baggage inevitably carried around by those who grew up where the writ of the Labour establishment still runs largely unchallenged.
Representing Dagenham, in east London, Mr Gould is seen by some colleagues as well-placed to assess how Labour can broaden its appeal to the communities that have rejected it at four general elections in a row.
Born the son of a bank official, he was 23 when he made the five-week voyage to Britain aboard the Northern Star armed with an Auckland University degree to take up his scholarship place at Balliol College, Oxford, in the early 1960s.
His first impressions of England were his contemporaries' upper-class accents, which he initially took for caricatures, and the vast post-war housing estates, unlike anything in his native land.
‘I ran hard up against the class system,’ he told Westminster's House Magazine.
‘At Oxford, people defined themselves in class terms and this was all a tremendous shock to me in many ways.’
At Oxford, Mr Gould joined the Labour Party partly in response to what he saw as an attempt by the City to frustrate the 1964 election results and he has retained a disdain for the get-rich-quick philosophy of the City ever since.
He passed out top in the Foreign Office entrance exam after Oxford and began work in Whitehall on the European Political Co-operation desk, ironically named given that at that time General de Gaulle was thwarting Britain's European ambitions.
Mr Gould moved on to Brussels, where his anti-EEC inclinations — which have been hidden though never abandoned in recent years — became entrenched.
In October 1974, he entered Parliament as MP for Southampton Test, a seat he unexpectedly won by just over 800 votes.
In the Commons, he hunted with the Left, earning a reputation as a sharp debater and a hard-worker and became a leading scourge of the Common Market.
He lost his seat in 1979 and was snapped up by Thames TV as a reporter and presenter before returning to Westminster as MP for Dagenham.
The first Left-winger to call for a drive against Militant and to recognise the popularity of selling council houses, he said his party ignored the aspirations of young married couples on new housing estates at its peril.
He was Labour's campaigns director for the 1987 general election, readily embracing the new red rose image, and was rewarded with election to the ruling National Executive.
As trade and industry spokesman and, more recently, environment spokesman, Mr Gould has enhanced his reputation as a parliamentarian and TV performer.
A lover of fine wines and good food, he has inevitably had the ‘champagne Socialist’ tag pinned on him.
But his ability to avoid any obvious stereotype could make him an attractive candidate for Labour members worried that the leadership election is being orchestrated to Mr Smith's advantage.
Smith: I will fight for economic efficiency and a fairer society
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
MR JOHN SMITH, the Shadow Chancellor, formally launched his campaign for the Labour leadership yesterday with a cautious pledge to examine the role of the trade union block vote in the party's affairs and to keep open the options for electoral reform.
He brushed aside complaints that the party was being ‘bounced’ into choosing him as Mr Kinnock's successor without a proper analysis of last Thursday's election defeat.
He also proclaimed himself fit for the job and fully recovered from the heart attack that threatened his career over four years ago.
‘This will, I suppose, be an issue, but I hope it doesn't become a dominant issue,’ he said.
To demonstrate his ability to draw a wide range of support from within Labour's ranks, Mr Smith was flanked at a press conference in the Jubilee Room, off Westminster's Great Hall, by Mr Robin Cook, from the Left of the party, and Dr John Cunningham, from the Right.
Mr Smith said his immediate task, should he win the contest with Mr Bryan Gould, would be to ‘lead a vigorous and searching opposition in Parliament’.
He added: ‘If elected, I commit myself to ensuring that a larger and stronger Labour opposition will challenge ceaselessly policies which damage our economy and divide our society.
‘I will continue the work begun by Neil Kinnock of modernising the structures and procedures of the party so that it can produce policies relevant to the society of today and tomorrow, and can campaign effectively for them.
‘I believe we must continue to develop a wider democracy within the party, based, wherever appropriate, on the clear principle of one member, one vote.’
To that end, Mr Smith urged every constituency party and trade union to ballot their members wherever possible before voting.
‘The most important objective for the next leader of the Labour Party must be to prepare to win power at the earliest opportunity.
It is my strong conviction that an efficient economy and a fair society go together.
Britain can — and must — have both.
‘The Labour Party must produce policies which convince voters that their own prosperity depends on a government which takes active responsibility to promote a strong economy and that their own security — and that of their families — is best advanced by a government which works for the welfare of the whole community.’
In Europe, said Mr Smith, Labour must stand for a positive partnership and active participation in the Community as the best means to secure the most benefit for Britain.
‘Our commitment to adopt the Social Charter should remain a priority objective so that employees in our country can achieve the same rights and opportunities as their Community counterparts.’
Mr Smith, who served in the Callaghan Cabinet in the late 1970s, reaffirmed his support for Scottish devolution and for constitutional reform, including the introduction of a Bill of Rights.
He was scathing about an electoral pact with the Liberal Democrats and said he was convinced that Labour could win the next election.
‘We have emerged defeated, it is true, but stronger,’ he said.
While declining to say what his views were on proportional representation, he promised to continue Labour's debate on electoral reform now being considered by an internal committee.
‘While the Labour Party must be free to reach its own conclusions, we should listen to the contributions which others wish to make to what must now become an important national debate.’
Mr Smith said it would be his task to broaden Labour's appeal to the whole community, but he peremptorily ruled out changing the party's name.
Some MPs believe it is outdated, associated with a working class tradition that has little resonance in the 1990s.
He disputed suggestions that his own redistributive mock Budget at the outset of the election campaign may have contributed to the party's defeat and expressed concern that those who would have gained from it had apparently failed to heed the message.
‘At the same time, the Labour Party must always be the party committed to lifting people out of poverty and out of unemployment,’ he said.
LABOUR LEADERSHIP CONTEST
Gould: I'm the best candidate to lead party to victory
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
MR BRYAN GOULD proposed a decisive break with the programme on which Labour lost last week's general election when he launched his campaign for both the party's leadership and deputy leadership at Westminster last night.
He called for a ‘radical’ agenda that would reach out to the groups of voters, especially in the South of England, which have shown a marked reluctance to support Labour at four elections.
‘We must consciously set out to win new constituencies of support,’ Mr Gould said in the same room where five hours earlier his opponent, Mr John Smith, mounted his own challenge.
‘If that requires a radical rethinking of some of our policies, so be it.
‘Our task over the next few years is not just to be an effective Parliamentary opposition but to lead great national debates about the future direction of our country and to forge a new national consensus across a range of issues.’
Mr Gould said he was prepared to serve under Mr Smith as deputy and invited the Shadow Chancellor to put his name forward as well for the deputy leadership.
He also made clear his misgivings at the attempts to rush the decision.
‘I am standing to win because I believe I am the best candidate to lead the Labour Party to victory next time but also because it is imperative that we have a contest in which a proper debate can take place,’ he added.
Mr Gould is likely to gain support from the Left-inclined sections of the party at Westminster, in the constituencies and in the trade union movement although he envisaged an end to the influence of the trade union block vote in party affairs.
‘Trade union involvement must remain at the heart of the party but it must be based far more on individual choice and decision rather than through the exercise of a block vote,’ he said.
Mr Gould, a prominent anti-Common Market campaigner in the 1970s, also favoured a realignment of the pound within the European exchange rate mechanism.
‘There is a widespread view that the current rate is indefensible and that we will suffer great damage if we continue to attempt to defend it,’ he said.
Mr Gould did not intend to indulge in recriminations over Thursday's defeat but he felt Mr Smith's tax policy and its impact on middle income earners in the South ‘perhaps showed less than total sensitivity to their interests.
If we find ourselves, as we did, unable to campaign, to argue, to debate on the great issues of economic policy, we were left with a very narrow terrain on which to fight economic issues.
‘That terrain was tax and I believe it was not the best territory for us to choose.’
Mr Gould said Labour had suffered ‘a grievous defeat’ and there were no easy explanations for its failure.
‘We had a superb leader, a well-organised campaign and a policy platform that commanded wide support in the party.
We faced lacklustre opponents in the depth of recession.
Yet still we lost.
‘The party needs a period of serious reflection about what went wrong and what needs to be done.
We have some hard thinking to do and we must move forward with a positive and radical agenda.’
While ‘one more heave’ might have been the right response to Labour's 1987 defeat, ‘it is a wholly inadequate response to our 1992 defeat,’he said.
‘We cannot simply change the face at the top and expect to win in 1996 on the programme on which we lost in 1992.
‘That is why I share the disquiet now widespread in the party at the speed with which we are being assured the leadership is settled.’
Money-for-nothing adverts ‘getting more audacious’
By Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent
GET-RICH-QUICK offers in the recession, and the belief that all advertisements are genuine are luring otherwise sophisticated consumers into bogus mail order schemes, the Advertising Standards Authority says today.
It believes that ‘fooling all of the people all of the time’ is entirely possible when the product or service is interesting or persuasive enough.
Recent complaints include a mailshot saying: ‘No more telephone bills for you — ever.’
For £7.50, GP Services of Huntingdon, Cambs, offered to disclose details of a technique which had been ‘tried, tested and proven’, which required no equipment or capital and which was ‘currently being used throughout the UK’.
The method was just to contact British Telecom's customer services department and ask to be disconnected.
Upholding complaints against the firm, the authority ruled that it ‘exploited consumers’ credulity’.
The authority also says that advertisements offering easy ways to earn cash are ‘gaining in audacity’ as the recession deepens.
One offered guaranteed annual earnings of £35,000 to people able to sell 45 titles a week from home, but a complainant who sent £149 for more information was unable to make any money at all.
Another scheme, by Paper Moon Publishing, of Newbury, Berks, included testimonials to demonstrate its claim of part-time earnings of £5,000 a month from home.
The testimonials were challenged and the mailshot was amended to read that monthly earnings could amount to ‘£1,000s’.
Miss Caroline Crawford, the authority's spokesman, said: ‘We can all sneer at people who are caught out by outrageous offers, but it is often a case of the triumph of hope over experience.
‘Many of us truly want to believe that money-making schemes are genuine, even if we harbour some doubts.’
The Face magazine, which faces a libel payout to the actor and singer Jason Donovan, is criticised by the authority today for ignoring a warning not to carry the controversial advertisement for the clothing firm Benetton, showing an Aids sufferer.
The Company magazine is also criticised for carrying another controversial Benetton advertisement showing a black soldier holding a human thigh bone.
Labour activist died in 80ft fall
A Labour Party activist fell 80 feet to his death from Longroyd railway viaduct at Huddersfield, West Yorks, after watching the Labour election defeat on television, an inquest was told yesterday.
‘I've had enough.
I'm going,’ Mark Kettley, 28, of Eldon Road, Marsh, Huddersfield, vice-chairman of the party's Paddock ward, was said to have told friends.
‘The Labour Party was his life,’ said the local agent.
The inquest was adjourned.
Parrot attack
A woman needed hospital treatment after being attacked by a parrot as she walked her dog at Ashleworth, near Gloucester.
Miss Lyn Birchmore, 24, of Cheltenham, was bitten on the face and back by the pet macaw which had been allowed out by its owner.
Hiker killed
A hit-and-run driver was being sought by police yesterday after his lorry killed a 19-year-old French student hitch-hiking on the hard shoulder of the M2 at Newington, near Sittingbourne, Kent.
Cricketer raided
Jewellery and cricket memorabilia worth £10,000 have been stolen from the home of Jim Parks, the former England wicketkeeper, in Worthing, Sussex.
International: Outrage over court's ‘Vichy whitewash’
By Suzanne Lowry in Paris
AS FRENCH outrage at the dismissal of charges against M Paul Touvier for alleged crimes committed during the Nazi occupation grew yesterday, the National Assembly suspended its afternoon session so that deputies could attend a demonstration at the Memorial of Deportation on the Ile de la Cite.
On Monday, the Paris Appeal Court ruled that M Touvier, intelligence chief of the pro-Nazi Lyons Milice during the 1939–45 War, and now aged 77, should not face charges of crimes against humanity in connection with the murder of Jews and resistance workers.
The court's decision was based on a finding that M Touvier had not acted in the context of a ‘concerted plan of extermination’ by the state.
The decision has been called a whitewash of the Vichy regime.
M Lionel Jospin, former Minister of Education, said that it was an astonishing rewrite of history.
The Public Prosecutor lodged an appeal, backed by the families of Nazi victims.
International: Major in the driving seat amid Community strains
A series of electoral shocks in recent weeks has shaken the European political landscape, and the Maastricht Treaty, the framework for EC union, may be about to crack.
Boris Johnson reports from Brussels
By BORIS JOHNSON, ROBIN GEDYE, TIM WITCHER AND ALAN PHILPS
IN the four months since Mr Major emerged from negotiations in the Dutch town of Maastricht, his main rivals among the European Community's leaders have been embarrassed by their electorates.
Now they are scrambling to prevent the treaty being rejected in June.
Four months ago at Maastricht, Mr Major was the new boy, the cadet among titans who had led their countries for 10 years or more: Kohl, Mitterrand and Andreotti, men who shared a vision of a tightly-integrated monetary and political union and who rode roughshod over Britain.
Now the Conservatives have won a record fourth term, while M Mitterrand's Socialists have suffered their worst poll defeat since the war, as have Signor Andreotti's Christian Democrats.
Herr Kohl's coalition has also been punished at the polls.
Into this political maelstrom, Maastricht has at last emerged as an issue, provoking the kind of controversy seen in Britain last year.
Above all, the Germans have woken, belatedly, to the loss of the Deutschemark in favour of the Ecu.
They are also not enthusiastic about bankrolling the economic ‘convergence’ of the poorer EC countries.
The French Right wing is calling with growing stridency for a repeal of the chapter which allows foreigners from other EC countries to vote in local elections.
But for the federalists, perhaps the greatest peril will come from Denmark and Ireland, both facing referendums in June.
It is a sign of the nervousness around Europe that when the Irish asked a week ago for the treaty negotiations to be reopened so that they could amend the abortion protocol, other countries reacted with horror.
The 12 EC members may, however, pay an immense price for turning the Irish down.
A rejection by just one country would force what they hoped to avoid: a renegotiation in a climate of mounting public suspicion.
Even if Maastricht is ratified intact, the past four months have made it seem backward-looking, or even irrelevant.
Britain has always said that, despite its plans for union, Maastricht fails to answer the question posed by the end of the Cold War: how to bring the former communist countries into Europe, and expand the EC to include up to 20 members.
Now Mr Major has a chance to drive that message home.
‘The paradox is that Major is now the strongest of them all,’ said one EC official.
In Europe, not just at home, the game seems to be going his way — assuming Maastricht is ratified.
But, as our correspondents in Europe report, this looks increasingly uncertain: The Irish may throw out the treaty at their referendum because of controversy over the ‘abortion protocol’.
Pro-life groups complain that the protocol, which says EC law cannot affect Ireland's anti-abortion law, is too lax.
The lobby is threatening to campaign against the treaty unless the government clarifies the constitution to rule out abortion on demand.
Pro-abortion groups also oppose the protocol on the grounds that it is too restrictive.
They believe it could be used to prevent women from having abortions overseas, or obtaining information on them from EC countries.
Mr Major's claim to have emerged from the shadow of his predecessor will be tested in July when he takes over the presidency of the EC for six months.
Top of the agenda will be the same issue over which Mrs Thatcher fought countless battles: Britain's contribution to the budget.
M Delors, President of the European Commission, wants a £14.6 billion increase in the budget over the next five years, a rise which Britain will fight.
Britain will contribute £3.2 billion to the budget this year, with Germany and France also net payers.
Under the Delors plan the sums would rise, and Holland, Denmark and Italy would also become net payers.
Britain is unlikely to get all six wealthy nations on its side, but Mr Major will still hope to torpedo the package without suffering the isolation of the Thatcher years.
Continental observers see it as significant that Britain will take the EC helm when disillusionment with the goals of a federalist Europe is sweeping voters in some countries seen as most pro-European.
Holding the presidency allows a country to push its own pet projects.
Apart from the budget, Britain hopes to set the negotiating mandate for the new members queueing to join, probably initially Sweden, Finland and Austria.
Federalists are worried that new members will dilute the EC, turning it away from the grandiose schemes of political union and towards the modest goal of free trade.
Downing Street is keen to end the year with a celebration of the Single Market, which will serve as a reaffirmation of Britain's view of what matters in the EC.
Germany, once the greatest supporter of a united Europe, has turned into a nation of bewildered sceptics intent on forcing Bonn to claw back some lost sovereignty.
Herr Theo Waigel, Finance Minister, says it is ‘an indispensable condition for German acceptance of currency union’ that the European Central Bank is in Frankfurt.
Chancellor Kohl has promised the EC currency will not be called the ‘Ecu’.
The Bundesbank has warned that monetary union will fail because Maastricht did not go far enough on political union.
After the upper house of parliament threatened to block ratification of the treaty, Bonn agreed to give Germany's 16 states a veto on transfer of powers to the EC.
But from the moment that the electorate realised it was to be stripped of its Deutschemark, a symbol of nationhood, Germans began to wonder how much else had been given away.
Polls show the number of people opposed to relinquishing the mark has grown to 56 per cent without a sign that a peak has been reached.
President Mitterrand will be fighting for his own authority and that of France in Europe with his campaign to get the Treaty ratified by parliament.
He says it would be ‘a national drama’ if political and monetary union were rejected.
Faced with growing hostility or boredom over Europe, M Mitterrand threatened at the weekend to hold a referendum if the two parliamentary chambers do not give him a two-thirds majority for constitutional changes.
But France has been hit by the kind of unease over European union that British governments have been expressing for years.
The prospects of other EC nationals voting in European and local elections in France, and Brussels deciding who gets a French visa, have pushed the National Front campaign into turbo-charge.
The Socialist Party considers Europe too capitalist, many ordinary conservatives feel awkward campaigning for a replacement for the franc and the all-party rump that opposes European union is getting bigger and stronger.
Danish nervousness about surrendering more power to the EC has reached a new intensity in the run-up to a June 2 referendum on ratification of the treaty.
Anti-EC groups, backed by businessmen, have been campaigning for a ‘no’ vote and are six to eight percentage points ahead in the polls.
International: Britain set for clash on £600m Euro-TV
By Boris Johnson EC Correspondent, in Brussels
BRITAIN is set for another clash with Brussels after the European Commission unveiled yesterday a £600 million plan to increase sales of a new generation of wide-screen televisions, mainly made in France and Holland.
If British consumers fail to buy the new models, European Community-devised satellite broadcasting norms could mean millions of viewers finding themselves watching a distorted picture, or being forced to buy a decoder costing up to £200.
British sources last night immediately signalled their readiness to fight, after the plan was agreed by the 17 commissioners.
The EC Audio-Visual Commissioner, M Jean Dondelinger, said the plan was part of a move towards the ‘high-definition television’ of the future, although the sets do not themselves provide such an image.
The scheme has raised the stakes in the intensifying struggle between Britain and the Commission, led by M Jacques Delors, over whether the EC should have an industrial policy.
M Delors's appeal for an extra £4 billion to be spent by Brussels on European industry is likely to bulk large at the Lisbon summit in June.
The cash proposed yesterday will mainly be used to pay satellite broadcasters.
A British Government source said it was absurd to pay people to broadcast in a signal before consumers had even shown any interest in wide-screen television.
International: Lords attack EC for attitude on environment
By Our Environment Editor
European Community laws on the environment are being widely ignored throughout the 12 member states, a House of Lords committee reported yesterday.
The Lords suggested that an EC inspectorate should visit states and investigate alleged infringements instead of relying on Brussels.
The Lords' recommendations follow complaints that the Commission acts too frequently against Britain.
International: German public service workers set for strike
By Our Bonn Correspondent
Germany's 2.3 million public service workers are heading for their first strike for 18 years in support of a 5.4 per cent pay rise recommended by arbitrators but rejected by the government.
Union leaders say they expect an overwhelming call for industrial action in an imminent ballot, after employers refused to improve a 4.8 per cent offer on Monday.
Unless there is a last-minute offer, transport workers, refuse collectors, nurses and postal workers will begin lightning strikes after Easter.
International: Villagers set to flee Etna as lava flow closes in
BY BRUCE JOHNSTON
LAVA from Mount Etna continued creeping closer to a village yesterday, engulfing a cottage, as authorities used explosives and huge concrete blocks to try to stop the advance, writes Bruce Johnston in Zafferana.
A river of molten rock overwhelmed the last of five big dykes, hurriedly built by villagers to protect their homes, and surrounded Signor Giuseppe Fichera's farm cottage, only 150 yards from the nearest permanently inhabited house.
Professor Franco Barberi, a vulcanologist co-ordinating protection efforts, said yesterday it was ‘impossible to predict’ when the lava would reach Zafferana, a farming village of 7,000 people on Etna's south-eastern slope, or which part would be affected first.
Most families have packed their bags, ready to evacuate their homes, although officials say every effort will be made to save the village.
Signor Fichera, whose vineyards and orchards were destroyed, left his cottage after hanging out a banner saying: ‘Thanks to the government’, hinting at the anger among residents who say the authorities should have acted sooner to protect them.
Signor Finchera also set up a table with a bottle of wine on it to ‘welcome the lava’.
Etna is ‘tired and must be thirsty’, he said in a bitter, parting comment as he left his land.
But a bar owner said: ‘Since this all began the town has been making money hand over fist.
It has become a tourist trap.’
After passing the dyke, the lava flow accelerated slightly and forked into two, forming a pair of streams each about 20 yards wide.
Meanwhile, powerful United States Army helicopters continued dropping massive concrete blocks to hinder the lava flow.
A new idea is to drop 50 two-ton blocks into a lava tunnel high up the mountain to try to clog the flow, in the way things dropped into a kitchen sink will block the drain.
Explosives experts were planning to set off mines to destroy the underground conduits which keep the lava from cooling and solidifying before it reaches inhabited areas farther down the mountain.
About a million tons of lava are pouring every day from the fissure which opened on the Sicilian volcano in December.
International: Serbian invaders close to taking Muslim centre
By Philip Sherwell in Visegrad
SERBIAN forces were last night close to winning the battle for the Muslim-held town of Visegrad, intensifying the land-snatch offensive which has shattered the ceasefire in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
In Foca, 50 miles south of the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, residents sought refuge in schools and hospitals and European Community monitors were refused access to the town as the Serbian-dominated federal army mopped up Muslim opposition.
Straggling columns of federal infantrymen and their local militia allies advanced unopposed on the suburbs of Visegrad as shells rained down on Muslim positions.
Their hand-in-glove co-operation has destroyed the final pretence of army neutrality in eastern Bosnia.
The advance was a direct snub for America, which hours earlier had criticised Serbian paramilitaries and the regime in neighbouring Serbia for the escalating conflict in Bosnia.
A big push for land is under way along the River Drina on the Bosnian border as Serbian warlords, backed by local federal army commanders, try to establish safe corridors between their strongholds and grab areas of land for the self-styled Serbian republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Asked about the fate of his Muslim adversaries, one man simply smiled and drew his finger across his throat.
Mr Alija Izetbegovic, beleaguered President of Bosnia-Hercegovina, yesterday condemned Serbian forces for blatant violations of the latest EC-brokered ceasefire.
The Serbian forces' westward drive into Bosnia fits into a map disclosed for the first time yesterday, which shows Serbian leaders intend to capture more than 70 per cent of Bosnia, leaving Croatian and Muslim populations isolated in small pockets of land.
International: Serial killer faces court admitting 55 murders
By Marcus Warren in Rostov-on-Don
THE self-confessed murderer of 55 girls, women and boys faced his victims' relatives yesterday on the opening day of a trial which will enter legal and medical history.
According to testimony read in court, Andrei Chikatilo raped his victims, mutilated their bodies, and sometimes disembowelled them and ate parts of their bodies.
The accusations are not disputed by Chikatilo, who led police to the site of 19 more murders than he was originally believed to have committed.
If found guilty, he will be Russia's most prolific serial killer and qualify as one of the most depraved mass murderers of all time.
As he was led up from the cells and into a cage, there was bedlam in the courtroom.
Many of the victims' relatives broke down, fainted or shouted abuse.
While some elderly women beat their breasts, stamped their feet in grief and wept, Chikatilo appeared oblivious to the uproar.
In the 12 years before his arrest in 1990, the defendant is said to have found his victims in the various regions of Russia, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
But most of the killings took place in and around Rostov-on-Don.
Police called the hunt for the killer the Forest Belt Case because the victims' bodies were usually found in woods.
International: Yeltsin's government ready to stay on after compromise is agreed
By John Kampfner in Moscow
THE bitter tussle between Russia's parliament and government appeared to be drawing to a close last night after preliminary approval was given to a compromise that would allow President Yeltsin's administration to continue its reforms.
At the end of the day's session, the Congress of People's Deputies voted by 530 votes to 236 to ‘accept as a basis for discussion’ a declaration that should free ministers' hands to press ahead with free market policies.
‘To a great extent this removes the need for the government to resign,’ said Mr Gennady Burbulis, State Secretary and Mr Yeltsin's closest aide.
‘On the whole this document would enable the executive power to carry out its reforms,’ Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister, told deputies.
Congress will debate the resolution in full today, with several opportunities remaining for hardliners to scupper a deal which representatives of both sides spent several hours haggling over.
As it stands, it obliges the government to fulfil parliament's resolution on Saturday, the one that caused the crisis, granting subsidies to many areas of the economy, something Mr Gaidar has called ruinous.
It also spoke, however, of ‘due account of prevailing economic and social conditions’— a get-out clause that ministers said would give them free rein while saving the face of parliament.
Significantly, it does not give a deadline for Mr Yeltsin to present a new law on the government, ending his emergency powers.
The President asked for Dec 1.
The compromise, if it remains intact, represents a successful counter-attack by Mr Gaidar and his young team and indicates the extent of Mr Yeltsin's authority.
Ironically, Mr Yeltsin's studious absence from public view for the past few days forced the two parties to seek a solution and not wait for him to intervene.
Nevertheless, many argued that, once again, Mr Yeltsin was not seen to be taking charge when most needed.
Without explanation, he cancelled talks with Mr Nicholas Brady, United States Treasury Secretary, leaving the high-ranking American delegation to meet Mr Gaidar.
Mr Brady made clear American concern over the crisis, implying that the West's £15 billion aid package was conditional on Mr Gaidar being allowed to continue unimpeded.
Despite the ‘ceasefire’, considerable bitterness remained in several quarters, much of it focusing on Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, Speaker of parliament, who described ministers as children who had lost their way.
Mr Gaidar, who brought his team into the hall only towards the end of yesterday's session, told Congress: ‘This isn't a government of capricious boys and girls.’
Mr Sergei Shakhrai, a key Yeltsin adviser, said he was instigating legal proceedings against Mr Khasbulatov for insulting him in an interview.
The editor-in-chief of Izvestia, the most respected national daily newspaper, also said legal action would be taken against the Speaker, for seeking to impose restrictions on the newspaper and employing ‘Bolshevik psychology’ to gag the press.
In a further row, deputies from St Petersburg walked out of the chamber when Congress voted down ratification of the name change of Russia's second city, formerly Leningrad.
The required number of votes was eventually achieved, but only on the third attempt.
International: Malta will accept Lockerbie bomb suspects for trial
By R Barry O'Brien in Valletta
MALTA said yesterday that it was willing to accept the two Libyans accused of the Lockerbie bombing for trial on the island if all parties agreed.
Britain's High Commissioner and ambassadors of the United States and other countries were called to the Foreign Ministry in Valletta to be told.
A government statement said: ‘Malta has acceded to a request for the two suspects to be tried in Malta, provided that all parties to the dispute are in agreement and consistent with Malta's obligations under the UN Charter.’
A government spokesman said Professor Guido de Marco, Foreign Minister, had received a letter from his Libyan counterpart informing him that the two bomb suspects had asked to be tried in Malta, and asking Malta to accede to this request.
A United Nations air traffic and arms embargo against Libya was starting today over its refusal to extradite the two suspects to Britain or the United States to stand trial for their alleged involvement in the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie in December 1988, which killed 270 people.
Libya proposed at a weekend Arab League meeting that Malta should receive the pair.
Washington dismissed the offer as unacceptable.
Dr Edward Fenech-Adami, Maltese Prime Minister, said of his country's announcement last night: ‘Whether it is satisfactory or not to the UN Security Council has to be decided by them.’
He added: ‘We have a judicial system of which we have been extremely proud…
Our laws will give all the guarantees one can think of for any democratic country.’
Malta, 220 miles north of Libya, has long-standing links with Tripoli.
More than 4,000 Maltese work in Libya.
Malta exported £38 million of goods to Libya last year, and Libyans have regularly visited Malta to buy food, clothes and consumer goods.
Libya is Malta's principal source of oil.
Dr Fenech-Adami, whose nationalist government won five more years in power in a close-fought general election against the Labour opposition in February, said: ‘Our relations with Libya are good.’
The Maltese government has repeatedly denied allegations that the suitcase bomb that blew up flight 103 originated in Malta, travelling on an Air Malta flight to Frankfurt and being transferred to the Pan Am flight.
Dr Fenech-Adami said last night: ‘On the facts as known to us, it has not been proved that the suitcase carrying the bomb originated in Malta.
That is the position taken by the airline.
The airline has a number of libel actions pending because it strongly denies that this happened in Malta.’
Malta is a party to the Montreal Convention covering the trial of terrorists and has incorporated it within its own legislation.
Maltese officials privately express the hope that Britain, the United States and the UN Security Council will not agree to the suspects being handed over to Malta for trial.
International: America's Cup star Bond runs aground in bankruptcy court
By Geoffrey Lee Martin in Sydney
MR ALAN BOND, the London-born tycoon who became an Australian hero in 1983 when he won the America's Cup yacht race, was declared bankrupt yesterday.
The Bond business empire was once worth about £3.5 billion.
In the Federal Court in Sydney yesterday, a banking syndicate headed by HongkongBank Australia applied for a trustee to be appointed after Mr Bond, 53, failed to repay about £110 million arising from a personal guarantee he gave on a loan to his former Greenvale nickel project.
He had fought a series of legal delays through the courts for 13 months to avoid paying the banks.
The Federal Court ended the battle by rejecting all arguments presented on his behalf.
The court appointed Mr Bob Ramsay of chartered accountants Bird Cameron as trustee of the bankrupt estate.
Mr Bond's lawyers would not comment on whether there would be an appeal.
They would be discussing options with their client.
Mr Ramsay said he had ‘no idea’ what the former sign-painter who built an empire based in Perth, Western Australia, might be worth.
Close observers of Mr Bond's affairs say his family controls considerable wealth.
Mr Paul Barry, author of The Rise and Fall of Alan Bond, estimates his hidden assets to be worth up to £22 million.
Mr Ramsay said sorting out Mr Bond's finances would take a team of accountants at least a year, with the investigation stretching around the world.
He said the Bond family's trust structure would be closely examined.
‘I have the powers to make whatever inquiries I think fit and also, if necessary, to examine him in the Federal Court,’ said Mr Ramsay.
Mr Bond must surrender his passport to Mr Ramsay, who will consider any application from Mr Bond to travel overseas.
‘He will need a good reason to convince me,’ Mr Ramsay added.
The trustee will make inquiries into ‘associated parties’, including Mr Bond's sons, John and Craig.
‘I have no rights to ask what their assets are.
But I can certainly ask them questions about their dealings with Mr Bond.’
Mr Ramsay said assets in family trusts controlled by Mr Bond's sons were not necessarily assets deemed to belong to creditors.
‘It is quite in order,’ he said, ‘for a person to put assets into family trusts, or indeed give assets away to other parties, provided that at the time a person gives away his assets he is quite solvent.’
Mr Bond was deemed to be insolvent at the time the bankruptcy judgment was entered against him and the bankruptcy notice was served —‘about three weeks ago’— but Mr Bond may have been insolvent before that time.
Mr Bond told the Federal Court late last year that his assets were worth less than £25,000, although he had been receiving about £3,000 a month salary from a firm, Metals Exploration Ltd.
Under cross-examination at the time, Mr Bond admitted to a superannuation fund of about £870,000, which he said was held by trustees.
He said the house where he lived in the fashionable Perth suburb of Dalkeith, built for about £530,000, was owned by a trust, and the beneficiaries were his children.
In various other trusts were a former monastery in England where his daughter Susan lives, and some other properties.
He had sold a Rolls-Royce for about £28,000, and his half share of the furniture in the Dalkeith home to Eileen, his wife of 38 years, for £150,000, and used the money to pay legal expenses.
Mrs Bond recently began divorce proceedings.
Mr Bond and his lawyers had fought the bankruptcy petition through the Australian courts since March last year, arguing that his personal guarantee was not enforceable and, when that failed, appealing on other technical grounds.
Three times Mr Bond tried to avoid the bankruptcy petition being served on him, once in a car chase through Perth and twice by going abroad.
Last month, the Federal Court, exasperated by the delays, ruled that the creditor's petition could be served on his lawyers while he was in London.
When the bankruptcy decision was issued yesterday, he was in Perth to appear before a specially appointed Royal Commission investigating possible irregularities in business-government relations in Western Australia.
Mr Bond has pleaded not guilty to a charge he violated the Securities Code by inducing businessman Brian Coppin to contribute to the failed 1987 rescue of merchant bank Rothwells while concealing a £7 million fee.
The trial is due to start on May 25.
Mr Bond's empire covered brewing, media, mining and property.
But the man who built a fortune on borrowed funds continued to extend and over-extend.
A combination of heavy debts, rising interest rates and bad business decisions alienated his bankers and creditors, put his Australian brewing interests into receivership and forced him to sell assets ranging from an office development to a coal mine.
Flamboyant Mr Bond, a former holder of the Australian of the Year title, once paid $53.9 million (£30.5 million at today's rates) for Van Gogh's Irises, only to be forced to sell it, reportedly for a loss.
International: N Korean leader, 80 today, named Generalissimo
By Robert Whymant in Seoul
PRESIDENT Kim Il Sung, North Korea's enduring dictator, celebrates his 80th birthday today in lavish style with a new title to his name.
He has been named Generalissimo, seen as a further step towards the succession of his son and heir, Kim Jong Il.
‘The Great Leader’ was given the new title as 22 million North Koreans prepared to enjoy lavish birthday festivities in what the official media called ‘the biggest national holiday ever’.
To celebrate his birthday, the dictator has decreed a rare meat ration for the people, a brief respite from a dire food shortage.
For a year, birthday preparation committees throughout the nation have toiled for this moment.
The pledges of loyalty are piling up.
A textile mill developed natural fibres for special bedding to promote Kim's longevity.
The army was mobilised to catch snapping turtles for a soup to enhance his virility, while farmers fattened edible frogs and ducks as birthday gifts.
Citizens young and old laid bird traps, and 700,000 sparrows made the supreme sacrifice so that the down from their necks might pad a birthday quilt.
Kim Il Sung's most astonishing achievement is to have survived the 47 years since he was put in charge of the North by Stalin when Korea was divided in 1945.
Propping up the world's most enduring dictator is a slavish personality cult, and rigid control of the nation.
Although Kim is hailed as the Beloved Leader, 12 corrective camps are believed to provide 152,000 less-adoring citizens with re-education.
China has provided 400 tons of pork and Cuba an unspecified quantity of poultry for the birthday celebrations, but there will be more circuses than bread to lift popular morale in a joyless nation.
Peruvian singers, Cuban ballerinas and Swiss circus artistes are among 80 troupes and cultural delegations.
Tributes to Kim have been pouring in from overseas.
However, a delegation from Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party handed him a message from Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, Japanese Prime Minister, calling on him to allay international concern that North Korea's nuclear programme is weapons-oriented.
Amid the build-up to the great birthday extravaganza, North Korea watchers have gone on the alert for signs of the president handing over power to Kim Jong Il.
The younger Kim, designated heir since the sixth party congress in 1980, recently took over the post of supreme commander of the armed forces from his father.
But the elder Kim retained the military title of Marshal.
Hwang Jang Yop, a senior North Korean official visiting Tokyo in early April, dismissed speculation of a transfer of power in the immediate future.
International: Hong Kong riot fear over UN cash crisis
By Hugo Gurdon in Hong Kong
A UNITED Nations cash crisis threatens to reignite violence in Hong Kong's Vietnamese detention camps and snuff out hopes of an orderly end to a 17-year problem.
Compassion fatigue among donor countries means there is less money than needed to pay Vietnamese boat people to go home.
Massive peacekeeping and refugee operations in Cambodia, Yugoslavia and the Horn of Africa are also draining funds currently used to diffuse frustration among the 52,000 boat people in camps.
Weeks after 24 Vietnamese were killed in a riot at Sek Kong camp, the UN wants 25 per cent cuts on education, employment, health and recreation spending.
Hong Kong's refugee co-ordinator, Mr Clinton Leeks, said: ‘The increased danger of violence is a high priority after Sek Kong.’
A European Community fund, set up effectively to bribe boat people to go and Hanoi to take them back, has secured less than half the £80 million it needs.
A group of 261 Vietnamese flew to Hanoi from Hong Kong yesterday, bringing to 3,241 the number returning voluntarily this year.
International: Britons take top roles in Nato forces
By Peter Almond Defence Correspondent
A BRITISH general was named yesterday as the first commander of Nato's new Allied Rapid Reaction Corps, heading about 80,000 troops from 11 countries.
Lt-Gen Sir Jeremy Mackenzie, 51, commander of 1st British Corps in Germany, will assemble an international military staff at corps headquarters in Bielefeld and prepare to move in October to the Corps headquarters at Rheindhalen, formerly HQ British Army of the Rhine.
Together with the appointment of Field Marshal Sir Richard Vincent as chairman of Nato's Military Committee, the decision means a Briton will direct all of Nato's major internal military-political relations and with the emerging Soviet republics.
Also, a Briton will commit and direct Nato troops in a military emergency.
Creation of the ARRC, however, is developing slowly.
More than a year after it was first proposed Sir Jeremy is still unsure of his team.
So far only Britain's two new ‘super-divisions’, based in Germany and England, plus one Dutch-commanded multi-national airmobile division consisting of German, British, Dutch and Belgian troops, along with a German division and an American division are coherent forces based in the central region.
Canada, which had offered forces, is now pulling its remaining troops out of Europe.
Development is also being hampered by defence budget cutbacks.
International: Police broaden Winnie Mandela inquiries
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
SOUTH African police confirmed yesterday that they have broadened their inquiries into cases involving Mrs Winnie Mandela to include three possible charges of kidnapping and one of theft.
These are in addition to the re-opening of investigations into the 1988 murders of the young township activist, Stompie Moeketsi, and of Dr Abu-Baker Asvat, a Soweto physician who was a member of the radical Azanian People's Movement, Azapo.
The latest investigations also relate to incidents in 1988 when Mrs Mandela had returned to Soweto after years of banishment by the authorities to a remote town in the Orange Free State and had surrounded herself with a bodyguard of ‘football club’ thugs.
One of the possible kidnapping charges and that of theft relate to two incidents in which Mrs Mandela was part of a group which allegedly abducted three people before assaulting them in the old Mandela home in Soweto.
Another relates to an incident in which two people were allegedly abducted and assaulted at the house by being lifted and dropped, and then having plastic bags placed over their heads.
A third involves a man who disappeared after allegedly being assaulted at her home.
International: Clinton wins backing of big unions
By Ian Brodie in Washington
BILL CLINTON clinched the backing of America's largest trade union group yesterday and won an easy victory in caucuses in Virginia.
The twin successes were yet more proof that the Arkansas governor is well on his way to becoming the Democrats' White House nominee, despite widespread misgivings about his ability to defeat President Bush.
The ramifications of these doubts are reflected in a poll by Time magazine and CNN, which shows 53 per cent of voters do not think Mr Clinton is honest and trustworthy enough to be president; 67 per cent think he would say anything to be elected president; and 62 per cent say he is not someone they would be proud to have as president.
But leaders of the AFL-CIO, a federation of 33 unions with 14 million members, recommended an endorsement of Mr Clinton to try to head off moves by some Democratic elders for a brokered convention at which a more electable candidate might emerge.
In Virginia, Mr Clinton won with 52 per cent, to 36 per cent uncommitted and 12 per cent for Mr Jerry Brown, the ex-California Governor, and his only rival.
International: Blackout flood
By Our New York Correspondent
Chicago was blacked out yesterday after a freak flood caused by two million gallons of water from the Chicago river which poured through a hole in its retaining wall.
International: China Scud deal to aid America
By Our Tel Aviv Correspondent
China is offering to sell Scud surface-to-surface missiles to Saudi Arabia so that they can be used by the United States in a programme to improve the Patriot missile defence system, according to a report in the Haaretz newspaper in Israel.
International: Security inquiry launched after Reagan is attacked by protester
BY CHARLES LAURENCE
THE American Secret Service launched an internal investigation last night following an attack by an anti-nuclear protester on former President Ronald Reagan.
Mr Reagan was punched, jostled and showered with splintered glass as he was giving a speech in Las Vegas when the protester broke through a security cordon to seize the microphone, writes Charles Laurence in New York.
The lanky, bearded leader of the Hundredth Monkey protest group, Richard Springer, 41, leapt on to the stage, caught him a glancing blow and pushed him aside.
Then he grabbed a crystal glass eagle that had been presented to Mr Reagan, 81, raised it above his head and smashed it on to the podium.
Mr Reagan was showered by shards of glass, including at least one that struck him in the face, but was unhurt.
But the ex-President, still affectionately known as ‘The Gipper’ after one of his old film roles, proved that he had lost none of his old style and sense of humour.
Although visibly shaken during the attack, he later returned to complete his speech, saying: ‘I think I'm going to go out and see who that guy is.’
He joked to reporters: ‘He hit me with a fist but it just bounced off.’
Security men, taken by surprise as Springer mounted the stage, hurried into violent action.
They manhandled Mr Reagan to the side of the stage and pounced on his attacker, forcing him over the podium to check him for any possible weapons before dragging him away.
But Springer managed to make himself heard, shouting into the microphone as he attacked Mr Reagan.
‘Excuse me, Mr President.
Mr President, there is going to be a nuclear test on Tuesday,’ he yelled.
Springer's group organises an annual Easter protest against the nuclear testing programme in the Nevada desert, 65 miles from Las Vegas.
Several hundred protesters had gathered in the city, and held a rally earlier in the day.
But other members said that they had not known of plans to attack Mr Reagan.
The former President was the star attraction at the annual National Association of Broadcasters, an audience filled with television personalities and network executives.
They were shocked by the failure of the Secret Service to stop the attack on Mr Reagan, who survived a bullet wound from an assassination attempt in 1981 during his first term as President.
Secret Service teams maintain a guard on all former presidents during their retirement.
‘There was total shock.
No one understands how he got on stage and how he got near the president.
Somebody goofed,’ said Mr Larry King, host of a chat show on the news network CNN.
Springer was held in jail overnight and was charged yesterday with assaulting a Secret Service officer.
Police said charges involving the attack on Mr Reagan were likely.
Leading Article: Keeping an open House
ALTHOUGH traditionally the Speaker is a figure who presides impartially over the Commons, his election by the whole House is usually influenced by strong party political currents.
It was no secret that Mrs Thatcher was unenthusiastic about the appointment in 1983 of Mr Bernard Weatherill, who has just retired.
Her will quite properly did not prevail; and Mr Weatherill, in a House even more disorderly than its predecessors, is held to have served it well.
Other party political currents now run through the choice of his successor.
Mr Peter Brooke, lately the Northern Ireland Secretary, seems to be the new Government's preferred choice.
He is respected, popular and (although once chairman of the Conservative Party) less partisan than most politicians.
Failing him, Sir Giles Shaw, a former minister but more widely seen as one of the back-benchers' own, would be suitable.
Dame Janet Fookes, never a minister but with 22 years of parliamentary experience behind her, and one of the Speaker's panel of deputies, is fully qualified.
Labour has at least two good candidates: Mr Harold Walker, deputy to Speaker Weatherill, and Miss Betty Boothroyd, who has proved her competence in the chair and would be acceptable to all parties.
Had the Conservatives won the election by a whisker, which at one time seemed likely, they would probably have plumped for a Labour Speaker (on the grounds that it took one vote off the Opposition).
With a majority of 21, they are in a position to vote in any Speaker they wish, and so may be inclined to reward one of their own party.
After this fourth successive Tory election victory, we think it would be better if a Labour Speaker had a turn.
We hope that the Prime Minister, if he feels the need to indicate any preference at all, will encourage such a move.
The Speakership is for the whole House of Commons, and should not be an extension of government patronage.
Letter to the Editor: Racism not reason for Tory loss
SIR — Having been in the ‘think-tank’ of the Cheltenham rebels after the initial selection of John Taylor as Conservative prospective parliamentary candidate (article, April 11), I feel obliged to point out that the best of us are not motivated by knee-jerk racism.
I fully understood the principles which led the party to believe it could gain more of the ethnic minority vote if it could prove that a barrister of Afro-Caribbean extraction could become a Conservative MP.
But there is a lack of ethnic minorities and the town's poorest areas, Whaddon and Hester's Way, are populated by the ex-agricultural working class, who are not dissimilar in outlook to Essex Man.
I could foresee that these factors might lose us the seat — even if the Conservative vote was on its best politically correct behaviour on polling day.
At the count, Mr Taylor held his own until it came to the boxes from Whaddon and Hester's Way — then disaster.
Much of Sir Charles Irving's personal vote came from these areas, where many know of his extraordinary personal kindness.
The Cheltenham Conservative Association must now address itself to recovering our council from the Liberal Democrats which dominate it, and on putting the John Taylor affair behind us.
A. W. MORTIMER MOORE Cheltenham, Glos
SIR — John Taylor's result was within 2,500 votes of the record poll achieved in 1987 by the then sitting member in a three-cornered fight.
If only prudent allowance is made for the loss of Sir Charles's personal cross-party vote, the participation of three other candidates and the tactical switch of a significant number of Labour supporters, it will be seen that Mr Taylor's defeat was indeed a close run thing.
The swing from the Conservatives here of 5.21 per cent was less than in either nearby Gloucester (5.34) or Stroud (6.22), where sitting members were candidates, and only a little more than Bath, where 4.95 per cent defeated a Cabinet minister.
Extensive canvassing showed the race issue to be, at best, marginal, more than counter-balanced by a strong pro-Taylor vote from many non-Tory constituents.
ROBERT WILSON Cheltenham, Glos
Letter to the Editor: Basildon, OBE
SIR — In two successive general elections, Basildon's early return of the Conservative candidate has signalled the defeat of socialism.
Surely in the next Honours List its services to the nation should be acknowledged.
A monument is about to be unveiled on Malta, GC.
So how about Basildon, OBE?
R. T. ALLEN Loughborough, Leics
Letter to the Editor: Biting back
SIR — The death of William Paling, Labour MP for Dewsbury from 1945–1959,(obituary, April 14) recalls a famous item of Churchilliana.
During a speech in the House, Sir Winston was constantly interrupted by Paling with cries of ‘dirty dog’.
Finally, the Churchill patience snapped and, peering over his glasses at the hapless Opposition MP, he retorted: ‘I am grateful for the opportunity to remind the Honourable Member for Dewsbury what a dirty dog does to a paling.’
CLIVE THOMAS Wrotham, Kent
Knocked into a cocked hat
BY ALAN PHILPS
DAVID, I think we need a new stage to display your talents.’
‘Yes, Prime Minister.’
‘I want you to be Governor of Bermuda.
It's our oldest colony and we need someone of your calibre to stop the Americans taking over.’
Lord Waddington — former Home Secretary, until recently Leader of the House of Lords and eternal British bulldog of the Tory Right — gulps as he hears his fate in the post-election reshuffle.
‘But, Prime Minister, Bermuda is the ultimate dumping ground for superannuated diplomats.
I don't want to have to take orders from some Foreign Office fairy.’
‘Nonsense, David.
You'll love it there: they still have the death penalty, which we know is dear to your heart.
Besides, I believe you can go sailing all year.
And think of the climate — more people will want to spend their holidays with you than when you were MP for Ribble Valley.’
One can only imagine the ways in which prime ministers break the bad news to Cabinet members they are dismissing.
For Lord Waddington, kicked upstairs to the Lords in 1991, a conversation with the PM could mean only one thing — another gentle shove away from the centre of power.
Few, however, could have imagined that the man who once served as chairman of Clitheroe Young Conservatives would be asked to don the cocked hat and plumes of Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Bermuda.
That Lord Waddington would have mixed thoughts about the post is likely.
The cocked hat brings to mind the hapless Governor of the Falkland Islands, Rex Hunt, driving around in a London taxi until the Argentines came to expel him.
Or Lord Wilson, beleaguered in Hong Kong, facing the Chinese takeover.
Bermuda, known for little but its shorts and triangle, is the place where great public servants disappear.
Sir Peter Ramsbotham, Foreign Office high-flier and Ambassador to the US in 1977, fell to earth in Bermuda when James Callaghan wanted to give his job to his son-in-law, Peter Jay.
Lord Waddington will arrive in late summer, after the departure of his predecessor, Sir Desmond Langley — protocol decrees that there cannot be two Queen's representatives on the island at one time.
He will find himself at the heart of a Ruritanian ceremonial which makes the House of Lords seem informal.
As befits a country where the police wear pith helmets, the Governor is the leading player in the pageant of public life.
Normally to be seen driving around in a funereal Daimler — dwarfing the island's other cars (including the BMW of Premier Sir John Swan)— the Governor also dons his uniform and takes to the streets in a horse-drawn landau several times a year.
With the Government in attendance in morning dress, he presides over investitures, the opening of Parliament, the Queen's birthday parade, Remembrance Sunday and two local festivities — the peppercorn ceremony (where freemasons pay a symbolic peppercorn for the use of the state house) and a bizarre ceremony in which the Maritime Museum pays its annual rent of one cannonball.
THE tourists — 90 per cent of them from America and Canada — love all this.
Indeed, you can see their wonder as they land from their cruise ships and are greeted with a scene from Olde Englande played out by Bermudians in 17th-century dress romping around the dinkily preserved streets.
When they see the Governor, he seems just another player in the pageant.
Bermudians are not above manufacturing a little tradition.
The cannonball ceremony, unknown to history, was devised in 1980 to give some spurious touristic focus to the west end of the island, often neglected by visitors.
The effect has been miraculous.
Though the island (there are in fact several but all are now linked by causeways and bridges) is only 600 miles off the South Carolina coast, it is thought by many of the tourists to be the genuine article — a part of England just spitting distance from Land's End.
In the heat of summer, as the humidity rises to the barely tolerable and the threatening cloud formation known as ‘Morgan's Hand’ hangs off the coast, thousands of tourists buy tartans and Pringle knitwear on the quayside.
The parallel with England has been so firmly established that when US tourists shunned Europe last year, for fear of being struck by Gulf war shrapnel, they also stopped coming to Bermuda.
The economy has yet to recover.
The otherworldliness of Bermuda is reinforced by the languorous pace of life.
Nowhere else could a sign be displayed saying: ‘No loitering in this yard except on business.’
The speed limit is a rigidly enforced 20 mph.
There is a rule not only on the size of cars, but how many are permitted.
Cars cannot, therefore, be hired by tourists and the Governor will be able to enjoy nosing the Daimler gently along the island's roads amid a sea of obese Americans on mopeds.
Can it really be paradise?
The great and good of America think so.
The Texan billionaire H. Ross Perot, who is now contemplating a wild-card challenge to George Bush in the American presidential race, has two houses there.
Neither, however, is as big as Government House, the crenellated, Italianate mansion used by the Governor.
After a few glasses of the local ‘dark and stormy’ cocktail — a mixture of rum and ginger beer — the new Governor might agree with the poet Andrew Marvell who wrote of eternal spring in ‘an isle so long unknown and yet far kinder than our own’.
But there is another less attractive side.
Shakespeare called the islands ‘the still vex'd Bermoothes’ and the sinister legend of the islands at the edge of the world where ships disappeared lives on.
Bermuda became extremely vexed in 1973, when the local Black Power movement ambushed and killed the then Governor, Sir Richard Sharples, and his aide-de-camp in the gardens after dinner.
Since then, racial tensions among the population (60:40 black to white) have greatly eased, thanks to prosperity caused by tourism and, more recently, offshore financial services — exemplified by the decision of Hong Kong's giant Jardine Matheson to escape China's clutches by registering itself in Bermuda.
But security around the Governor remains much tighter than in any of the other Caribbean dependencies.
The Governor has effectively given up control of the Bermudian police to the local government, though he still retains the right to be consulted.
His main powers concern external relations, defence and, perhaps most significantly for a supporter of the death penalty, the ultimate say on whether a condemned man will hang.
BUT WILL he actually have to anything to do — given that the island's security is not under threat?
‘Governors do as much or as little as they care to,’ says David White, editor of the island's only daily newspaper, the Royal Gazette.
Lord Waddington's season in paradise could be disturbed: there is an election expected in February and tourist revenue is falling as the island becomes too expensive for all but the rich.
In the past, many governors who fell out with the Bermudians were put on a boat and sent back to London.
That, however, is unlikely in the modern age.
The tourist trade depends too much on the cocked hat.
It's the best show they've got.
Peterborough: Bull's-eye
MOST popular appointment in yesterday's reshuffle of junior Government ministers was the elevation of Nicholas Soames, MP for Crawley and grandson of Churchill, who becomes parliamentary Under Secretary to John Gummer at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Soames, a doughty trencherman who always gives the Simpson's beef trolley a good run for its money, should go down well with the farming community.
Cordelia Gummer need never again be force-fed hamburgers.
‘It is a fantastic honour and I am absolutely thrilled,’ said Soames, moments after his promotion was announced.
‘I have lived in the country all my life.
There is a very big job to be done and I adore John, having worked for him when he was party chairman.’
Joining the Government means that Soames, a keen shot, must surrender a clutch of useful company directorships.
A junior minister's pay scarcely covers the cost of a man's cartridges for the year, but Soames did not give the matter a second thought.
Peterborough:
ST GEORGE'S DAY, a week tomorrow, is awaited with eager anticipation in some our more illustrious households.
It is the day when the Queen traditionally announces who is to be awarded the Garter.
This year she could name three new Knights.
That is the number of vacant stalls in St George's Chapel, Windsor, following the deaths of Viscount De L'Isle, Lord Ashburton and the Earl of Cromer.
The Queen is under no obligation to restore the number of Knights Companions to the customary 24, but the feeling is that she will.
With all three services already represented, the Queen may choose to honour the Earl of Carnarvon, her racing manager and a personal friend.
Other contenders include Lord Charteris, one-time private secretary to the Queen, and Baroness Castle, the fiery former Labour Cabinet minister; among Lords-Lieutenant, the Earl of Morley, her representative in Devon, is considered the front runner.
Also in the frame for the June 15 installation is Mrs Thatcher.
But she would have to alter her travel plans — she is due to be abroad that day.
Peterborough: At a loss without Paddy's wagon
LIKE Neil Kinnock, Des Wilson once said that he wanted to retire at 50.
But Wilson, 51, the Liberal Democrats' election campaign director, may be wishing life was that simple.
With the election over, he is unemployed.
‘You're talking to a bankrupt — almost!’ he told me yesterday lunchtime.
During his two years at Lib Dem headquarters he insisted on being paid nothing because he felt he would have more authority and room for manoeuvre that way.
His cash-strapped employers jumped at the offer.
It has meant an ascetic existence for Wilson, who is to protest politics what the Hackney cab is to public transport.
‘I've been living on odd bits and pieces,’ he says, ‘as well as the proceeds of my first novel.’
That book, a ‘bodice ripper’, will soon be followed by a thriller, inevitably titled Campaign.
But Wilson, who was more visible during the election than many ministers, would be well advised not to pen an account of the real campaign — his version of the Alliance's 1987 effort won him few friends.
As for a job, Wilson says: ‘I haven't given it any thought.
It can wait until after my holiday on the Costa del Sol.’
It may not be easy.
Some of his crusades, for example the campaign for lead-free air, have been bankrolled by Godfrey Bradman, the property developer, but he no longer has largesse to spare.
Wilson is a flexible sort — an enthusiastic cigar smoker, he was until recently front man for a pressure group called Parents Against Tobacco.
Having done a fair job for the Lib Dems, perhaps he could now go and help the Tories.
Peterborough:
MEANWHILE, at least one Tory MP has made a packet out of the campaign.
He has won £10,000 at the bookies after betting £200, at odds of 50–1, on a rise in the number of Tory seats in Scotland.
Friends are endeavouring to keep his identity secret, saying only that he is a young chap with a safe seat south of the border.
No doubt they have been promised a good party in return.
Peterborough:
WE shall probably never know the appointments Neil Kinnock had in store for his first week as Prime Minister, but there would have been some surprises.
Kinnock liked to bandy such matters about, and once proposed the job of Washington ambassador to Simon Hoggart, The Observer's diarist.
‘It was a joke, really,’ says the puckish Hoggart.
‘Neil held out these things as one of his running gags.’
Stranger things have been known to happen: Jim Callaghan, after all, gave the Washington job to his son-in-law, Peter Jay.
Commentary: We'll do it our way, thanks
BY ALAN MASSIE
NANCY Mitford's uncle Matthew declared that ‘abroad is utterly bloody and foreigners are fiends’.
This is not a sentiment that would commend itself to our Liberal and Labour politicians whose catchphrase throughout the election seemed to be ‘other European countries’.
It was always said with approval.
Paddy Ashdown used the phrase to justify his demands for electoral reform.
Gordon Brown used it when he talked about the need for an industrial policy.
John Smith used it in his defence of the minimum wage.
All assumed that they manage things better on the Continent.
Indeed, only one voice was missing from the chorus.
I don't recall hearing Robin Cook tell us that ‘other European countries’ manage their health services better than we do.
This is odd.
If they are so much our superior in everything else, one would think that their insurance-based systems might be better also.
Of course, most of these assertions are merely matters of opinion, often rather wild opinion, for one can't help wondering just how much Messrs Ashdown, Smith and Brown really know about the ‘other European countries’ they so blithely summoned to their aid.
Take, for example, the matter of the minimum wage.
The Conservatives say its imposition would raise business costs and thus create unemployment.
This sounds like commonsense.
Clearly, there are many jobs, especially in small retail businesses, which are marginal.
Clearly, there are also people ready to take these jobs at the going rate, and not too discontented as long as they are not the breadwinner in their family, and are thus able to regard their wage as additional to the basic family income.
Who would gain if these jobs disappeared?
COMMONSENSE is met with parrot-speak: ‘Other European countries…
’ Well, if Smith can demonstrate that all the North African immigrants who arouse the wrath of Jean-Marie Le Pen are being paid the statutory minimum wage, I shall send £10 to the Labour party.
As for Italy, when I lived there 20 years ago it was common knowledge that many small businesses kept two sets of books: one for the authorities, the other for real.
I expect they still do so.
‘Other European countries have a fair votes system that works,’ says Ashdown, and then tells us to look at Germany.
He may have to change his tune if a swing to the right-wing Republicans shoves his beloved Free Democrats below the 5 per cent mark and so out of the Bundestag in the next elections.
But let that pass.
More important is the fact that nobody can really tell whether Germany has a successful economy because of its voting system (though, between you and me, this seems as unlikely as a cart pulling a horse) or whether it seems to have satisfactory constitutional arrangements because its economy has been working so well for so long.
THE inter-war Weimar Republic had a lovely PR system; it didn't prevent economic catastrophe and it let in Hitler.
His constitution was not at all what nice Mr Ashdown would approve, but the economy did rather well.
The connection between a country's constitution and its economic record is at best unproven.
I suspect all this ‘other European countries’ stuff did the opposition parties no good and that the admiration for all things European diminishes the further you move from the great and good.
One could detect a purr of satisfaction when John Major replied that actually some other European countries made rather a mess of things: that Belgium had taken 100 days to form a government; that the Italian political system was a disaster and the French one not much better; and that, if they had any sense, they would copy the way we do things.
There is little strong anti-European feeling in Britain, but there is little liking for being told how much better the Europeans are.
For a great many people, Europe is fine for business and fine for holidays because the sun shines and the booze is cheap, but Germans are still chaps whom we beat in wars, and the French still let you down and think only of themselves.
When politicians tell us to copy other European countries, the British are more likely to say ‘Sod off’ than ‘Hear, hear’.
Mrs Thatcher understood that and so, it seems, does Major, in his milder manner.
Which is one reason why he is back in Downing Street and Paddy Ashdown is still dreaming dreams — of ‘other European countries’ of course.
Obituary of Dr Peter Mitchell
DR PETER MITCHELL, the biochemist who has died aged 71, won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1978 for his achievement in explaining the chemical processes by which living cells generate energy from food.
His research on ‘bio-energetics’ led him to develop the prize-winning chemiosmotic theory while at Edinburgh University in the early 1960s.
Later he set up his own research centre, the Glynn Research Laboratories in Cornwall.
The Nobel citation praised Mitchell for his contribution to a deeper understanding of biological energy transfer through the formulation of his theory, which involves charged particles (protons) being driven across membranes within cells.
The theory was initially received with some scepticism by fellow-scientists.
But work in Mitchell's and other laboratories showed that his basic postulates were sound.
The theory has been somewhat modified to fit subsequent experimental evidence, and some of the details are still debated, but its general thrust is widely accepted.
Peter Dennis Mitchell was born at Mitcham, Surrey, on Sept 29 1920 and educated at Queen's College, Taunton, and Jesus College, Cambridge.
He stayed on at the Cambridge biochemistry department as demonstrator until 1955, when he moved to Edinburgh University as director of the chemical biology unit of the Department of Zoology, where he became senior lecturer and then Reader.
In 1964 he founded the Glynn Research Laboratories, where he directed biochemical research until 1986.
He was also visiting professor at King's College, London.
Mitchell first proposed his chemiosmotic theory in 1961.
It explains how cells convert food into metabolic energy, in an area outside the nucleus where adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is produced during respiration.
The Nobel citation noted that his discovery would be useful for energy conversion technology.
At the time Mitchell felt a little embarrassed by the Nobel Prize, as he thought scientific effort was essentially collaborative.
He refused an invitation from the EC's energy authority to investigate the possibilities of translating electricity, generated within green plants, into a new source of fuel: he did not care for the clause giving the EC the right to suppress anything in the eventual reports.
Peter Mitchell was delightfully informal, a connoisseur of the unexpected and unconventional.
He minted his own silver pieces, and enjoyed music, thinking, inventing, sailing and restoring old houses.
He won many prizes and honours.
He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1974 and an honorary Fellow of Jesus in 1980; won the British Biochemical Society's CIBA Medal and Prize for outstanding research in 1973, and the Royal Society's Copley Medal in 1981.
His publications include Chemiosmotic Coupling in Oxidative and PhotosyntheticPhosphorylation (1966) and Chemiosmotic Coupling and Energy Transduction (1968).
He married, in 1958, Helen, daughter of Lt-Col R P T ffrench; they had three sons and a daughter.
Obituary of Stuart Surridge
STUART SURRIDGE, who has died aged 74, was celebrated both as a manufacturer of cricket bats and equipment, and above all as a uniquely successful captain of Surrey County Cricket Club.
In the five seasons under his command at the Kennington Oval, from 1952 to 1956, Surrey won five County Championships in a row.
When he handed over to Peter May, another two titles followed immediately.
The successive run of seven is unique in cricket history — unequalled even by Yorkshire, which has never exceeded a sequence of four.
South London bred, Walter Stuart Surridge was born at Herne Hill on Sept 3 1917 and educated at Emanuel School, Wandsworth, and in the Oval cricket classes during the Easter holidays.
Surridge emerged from club cricket as a tearaway, fast-medium bowler, a dangerous hitter and, more than anything else, as a fearless catcher close to the wicket.
But he was close on 34 when, in 1951, he played his first full season for Surrey under M R Barton.
This was clearly to prepare him for the task of taking over the captaincy the next summer.
Surridge inherited and greatly expanded the family bat-making and sporting equipment firm.
Many a schoolboy first took guard with a bat bearing the legend ‘Stuart Surridge’.
He is survived by his wife, Betty, and his son Stuart ‘Tiger’ Surridge, who carries on the family firm.
E W Swanton writes: Alec Bedser has recorded how, before W S Surridge started his first season as captain, he made this entry in his diary: ‘Surrey will be champions for the next five years.’
To me the story — egotistical as it is — rings true.
For of all Surridge's virtues as a leader a bounding self-confidence was paramount.
Surridge certainly had at his disposal two great bowlers in Alec Bedser and Jim Laker, and another, soon to make his name for England, in Tony Lock.
Peter Loader, another Test bowler, came a little later.
Surridge also had a batsman of top pedigree (but only one) in Peter May, and a wicket-keeper, Arthur McIntyre, scarcely inferior to Godfrey Evans.
In the Surrey side he inherited were a few reputedly awkward personalities.
They did not remain so for long.
In the postwar euphoria big crowds flocked regularly to the Oval to see the attacking cricket on which Surridge insisted.
His instinct was aggressive in all respects, especially in the fielding.
The strong bowling was supported by four brilliant close catchers — Lock, Ken Barrington, Mickey Stewart (the present England team manager) and, not least, the captain himself.
John Warr, his opponent in many a tough fight, has described Stuart Surridge as ‘an enthusiastic extrovert buccaneering risk-taker’.
I would add only that, in truth, the keenness on the field at tense moments sometimes grew rather too fierce — slightly akin to what one deplores today.
In 1956, Surridge's last year, Surrey became the first county to beat the Australians since Hampshire did so in 1912.
As he approached the age of 40 he bowed out in favour of Peter May, an heir-apparent who had succeeded Sir Leonard Hutton as England captain two years earlier.
In his career Surridge took 506 wickets at 28 runs each and in 267 matches took 375 catches.
As a batsman he made 3,882 runs at a modest average, but showed himself a robust tail-ender when it mattered.
On his Suffolk property Stuart Surridge grew willow trees.
Obituary of Sir Raghavan Pillai
SIR RAGHAVAN PILLAI, the eminent Indian civil servant, who has died aged 93, achieved the distinction of holding positions at the highest levels both during the Raj and after Independence.
Narayan Raghavan Pillai was born of Nair (warrior) stock on July 24 1898 at Trivandrum, in the state of Travancore and Cochin.
He was educated at Madras University, where he took a first in English, and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he gained firsts in both Natural Sciences and Law.
Like many patriotic Indians of his generation, Pillai was faced with two choices: whether to join the Congress party or one of the Imperial Services — the Indian Army or the Indian Civil Service (ICS).
Although Indians had been allowed to join the ICS since 1858, only a handful had actually sat its fiercely competitive examinations, let alone passed.
Pillai, though, came second, and in 1922 joined the elite body, known to some as the ‘heaven born’.
Pillai was sent as assistant commissioner of the Raipur District of the Central Provinces, where he learned ‘on the job’ the art of administering to the needs of half a million people.
He spent half the year in the saddle, touring villages to collect revenues, dispense justice as a magistrate (with the power to send miscreants to prison for up to two years) and even to inspect opium dens.
In 1927 Pillai was appointed assistant collector of customs in Madras and two years later became deputy director of commercial Intelligence in Calcutta.
In 1932 he was appointed deputy secretary to the Commerce Department of the Government of India, where he remained until the end of the Raj 15 years later.
Pillai's insistence on specialising in commercial affairs enabled him to avoid the sort of tough political decisions — such as suppressing Congress — which the generalists in provincial postings were forced to implement.
He earned a reputation as a a first-rate draftsman.
As the Second World War approached Pillai was intimately involved in efforts to develop Indian industry for war production.
India was largely cut off for long periods, and its under-developed arms and textile industries were required to supply substantial quantities of ammunition and tents to British forces in the Middle and Far East.
After Independence, Partition and the departure of most British and Muslim cadres from the ICS, Nehru, the new Prime Minister, who had previously been less than sympathetic to the ICS, came increasingly to depend upon men such as Pillai, who — embodying the Service's traditions of discretion and loyalty — had no difficulty in serving a new master.
‘His business,’ one observer noted of Pillai, ‘is to do a good job, whether the job is the procuring of animal manure or the crushing of nationalism or the nursing of village sports.’
In 1948 Pillai became India's Commissioner-General for Economic and Trade Affairs, with the rank of Ambassador, and led the Indian delegation to the GATT talks.
As head of the first Indian mission in Europe, Pillai laid the groundwork for the development of the Indian Foreign Service.
On one occasion in Belfast, at a launch of two ships built for the Bombay Steam & Navigation Co, he used coconuts instead of champagne at the ceremony and made sure that the Indian Swastika — which symbolises good luck — was marked on the side of the vessels.
In 1949 Pillai was appointed Cabinet Secretary and, despite aspersions on the ‘patriotism’ of ICS officers (often from those whose ideological loyalties were either to Peking or to Moscow), upheld the tradition of Civil Service neutrality.
In 1952 Pillai was appointed Secretary-General of the Ministry of External Affairs, or Permanent Under-Secretary.
He loyally implemented Nehru's policies of anti-colonialism and non-alignment, and in 1954 accompanied him to China.
Pillai was also prominent in attempts to achieve a solution to the Kashmir dispute.
When he retired as Secretary-General in 1960 he was given the Padma Vibhushan, the second-highest Indian honour; in the Lok Sabha (India's Lower House) Nehru paid an extremely rare tribute to a civil servant, saying that Pillai's departure created ‘a certain blank’.
In 1961 Pillai became the first Indian chairman of GKW (the Indian subsidiary of GKN).
In 1966, as the doyen of Indian civil servants, he was recalled to preside over the report of a commission on the future of the Indian Foreign Service.
Lloyd George once declared that the British element in the ICS was the ‘steel frame’ of the Indian constitutional structure, and prophesied that ‘if you take the steel frame out, the structure will collapse.’
But Lloyd George underestimated the soundness of that edifice; and the fact that the sinews of government did not atrophy after the British departure can largely be ascribed to the tradition of service personified by ‘Rag’ Pillai.
Pillai was appointed CBE in 1937, CIE in 1939 and KCIE in 1946; he was elected an honorary Fellow of Trinity Hall in 1970.
He married, in 1928, Edith Minnie Arthurs, who died in 1976.
They had two sons.