

Lloyd Webber pays record £10m for Canaletto
By Georgina Adam
ANDREW Lloyd Webber paid a record £10,120,000 for a Canaletto yesterday when he bought The Old Horse Guards at Christie's in London to ensure the painting remains in Britain.
The picture was consigned by trustees of Viscount FitzHarris and was estimated at £8–10 million.
Heritage groups had feared it would leave the country after the Tate Gallery failed to buy it before the sale.
The 44-year-old composer said: ‘When they let me know they could not afford to pay more than £6 million, I realised we had to step in to save it for the nation.
Al though Canaletto is Italian, this is a quintessentially British painting.
Fortunately their approach coincided with my plans for a charitable foundation to buy art for Britain.
‘It has hardly been seen so far and it really must go on public view.
I haven't decided yet exactly where it will first be shown.’
Mr Lloyd Webber, in London to receive an Ivor Novello Award for his musical Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, added: ‘I might have to write another musical before I can think of doing this again.
I might also have to fly back to France economy class’.
Mr David Mason, the London dealer acting for the composer, said: ‘He felt strongly that the picture shouldn't leave the country, and the two underbidders on the telephones were both Americans.’
Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman of the National Art Collection Fund, said: ‘This sale is a lost opportunity for British public collections, but I am glad that it is staying in the country.
The price achieved is a timely illustration of the challenge which lies before our new Secretary of State for National Heritage.’
Mr Lloyd Webber has built up one of the country's finest collections of Pre-Raphaelites, which is split between his 10,000-acre country estate in Berkshire and his home in Eaton Square.
In 1990 he set a world record, buying Frederick Lord Leighton's Dante in Exile at £1.1 million at Sotheby's.
Asked why he had changed tack in his purchasing, Mr Mason, his dealer, said: ‘Mr Lloyd Webber has made his money in Britain in the last decade, and he wants to put some back to save the finest of Canaletto's London views.’
The picture, full title ‘The Old Horse Guards, London, from St James's Park’, was painted in 1749 during his 10-year stay in London.
It shows the Parade with the Admiralty building, the spire of St Martin-in-the-Fields and the entrance to Downing Street, with the brick Old Horse Guards building.
It was demolished in 1749/50 and replaced by the New Horse Guards.
Its sale did much to improve the results of Christie's most important Old Master sale of the season.
The star lot, Holbein's Lady with a Squirrel, was withdrawn two weeks ago by Lord Cholmondeley, when he sold it to the National Gallery for £10 million.
The other notable picture, Rembrandt's early and small Daniel and Cyrus before the Idol of Bel, estimated at ‘over £5 million’ failed to find a buyer after bidding stopped at £6 million.
After the sale, the dealer Bruno Meissener said: ‘The estimate was too high, and collectors want Rembrandts to be later, larger and more obviously Rembrandt.
It is not representative enough of his work.’
However records were broken by Salvator Rosa (a self-portrait made £440,000) and Van den Eeckhout (Soldiers made £374,000).
The sale totalled £14,356,595, with 40 per cent bought in by value.
Unveiled: the jigsaw that took ten years
BY IAN SHAW
A FULL-SCALE replica of the largest mosaic in northern Europe has gone on display at the Victoria Rooms in Bristol, writes Ian Shaw, Archaeology Correspondent.
At 200 square metres, the Great Orpheus Pavement was the crowning glory of a luxurious 65-room Roman villa built near the Cotswold village of Woodchester in about AD 325.
It covered the floor of the main dining room and had a pool and fountain in its centre.
Dr Roger Wilson, Lecturer in Classical Archaeology at Trinity College, Dublin, described the mosaic as ‘a magnificent portrayal of Orpheus charming the birds and animals’.
The pavement was made in the famous Corinium workshop at Cirencester, which produced many mosaics for other Roman villas in the Cotswolds.
It has taken 10 years for Robert and John Woodward, two brothers in the village of Wotton-under-Edge, to piece together replicas of the 1,500,000 coloured clay tesserae of the mosaic, using nearly 300 photographs of the original.
First discovered in 1695, the pavement has been repeatedly buried and re-exposed over the last three centuries.
It was reburied for the last time in 1973 after the number of visitors was found to be too high for the Cotswold village of Woodchester to cope with.
In creating the replica pavement, Mr Bob Woodward, a builder by trade, has undertaken such thorough background research that he is now regarded as a leading international expert on Roman mosaics.
He described the task of reproducing the mosaic as ‘something akin to piecing together a 1,500,000-piece jigsaw with the picture to be copied only half complete’.
All profits from the display, from today until May 9, will go to the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust.
The Arts: Bitter irony in a glossy package FILMS
Nigella Lawson on a soft-focus adaptation of a disturbing novel; a stunning portrait of post-war Germany; and the rest of the week's releases
By NIGELLA LAWSON
Voyager is perhaps an unfortunate title for a film that all too often fills the screen with beautifully crafted pictures from glossy holiday brochures.
There comes a point where one begins to suspect that it could be part of some Euro-plot to boost tourism: France is white-napped tables and hot coffee, a stroll round the Louvre, a lingering bistro lunch; Italy, a glass of grappa, a plate of pasta and the mottled-stone lure of antiquity; Greece, a Technicolor turquoise panorama of sea and sky.
In this film, the plot comes by postcard.
But Voyager is more than just a pretty face; one would expect no less from Volker Schlondorff.
The man who brought you Heinrich Boll (The Lost Honour of Katerina Blum), Gunter Grass (The Tin Drum), Proust (Swann in Love) is no purveyor of the saccharine snap.
Rather it is as if , for him, taste represented thought.
Voyager is Schlondorff's version of the Swiss writer Max Frisch's Homo Faber, a flatly delivered first-person narrative, which circles, like a vulture, around the themes of identity and fate.
The detached narrative voice of the novel is faithfully reproduced here, yet somehow on celluloid there is a drama-draining sense of dislocation, at odds with the lushness of the images.
Walter Faber is a man dedicated to the world of science and fact, who denies and resists the irrationality of coincidence.
Frisch is not exactly an existentialist, but his book is shot through with a certain emotionally short-circuiting ennui, a weary horror that life is nothing but a random yet poignant series of coincidences.
Waiting to board a plane in Venezuela, Faber suddenly feels faint, and goes to the bathroom, hoping that the plane will leave without him.
But he is found by the air hostess and bustled on board.
The plane he so nearly didn't catch crashes, and he is forced into befriending a vaguely familiar-looking German who turns out to be the brother of an old friend…
And so it goes on until he boards a ship about to set Voyager (15, Curzon West End, 113 mins) Europa (15, Chelsea, Everyman, 114 mins) sail for France and meets Sabeth, the pony-tailed young woman who is his ‘fate’, leading him back to the woman he once loved and to his own Greek tragedy.
Too many hints are dropped; it is not hard to guess what ensues.
Visually, this is a spectacular film, all inky images and achingly authentic period detail.
But the bleak, bitter irony of the book is subsumed; the soft-focus, slo-mo romance threatens to turn this voyage into a sentimental journey.
And yet this film etches itself upon one's consciousness.
Some essential honesty about it brings it back from the brink.
Sam Shepard, all Aldous Huxley ranginess and neurotic alertness, brings to the part of Faber a brittle dolour.
Julie Delpy (last seen in Tavernier's Passion Beatrice) imbues Sabeth with all the solemnity of youth without ever dwindling into winsomeness, and Barbara Sukowa, as Faber's early love, has a robust mystique.
YOU ARE in a cinema.
On the screen flicker black-and-white images.
From the speakers drones the voice of Max Von Sydow.
You are being hypnotised.
‘On the mental count of 10’ you will enter Europa.
You will be led to the chaos and corruption of post-war Germany that is Europa.
Irritating, isn't it?
There is nothing more resistance-inducing than a second-person narrative.
It's like being lectured to and bored at the same time.
Europa threatens to do both throughout its 117-minute duration, but this Danish/Swedish/German/French co-production at least has a good excuse: the experience is meant to be unpleasant.
‘I have made,’ says Lars Von Trier, the film's Danish director, ‘a film that I would be afraid to see.’
Kafka-esque is inevitably the word that will be employed to describe the image-battering confusion and dark horror of this picture of the collapsed state, as much moral as political, of Germany in the weeks immediately following the end of the war.
Yet the teasing surrealism and lugubrious absurdism are, rather, reminiscent of Max Frisch's contemporary and fellow-countryman Friedrich Durrenmatt.
And one does rather feel that the director was wearing a black polo-neck throughout the film's shooting.
Leopold Kessler is a young American, of German parentage, who has arrived in Germany in 1945 to make his own restitution, as it were, to the country his father abandoned.
Working for the train company Zentropa, he meets the boss's daughter, Katerina Hartmann (the compelling Barbara Sukowa again), and is in turn befriended by the entire family.
The family, complete with pet priest, is neatly emblematic of Germany's guilt-stained record in the recent past, a past of collusion and corruption.
As the Allies, led by a wheezing and cynical Eddie Constantine, investigate to ‘test the guilt of the country’, the country grows defensive.
‘After all,’ Katerina Hartmann defiantly says, ‘we were just fighting for our country like the rest of the world.’
The moral low point comes when a Jew (played by Von Trier himself) is forced to attest, falsely, to the Hartmanns' kindness and help during the war.
A Special Jury and Technical prize-winner at last year's Cannes, Europa, for all Max Von Sydow's would-be mesmeric intonings, is often more numbing than entrancing.
The technical tricksiness — black and white smudged with colour, back projections and spinning symbolism — does slip into certain film-school idiom, turgid and clever-clever.
But the atmosphere of the film is unforgettable, a stunning assault on the unconscious.
You won't like visiting Europa, as Von Sydow warns, but it's worth making the journey.
The Arts: The old joke's on Sly
By NIGELLA LAWSON
OY-OY-OY, as they say in America.
What is happening here?
Better you don't ask.
Sylvester Stallone is playing comedy again.
as if Oscar didn't teach him a lesson.
Comedy is not about the jokes you tell, not just about how funny you even tell them, but simply about whether you're funny or not.
Arnold Schwarzenegger is no better an actor, worse actually, but he is funny.
When Sly Stallone (wearing, these days, more eye-liner than Sophia Loren) is up there, playing it for laughs on the set, the worst thing is not that you don't laugh, but that you feel anxious for him.
This is not good.
But the story so far: Stallone is Joe Bomowski, a cop in LA whose Mom, Tutti (played by Estelle Getty from Golden Girls, and looking like a cross between Dr Ruth and Lucille Ball), comes visiting with her pet pooch from New Jersey.
Except for the fact that she isn't meant to be Jewish, we are in stock Jewish-mother territory.
Why have you come with a suitcase of canned pineapple chunks, asks Sly.
They're your favourite, says Mom.
But you can get pineapple chunks in California, says Sly.
They're not the same as the ones from Noo Joisey, says Mom.
But they're canned, they taste exactly the same, says Sly.
Mom: My son the gor-may!
Laugh — I nearly reached for my 12-bore.
It's not that the jokes are not funny, but just that they are about as fresh as a tin of those pineapple chunks.
Mom grabs a megaphone as Sly's squad try to talk down a youth threatening to jump from a tall building, and regales everyone with her Joey's boyhood stories, his bed-wetting and toilet-training.
Embarrassing, huh?
Woody Allen did it better in Oedipus Wrecks.
One of the difficulties is that if Sly lacks a talent for comedy, Getty is devoid of charm.
You do not warm to this lady, who delivers her lines to camera as if waiting for the canned laughter.
Anyway, you could write the script.
You don't need to see the film to know what'll happen.
Mom gets involved in murder cases, car chases and mean-street shoot-outs, wins the day and her son's heart into the bargain.
Welcome to Grambo.
The Arts: Waking up to the terrors of the night TELEVISION
Richard Last reviews an investigation into the perils of sleepwalking and another into Red Star
By RICHARD LAST
LADY Macbeth is probably the best-known sleepwalker in European literature.
Her travails were the deserved reward for a bad conscience.
In real life, the affliction tends to get laughed at — unless you happen to be a sleepwalker, or to live with one.
Just how far the condition is from being any kind of a joke was vividly brought home in last night's QED (BBC1), Night Terrors.
One in 50 people suffer from attacks of night terrors.
In some cases they half-wake, perhaps 10 or 20 times in a night, screaming with unexplained fright.
In others, they may cause themselves serious injury from half-conscious nocturnal excursions.
What most disturbed the three long-standing sufferers in Bryn Higgins's programme was not just the absence of cause for their experiences, but the fact that the medical profession had no answer — and didn't seem particularly interested.
Rosemary, a young mother of two, and Clyde, a former Scots Guardsman, were lucky to be referred to the only NHS clinic which attempts to treat the condition.
They spent a night being monitored by infra-red cameras and many hours submitting to psychotherapy.
They were left with the feeling of not getting anywhere.
But at least they had been brought into contact with other sufferers.
Moya, once a business executive, went to a private clinic and was given an alarm clock which would wake her (so an expensive consultant gravely informed her) just before an attack.
It worked for six weeks, but then Moya's subconscious started waking her earlier.
The clinic responded with two more alarm clocks before prescribing drugs.
It sounded like a remarkable vindication of the NHS in the face of all the disagreeable things that have been said about it recently.
Moya, a seemingly relaxed woman in her forties, described her attacks, which she has been having for 20 years, as ‘an enormous blackness and fear, like being held under water’.
She was originally — and wrongly — diagnosed as epileptic.
Clyde, obviously a fairly tense type, confessed to feelings of hostility towards his mother: ‘Not once did she ever tell me she loved me.’
Rosemary apparently has to cope with her husband's anxiety that she could only be cured by becoming more ‘assertive’.
Despite experiences which have come close to destroying their lives, the three managed to appear remarkably cheerful as they faced the cameras in Moya's elegant house.
Perhaps the most important thing that QED will have done is to open other sufferers' eyes to the realisation that they are very far from being alone.
No one who has ever contemplated sending a parcel by British Rail's Red Star — minimum charge £23.50 for same-day delivery between stations, plus a lot more if you want door-to-door service — will be greatly surprised to learn that the operation is allegedly riddled with inefficiency, waste, and misdirection.
Dispatches (C4) went a lot further and, on the basis of British Rail's own recent inquiries, came up with a luridly tangled tale of opportunism, misappropriation and downright fraud.
According to producer John Mair's extremely detailed investigation, British Rail got hopelessly out of their depth when they escalated Red Star from a simple station-to-station service to home delivery, and then to an international operation.
Red Star's subsidiary, Road Express, started by recruiting a fleet of privately chartered taxis.
They ended with loss-making Continental involvement and directors said to be drawing two lots of salaries and dividends for the same service.
Mair interviewed a clutch of former BR executives who claimed they had been made redundant for pressing their inquiries too closely, and the understandably defensive chairman of British Rail's Parcels Board, Gordon Pettitt, who admitted that things had gone wrong but couldn't see what all the fuss was about.
For the paying customers — you and me — I'd have thought an auditors' report claiming ‘mismanagement and excessive expenditure’ was a pretty good start.
The Arts: Spellbound by Prokofiev OPERA
Robert Henderson reviews an enthralling staging of The Fiery Angel
By ROBERT HENDERSON
The Fiery Angel has long held an almost obsessional fascination for Prokofiev enthusiasts.
Those who saw it at the time have never been able to erase the startling impact that it made when it was given its short-lived British premiere at Sadler's Wells in 1965.
Even now, nearly 70 years after its composition, the combination of its lurid story and the highly charged frenzy of its music sharply divides opinion.
Ostensibly it is a tale of the supernatural; of religious hysteria and demonic possession set in 16th-century Germany at the time of the Inquisition.
But the novel by Valery Bryusov from which the opera is derived also symbolically re-enacts a tense, real-life emotional triangle that involved Bryusov himself and two other Russian symbolist poets, Andrey Bely and Nina Petrovskaya.
For this first Covent Garden production in the original Russian of Prokofiev's disturbingly enigmatic work, David Freeman and his associate producer Robert Chevara have completely entered into its strangely unnerving world.
The towering black walls of David Roger's designs and the shadowy, creepily menacing presence of the remarkable St Petersburg Maryinsky Acrobatic Troupe create a compact sequence of vividly picturesque tableaux, encompassing scenes of personal and collective mania, devilish magic, exorcism, sado-masochism and touches of macabre humour.
The central role is that of the demented Renata —‘half-saint, half-whore, torn between the two extremes of sexual indulgence and religious self-denial’.
It contains passages of terrifying vocal difficulty.
But, as she demonstrated so memorably in last year's auspicious Prom performance, it holds no terrors for the young soprano Galina Gorchakova, who gives a performance of thrilling virtuosity and commitment.
The imposing, darkly compassionate singing of Sergei Leiferkus as the knight Ruprecht who falls so disastrously under Renata's spell is as authoritative as in last year's Prom.
And the many real or invented minor figures who weave in and out of the opera, such as the Hostess, Fortune Teller, cabbalistic Bookseller, Faust and Mephistopheles, provide an exemplary portrait gallery for some of the company's finest character singers.
But Prokofiev's opera owes just as much of its enthralling power to the brilliance of its orchestral writing, and in Edward Downes it has a superlative master of the composer's idiomatic style.
Both music and drama unfold with an inexorable concentration to the riotously naked, yet scrupulously choreographed mania of the orgiastic final scene.
At the end of the opening night there was an unannounced ceremony, which clearly delighted the audience as much as the eagerly anticipated performance of the work itself.
After proper tribute had been paid to the heroic efforts of its singers and orchestra, the Royal Opera's general director, Jeremy Isaacs, came on to the stage to make a special presentation to Sir Edward Downes.
This was in recognition both of the 40th anniversary of his debut with the company and of the strenuous part he has played in bringing to fruition this ambitious project.
Sponsored by the Friends of Covent Garden, ‘The Fiery Angel’ is a co-production with the Kirov Opera of St Petersburg and the first instalment of a collaboration between the two theatres which will be continued in 1995 with Prokofiev's ‘War and Peace’.
The Arts: Drama, not dogma THEATRE
Charles Spencer on an improved Howard Brenton
By CHARLES SPENCER
SIX years ago, in the introduction to a collection of his plays, Howard Brenton was still trumpeting his adherence to Marxism and looking forward to an unstoppable ‘British Revolution’.
Autres temps, autres moeurs.
Since then, communist countries across Europe have found their freedom and Mrs Thatcher has been replaced by Mr Major and his vision of a kinder Britain.
The old certainties have gone, on both Left and Right, and the loss of dogma seems to have done wonders for Brenton as a dramatist.
Berlin Bertie, his new play at the Royal Court, Sloane Square, is worlds removed from the Brenton we used to know and found so hard to love.
Though part of its subject is the fall of the Berlin Wall, he has abandoned his epic mode, in which cartoon-like characters, glibly identified by class and conviction, debated big issues like the collapse of capitalism and the coming socialist utopia.
This is a domestic drama, with characters you come to care about as people.
It is funny, painful and moving, and although it is rooted in the detail of individual lives, it says far more about the way we live than the windy bellicosity of much of Brenton's previous work.
There is no point in pretending that Brenton has gone soft.
The man who gave us The Romans in Britain still knows how to make an audience feel uncomfortable.
The action is set in a south London council flat of hideous squalor over the Easter weekend of 1990, and it begins with a young man effing and blinding in a crescendo of impotent, inarticulate fury, before picking up a television and hurling it across the room.
But the play's compassion and mordant comedy make for compelling viewing.
The two central characters are middle-class sisters whose lives have reached a crisis.
Alice Brine is a social worker who, we finally discover, was the negligent official in a hideous case of child abuse.
Rosa, her older sister, is the wife of a pastor who played a leading part in the democracy movement in East Berlin.
But, after a chilling encounter with a member of the Stasi just before the fall of the Wall (we see it in a flashback), she has come running back to England, her marriage and her Christian belief in tatters.
The question Brenton appears to be asking, and it is surely as relevant to himself as to his characters, is how do you live after faith and hope have gone?
To his great credit he comes up with no easy answers, but nor does he give in to glib despair.
The very empathy (charity in the broadest and best sense of the word) with which he observes his characters seems to point to a better way forward.
And the ending of the play is tantalisingly ambivalent, representing either a fresh start or a flight from responsibility, depending on your point of view.
Berlin Bertie mixes gritty realism with poetic passages in which the five characters step out of the action to express their innermost thoughts and desires.
It sounds fey, but it works surprisingly well in Danny Boyle's gripping, passionate production.
Penny Downie gives an astonishing performance of self-lacerating despair as the social worker, vainly attempting to achieve merciful oblivion on a bender of drugs and booze, but I felt Diana Rigg could have dug deeper into the character of Rosa, though her prim Englishness undoubtedly makes a fine and comic contrast with Downie's degradation.
The three supporting roles are all superbly played.
Nicholas Woodeson combines high comedy with cold menace as Berlin Bertie, the secret policeman who follows Rosa to England; Kevin Allen is stubbornly endearing as Alice's dim, foul-mouthed and devoted toy boy; and Susan Lynch gives a touching performance as a waif-like Gothette who wants to be a mime artist, poor thing.
This is a bruising, emotional play, full of surprises and sudden laughter, and you leave the theatre feeling strangely uplifted.
I never expected to say that of a work by Howard Brenton.
The Arts: Building up to a fiesta or siesta?
Expo 92 opens in Seville on Monday.
Is it worth a visit?
Kenneth Powell tours the huge culture park and finds the British pavilion's exhibits something of a disgrace
By KENNETH POWELL
VAST, variegated and hugely expensive, an apparently random mix of the earnest, the entertaining and the purely kitsch, Expo 92, which opens in Seville on Monday, is certain, if nothing else, to change the face of Andalusia.
When the Expo closes on October 12, Seville and its surrounding region — still one of the poorest in Europe — will be left with new motorways and high-speed railways, a magnificent new central station, an airport (the work of architect Rafael Moneo) which outshines Madrid's, and a technological infrastructure which will, it is hoped, lay the foundations of industrial growth and prosperity.
Many historic buildings in the old city of Don Juan and Carmen will have been repaired and the Expo site, across the River Guadalquivir from the city centre and containing four million sq ft of new buildings, is scheduled to survive as a science park.
(New bridges, the best of them by Santiago Calatrava, provide access.)
Whether or not the projected 18 million visitors materialise, Seville has nothing to lose, and plenty to gain, by hosting the event, a key part of the ‘Year of Spain’.
The government has spent £1 billion on the Expo site alone and expects to recoup the cost from the visitors.
But is Expo 92 the ‘world of information’ its organisers claim — or will it be merely the greatest funfair in Spanish history, a fiesta open every day until 4 am?
Does it really contain ‘the most amazing, precious and thrilling things from all over the world’?
Will it do anything to promote peace, international understanding and progress?
Such claims have been made for a succession of international exhibitions since the first, the Great Exhibition, opened in Hyde Park in 1851.
Paxton's Crystal Palace, the first large-scale prefabricated building, was hailed as ‘a symbol of universal happiness and brotherhood’, six million people attended, and a phenomenon was launched.
Over the next century, ‘universal expositions’ were staged in Paris, New York and Chicago: Seville is the largest since Montreal (1967) and Osaka (1970).
A visit to the site of Expo 92 barely 10 days before the opening left many questions unanswered.
A number of the national pavilions remain structurally incomplete, while many more have yet to receive their contents.
There have been teething troubles with the monorail and cable-car (essential accessories in the futuristic world of expos).
But the big central pavilions which house striking multi-media shows devoted to the central themes of the Expo (discovery, navigation, nature, the future) are complete, as are the many performance spaces.
(Pavarotti, Domingo and Carreras will be among the musical turns.)
However, for all its attractions (they include talking robots, the world's biggest TV screen, simulated black holes and ‘time tunnels’), Expo 92 offers a confusing view of the world, often falling between entertainment and instruction.
Some nations seem uncertain what their national image should be.
What, for example, is one to make of New Zealand's pavilion, fronted with a giant rockery, complete with plastic seagulls and mechanical penguins?
How can Greece, the birthplace of Classical architecture, justify a mirror-glass box with spindly steel pavilions, or the Vatican another exercise in plate glass which appears to have been spawned by Texas Homecare?
Monaco has produced yet more mirror glass, with a doll's house Georgian faade, Pakistan something that looks like a pretentious curry house in Southall.
For sheer vulgar awfulness, look at the pavilions of China and Morocco, business-park sheds ‘customised’ with ‘traditional’details.
Kitsch can, of course, be fun.
The Saudi pavilion, designed by the American SITE group (famous for wacky supermarkets), is surprisingly witty.
Some nations who have tried to be serious have ended up being dull.
Canada, Russia, Italy (an especially grim specimen) and the Latin American countries (which clubbed together to build one huge, boring block) fall into this category.
The Norwegians have done rather better — their pavilion (by Pal Henry Engh) is both entertaining and architecturally serious, true Expo material.
Imre Makowecz's Hungarian pavilion, all timber and looking like a rustic church, is original, economical and (most important) says something about Hungary.
Wood is also the raw material for Japan's pavilion; designed by Tadao Ando it is a serious, even solemn, piece of architecture.
The typical visitor (paying an adult admission charge of £23) is probably less likely to be interested in the architecture of the pavilions than in their contents.
The Americans, whose still unfinished premises (the result of Gulf War economies) consist of a pair of recycled geodesic domes, promise the world's greatest film show.
Monaco offers an aquarium.
The Australians have not only a pavilion but also a reproduction outback sheep farm, complete with windmill.
Italy will show ‘works of art of incalculable value’.
The Vatican's pavilion will provide daily Mass…
Jumping on the Expo 92 bandwagon doesn't come cheap.
Britain has spent well over £30 million — two-thirds of it on Nicholas Grimshaw's pavilion.
When the UK decided to be represented at Seville, Mrs Thatcher declared that Britain's building should be ‘quite the best’.
Her hopes have been fulfilled.
The pavilion, over 200 ft long, was prefabricated in Britain and assembled on the site from a ‘kit of parts’.
It is thoughtful and finely crafted, rooted as much in the British engineering tradition (which produced the Crystal Palace) as in ‘high-tech’.
Indeed, Grimshaw strove to make it low-tech.
Natural ventilation is used instead of all-over air-conditioning, and further cooling (Seville is scorching in high summer) is provided by a 40 ft high wall of water, covering the entire east faade, conceived and executed in conjunction with the sculptor William Pye.
The ‘waterfall’ was intended to be powered by solar cells on the roof.
In the event, back-up power from the mains is needed.
Inside, however, Grimshaw's pavilion is cool, lofty…and, I'm sorry to say, somewhat empty.
The imagination which produced this imposing structure did not extend to the interior.
Our government insisted that commercial sponsorship (totalling £6 million) be raised for the interior.
Hence we have an up-ended Land Rover, a display of Royal Doulton china, and two pseudo-Classical showcases full of Marks & Spencer products occupying the ground floor, along with a rather tacky souvenir shop.
Upstairs there are some displays about science and engineering which are pedestrian by Science Museum standards and two small theatres for audio-visuals.
The lower ground floor contains a rather characterless, Docklands-style pub.
After the drama of Pye's water wall, this is all a bitter disappointment and something of a disgrace.
Is this really the best Britain has to offer?
Do the sponsors feel that this tawdry display does them any good?
(British Steel, incidentally, a major backer, wisely contented itself with anchoring a rather elegant yacht outside, a nice counterpoise to Grimshaw's distinctly nautical architecture.)
So, if you get to Seville between now and October, and find the idea of a day trekking the Expo site appealing, give the interior of our pavilion a miss, unless you're desperate for a pint of English bitter.
Expo apart — and I do not recommend a visit unless you are in the vicinity — Seville is a wonderful city and the Sevillanos admire Britain.
They even have a branch of M & S. Come to think of it, perhaps Grimshaw's pavilion is the ideal location, come the autumn, for the first out-of-town branch of that great British enterprise to hit the Iberian peninsula.
Letter to the Editor: Television's price for Thatcherism
SIR — I agree with George Walden that David Mellor should beware acting hastily against the BBC for its election coverage (article, April 13).
Having done my first sound broadcast in the Forties and made my first television appearance in 1952, I can remember when Lord Reith's belief that broadcasting's prime function was to inform, to entertain and give all sides a chance to state their case, still reigned.
The horizontal love scenes, which now ‘educate’ any teenyboppers who do not already know the facts of life, would have earned instant dismissal in his day.
It is true that one can scan a whole evening's programmes and find only puerile junk on every channel.
This is despite the fact that there are such programmes as Mastermind, a sheepdog series (with which I happen to be involved — I declare my interest) and superb epics by the Natural History Unit.
But we should not forget that this is the inevitable result of Mrs Thatcher's much vaunted Law of the Marketplace (or Jungle?), which has forced producers to be ‘different’, if not better, to catch the highest number of viewers.
The thousands of redundancies, in the cause of ‘economies’, owe most to government insistence on having 25 per cent of programmes farmed out to private enterprise with its higher regard for profit than for human dignity.
If Mr Major really wishes to ditch the more arrogant whims of his predecessor, now is the time for him to put his money where his mouth is.
PHIL DRABBLE Abbots Bromley, Staffs
Letter to the Editor: ‘That thing!’ forgotten
SIR — In his review of the National Theatre's Pygmalion (April 13), Charles Spencer rightly stresses the categorisation of Higgins as an emotional cripple rather than a potential bridegroom for Eliza.
He also perceptively draws attention to the embarrassed key phrase, ‘that thing!’, uttered by the professor when the subject of sex comes up.
Significantly, Leslie Howard, in the famous film of 1938, misunderstood this phrase, which he uttered as if it referred not to sex but to Eliza herself.
One immediately imagined Higgins as a roue who would accept sex with a girl of his own class.
This was all part of a romanticising process that has afflicted Pygmalion for more than half a century.
The film makers of 1938 slipped in, behind Shaw's back, a sentimental ending in which Eliza improbably returned to Higgins and in our own time the play has become operetta fodder.
One dreads a future version in which Freud is set to work on the decision of Higgins and Pickering to set up together as two old bachelors.
ROBERT BOAS Brixworth, Northants
Letter to the Editor: Sloppiest speakers
SIR — And so say all of us to W. F. Deedes's timely remarks (Commentary, April 13) about the sorry state of spoken English.
It is fast becoming the sloppiest language in Europe.
Not only are aitches dropped, appalling vocals now reign virtually supreme in the realm of pronunciation.
We are even hearing BBC reporters, not to mention Sgt Lewis of Morse with his Oxford background, pronouncing ‘either’ as ‘eeether’.
An officially estimated 75 per cent of British children speak their mother tongue, which they hear at home, abysmally, and will, in the course of time, pass on to their own children, since, after all, languages are first learnt with the ears and not grammar books.
It has thus become a vicious circle of spoken mumbo jumbo.
I believe that by around the year 2020 most foreign countries will be turning out better English-speaking teachers than in Britain.
It seems that we no longer take pride in our oral heritage.
Prof MICHAEL de HAVILLAND Murcia, Spain
Peterborough: Belting up
SENSIBLY, speeches were made at the start of Sir Kingsley Amis's 70th birthday party at the Savoy Hotel yesterday.
The old tiger himself pronounced it a good idea, even if his friends had to listen in a state of uncharacteristic sobriety.
Like Polonius, Amis passed on his secrets to an easy life.
One: when confronted with a warm bottle of champagne, fill a teapot with ice, pour in the champagne, and swill before serving.
Two: Japanese sake, far too filthy to drink, can be used to scour saucepans.
Three: portly old men should use belt and braces, in case their trousers burst open; the belt hides the disaster.
Four: ‘Never forget to count your blessings.
It won't take long.’
Lady Kilmarnock, Amis's first wife, roared with laughter (she and Lord K share digs with him — an unusual menage), while Paul Fussell, an old American friend of Amis, disclosed: ‘Kingsley has been sent a clean set of underwear as a birthday present.
It must have been from an old girlfriend.’
NOW that Nicholas Soames has access to a ministerial Montego, what will happen to Sutton, his old chauffeur?
According to Soames's sister, Emma, the admirable Sutton would answer Soames's car phone in the manner of a country butler, asking callers to hold the line while he saw if Sir was in.
PERSONAL VIEW FM: the long and short of it exposed at last 
By BRENDA MADDOX
THE propaganda has gone out; most of us have obeyed.
Buy an FM radio.
The reason used to be to get better sound quality.
Now you need FM to receive BBC Radios 2 and 3, as well as local radio and the new commercial Classic FM.
What the broadcast authorities did not tell us is how patchy a signal FM delivers.
The truth about FM is that when it is good, it is very, very good; when it is bad, it is horrid.
In London, my kitchen counter is as cluttered as anybody's.
Nudge the radio and you lose Radio 3.
In my home in Wales last week, I paced back and forth over the flagstones, my aerial before me, like a dowser looking for water.
All I wanted was The Marriage of Figaro, live from the Met in New York.
I could have found water more easily.
Engineers at the BBC and the Radio Authority know all this.
They are sorry.
‘You can't fight the laws of physics,’ they say.
The fact is the radio waves that carry FM travel in short, straight lines.
They do not go up hills or through mountains.
They are not suited to deep country.
Lucky you live in the city, then?
Well, no.
London is, I'm told, ‘notoriously difficult for FM’.
A computer in the same building can cause interference.
Because FM waves travel only 60 or so miles from a transmitter, they provide essentially a local pool of sound.
To try to unite these pools into a long-distance chain, the BBC has placed around 200 transmitters throughout the country; Classic FM is making similar efforts.
But many places are too small to warrant the cost.
And there will always be areas of what the engineers call ‘mushiness’.
Truth is, a national FM network is a contradiction in terms.
All this new equipment we have bought to receive FM can only get, in one engineer's words, ‘the best available signal’.
For anyone on a long car journey, FM will never produce a solid clear path like the long-wave (LW) which carries Radio 4 the length and breadth of the land, up hill and down dale.
If you call the BBC Radio 3 Helpline, you will be treated kindly.
I explain my particular problem.
The answer is spelt out with great care: to get a constant Radio 3 from London to mid-Wales, I should, when London fades out, tune in to the Membury transmitter (that tall mast near the motorway services station), and after that to Wenvil.
Into Wales I should switch to the Abergavenny mast, but approaching Abergavenny when a big hill causes problems, I should briefly tune back to the Wenvil setting, then return to Abergavenny until the Llandrindod Wells mast comes into view.
Have they any idea of what it is like to re-tune at 70-plus miles an hour?
Do they know what marital tension this can cause?
They do.
They have long advised serious car-radio listeners to equip themselves with a Radio Data System.
For about £200, RDS will automatically track the station of your choice, wherever.
Interference-free reception for £200?
Not exactly.
It will not be a perfect signal everywhere — and by ‘perfect’ they mean as good and reliable listening as you get from long-wave or a cassette.
Then the truth pours out: FM transmission is based on a scheme drawn up 40 years ago.
The age of people carrying radios around or listening in cars was undreamt of.
Our FM was designed for The Listener, that serious postwar creature, Radio Times in hand, listening solemnly to a concert or a ‘talk’.
If they were starting again, the engineers would not do FM this way.
But they do hold out hope — sort of.
Something new is on the way: Digital Audio Broadcasting, DAB, will give startling improvements in reception and increase the number of networks available.
There are just three problems.
DAB will not be available for at least five years; it will probably cost around £500; and we will all need new radios.
The rooftop aerials, the RDS in cars, will be obsolete.
The switch will be more drastic than that from black-and-white to colour television, for the old services will not be receivable on the new equipment.
The decision to shunt so much radio exclusively to FM is not the BBC's fault.
It did not want to part with the medium-wave lengths which allowed simulcasting on both FM and medium-wave, so that the deficiencies of one could be remedied by the other.
(Medium-wave is not much good at night.)
The reshuffle of airwaves was a political decision, taken in the interests of allowing commercials use of a natural resource long allocated as a monopoly to the BBC.
I accept that.
But I wish the sacrifice had been more clearly spelt out.
Radios 2 and 3 have irrevocably lost listeners now that they have been squeezed on to FM only; so will Radio 1, which is to meet the same fate.
The new Classic FM will at best reach only about 85 per cent of the country.
The residual FM problem has no cure.
There will always be areas that, barring expensive ‘self-help’ equipment or new technology, FM will never touch.
We might have been told.