

Redundancy threat ‘for hundreds of teachers’
By Paul Marston, Education Correspondent
HUNDREDS of teachers in State and independent schools face the threat of redundancy as a consequence of funding changes in schools and the impact of the recession, a classroom union leader said yesterday.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Assistant Masters' and Mistresses' Association, said the union was already dealing with 500 cases of possible redundancy among its members.
Other unions were equally alarmed by the potential scale of the problem, which was just emerging as schools received their budgets for the new financial year.
He told the association's conference in Birmingham: ‘Day after day come fresh stories of proposals to ditch teachers by hard-up schools trying to balance the books.
‘Unless local and national action is taken, the profession will face a crisis of a kind it has not experienced before,’ he added.
Mr Smith blamed local authorities for changing the formulae by which budgets were calculated and blamed the Government for capping council spending and insisting that schools should be funded on the basis of the local average of teachers' salaries rather than the actual salaries they paid.
He said local management of schools — where schools had total control of their budget — was like putting a Rolls-Royce badge on a Skoda and expecting it to go better.
Putting large numbers of teachers under annual threat of redundancy was not an authentic way of recruiting, retaining or motivating them.
Mr Smith said: ‘However well intentioned the reform may have been and however well it may work in schools sufficiently funded for it to work, the fact is too many of its side-effects are visible, malign and damaging and John Patten must have at the very top of his agenda an urgent review.’
Teachers complain that the restriction forced financially-pressed schools to consider replacing older, relatively expensive staff with young, lower-paid teachers.
Mr Smith said that, in the private sector, jobs were threatened by the recession which was causing some parents to transfer their children to State schools.
In some cases, teachers in fee-paying schools knew nothing until they received a letter announcing ‘the school has shut down and they are out of a job’.
Later he told a news conference that independent schools will be hit hard by recession and suffer a wave of closures.
‘The notion that independent schools are in a velvet-lined rut and are immune from pressures is incorrect,’ said Mr Smith.
Prep schools, in particular, were in trouble trying to match the State sector's 7½ per cent pay rise for teachers.
Since last summer at least 256 teachers had lost their jobs after 10 fee-paying schools folded, said officials.
Another 95 were being axed in 51 schools, with a possible 90 further redundancies in the pipeline.
Closures were mainly among private girls' schools and included: Berisford House, Eastbourne, 35 redundancies; St Stephen's School, Broadstairs, Kent, 36; St Brandon's School, Cleveland, 56; St Audrie's, Somerset, four; Oakdeane School, Beaconsfield, Bucks, 40; Humanby Hall, North Yorkshire, 28; and College of Sacred Hearts, Weymouth, Dorset, seven.
At least five association members were made redundant by the Roman Catholic boys' school of Ampleforth, North Yorkshire, last year.
Mr Dick Davison, of the Independent Schools Information Service, said a dozen private schools had closed in the last year.
‘Parents are having more problems with fees.
We are clearly in more difficult economic circumstances than three or four years ago.’
Mr Davison said schools often had no choice but to let teachers know of ‘drastic measures’ at the last minute otherwise parents might ebb away, ensuring the closure everyone wanted to avoid.
Editorial Comment — P18.
Patients face longest wait in Europe to see specialist
By Peter Pallot, Health Services Staff
PATIENTS in Britain face the longest wait in Europe to see a specialist, according to a major study published yesterday.
The research examined delays faced by patients between referral by a family doctor and a specialist consultation — an area not covered by Department of Health figures.
Official statistics have often been criticised for counting only the wait between first specialist consultation and treatment, although the department says it would be misleading to include patients before they have been fully assessed.
The study, by the Royal College of General Practitioners, confirms fears that the ‘queue to join the queue’ for surgery is a serious unrecorded obstacle to hospital treatment.
British patients wait an average of 36 days to see a specialist, the longest delay of 15 European countries studied, the college found.
Patients in Hungary waited 1.5 days on average, in Germany seven days and in Italy 11 days.
The figure for France was six days, but the investigators say this is provisional because of difficulties in collecting French information.
The delay in Britain would have been greater had long-wait specialities such as skin disease not been excluded to allow inter-country comparisons, Dr Douglas Fleming, head of the college's Birmingham unit, said last night.
Only 39 per cent of patients in Britain were seen within four weeks of referral (Hungary 98.5 per cent, Italy 87 per cent , Spain 85 per cent , Holland 71 per cent ).
The study compared 860,000 consultations and 44,000 referrals across Europe.
It concluded that GPs in Britain referred relatively few patients to hospitals, handling many cases themselves.
Dr Fleming said: ‘The study has yielded a mass of useful data including the finding that we have the longest referral wait in Europe.’
Calling for a radical overhaul of the referral system, Dr Fleming said there was a need for ‘fast-tracking’ certain conditions.
For example, blood in the urine would almost certainly necessitate an internal inspection by a specialist.
‘Any steps that delay that referral are an obstacle,’ he said.
Similarly, a patient with dyspepsia would need an internal examination by a consultant because he might be suffering from an ulcer which could be quickly treated by drugs, preventing weeks of suffering.
Dr Fleming said: ‘We have a tradition of using the same route for all referrals, an all-stations route.
That needs to be looked at.’
The report urged research to find out why delays in Britain were so long.
It said: ‘There are extreme viewpoints, but this study has clearly identified a major problem area for the National Health Service.’
The study also showed West German doctors did 220 consultations in a week, compared with 128 in Britain, and 60 in Norway.
Dr Fleming said the reason was that Germans had a quite different medical tradition and expected to see a specialist.
‘Although we did not measure this in our study, I can say from other work the average German sees his doctor 13 times a year, the average Swiss sees his doctor 7.5 times a year and the average Briton 3.5 times.’
But there was nothing to suggest that Germans were healthier, happier or lived longer than Britons, he added.
Once patients had been seen for an initial consultation, half were treated within five weeks and 80 per cent within six months, she added.
Department records show a million people waiting for hospital treatment in England and Wales.
But the spokeswoman stressed it was the length of wait rather than numbers in the queue that mattered.
Education: Lessons drawn from life
What is the secret of Robin Child's success in teaching people to paint?
Sarah Drummond finds out
By SARAH DRUMMOND
ROBIN CHILD is that rare thing, an inspiring teacher and a great educator.
At Marlborough College, where he runs what is widely recognised as the best art department at any school in Britain, his students have repeatedly achieved the highest A-grade results in the country.
A quarter of the sixth formers take A-level art, frequently gaining over 80 per cent A-grades.
A third go on to take art degrees.
Walking around a group of A-level students, Robin Child talks, looks, encourages, admires, and asks questions.
He teaches from life, by analogy, and constantly quotes the great masters.
‘How is this going to reconcile with that?’ he asks a 17 year old, pointing to the two figures she is working on.
‘Piero della Francesca does it like this,’ and he describes the way the figures in Piero's Baptism look at each other, drawing in the observer.
To another student, whose canvas is in danger of becoming congested, the art master suggests: ‘It feels like sentences, and needs paragraphs: you'll often find a picture has a rest — give it some space.’
Later on in the morning, a class of 15 and 16 year olds is painting in oils for the first time.
‘Notice the effect that black has on colours — Poussin painted on black canvas, and so did Braque sometimes.’
He reminds the students of the three elements to work with in colour: warm and cool, bright and tertiary, dark and light.
‘Reubens said two-thirds of painting was grey — that's the tertiaries, and that if you don't have a number of greys you won't get colour to work.’
To a boy who declares himself stuck about what colour to use, he says: ‘Well, Sickert said that when in doubt put a little of the last colour into the next colour you use, and that gives harmony: it doesn't work to use a colour in isolation — white and black are the two parents, red in isolation can appear like a wound in the picture — it's like friendships, we all know the awful consequences if a new person joins a group and the friendships aren't mixed through, it's the same with colours.’
Half-way through the lesson, the class gathers round to look at works by Klee, Stanley Spencer, Ingres, Vuillard, Braque.
It is one of Robin Child's primary aims that everyone should learn to be visually literate, to learn to read a picture as they would a book.
These students will be taking GCSE this summer — but not in art.
Robin Child absolutely refuses to grade, and when O-levels gave way to GCSE with all its internal coursework and marking, he rejected it.
‘I never grade,’ he says firmly, declaring that the labelling it entails is ‘extremely destructive’.
Getting children interested is the secret: ‘That sets them free, and gives them a spirit of inquiry.’
This philosophy is fundamental to his teaching.
‘If you give children enough time and space, they'll discover their intelligence,’ he insists.
Robin Child's influence has gone far beyond the limits of the classroom and his Marlborough pupils: he has lectured widely, here and abroad, to teachers, art societies, art colleges, educationists, church audiences and schools (some subsequently sending their own heads of department to Marlborough to see how it's done) on many aspects of art and art history, the philosophy of teaching and his own approach to it.
Marlborough's art work has been accused by some critics of being too prescribed, a charge Robin Child refutes, insisting that ‘there has to be a starting point, a language learnt’.
To those that consider A-level art a soft option, he quotes his pupils, who invariably claim this is the hardest subject of all: ‘There are no right answers, you can't learn it, or look it up, or quote from someone else — it has to come from you.’
Teaching came about almost by accident for Robin Child.
A severely asthmatic child, a brilliant cricketer, he had no formal education whatsoever.
He greatly admired his clever mother, from whom he inherited a love of poetry.
(The belief of a mother in her child, and of the teacher in his pupils, is a constant theme.)
He completed his art degree at the Berkshire College of Art —‘but, at the end, I found I hadn't got any answers to my questions’— and went as a postgraduate to Reading University to study with Professor Anthony Betts, ‘the only man I've ever met who could really teach’.
He taught initially at a junior school in Berkshire, then at a grammar school, and later at Downe House, where he became well known on the art-teaching circuit when his pupils won (for two consecutive years) a national art competition and their work toured internationally.
When he started at Marlborough 20 years ago, the art department was almost non-existent, a situation the then headmaster, John Dancy, devoutly wished to reverse.
‘One of the very great and rare educators, he knew the art department had to be in the centre of the school, and not way down in some field: he encouraged me to get on with it.’
When Robin Child leaves Marlborough at the end of the summer term, he will be sorely missed.
He is taking early retirement in order to concentrate his formidable energies on teaching adults.
As founder of the Marlborough summer school, and through running courses — mostly from a beautiful barn at his home in Wiltshire — he has become increasingly fascinated by the energy adults bring to classes.
‘They're so motivated, they penetrate to the core, making new equations,’ he says.
He is convinced that the adage — the younger you are, the better you learn — is not true.
‘We adults have a sense of history, the present has a context from which we discerningly plan the future, children only have now and the future.
Children have very little sense of organisation.’
He quotes Cezanne: ‘Give me an organised mind, and I'll make an artist.’
To date, his courses have provoked some extraordinary work from brain surgeons to housewives, from experienced artists and from those who have never before painted.
There is much here, he thinks, to be explored and researched: this may yet be Robin Child's most creative period.
For information on courses contact Robin Child at Lydgate Farmhouse, Wedhampton, Nr Devizes, Wiltshire SN10 3QE (038 0840 350).
Education: The art of guiding a pupil's free hand BROAD CANVAS
The importance of art is often ignored in schools.
But two teachers think it is vital
By MAUREEN COX
GOOD drawing ability used to be considered important at school, not only as a skill that might give expression to a child's aesthetic and artistic inclinations, but also one that would be useful in practical ways — in recording flora and fauna in nature study, for example.
A handbook for teachers published before the Second World War gives us the flavour of a drawing lesson in an elementary school.
In A Landscape with Simple Figures, the teacher is advised first to demonstrate the drawing with charcoal on a large sheet of white paper; the landscape, illustrating figures walking down a country road, is shown in the manual for her to copy.
Then she should put her drawing away while the pupils try out their own landscapes using pencil on paper.
The manual alerts the teacher to the kinds of ‘errors’ children are most likely to make and emphasises that in the ‘correct’drawing ‘the front of the road occupies the whole width of the picture, and the distant end of it vanishes away to a point far back on the horizon’.
She is expected to ‘correct all really stupid blunders’.
Such practice appears to us now as rigid, authoritarian and unimaginative.
A different view of the teaching of art in school has developed: the modern movement is much less formal, emphasising free expression and creativity.
Whereas teachers play a supportive role — providing materials and suggesting topics — many, especially in primary schools, feel it inappropriate to interfere with the children's drawing or painting, lest their creativity be stifled.
Drawing is rarely taught in primary schools.
This does not matter too much for the younger pupils, since they draw readily and without inhibition, but it does become an issue with slightly older children.
Somewhere between the ages of eight and 10 children's ideas of what they want to draw become much more ambitious; in particular, they want their pictures to be more visually realistic and for most of them this ambition far outstrips their skill.
Although there are some children who have a natural aptitude or a special interest in art and who manage to overcome the problem, most children need help.
If they do not receive it, as many do not, then they may well give up drawing altogether.
Since the ability to draw is not seen as particularly important, this state of affairs has not come to the fore.
Contrast this with concern among teachers and parents over levels of literacy and numeracy.
In these areas there are standards of achievement specified for all age levels and pupils who fail to achieve these may be given remedial help.
When it comes to drawing, however, most of us, parents and teachers alike, have little idea of the normal standard we would expect from children at any given age.
We would not dream of seeking remedial help for a child who does not draw well.
If the ability to draw is not a skill necessary to most people's lives why should we be concerned about it?
I think it matters in a broad sense, in that the ability to master a variety of skills and express oneself through a variety of media (including language, music and the visual arts) is important to any well-rounded and educated person.
It also matters currently, since art is to be included as a foundation subject in the national curriculum and the mastery of basic skills such as drawing will have a higher profile.
Many people will be concerned at my suggestion that drawing should be taught in our schools, perhaps fearing that it will take us back to the kind of dull lesson I have described, with children being taught unimaginative and stereotyped ways of drawing.
This need not be.
There are a number of schools that have introduced a more interventionist approach, without sacrificing the enthusiasm and creativity of their pupils.
In my experience, children find it extremely frustrating to be fired with enthusiasm for a topic but then to find that they simply do not have the skill to express themselves.
I do not believe a more structured approach will kill creativity; on the contrary, given the necessary skill children's achievements can be quite remarkable.
Dr Maureen Cox is the author of Children's Drawings, published this month by Penguin.
Leading Article: Making slow progress
YESTERDAY'S endorsement of grant-maintained schools by Peter Smith, the General Secretary of the Assistant Masters' and Mistresses' Association, marked a significant change in his union's attitude towards the Government's education reforms.
‘Grant-maintained schools can no longer be seen as a politically reversible gimmick,’ he told the AMMA's annual conference.
‘They're here to stay.
Let's make them work.’
The slightly grudging tone is revealing: the AMMA, like most other teaching unions, campaigned against the funding of schools from Whitehall during the last Parliament.
Last week's election result, however, has obviously caused it to reconsider.
A wave of secondary schools will now apply for grant-maintained status.
The next five years will also see the implementation of tests for seven, 11 and 14 year olds; a shift towards ‘on the job’ teacher training; and the transformation of some grant-maintained institutions into grammar schools.
These reforms represent the most radical changes in education since the 1944 Act.
Next week, the other major teaching unions, the National Union of Teachers and the National Association of Schoolmasters and Union of Women Teachers, hold their conferences.
Will they follow the AMMA's constructive lead?
The precedents are not encouraging.
During the 1980s, the NUT in particular seemed, at times, to oppose all education reform on principle; its main prescription for educational problems was the pumping of more money into the system.
It will be surprising if its conference next week sees a sudden change of tone.
Such obscurantism has badly damaged the NUT, which has seen its membership fall steadily in the past few years, while the more moderate AMMA's has gone up.
Opinion among ordinary teachers is moving faster than among the trade union professionals or NUT militants.
The past 10 years have not been easy for the profession.
Its pay has always compared poorly with that of other white-collar occupations, but the social standing of teachers traditionally offered compensation.
During the money-conscious 1980s, this status seemed to decline.
Over the medium term, however, the new Teachers' Pay Review Body is likely to make teaching markedly better paid — nearly half of all secondary school teachers now earn more than £20,000 a year — which will take much wind out of the NUT's sails.
Teachers themselves, meanwhile, increasingly seem to realise that change is here to stay.
One of the most intriguing aspects of the AMMA's conference was the revolt from the floor against GCSE coursework, traditionally favoured by ‘progressive’ opinion.
The NUT would be wise to take note.