

Chris Patten ponders Hong Kong job offer
By George Jones
MR CHRIS PATTEN, the Conservative Party chairman, is to consider over the weekend whether to accept an offer to become Governor of Hong Kong.
Friends believe he may take the post rather than wait for a by-election to resume his career.
He has already ruled out the forcing of a by-election by the elevation of a senior Tory MP to the Lords.
Mr Patten lost his seat of Bath despite being the architect of Mr Major's 21-seat majority.
Downing Street confirmed yesterday that an announcement on the new Governor would be made ‘within weeks’ but would not discuss the possible candidates.
At yesterday's Cabinet meeting, Mr Major praised Mr Patten's running of the election campaign.
The new Governor will have the high-profile and delicate role of overseeing the handover of the colony to China in 1997.
Mr Patten is a former Overseas Development Minister, and his appointment would be likely to reassure the Hong Kong people that the Government takes their concerns seriously.
The post carries a tax-free salary of £140,000, but it would put Mr Patten out of mainstream British politics for five years.
Beckett wins backing as Smith deputy
By George Jones, Political Editor
LABOUR'S leadership battle gained momentum last night after an unofficial ‘dream ticket’ of Mr John Smith and Mrs Margaret Beckett secured widespread support among the party's senior MPs.
Mrs Beckett was one of four MPs to announce they were throwing their hats into the ring for the post of deputy leader.
She immediately won the support of leading members of Labour's shadow Cabinet, including Mr Gordon Brown, the party's industry spokesman, who is to be her campaign manager.
Mr Bryan Gould, the party's environment spokesman, has already announced that he is standing for both the leadership and deputy leadership.
Two others, Mr John Prescott (Transport) and Mrs Ann Clwyd (Overseas Development and Co-operation) announced their intention to stand, while the Left-wing Socialist Campaign Group of MPs is considering whether to put up Mr Ken Livingstone.
Mr Smith has publicly refused to endorse any of the deputy leadership challengers, insisting that he is not seeking a ‘running mate’.
If elected, he will work with whoever the MPs, party activists and trade unions decide should be deputy leader.
But Mr Smith, the shadow Chancellor, worked closely with Mrs Beckett, shadow Treasury Chief Secretary, in the run-up to the general election.
They were the architects of Labour's economic policy which was designed to reassure the financial community and the voters that a Labour government would be financially responsible and would seek to fund its spending commitments out of higher growth.
Her chances received a considerable boost when two other possible contenders for the deputy leadership, Mr Brown and Mr Tony Blair (Employment) announced that they were backing her.
Other leading members of the shadow Cabinet to support Mrs Beckett include Mr Derek Foster, the Chief Whip, Mr Gerald Kaufman (Foreign Affairs), Mr Jack Straw (Education) and Mr Kevin McNamara (Northern Ireland).
The degree of heavyweight support for Mrs Beckett will undoubtedly lead to renewed accusations among some Labour MPs of a ‘stitch up’ to secure Mr Smith and Mrs Beckett for the leadership.
Her intervention — after dismissing reports at the weekend that she would be standing for the deputy leadership — will be seen as an attempt to block Mr Gould's bid for the post.
Some MPs are worried that he may not be able to work with Mr Smith, the favourite for the leadership.
Mr Gould has challenged Mr Smith's tax policies.
Mrs Beckett, announcing her candidature, said she would be standing on a ‘modernisation manifesto’.
Mr Prescott said his priority would be to lead a revival in Labour's organisation, membership and finances.
Mrs Clwyd — like Mr Livingstone — may well have difficulty gathering the nominations of 55 MPs needed to get her name on the ballot paper.
Expatriate votes tipped marginals
By Colin Randall
MR MAJOR'S majority in the new Parliament owes one seat, maybe two, to proxy votes cast in marginal constituencies by expatriates, Conservatives said yesterday.
In the Vale of Glamorgan, which the Tories won by 19 votes after a second recount, 64 overseas voters registered in time to vote.
Some 53 overseas voters registered in Bristol North-West, where the Conservatives had a majority of 45.
Although the number of expatriates who voted is not known, it is generally accepted that those who take the trouble to register are likely to vote.
Labour activists in both constituencies believe the organisation Conservatives Abroad is probably correct in its claim that Tory supporters account for at least 80 per cent of the registered overseas electors.
On these assumptions, the expatriate vote clinched the Vale of Glamorgan for Mr Walter Sweeney, enabling him to recapture the seat lost in 1989 to Labour, and may have tipped the balance in Mr Michael Stern's defence of Bristol North-West.
Labour supporters in Bristol had considered canvassing known overseas voters but decided it was not worth the expense.
Mr Phil Gregory, Labour agent, said yesterday that, at the count, he turned to the beaten Labour candidate, Mr Douglas Naysmith, and said: ‘Wouldn't it be ironic if you were beaten by people who had never even set foot in the constituency?’
Under the 1985 Representation of the People Act, as amended in 1989, Britons overseas may, for up to 20 years after their departure, register to vote by proxy in the constituency where they last lived.
Children who reach voting age while abroad have the same right, again in the constituency where their parents or guardians last registered.
Labour did not formally oppose the measure in Parliament, despite backbench misgivings, but did criticise the use of £750,000 of public money to advertise overseas voters' rights.
Sir James Spicer, Conservative MP for West Dorset and vice-chairman of Conservatives Abroad, described as nonsense Labour allegations that expatriate votes had ‘been funnelled into critical constituencies’.
The rules made this impossible.
He said legislation extending the vote to expatriates went through Parliament with all-party support.
Mr Alistair Darling, a Labour front bench Home Affairs spokesman, had moved the amendment to extend the qualifying period.
‘I am delighted that Britain has come into line with all other major Western democracies and given the vote to its citizens who live and work abroad,’ Sir James said.
A Labour Party spokesman said the Opposition accepted the principle of expatriate voting, but disapproved of ‘disproportionate’ Government effort and expense devoted to ‘chasing’overseas voters who were assumed to be Tories.
Man and woman are charged with terror offences in London
By David Graves
TWO PEOPLE were charged last night with terror offences in London while police hunting the killers of a soldier in Derby named a man they wanted for questioning.
James Joseph Canning, 36, and Ethel Audrey Lamb, 60, of Islip Gardens, Northolt, north-west London, were jointly charged at Paddington Green police station with conspiracy to cause explosions and possession of Semtex and firearms.
The couple, who were arrested on Monday night in a raid on a bungalow in west London and held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, will both appear before magistrates at Arbour Square today.
The charges follow the discovery of an arms cache, including 50lb of Semtex and Kalashnikov rifles, in a lock-up garage on Tuesday.
Canning is also separately charged with causing an explosion in Bridle Lane, Soho, on April 6 and possessing a revolver with intent to resist arrest.
Mr Don Dovaston, assistant chief constable of Derbyshire, named one of the terrorists being sought for the murder of the Army recruitment soldier as Joseph Philip Magee, 26, whose wife and sister live in Derby and who detectives believe acted as the getaway driver for the gunman and his accomplice who killed Sgt Michael Newman, 34.
The Irish National Liberation Army has claimed responsibility for the shooting.
The assistant chief constable also said last night that police had arrested four people in Derby after the shooting and they were assisting detectives with their inquiries.
A man answering a description of Magee, who was knee-capped in Northern Ireland several years ago, was said to have been lagging behind the two terrorists as they ran from their gold-coloured Ford Granada getaway car, which they had abandoned in Charnwood Street, Derby, minutes after the shooting on Monday evening.
Mr Dovaston said witnesses had told police they saw the two men shout to Magee to catch up with them.
One is known as ‘Wacko’ and the other has the letter F tattooed on a forearm.
Both were wearing baseball caps.
Magee's name was issued after armed police raided four houses in the Peartree area of Derby early yesterday, including his sister's terrace home.
Neighbours said that Magee had moved into a terrace house in Silver Hill Road, Derby, with his wife, Fiona, and 12-month-old son, Seamus, early last year.
Magee is described as 5ft 5in tall, of slim build, eight and a half stone, with fair complexion, blue eyes and fairly short hair.
Mr Dovaston said Magee had a tattoo on his left forearm of a heart with the letter A inside, with the names Pat and Joe underneath.
Magee, from Armagh, Ulster, has a criminal record.
In January 1987 he was sentenced to five years and nine months' imprisonment at Belfast Crown Court for possessing firearms in suspicious circumstances and for possessing petrol bombs.
He moved to Derby after being released from prison.
Neighbours said his sister, Kathleen Magee, 30, a divorcee, had lived in Northumberland Street, Derby, for three years with her son, Christopher, aged seven.
The other terrorist, known as ‘Wacko’, was described as aged 22–25, 5ft 7in tall with brown hair.
The third man was 20 to 22, 6ft, had an F tattooed on a forearm and wore a Mexican-type moustache.
The shooting of Sgt Newman came three days after two IRA bombs in London killed three people and injured 91.
Mr Major voiced his concern yesterday at television coverage of the IRA bombing of the City of London.
He said pictures concentrated on the structural damage rather than the human casualties.
He felt that such ‘impersonal’ coverage amounted to a propaganda victory for the IRA.
Martin McGuinness, a leader of Sinn Fein, was arrested in Dublin last night on suspicion of being a member of an unlawful organisation.
Barometer of justice in the public gallery
Lord Lane, referring to members of the public who attended court regularly to follow cases, made special mention of a Mr Maurice Mahoney.
The retiring Lord Chief Justice said Mr Mahoney had attended his court since 1980.
Often present during involved cases, Mr Mahoney's facial expressions were a ‘barometer’ of the weight of barristers' arguments.
Mr John Bond, Lord Lane's clerk, said Mr Mahoney was in court almost every day.
‘When the chief comes into court, the two of them are on nodding terms.’
Judges break silence on ‘media campaign’ against Lord Lane
By Ben Fenton
LORD DONALDSON, the Master of the Rolls, yesterday denounced attempts to make Lord Lane, the retiring Lord Chief Justice, a ‘scapegoat for failures of the criminal justice system’.
He spoke of the ‘anger and disgust’ of judges over a ‘campaign of calumny’waged against Lord Lane, the senior judge of England and Wales, following a series of embarrassing judicial reversals in recent years.
Lord Lane has been a target of criticism in the wake of a diminishing public respect for the verdicts of criminal courts within his jurisdiction.
But after hearing the praise of his fellow judges yesterday, Lord Lane hit back at critics, speaking of ‘orchestrated and ill-informed attacks’ on the judiciary and its independence.
He said: ‘Too few people realise that the independence of the judges is the one thing that stands between John Citizen and the abuse of power by governments of whatever colour.
It is only when that independence has been eroded that its true value is appreciated.’
Yesterday's valedictory speech by Lord Donaldson was the first time that judges have spoken out about the treatment of Lord Lane at the hands of the media after a series of controversial court decisions.
Court Four of the Royal Courts of Justice in London was packed with judges and barristers to hear the support lent to Lord Lane, who announced in February that he was stepping down at the age of 73, 18 months before the compulsory retirement age for judges.
He had been widely criticised for his handling of the Birmingham Six appeal in 1988 and has seen a number of earlier convictions overturned as police evidence was discredited in the Appeal Court.
But Lord Donaldson paid tribute to Lord Lane and defended his performance during 12 years as Lord Chief Justice.
Lord Donaldson said that he could now break the traditional silence of judges about their colleagues and ‘give voice to the anger and disgust which we have felt at the campaign of calumny waged against you in recent months’.
He added: ‘I have no doubt that you, like all judges, regard exposure to public criticism as an occupational hazard.
You would, I know, be the first to agree that, if the critics base themselves on fact and eschew the attractions of hindsight, such criticism is valuable.
But what has outraged all of us is the spectacle of attempts to make you the scapegoat for failures of the criminal justice system, the cause of which, however defined, lay outside your control or responsibility.’
Lord Lane personally rejected the second appeal of the Birmingham Six in January 1988 saying, in words which returned to haunt him: ‘As with many cases referred by the Home Secretary to the Court of Appeal, the longer the case has gone on, the more this court has been convinced that the jury was correct.’
The six Irishmen were released last March on a third appeal after spending 16 years in jail.
There were other embarrassments during Lord Lane's tenure, including the quashing of convictions against the Guildford Four and the Maguire Seven in addition to the three men convicted of the murder of Pc Keith Blakelock during the Broadwater Farm riot in north London in 1985.
More than 60 judges sitting in the High Court heard Lord Donaldson praise Lord Lane's achievements in moving towards consistent sentencing policy and reducing the prison population.
He said Lord Lane had given ‘substance’ to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act and took the ‘decisive step’in removing the legal fiction that a husband could not rape his wife.
Lord Lane paid tribute to his ‘team’ of judges and revealed that over the past four years he had reviewed almost 1,500 life sentences — a task he had been unable to delegate and which he willingly relinquished to his successor, Lord Justice Taylor.
Blockade jets bar Libyan aircraft
By ALAN PHILPS
ITALIAN air force fighters scrambled to intercept a Libyan airliner flying towards Europe yesterday as the United Nations imposed sanctions on Libya for the first time in Col Muammar Gaddafi's turbulent 22 years in power.
Throughout Europe and in Japan, Libyan diplomats were ordered out.
Even the Arab world, which had tried to prevent the UN turning Libya into an international pariah, grudgingly acceded to the UN Security Council and cut off all air links.
The Libyan government issued a defiant statement saying that ‘Arabs will kneel to no one but God’ and threatened to ‘reciprocate’against countries which followed the UN sanctions regime.
There are still about one million foreigners in Libya, including 5,000 Britons.
But there has been no sign of panic flight as they remain convinced that they can still leave Libya by road, albeit at the cost of a 12-hour drive through the desert.
Sanctions, including a ban on air traffic and arms sales and the reduction in Libyan diplomatic representation, went into effect at dawn yesterday with the expiry of a grace period for Col Gaddafi to hand over the two suspected bombers of a Pan Am jumbo jet which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988.
Libya, seeking to test the resolve of its critics, despatched aircraft in defiance of the embargo eastwards to Egypt and north across the Mediterranean en route to Switzerland, whose position on sanctions was unclear at the start of the day.
Egypt closed its airspace and two Libyan aircraft were forced to turn back.
But as the Zurich-bound Boeing 727 of Libyan Arab Airlines headed towards Italian airspace, two F104 fighters scrambled from a base in Sicily to intercept it.
The Libyan plane was about eight nautical miles from Italian air space when it was told by air traffic controllers in Malta that it could not fly over Italian territory, an Italian air force spokesman said.
It turned back and tried to land at Malta, but was refused permission.
Another Libyan airliner took off from Tripoli en route for Malta, but was refused permission to enter Maltese airspace.
Shortly afterwards, the Swiss Cabinet decided to join in the sanctions, despite the country's tradition of neutrality.
The Italian alert provided the main drama in a day when the diplomatic noose around Libya was tightened.
European countries, including France, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Germany, as well as Japan, ordered out 24 Libyan diplomats.
In Manila and New Delhi, demonstrators burned effigies of Uncle Sam and President Bush, while Arab commentators spoke of a new crusade by the West against the Islamic world.
The sanctions are designed to force Libya to hand over the two Lockerbie suspects and to co-operate in the investigation in a similar case, the mid-air explosion of a French airliner over Africa in 1989.
A total of 440 people died in the two aircraft bombings.
Libya also has to give proof of its claim to have renounced terrorism — notably by revealing its history of links with the IRA.
Mr Douglas Hurd, Foreign Secretary, made clear that the sanctions were only a first step, to be followed if necessary by a ban on oil exports, source of 95 per cent of Col Gaddafi's revenue.
But an oil embargo would also hurt Italy and Germany, the main importers of Libya's high quality crude.
‘We are deliberately taking it one step at a time…
We hope the existing measures will be persuasive,’ Mr Hurd said.
Britain is not obliged to take any action.
There are no direct air links with Libya, and the two countries do not have diplomatic relations.
There are two diplomats at the ‘Libyan interests section’ of the Saudi Arabian embassy, but they are not formally considered Libyans and will not be expelled.
The sanctions also call for a ban on weapon sales, including small arms for police use, and training, and an end to the sale and servicing of aircraft.
Land and sea links remain unaffected.
Surgeon banned after speeding to emergency
A surgeon banned from driving for 14 days and fined £105 for speeding at 104mph on his way to hospital to operate is to appeal to the Crown Court.
William Rees, 61, a consultant ophthalmic surgeon, of Tonteg, Mid Glamorgan, had been going to the Princess of Wales Hospital in Bridgend, where a patient was already under anaesthetic, when police stopped him.
Mr Alan Havard-Jones, defending, told Bridgend magistrates: ‘It was vital that the surgeon arrived on time.
This was an emergency in every sense of the word.
He would not speed normally.’
Mercy for man in medical siege
A man who held staff at a medical centre hostage after his wife's death was freed at the Old Bailey yesterday in an ‘act of mercy’.
Mr Justice Leonard sentenced Lance Williams, 36, of Mulgrave Road, Sutton, south London, to two years, suspended for two years, after he admitted false imprisonment.
Mr Steven Hadley, defending, said Williams's wife, Andrea, 30, died of cancer and he went to the medical centre in Pinner armed with a knife intending to make his wife's GP, Dr Patricia Carson, apologise for what he felt was a wrong diagnosis.
She was out, so he held three women staff hostage until he allowed two policemen to take their place.
Briton shot dead in New Orleans
By Our New York Staff
A British tourist died yesterday after being shot in a robbery in New Orleans.
Miss Julie Stott, 27, from Eccles, Manchester, was walking back to her hotel with a friend, Mr Peter Ellis, 27, when a man attacked them from a passing car.
Twin attacks
Identical twin boys, aged 14, were found guilty of robbery and attempted robbery at the Old Bailey yesterday after holding up two women with air pistols in Wembley.
They were remanded for reports.
Holiday death
A holidaymaker from Salford, Lancs, fell 600 ft to his death from a castle in Murcia, south-east Spain, yesterday.
Jonathan Russell, 27, fell after climbing on to the battlements to take photographs.
School rape
Two seven-year-old American boys face rape charges over an attack on a six-year-old classmate in a school in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Baby ‘thrown in river’
By Colin Wright
POLICE divers last night called off their search of a six-mile stretch of the River Nidd near Harrogate, North Yorks, for a four-month-old girl whose mother claimed to have thrown her into the water, and will resume their efforts at first light.
A 29-year-old woman will appear before magistrates in the town today charged with attempting to cause grevious bodily harm to Tara Calman, police later revealed.
Det Supt Ian Peacock, in charge of the inquiry, said the investigation was also moving to Leicestershire.
Police began their inquiry after an unmarried woman was arrested near Thirsk after travelling with her daughter from their home in Hinckley, Leics.
She told police she threw the infant into the fast-flowing waters from the A61 road bridge at Killinghall before travelling to Thirsk, where she stayed overnight at the Busby Stoop Inn.
Police said yesterday that the woman left her home at 2pm on Monday, driving to North Yorkshire in her white Vauxhall Astra GTE.
She told officers she threw her baby into the river at about 7.30pm the same day.
The woman was detained at the inn on Tuesday after she contacted a friend in Leicestershire.
Envoy jailed for black market cash deals
By John Steele Courts Correspondent
A CAREER diplomat was jailed for nine months yesterday for using United Kingdom High Commission bank accounts to profit from a currency black market.
Terence Evans, 50, who had spent 31 years in the Foreign Office, was sentenced at Southwark Crown Court after admitting falsifying accounts to cover his activities.
During his two years as Second Secretary, Administration, in Kingston, Jamaica, when he had responsibility for the accounts, he withdrew $150,000 from the Commission's US dollar account and paid it into a personal account in America.
He brought the dollars back to Jamaica and converted them into Jamaican dollars at the black market rate.
Then he repaid into a High Commission Jamaican dollar account the equivalent, in official-rate Jamaican dollars, of the amount of US dollars he had first removed.
The profit was the difference between the higher black market and lower official rate.
Evans, of Cobham Road, Frimley, Surrey, admitted eight offences of false accounting between July, 1984, and July, 1986.
Mr Andrew Mitchell, prosecuting, said: ‘There has been no loss to the British Government but there has been avoidance of currency restrictions.’
Evans was arrested in August, 1990, when he was First secretary at the London passport centre.
Judge Gerald Butler told him he had no option but to pass a custodial sentence.
He said Evans had an exemplary character and it was inevitable that his 31 years of public service would end.
‘Either by reason of excessive zeal to do well in your post or to assist yourself, colleagues or others, you used your employers’ money in a manner which gained an advantage not received by your employer,’said the judge.
EC plans ban on cheap car body parts
By Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent
INDEPENDENT firms will not be able to sell their versions of car parts such as panels, windscreens, bumpers and lights if plans by the EC Commission become law, it emerged yesterday.
It would effectively grant car makers such as Ford, BMW and Rover a monopoly in such after-sales parts, although the plans do not apply to mechanical products such as gearboxes and engine parts.
British motorists would be forced to pay the far higher prices that car makers invariably charge for their body parts, in some cases up to 60 per cent more, the Consumers' Association has said.
Mr Stephen Locke, the association's head of policy, said the proposals would allow car makers to impose an additional ‘monopoly premium’ for every part they sold.
The plans are contained in what Mr Locke called ‘an otherwise dull and dry’ discussion document on the legal protection of industrial design.
The document comes from the office of Mr Martin Bangemann, Commissioner for the Internal Market.
Independent parts manufacturers condemned the proposals as anti-competitive.
Under the scheme, which could become a draft directive by the end of the year, motorists would be denied the choice of purchasing parts from the largely cheaper independent suppliers.
Examples of the current price differences are: £136 charged by Ford for an Escort Mark III front panel, compared with £54 from an independent supplier — the true cost of making such a panel is closer to £10; Peugeot charges £136.50 for a bonnet on its 405 model, £85 from an independent; A headlamp on a Granada Mark III can cost £106.50 from a Ford dealer, £67 from an independent.
Halfords, one the country's leading independent after-sales parts suppliers, said it was ‘keenly aware of the EC move’ and was keeping it under review.
Mr David Marrs, managing director of Veng, the largest independent panel manufacturer, said: ‘This is a very real threat to competition which will put sections of the entire independent trade out of business.
Very few people appear to be aware of it.’
He added: ‘The question of stealing designs from car manufacturers, which is how this proposal arises, hardly occurs nowadays — they steal from each other too much.
Independents provide almost identical products for lower prices and motorists should not be denied the chance of buying them.’
The EC proposals suggest that ‘original designers’ be given what amounts to a monopoly in parts.
The Consumers' Association said the ‘yawning price gulf’ between car manufacturers and independent suppliers should ‘not be allowed to become more serious’.
Mr Locke said he feared the EC plan would force motorists into an ‘indissoluble marriage’ with car manufacturers, lasting as long as the car remained on the road.
He added: ‘This proposal is hasty, ill-thought out and anti-competitive and would turn British motorists into a captive audience.’
Strangeways prison riot trial ends
By Nigel Bunyan
THE 64-day Strangeways riot trial ended yesterday when a jury at Manchester Crown Court returned the last of their verdicts on eight former inmates.
In six days of deliberations, the jury found four of the accused guilty of riot on April 1, 1990, and acquitted four others.
Yesterday the last defendant in the trial, James Miller, 31, was convicted.
Earlier, the jury had cleared Brian Parke, 23.
Miller and the other three convicted men, Paul Taylor, 27, Tiny Doran, 25, and John Spencer, 30, will be sentenced by Mr Justice Mantell today.
Five of the defendants were originally accused of murdering Derek White, 46, a suspected sex offender, who died in hospital three days after the riot began.
But they were found not guilty on the direction of the judge.
Yesterday's sentences marked the end of the first of what will be a series of trials concerned with the 25-day disturbance.
Another 40 people are facing charges of riot and conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm.
The cost of the riot and siege, with a criminal investigation and rebuilding scheduled for completion next year, is about £100 million.
‘Dream love’ for hammer victim
By Michael Fleet
THE LAST movements of a financial consultant found battered to death with a claw hammer in a quiet village are to be reconstructed today.
Paul Newman, 36, was killed a week ago as he got out of his car in Charity Lane, Eggington, Beds.
A man calling himself John Haydon had lured him there with a request for advice on pensions.
Yesterday Mr Newman's girlfriend appealed for help in finding the person responsible for what police called the ‘maniacal’ killing of Mr Newman.
‘If there is anyone who knows anything could they please come forward,’ said Miss Helen Thomas, 33.
‘Paul was a dear sweet man.
I have no idea who would do such a thing to him.
‘Our romance was like Mills and Boon and we kept pinching ourselves, believing it was a dream and we would wake up soon.’
The couple had lived together in Emu Close, Heath and Reach, Beds, for a month since Mr Newman left his wife, Jacqueline.
His employers, Sun Life of Canada, yesterday offered a £10,000 reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the murderer as police looked into the business dealings of the £40,000-a-year executive.
He had been cautious of the 9pm appointment which led to his death and had driven to the village the night before to check the address.
Miss Thomas said he had been concerned that the call had come out of the blue.
Terry Waite ‘passed up chance of escape’
By Ian Brodie in Washington
TERRY Waite passed up a chance of escape while he was held hostage because it would have meant shooting one of his captors, he reveals today.
That would have broken his oath never to use violence, Mr Waite said in an interview to be shown tonight on American television.
Mr Waite, who was freed last November after five years in Lebanon, says on the ABC programme 20/20: ‘One day I asked to go to the bathroom.
There was just one guard in the room and he unpadlocked my feet and hands.
I got into the bathroom and took my blindfold off and I discovered on top of the cistern, an automatic weapon.
‘It was loaded and I thought, here's a chance.
And then, immediately, I said to myself, well, you've been saying to these men [his captors]‘When you're in a tight corner, renounce violence’.
And now here was I in a tight corner and was I going to use violence?
Because if I picked up that gun I would have to use it.
‘And I thought, no, I must stand by what I believe.
So I put my blindfold back on, knocked on the door and said ‘Take it.
I want nothing more to do with it’.’
Mr Waite said that during his captivity he endured torture, a mock execution and four years solitary confinement, including a period in which he lay blindfolded in a foetal position day and night with his hands and feet chained together.
Mr Waite, formerly the Archbishop of Canterbury's envoy, had been trying to secure the release of Western hostages when he was himself captured because he was suspected of spying for the Americans.
But he again denied any knowledge of Washington's plans to swap arms to Iran for hostages.
Rape victim kept locked in garage
By Wendy Holden
A WOMAN who was raped, locked in a garage overnight and then raped again escaped from her attacker yesterday by running screaming into a crowded supermarket.
The 29-year old victim from South Norwood, south-east London, was recovering from her 13-hour ordeal after supermarket staff called police and her assailant ran off following a struggle.
The assault started at 9pm on Tuesday night when a man, who was known to the victim, called at her flat, raped her and carried out what police described as ‘a serious sexual assault’.
At least three hours later, between midnight and 2am, he drove her in his red Golf GTI car to a garage at an unidentified address three miles away in Addiscombe, where she was imprisoned alone overnight.
At 10am yesterday, the man returned to the garage, took the woman back to her flat and raped and sexually assaulted her again.
Several hours later he drove her half a mile to a car park in Whitehorse Lane, South Norwood, near Sainsbury's supermarket, and forced her to take some money from a cash point machine.
She managed to escape and ran to a lorry parked nearby where she banged on the door to attract the driver's attention.
Pursued by her attacker, she ran into the supermarket screaming.
At 5.30pm yesterday a garage in Addiscombe was searched by police.
A sawn-off shotgun was seized and a man was arrested.
Police said later that the shotgun was not used during the assault.
Last night a man was helping police inquiries.
Detectives are appealing for the lorry driver and any other witnesses who may have seen the struggle in the supermarket or car park to come forward.
Dockland rail chief advises on efficiency
By George Jones Political Editor
SIR PETER LEVENE, chairman of the Docklands Light Railway, and former chief of Defence Procurement, was yesterday appointed as adviser on efficiency to the Prime Minister.
Mr Major has also chosen a new adviser on foreign affairs, Sir Rodric Braithwaite, who is retiring as British ambassador to Moscow next month.
Sir Peter worked in the Ministry of Defence from 1985 to 1991.
Sir Rodric succeeds Sir Percy Cradock, 67, who has been the No 10 foreign affairs adviser for eight-and-a-half years.
Sir Rodric, ambassador in Moscow since 1988, had previously worked in Washington, the EC and Rome.
Three senior civil service appointments were also announced yesterday.
Mr Richard Wilson, a deputy secretary in the Treasury, is to succeed Sir Terence Heiser as Permanent Secretary at the Department of the Environment in June.
Mr Hayden Phillips is moving from the Treasury to become permanent secretary in the new Department of National Heritage.
Mr Alex Allan, a Treasury Under-Secretary, will succeed Mr Andrew Turnbull next month as the Prime Minister's principal private secretary.
Mr Turnbull is returning to the Treasury.
Mr Major has confirmed Mr Jonathan Hill as his political secretary at No 10.
Mr David Heathcoat-Amory, a former junior Energy Minister, has been appointed deputy chief whip by Mr Major, succeeding Mr Alastair Goodlad who is going to the Foreign Office.
There is promotion within the Whips' office for Mr Sydney Chapman, MP for Chipping Barnet; Mr Tim Boswell, MP for Daventry and Mr Tim Wood, MP for Stevenage.
Three backbenchers have been appointed junior whips: Mr Andrew Mackay, MP for Berkshire East, Mr Robert Hughes, MP for Harrow West and Mr James Arbuthnot, MP for Wanstead and Woodford.
The Prime Minister's move to give science a voice in the Cabinet was welcomed yesterday by the pressure group Save British Science.
Responsibility for science and technology issues is to be brought together under the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Mr William Waldegrave, acting on behalf of the Prime Minister.
The Department of Education and Science will become the Department for Education when the Office of Science and Technology is formed.
Ruling on press use of name
By Our Media Correspondent
The Press Complaints Commission is to rule on a complaint from the parents of eight-year-old Jennifer Bennett about their treatment by the media after their daughter was at the centre of the row over Labour's pre-election health broadcast.
It will decide on April 29 whether the Daily Express and the Independent invaded family privacy by naming her as the girl in the broadcast.
Both newspapers claim they acted legitimately.
Top Oxford scientists join brain drain to US
By Roger Highfield, Science Editor
A LEADING British team of chemists has joined the brain drain to the United States.
Two are about to leave Oxford University to work with their former professor — Tony Cheetham — and five other students who have already settled in California.
The news came with the announcement at the Annual Chemical Congress in Umist, Manchester, that the team has unravelled the most complex atomic structure to date, using a powerful new X-ray technique.
Prof Cheetham's group used X-rays from a particle acclerator called a synchrotron to find the atomic arrangement within a powder which is used as a catalyst in the petrochemical industry.
The Oxford group was at the forefront of X-ray crystallography, a technique for deducing atomic architecture from the way X-rays are scattered.
Among its many uses, X-ray crystallography is crucial for understanding how catalysts speed chemical reactions.
The University of California at Santa Barbara first attempted to headhunt Prof Cheetham, who had been at Oxford University for 26 years, in 1989.
He decided to leave when his wife, Dr Janet Cheetham, a biophysicist, was offered a job by Amgen, the US biotechnology company.
Describing his work on the material gallium phosphite, Prof Cheetham told the Congress: ‘We have solved a structure of extraordinary complexity.
It is the most complex structure to be solved from a powder sample.’
Priority for Bill on fake refugees
By Our Political Editor
THE CABINET agreed, at its first meeting since the election, to give priority to reintroducing legislation to curb bogus refugees.
The new Parliamentary session, to be opened by the Queen on May 6, will last for nearly 18 months, until the autumn of 1993.
Other key measures in the Queen's Speech will be Bills setting up a national lottery; ratification of the Maastricht treaty on European economic and political union; and legislation paving the way for the privatisation of British Rail and the coal industry.
The Asylum Bill, designed to curb bogus refugees, was abandoned with the dissolution of Parliament when the election was called.
After a welcome from Mr Major, the Cabinet discussed security in Northern Ireland and on the mainland after the latest terrorist attacks; sending of medical troops to what was Yugoslavia as part of the United Nations peace-keeping force; and forthcoming priorities in the EC, including reform of the common agriculture policy and demands for an increase in EC finances.
The Cabinet will meet again on April 30 after the Easter break to be given more details of the contents of the Queen's Speech.
Mr Waldegrave, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, who is responsible for the Citizen's Charter, told the Cabinet that he was now the ‘minister for the little guy’.
He warned his Cabinet colleagues that, with his responsibilities for efficiency in Whitehall, he would be ‘harrying them’.
Beckett is part of Smith double act LABOUR DEPUTY LEADERSHIP: George Jones profiles the three new contestants
BY GEORGE JONES
HAD Labour won the election, Mrs Margaret Beckett would now be safely ensconced in the Treasury in charge of public spending.
During the campaign she had a high-profile role as the woman who was prepared to keep tight control over the purse strings and demonstrate Labour's readiness for Government by rejecting demands from her Shadow Cabinet colleagues for excessive spending.
Both she and John Smith have denied suggestions that they are running mates on a ‘dream ticket’, but she is the deputy he would prefer.
They make a good double act in the Treasury team, where she is shadow Chief Secretary.
Mrs Beckett's enthusiasm for financial rectitude represents a considerable conversion.
Outside Parliament in the early 1980s, she was a prominent member of the hard Left, and at a Tribune rally in Brighton rounded on fellow Left-wingers, including Neil Kinnock, who had not voted for Tony Benn in the deputy leadership contest against Denis Healey.
Since her return to the Commons as MP for Derby South in 1983, she has gained a reputation as an effective parliamentary performer, able to master complex briefs.
She helped Mr Smith tour City boardrooms to try to convince businessmen that Labour could be trusted.
She is also one of the few Labour frontbenchers with ministerial experience, having been a junior Education Minister.
Woman who pushes ahead
BY GEORGE JONES
ANN CLWYD is a tough Parliamentary performer who has managed to force herself to the forefront of public attention despite holding the relatively low-profile portfolio of overseas development and cooperation in Labour's Shadow Cabinet.
A year ago, the Commons listened in silence as she gave a graphic eyewitness account of the suffering of Kurdish refugees on the Iran-Iraq border in the aftermath of the Gulf War.
She had been the first Western politician to reach the Kurds.
She told MPs she had seen ‘indescribable scenes’ of abject poverty.
A former teacher, journalist and Euro-MP, Mrs Clwyd has been MP for Cynon Valley, Mid-Glamorgan, since a by-election in 1984, when she became the first woman to represent a South Wales mining valley.
A Left-winger and a staunch campaigner against nuclear weapons, she became the first woman chairman of the Tribune Group.
But she has come to terms with Britain belonging to the European Community and is likely to back the introduction of proportional representation.
Prescott promises to hold his tongue
BY GEORGE JONES
LAUNCHING his bid for the deputy leadership, Mr John Prescott was on his best behaviour yesterday.
Asked about possible disagreements with whoever was chosen as leader, he admitted: ‘I might have to bite off my tongue.’
Diplomacy and tact are not qualities for which Mr Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman, are renowned.
He is refreshingly straightforward and forthright, embarrassing Labour's image makers who attempted to keep him in the background as much as possible during the election campaign.
Before the 1987 General Election he had a stand-up row over defence policy with Lord Callaghan, the former Labour Prime Minister, in the House of Commons tea-room, and he has been known to square up to Tories who have enraged him.
Mr Prescott's gutsy, down to earth brand of socialism has gained him the respect of party activists.
He is deeply committed to the Labour movement and proud of his trade union and working class background — and was once described as the ‘rottweiler of the Shadow Cabinet’ for his attacks on Government transport policy.
He is the only known ‘working man’ in the shadow cabinet, having worked as a merchant navy steward before entering politics.
In 1988 he made an unsuccessful attempt to challenge Mr Hattersley for the deputy leadership.
He has been MP for Hull East since 1970.
Angler wins test case on pollution
Salmon river covered by detergent foam was like ‘face of a beautiful woman scarred by disease’
By Charles Clover, Environment Editor
AN OWNER of salmon and trout fishing rights yesterday won a test case against South West Water for discharging detergents into the River Exe and River Creedy in Devon.
The action is likely to have wide implications.
Mr Ian Cook, who travelled to the hearing with Mr Ted Hughes, the Poet Laureate, had argued that South West Water had polluted his three-quarter-mile stretch of fishing at Cowley, above Exeter, with discharges from sewage works in the summer of 1990.
Although the water company had legal consent to discharge sewage effluent, the judge ruled that there was no legal immunity against damage done by detergents in the discharge.
This is thought to be the first such judgment on a privatised water company.
Judge Anthony Cox likened the foam on the river to ‘the face of a beautiful woman scarred by disease’.
He ordered South West Water to pay Mr Cook £2,500 damages and £1,500 costs.
Mr Cook, 42, a dealer in Old Master paintings, had argued under his common law rights as a riparian owner that South West Water had damaged the stretch with ‘a cocktail of complex chemicals’.
At Plymouth County Court, Judge Cox said that South West Water was allowed to discharge effluent into the water, but its legal discharge consent made no mention of phosphates or the detergents which cause foaming, technically called surfactants.
He ruled that damages were due for the effects of surfactants but not for a small presence of phosphates.
Judge Cox said that he was satisfied that in the summer of 1990 there was foam on the surface of the River Creedy for significant periods and it damaged the fishing rights.
‘This was deleterious to fly life and seriously interfered with fly fishing in particular, apart altogether from defacing the beauty of the river in its progress through the delightful countryside.
It is the face of a beautiful woman scarred by disease.
‘I accept that the foam is caused by detergents in the water.
I accept that on the River Creedy the foam comes from effluent discharged from the three sewage treatment works upstream.
I further accept that some of this foam is carried downstream and contaminated the plaintiff's water.’
Mr Cook told the judge: ‘I believe your judgment will be instrumental in improving all our South West rivers.’
Outside court, Mr Cook said: ‘It sends a warning shot across the bows of all dischargers, including industry, water authorities and factories.
If their discharges are seen to be causing harm they can be liable in the civil courts.
I hope this can be part of the clean-up of rivers.’
Mr Hughes, a keen fisherman, said: ‘I think it's an important case, an absolutely historical case because it's reactivated the power of common law in this terrific issue of water quality in rivers.’
The decision was hailed by Friends of the Earth.
Mr Blake Lee-Harwood, water and pollution campaigner, said: ‘It will awaken a lot of interest in others who may also want to sue polluters.
The water companies will have to improve the performance of their sewage works or risk other claims.
I think Mr Cook has done a great service to the water environment in this country and the ramifications of this case will be heard for many years to come.’
The South West Rivers Association, which represents riparian owners, welcomed the judgment.
Lord Clinton, chairman, said: ‘This is a marvellous result which sets a precedent which should be heeded by all the water and detergent companies and is a positive step forward for the future health of all rivers in the South West.’
EC lifts its threat to clamp down on adverts
By Jane Thynne Media Correspondent
A CAMPAIGN warning of the threats to newspapers and magazines from EC restrictions on advertising has been postponed after a pledge from M Jacques Delors, EC President, that ‘the EC would intervene less and less’.
Apart from the proposed blanket ban on tobacco advertising, which was ‘a special case’, all similar regulation would increasingly be decided country by country, with no new restrictions planned, he added.
This unexpected reassurance followed a meeting with the European Publishers' Council which claimed the EC's planned restrictions on the advertising of tobacco, alcohol, food, drugs and toys inhibited free trade and commercial freedom of speech.
But despite Mr Delors' firm line on tobacco advertising, the EPC said it now believed even that blanket ban would not now be implemented.
The re-election of Britain's Conservative Government, which opposes the ban, meant that the substantial ‘blocking minority’ of countries, including Germany and Denmark, remained to prevent the ban becoming law.
Publishers also fear the implications of a data protection directive which bans electronic storage of personal information.
Yesterday the EPC, whose 19 members include The Daily Telegraph, said it still intended to run a campaign against advertising restrictions, but did not know when.
‘Save water’ plea as springs dry up
By Charles Clover and Christopher Lockwood
PEOPLE in London, the Thames Valley, Kent, Hampshire and Sussex have been asked to turn off the tap when brushing their teeth, take showers not baths, and to fix dripping taps to save water.
Both the Thames Region and the Southern Region of the National Rivers Authority yesterday appealed to consumers to save water after levels in chalk boreholes in the Chilterns, Berkshire Downs and North and South Downs sank below the levels of the 1976 drought.
The NRA also appealed to water users to use washing machines and dishwashers only when fully-loaded and to use the minimum of water for gardening and car washing.
Gardeners are being asked to use bath-water in the garden and to water only at night to avoid losses through evaporation.
Hosepipe or sprinkler bans have already been imposed by four water companies in the Thames area: Three Valleys, Essex, Sutton and East Surrey.
The Mid-Kent Water Company has imposed a hosepipe ban, while the Kent Division of Southern Water Services and the Folkestone and District Water Company are to impose one from tomorrow.
Mr Giles Phillips, catchment control officer for the Thames areas, said that voluntary restraint had saved up to 10 per cent of water supplies.
The Thames region is short of 16 inches of rain in the fourth successive year of drought, and the Southern Region short of more than 20, the NRA said yesterday.
Mr Graham Warren, principal resources officer for the NRA's Southern Region, said that groundwater levels were the lowest observed in more than a century.
The NRA is pumping groundwater into the River Itchen in Hampshire to keep up its flow and is trying to save three streams, the Tong, the Little Stour and the Dour from going dry this summer.
The River Darent, in Kent, which ran dry last year, is expected to do so again this summer.
The Pang, Ver and Misbourne rivers, already suffering from over-abstraction, are badly affected.
Chalk streams are rising lower down their length as springs dry up.
Sutton Water Company has pointed out that it has imposed a sprinkler ban, not a hosepipe ban as stated in Tuesday's paper.
Plane takes off with man riding on the tail
By Paul Chapman in Wellington
A 53-YEAR-OLD aircraft engineer rode on the tail of a light plane out to sea off New Zealand and back yesterday after it took off without the pilot knowing he was there.
The single-engine Cessna 172 took off from a beach on Stewart Island, on the southern coast, and headed out to sea with Mr Maurice Treweek clinging to the tail.
It was making for Invercargill, 15 miles away on the South Island across the notorious Foveaux Strait, in winds of 20 knots.
‘I didn't know where we were heading,’ Mr Treweek said.
‘I'm not sure how high we went but I remember looking down at the surf.
It was a long way down.’
Because he was clinging to the rudder, the plane slowly turned in a circle and headed back to the island.
Mr Treweek inched along the fuselage, changing his weight position in an attempt to help the pilot, Mr Brian Grant, 30, to control the plane.
The plane dipped down and its starboard wing hit the water, flinging off Mr Treweek.
He was wearing two pairs of thermal overalls and had to struggle to the surface.
Then he swam half a mile to shore against a strong current.
The plane's wing was damaged on impact and Mr Treweek saw the tail break off as he swam ashore but the pilot managed to land the plane safely on the beach.
Neither Mr Treweek or the pilot was injured.
‘I have got a big God who's looking after me,’ said Mr Treweek, who is a born-again Christian.
Price of love for GI brides
US airforce wives must pay poll tax, appeal court rules
By John Grigsby, Local Government Correspondent
THE BRITISH wives of American servicemen stationed in the United Kingdom must pay the poll tax even though they receive little or no benefit from public services, the Court of Appeal ruled yesterday.
Lord Justice Mann, sitting with Lords Justice Purchas and McCowan, said that the wives were not covered by the term ‘exempt individuals’ in the community charge legislation.
They were therefore liable to pay the charge.
The test case is expected to affect almost 4,000 ‘GI brides’.
Lord Justice Mann said: ‘In practice their liabilities will be discharged by their husbands, who may understandably regard payment as a penalty for marriage to a British citizen.
If the husbands ask why there should be such a penalty, then I can only answer that it is because Parliament has enacted as it did.’
The court rejected appeals by 13 wives of military personnel at the US Air Force base at Upper Heyford, Oxon.
They now face a legal costs bill unofficially estimated at about £6,000.
Cherwell district council estimated that it had lost £200,000 in poll tax revenue due from the wives of US servicemen.
More than half the wives have now left Britain.
It is doubtful whether the council will be able to recover all the back tax or enforce the costs order.
Following the hearing, Mr Scott Vendrely, 29, a military policeman who has served in Britain since 1987, faces the prospect of paying the outstanding £538 bill for two years' poll tax for his British wife Stephanie.
He said: ‘It's crazy, but she's worth it.
I reckon she's going to cost me about £800 in tax by the time we return to the US in 1995.’
Mrs Vendrely, mother of Alexander, seven, Ryan, two, and Lianne, five weeks, said: ‘I am disgusted because, as the wives of US servicemen, we are not eligible for any state benefits and we don't take advantage of the public services.
They don't give us anything, but still expect us to pay the poll tax.’
Her husband was taxed in the United States.
‘I don't earn any money and they expect Scott to pay.
The whole thing seems wrong.’
Lord Justice Mann criticised the draftsman of the 1988 Local Government Finance Act, which created the community charge, for taking the provisions of the Visiting Forces Act and its ‘convoluted language’ as one of the yardsticks for entitlement to exemption.
Mr Andrew Collins, QC, for the wives — who were not legally aided — suggested it would be just if those responsible for the ‘singularly inept’ drafting of the poll tax legislation were ordered to pay the costs bill.
He said the US authorities were paying a substantial part of the costs incurred by the wives in preparing their legal challenge, but no provision had been made to meet a costs order in favour of Cherwell council.
The judges discharged the costs order made against the wives for the High Court hearing, but said that they would have to meet the council's bill for the appeal.
In April last year a community charge tribunal ruled that the 13 wives were entitled to exemption from the tax because they had ‘a relevant association with a visiting force’ as defined by the 1952 Visiting Forces Act.
But Cherwell council successfully appealed to the High Court in November.
A council in rural Hampshire, where the uniform business rate averages £1,250, is hoping to save village shops and sub post-offices by encouraging them to claim rebates of up to 80 per cent.
Mr Peter Giddings, Test Valley council treasurer, said: ‘We were approached by one village shopkeeper in financial trouble who asked if there was anything we could do.
It appeared to us then that the scheme which allows us to hand back a large proportion of the business rates was not widely known.’
War museum aims for £10m site on Teesside
By Robert Bedlow
THE IMPERIAL War Museum is to site its next ‘out of town’ branch in Hartlepool, Cleveland.
The £10 million development will create hundreds of jobs and boost Teesside as a tourist centre.
Based on the Teesside Development Corporation's ‘renaissance’ project along the river banks and old docklands, the museum is expected to attract a million visitors a year from its opening in 1995.
‘Our choice has been influenced by the fact that there is no national museum in the North East,’ said Dr Alan Borg, museum director-general.
The only ‘branch’ war museum outside London is Duxford, near Cambridge, featuring aircraft.
Other sites are the cruiser Belfast on the Thames near Tower Bridge, and the Cabinet War Rooms in Whitehall.
The Hartlepool museum will cover the history of two World Wars and the post-1945 world in displays that will include the Navy's last light-cruiser Caroline.
Some galleries will feature the museum's collection of paintings.
Dr Borg said: ‘Stanley Spencer's great shipbuilding series will be an appropriate exhibit.’
‘Queen Meanie’ goes to jail by chartered jet and limousine
By Charles Laurence in New York
MRS LEONA ‘Queen Meanie’ Helmsley, the self-styled Hotel Queen who failed to pay her million-dollar tax bill, yesterday booked in to the meagre, but free-of-charge, accommodation of an American jail cell.
It was Tax Day, the deadline for Americans to file their tax returns, and the day that a New York judge had ordered Mrs Helmsley, 71, to surrender to jail after two and a half years of appeals following her conviction for cheating the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of $1.7 million.
That was just one of many ironies relished yesterday by Americans who had learned to loathe Mrs Helmsley for her ‘only the little people pay taxes’ remark, her greed, and her notorious arrogance.
There was the swapping of the number of her Penthouse Suite at one of her own New York hotels for her inmate tag, number 15113–054.
There was the comparison of the view she had enjoyed — one of the world's most expensive — across Manhattan's Central Park with that she will now have of the exercise yard at her new home, also known as Central Park.
And there was the idea of her submitting to a search and medical check by prison guards after she had relentlessly promoted herself and her Helmsley Palace Hotel in the last decade as ‘The Palace Where The Queen Stands Guard.’
Mrs Helmsley, who began adult life selling cigarettes in a New York cinema, had become so unpopular as the details of her manners and penny-pinching management technique were exposed in court during her trial that her lawyers based an eleventh-hour appeal for mercy on her likely prison victimisation as a ‘notorious, widely-reviled, vastly wealthy New York Jew.’
In her last public statement, issued through a publicity agent, Mrs Helmsley described her final evening at home as ‘lying in bed, cuddling and necking’ with her husband, Mr Harry Helmsley, 83, the property magnate who owns the Empire State Building and who was also charged with tax evasion before being deemed too frail to stand trial.
Then she made her way to the Federal Medical Centre in the prison complex at Lexington, Kentucky, in defiant style, cheating the merciless media of a final picture by arriving at 4am.
She chartered her own jet for the trip, arriving at the prison gates by limousine.
‘She is depressed and afraid, but accepts the ruling of the judge,’ said her lawyer, Prof Alan Dershowitz.
Mrs Helmsley has been sentenced to four years in jail, and could become eligible for parole in 19 months.
Because she has mild heart disease, she may serve her whole sentence in the medical facility.
She will begin in a single room, where both her health and aptitude for prison life will be assessed, but may then be moved to a dormitory.
If she is found healthy, regulations dictate that she must perform some useful service, which a prison spokeswoman, Miss Janet Jacobson, described as working in the grounds, or cleaning and tidying rooms as a maid.
To many, particularly among her own hotel staff, the prospect of Mrs Helmsley making beds for other prisoners is justice indeed.
International: Michelin goes off the boil
By Boris Johnson in Brussels
AFTER 15 years of culinary perfectionism that brought a two-star award in the Michelin guide, the finest restaurant in Flanders has abandoned its prize in despair.
It is not just the cost of laundering the linen and polishing the silver, said the manageress of Antwerp's Sir Anthony Van Dyck yesterday.
It is the people.
Belgium's businessmen have become almost neurotic about the price of what they eat, said Mme Bernadette Paesbrugghe.
Until this year, the expense-account diamond merchants and shipping barons would not have thought twice about paying up to £30 for turbot or lobster.
But now M Philippe Maystadt, Belgian Finance Minister, has abolished the system which allowed them to set 100 per cent of the bill against tax as a business expense, she said.
With 50 per cent coming automatically from their own pockets, the remaining customers are martinets.
‘You just can't please them anymore.
It's just too much stress for my husband and my family.
You bring out a new menu and they say, ‘Is that all?
Don't you have anything else’?’
Now she and her husband, the cook, have decided to throw in their two Michelin rosettes and relax.
The food will revolve around veal stew at about £6.
International: Fears of Europe-US trade war grow
By Boris Johnson, EC Correspondent, in Brussels
EUROPEAN Community officials were stoking fears last night of an all-out trade war with the United States after it was disclosed that British and other European steelmakers could face crippling new duties on exports to America.
With the world trade talks perhaps nearing their final moment of truth, the senior spokesman for M Jacques Delors, EC Commission President, accused America of trade ‘harassment’.
He played down suggestions that President Bush and M Delors could resolve the central dispute over agricultural subsidies at the EC-US summit in Washington next week.
‘Nothing permits me to say the positions are coming closer together,’ he said.
American steel firms have laid charges before the US administration that five European firms, including Britain's United Engineering, have ‘dumped’ 200,000 tons of iron bars on the American market.
Washington could impose duties of up to 80 per cent of the price on imports from Europe, almost certainly making them uneconomic.
EC trade analysts said last night that M Delors was probably happy to raise the temperature of the dispute, to minimise expectations for his Washington mission, which until yesterday was being seen as the last chance to save the five-year round of Gatt talks.
The two sides are theoretically close on the remaining areas of dispute: the use of direct income support to compensate EC farmers for 35 per cent price cuts; cuts in ‘export refunds’— cash given to farmers to dump their produce on world markets — and the EC's demand that new duties be placed on American exports of cereal substitutes.
International: Conquerors defy Bosnian recognition
Serbian forces mock independence of breakaway republic and grab key town as 260 British troops prepare to fly to troubled region
By Philip Sherwell in Visegrad
THE commander of Serbian forces annexing large areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina yesterday mocked the international recognition of the former Yugoslavian republic.
While his men flushed out pockets of Muslim resistance in the eastern town of Visegrad, Colonel Milun Jovanovic declared that, as far as he was concerned, he was still on Yugoslavian soil.
As western condemnation of Serbian aggression in the breakaway republic reached a new peak, Col Jovanovic delivered an impromptu lecture on how the recognition of Bosnia breached ‘all international principles’.
The alliance of his Serbian-dominated federal forces and Serb irregulars was expected to take control of Visegrad last night, after poorly-armed and outnumbered Muslim defenders fled to the hills.
Army troops took over Visegrad dam after a Muslim fanatic opened sluice gates on Monday, releasing a tidal wave of water which flooded part of Visegrad, a key strategic town.
The federal army has this week strung a massive presence of men, artillery and tanks along the road from Serbia as it surges into Bosnia to help local Serb barons grab swathes of territory.
With Croat forces pursuing a smaller but similar offensive in western Hercegovina, the crude carve-up of the republic following its April 7 recognition is squeezing the Slavic Muslims, its biggest group.
Hundreds of people have been killed and injured and more than 170,000 displaced since fighting intensified two weeks ago.
A truce signed on Saturday by Serb, Croat and Muslim communities has failed to hold amid persisting violent opposition by groups opposed to the state breaking away from what remains of Yugoslavia.
Visegrad's streets were deserted yesterday as Serb irregulars exchanged sporadic fire with the handful of Muslim gunmen still holed up in the town.
The 20,000 residents — two-thirds Muslim; one-third Serb — took to cellars or fled.
The conquerors say they were obliged to take Visegrad because Muslims were persecuting Serbs.
‘There was a rebellion here by the Muslims.
It had been prepared for quite some time and the brunt of it was against the Serbs,’ said Col Jovanovic.
Mr Cyrus Vance, United Nations special envoy, arrived in Belgrade yesterday for talks aimed at solving the Bosnian conflict.
He is expected to travel to Sarajevo today.
Mr Vance ruled out the deployment of UN peacekeeping troops in the republic, despite urgent appeals from the Bosnian government for international intervention.
UN military observers will be deployed there.
International: Britain to provide medics in war zone
BY PETER ALMOND
BRITAIN is to contribute 260 troops, mainly medical personnel, to the 14,000-strong United Nations peacekeeping force being deployed in Croatia, writes Peter Almond, Defence Correspondent.
The announcement was made by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the new Defence Secretary, yesterday.
The British contingent is based on the 145 members of 24 Field Ambulance, from Catterick, North Yorkshire, who will take with them 18 ambulances, 62 other vehicles and a selection of mechanics, communications, logistics and headquarters personnel.
Led by Lt-Col Lois Lodge, 38, the first female commander of a regular British Army unit, 24 Field Ambulance will be split into four detachments and assigned to each of the four UN sectors in Croatia.
Lt-Col Lodge and 30 members of the British advance party will depart by air for Belgrade and then travel to the British headquarters in Zagreb next week, with the main contingent travelling by sea in early May.
The overall British commander, Colonel Christopher Price, and a number of medical advisers are already in the region.
The contingent is almost the smallest possible force Britain could meaningfully provide to a major UN force, but Mr Rifkind said it was nevertheless an important contribution.
‘Britain has consistently made significant contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations in many parts of the world,’ he said.
‘This is one more example of our ability and willingness to continue to support the UN in the cause of peace.’
The army had initially argued for the sending of an infantry battalion group of about 1,000 troops, partly to balance the large French contingent and partly to avoid being broken into smaller parts under foreign commanders.
But with no end to the civil war in sight, the high risk of casualties, and commitments elsewhere, the government decided to send only a small supporting force.
The assignment of 24 Field Ambulance, part of 24 Airmobile Brigade's key Rapid Reaction Force, is currently for only 12 months.
Soldiers will serve six-month tours.
Mr Rifkind said the British troops would provide ‘second line’ medical support, evacuating UN sick and injured from battalion aid posts to hospitals and only ‘in extremis’helping an injured soldier on the spot.
Six doctors and four nursing supervisors will be part of the field ambulance, but no surgeons, since surgery would prevent the casualty from being moved, and the best post-operative care is in local hospitals, which British officials described as excellent.
There are no indications that British troops will be required to operate in Bosnia-Hercegovina, where the UN has been unable to function because of intense fighting.
The deployment is being called Operation Hanwood, in a return to traditional British naming of operations based on progression through the alphabet.
International: Italy heals war breach with Malta
By R Barry O'Brien in Valletta
AN Italian admiral laid a wreath at the Cenotaph in Valletta yesterday in a gesture of reconciliation for the part played by Mussolini's air force in the Axis onslaught on Malta 50 years ago.
Admiral Mario Angeli, Vice-Chief of Italy's Defence Staff, laid his wreath at a ceremony commemorating the award of the George Cross to the island on April 15, 1942.
In 1942, 12,000 bombs dropped by Italian and German aircraft based in Sicily devastated Valletta and killed 3,000 Maltese.
But yesterday a contingent from the Italian navy joined the Queen's Colour Squadron of the RAF Regiment and the armed forces of Malta as part of the Honour Guard.
Earlier, the Maltese government's 50th anniversary George Cross medal was presented by the President, Dr Censu Tabone, to 148 men and two women who served in Malta during the 1939–45 War.
Malta is appealing for all veterans of the war on the island to apply for medals.
The Queen is to visit Malta next month.
International: Bush orders Green Berets out of Peru
By Our Washington Staff
PRESIDENT Bush has ordered the withdrawal from Peru of about 30 US Army Green Berets in protest at President Alberto Fujimori's suspension of the constitution and assumption of dictatorial powers.
The soldiers have been training the police and military in anti-narcotics operations to slow the export of cocaine into America.
US Drug Enforcement Administration agents will stay in Peru, helping to destroy the coca crop and intercept traffickers.
Hong Kong to lose Volunteers
By Our Staff Correspondent in Hong Kong
The Royal Hong Kong Regiment, ‘The Volunteers’, is to be disbanded, the colony's government announced yesterday.
Its end, in September 1995, is necessary before China retakes sovereignty in 1997.
The Royal Hong Kong Auxiliary Air Force, meanwhile, will be turned into a civilian government department so it can continue operations, primarily air-sea rescue, after the handover.
International: Two killed in Israeli clashes
By Our Jerusalem Correspondent
Two Palestinians were shot dead in clashes with the Israeli army in the occupied territories yesterday as wanted Arabs gave themselves up for fear of being shot by undercover squads.
Palestinian sources said two Arabs from the West Bank town of Jenin had surrendered.
Other reports said up to a dozen wanted people had given themselves up in Tulkarm.
International: £10m deal helps Bhopal victims
By Our New York Staff
Connecticut-based Union Carbide is selling its battery business in India to raise $17 million (nearly £10 million) to treat victims of the 1984 industrial accident at Bhopal.
More than 3,800 people have died since deadly gas escaped from a pesticide plant managed by an Indian subsidiary of Union Carbide.
International: It's business as usual in Libya for big-money British expats
By Alan Philps, Diplomatic Correspondent
BUSINESS continued as normal in Libya yesterday despite the imposition of United Nations sanctions.
Both the Libyan government and foreign workers there appeared confident they could survive the cut-off in air traffic.
The 5,000 British expatriates, many of whom have worked for up to 15 years in Libya, see the ban on flights as just another of the travails of doing business in an unstable but lucrative market.
It will oblige them to make long drives across the desert to Egypt or Tunisia when they want to leave the country.
But the prospect of being used as ‘human shields’— as in pre-Gulf War Iraq — is discounted.
Some British firms doing business there are thinking of buying a car to transport staff from Tunisia or Egypt to Libya to save paying rapacious taxi drivers.
‘We were thinking of a Fiat Panda,’ said an executive of a British-based supply firm.
‘The roads are excellent in Libya so you do not need a four-wheel-drive job, and there is certainly no shortage of petrol.’
From Tripoli to the Tunisian border is a drive of about four hours, with about twice as much again from there to the capital's international airport.
Traffic across the border is always heavy — about 12,000 vehicles a day, according to officials — because many Libyans go on shopping day-trips to Tunisia.
Taxi drivers on the resort island of Jerba, close to the Libyan border, are already expecting a windfall from the transit of foreigners working in Libya.
‘We are a tourist country and used to dealing with large numbers of people,’ says Tunisia's Interior Minister, Mr Abdallah Kallal.
In Egypt, taxi firms and bus companies are planning to lay on extra services from Benghazi, in eastern Libya, to Cairo, a distance of more than 800 miles.
There are one million Egyptians working in Libya, but no sign of any mass return.
Foreign oil workers have been assured by their Libyan employers that they will be given full freedom of movement.
As some of these are highly paid — a top specialist earns more than £100,000 a year — they have good reason to want to stick to their contracts.
The Libyan authorities, after causing concern by delaying exit permits, are now freely issuing papers to allow expatriates to leave by land.
Despite the bloodcurdling anti-western rhetoric of the Libyan leader, Colonel Gaddafi, he knows that his oil industry depends on foreigners, including Americans.
According to oil industry sources, the main talking point in the oilfields is the pressure being put on Americans by their own government to leave Libya.
US citizens are forbidden to work in Libya, but several hundred are defying the ban.
Letters are now being sent to their families in the United States, warning them that they face arrest upon return home.
New international links are planned to help foreign workers come and go.
A Turkish airline is to fly to Jerba, which has an international airport, and there are plans for a Turkish shipping route to Tripoli.
A jetfoil service between Tripoli and Malta will operate five times a week, covering the 190 miles in five hours.
Two ferries already ply the route between Tripoli and Malta.
Air Malta will also fly three times a week to southern Tunisia to pick up passengers who have left Tripoli by road.
The main sufferers from the air ban so far have been the Asian and African workers, many of whom have little more in their pockets than their return air tickets — now useless.
Pakistan said yesterday that it would seek UN help for its estimated 20,000 nationals in Libya.
The UN Security Council may authorise flights to Libya for humanitarian purposes, but it is not clear if Libya would allow them to land.
International: Hong Kong Volunteers face bullet
By Hugo Gurdon in Hong Kong
THE ROYAL Hong Kong Regiment, ‘The Volunteers’ is to be disbanded, the colony's government announced yesterday.
Its end, in September 1995, is necessary before China retakes sovereignty in 1997.
‘There is no role for any military organisation here after that’, said a colony official.
The Royal Hong Kong Auxiliary Air Force, meanwhile, will be turned into a civilian government department so it can continue operations, primarily air-sea rescue, after the handover.
The Volunteers were founded in 1854, when much of the local regular army garrison was sent to fight in the Crimean War.
Equivalent of the Territorial Army, the Volunteers played a major role in Hong Kong's doomed resistance against the Japanese early in the Pacific War.
Hong Kong police yesterday dropped because of identity problems riot charges against 67 Vietnamese held after violent unrest at a refugee detention camp in February, which left 24 people dead.
— AFP
International: Sweet news that is too good to be true
By Charles Laurence in New York
IT WAS sweet news for the sweet of tooth when a respected dental research centre in America announced that eating chocolate can be good for your teeth.
The Dental News newsletter, issued by the Princeton Dental Resource Centre, based in New Jersey and picked up by dental patients in waiting rooms all over America suggested that an ingredient of cocoa, tannin, had been shown to inhibit the formation of plaque on the teeth, therefore helping stop cavities.
‘So next time you snack on your favourite chocolate bar or bowl of peanuts, remember — if enjoyed in moderation, they can be good-tasting and might even inhibit cavities,’ it said.
But it has turned out that the theory is as it sounds — too good to be true.
An investigation by a suspicious dentist has shown that research work by a California dentist has been ‘misinterpreted’.
It has also shown that 90 per cent of the costs of the Princeton centre and its free newsletter are paid by M and M Mars, a division of Mars Inc, makers of the Mars Bar and a host of other sweets.
International: Poland and Russia agree to big troop withdrawal
By Krzysztof Leski in Warsaw
MOST of the 45,000 ex-Soviet troops in Poland are likely to leave by the end of the year after the resolution of a two-year row over the pull-out.
Mr Krzysztof Skubiszewski, Polish Foreign Minister, said yesterday that he had reached agreement on financial issues during talks in Warsaw with General Pavel Grachev, Russia's deputy Defence Minister.
Mr Skubiszewski declined to go into detail, saying the agreement had yet to be accepted by both governments.
Gen Grachev said the solutions would not hit the Polish budget.
‘But Poland will help our soldiers and their families after they return home.’
After 15 months of tough talks, Moscow agreed to pull out most of its troops by Nov 15 this year.
About 6,000 soldiers are to stay until 1994 to organise the withdrawal from eastern Germany through Poland.
However, until now the two sides have been deadlocked over financial issues.
The Russians demanded compensation for installations the former Soviet army is leaving behind, and the Poles sought payment for four decades of use of Polish property as well as environmental damage at military sites.
International: It's time for the Moscow circus to leave town
By JOHN KAMPFNER
THIS is one circus Moscow could have done without.
For more than a week, a group of grey-suited former communists has played with the nation's future with an irresponsibility and spite that would be risible were it not so dangerous.
The Congress of People's Deputies, the daring brainchild of Mr Gorbachev two years ago, has outlived its time.
It was conceived as the highest body in the land, 1,000 or so of the most powerful figures in industry, agriculture and science.
It quickly became an obstacle to reform, even more inclined to the tactics and principles of a discredited ideology than the sitting parliament, the Supreme Soviet.
Each time the Congress met, which was roughly every six months, Boris Yeltsin ran rings around it.
In 1990, he re-emerged as a political leader by winning election as its Speaker, a post that is anything but ceremonial, by the narrowest of margins.
Last year, as deputies tried to dislodge him, he counter-attacked by forcing through elections to the new post of President.
In October, riding high after the August coup, he forced deputies to give him emergency powers to appoint the government and rule by decree for a year.
This time, with deepening anger on the streets over price liberalisation, the hardliners were not to forgo their chance.
They pounced on Saturday, during Mr Yeltsin's first absence from the Grand Kremlin Palace.
Mr Yeltsin said that by December he would present a new law on forming a government that would have cancelled his special powers.
The deputies ordered him to do so by July.
For Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister and the brains behind the shock therapy, this was an attack on his government's freedom.
His Cabinet's threat to resign was a deliberate move to bring matters to a head.
Ultimately, it paid dividends, with hardliners effectively agreeing to give the government a free hand until December.
But it was only Mr Yeltsin's behind-the-scenes authority which won the day for the reformers, and the respite is likely to be brief.
A simple power struggle lies at the core, one which Mr Yeltsin has three months to resolve.
In temperament, age and policy, government and parliament are in a state of perpetual conflict.
The stage is set for a showdown over a new constitution for Russia.
The draft drawn up by the Yeltsin team would enshrine his emergency powers to run matters of state at the expense of parliament.
It would also dissolve the Congress, whose mandate lasts until 1995.
Assuming that the Congress, which has wasted so much time so far, does not get round to final approval of any of the versions of the constitution, Mr Yeltsin could either wait until its next scheduled meeting in the autumn, seeking a compromise with parliament.
Or he could go for a referendum.
Liberal forces have already begun to collect the million signatures needed to call a popular vote.
Mr Yeltsin would be wise take the courageous option.
In retrospect, perhaps his greatest mistake since the coup was not to call elections to parliament and guarantee himself a more liberal body.
Even now, with so much suffering in the early stages of radical reform, he and his government are likely to get a better hearing from the voters than from Congress.
International: Reform put back on track by Yeltsin win
By John Kampfner in Moscow
RUSSIA'S radical reform programme was back on course last night after the hardline opposition in parliament was forced to back a declaration supporting the government's move to the market.
The resolution, which the Congress of People's Deputies approved by 578 votes to 203, was a moral victory for President Yeltsin and his young administration.
For the moment at least, it puts an end to the most serious political crisis in Russia since it became a sovereign state.
The result will also bring a sigh of relief in the West, which had given warning that a recent £15 billion credit package was at stake.
After the vote, the government of Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister, announced that it was withdrawing its threat to resign.
Mr Yeltsin was absent from the chamber during the four days of debate.
But his power-broking behind the scenes has been the decisive factor in bringing uncommitted, but conservative-inclined deputies to heel.
Mr Andrei Nechayev, Economics Minister, said: ‘We hope that parliament will no longer interfere in the government's day-to-day activities.’
Other liberals were less confident.
‘Confrontation remains,’ said Mr Viktor Sheinis.
‘We have to continue our struggle against demagogic attacks on our government.
This round of the fight has ended in a draw.
The next round moves to the standing parliament.’
The resolution, which had been given provisional approval on Tuesday night, declared the Congress's support for fundamental economic reform and pledged there would not be a return to the Communist administrative-command system.
Its importance lies not in its detail, which is highly confusing and often contradictory, but in its broad outline.
Formally, it mandated the government to fulfil the economic resolution passed last Saturday — the one that began the crisis by forcing Mr Yeltsin to present a new government by July.
But the declaration spoke of ‘taking into account current economic and social conditions’, a clause that should give both the president and the government free rein.
Hardline resistance to Mr Gaidar and his shock therapy programme, which conservatives say is sending millions into beggary, will not have ended with the vote in the Grand Kremlin Palace and is likely to move back on to the streets with more rabble-rousing in coming months.
The ‘Russian Unity’ faction, which includes around 300 of the 1,000 deputies, renewed its call for the ‘government of market experimenters’to resign.
The war of resolutions overshadowed the Congress, which should have ended proceedings yesterday but which is expected to continue until the end of the week, as it discusses amendments to the Russian constitution.
The Congress is not scheduled to convene again before October, although an emergency session must take place if a fifth of deputies call for it.
In the meantime, Mr Yeltsin will come under pressure to call a referendum on a new constitution that would abolish the much-discredited ‘super-parliament’.
International: Easter prayers answered as Etna lava flow comes to a halt
By Bruce Johnston in Zafferana
as if in answer to their prayers, the people of Zafferana Etnea were accorded a moment of respite yesterday.
Suddenly, the immense wall of molten lava bearing down from Mount Etna on to their doorsteps came to a halt.
Although it did so just 150 yards from the first inhabited house of the 7,000-population Sicilian town, the steaming wall of lava — here 20 feet high, and in other places towering more than 50 feet — managed first to swallow up a summer cottage and a vineyard dotted with fruit trees.
In the 12 hours that followed after it clambered effortlessly over the last five earth dykes, raised by terrified residents in as many days, the lava officially caused £1 million damage.
Townspeople said it was closer to £4 million.
Beyond the cottage gates, a bent green and yellow sign welcomed visitors to the area as if nothing had happened, declaring: ‘Visit Etna National Park, where nature is protected.’
But the surprising interlude — the lava, pouring at the rate of a million tons a day since December from Europe's highest and most active volcano, has not stopped but has simply stopped here — provided a rare example of nature doing the protecting.
Despite elaborate efforts by experts to blast and block underground conduits housing dangerous flows, to force them onto open ground higher up the 10,948-foot volcano, where they could cool and harden, the lava inexplicably broke onto the surface itself.
Instantly hardening, it has effectively blocked an estimated 50 per cent of the force of the eruption coming from a new fissure.
Relieved Signor Alfio Leonardi, the Mayor, said: ‘The news means we should be able to have a peaceful Easter, and all the time necessary to evaluate the situation properly.’
He was being realistic.
The Civil Protection Authority, together with the Italian army, navy and even Nato, needs all the time it can get.
For many experts, the unusually heavy and dense lava may continue to be churned out of Etna for a further year.
If that were to be the case, Professor Lettario Villeri, a noted vulcanologist, said, ‘the town of Zafferana would run a very real and serious risk of being overrun’.
He added: ‘To do all we need in order to deviate the lava means at least 30 working hours.
But the only time there are good conditions is in the morning.’
Yesterday a 21-man team was once again forced to break off work early due to worsening conditions.
Swirling in an army Chinook helicopter through wind and fog and over a sea of smouldering lava yesterday, it was easy to see why earlier plans to bomb or mine it off course and up on to the surface have been shelved.
In the Calanna Valley, 4,000 feet up, the lava billows like a black and angry ocean.
Here it measures a third of a mile across.
Elsewhere it is two miles across.
Prof Villeri said there was no way of telling how long the present eruption would last.
The volcano was still ‘swollen’, a state which normally precedes eruption.
International: Najibullah may have fled Kabul
By Robert Adams in Islamabad
PRESIDENT Najibullah of Afghanistan is rumoured to have gone into hiding or fled the capital, Kabul.
The reports come amid fighting at the country's principal military airbase at Bagram, 40 miles from the capital.
United Nations negotiators fear the peace process may be derailed by the fighting, in which a Mujahideen group has been helping government units defend the base against rival Muslim rebels, according to guerrilla sources in Pakistan.
Mohammed Ayoub, chief of the military committee of the Jamiat-i-Islami, one of the rebel groups leading operations near the capital, yesterday called on Mr Najibullah to surrender.
He said the rebels' objective was ‘not to conquer Kabul by force, but to smash the security perimeter’ established by government forces.
‘Najibullah mustn't flee, he must surrender,’ he said.
Unsubstantiated reports say Mr Najibullah, 45, has gone into hiding, but newspapers in Pakistan have reported that he has joined his wife and children, who flew to New Delhi two weeks ago.
Mr Najibullah's brother-in-law is ambassador there.
Diplomats close to the peace negotiations say Mr Najibullah may be in hiding in Kabul, but there is no indication that he has left the country.
His departure would complicate matters for the UN's special envoy in Afghanistan, Mr Benon Sevan, who is trying to bring an end to the 14-year civil war.
A power vacuum would probably destroy his hopes for a smooth transition of authority.
Over the past six weeks, Mujahideen of the minority Tajik community have allied themselves with Tajik and Uzbek militias formerly loyal to the government, and now control most of northern Afghanistan.
Mr Najibullah, many of his key ministers, elite units of the Afghan army and most of the Pakistan-based Mujahideen groups are members of the Pushtun tribes which have dominated Afghanistan for 200 years.
Resistance sources in Peshawar believe that hard-line Pushtun leader Gulbeddin Hekmatyar, who is attacking Bagram, may try to stage a coup in Kabul — something he attempted two years ago — denying the northern minorities power.
International: ‘Hit money’ strikes a blow for forbearance
By ROBERT WHYMANT
IRATE passengers who attack public transport employees help the pay of bus drivers and station staff in Osaka, Japan's second largest city, writes Robert Whymant in Tokyo.
Osaka Transport Authority operates a ‘hit-money’ system that rewards staff who display forbearance when attacked, like the station employee who recently asked a man kicking a broken vending machine to stop, only to be hit on the head.
He was off work for nine days.
The price of turning the other cheek when passengers turn violent is 1,000 yen (£4.30) per assault, up from 200 yen (86p) two years ago.
The authority records about 100 cases of physical assaults to staff in the line of duty every year.
‘We instruct our staff never to strike back however angry they feel,’ said an Osaka transport official.
Because the assaults were carried out by passengers — the Japanese word literally means ‘honourable guests’— there was no question of resorting to legal action, the official explained.
Japanese traditionally set store by the heroic virtue of gaman, which means long-suffering perseverance.
International: Tearful Winnie leaves ANC post
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
A SUBDUED, tearful Mrs Winnie Mandela announced her resignation yesterday as head of the African National Congress's social welfare department, the highest office she holds in the organisation.
Mrs Mandela, in her first public appearance since her husband, Nelson, announced that the couple were separating, told a press conference in Johannesburg that she was quitting ‘for the sake of the ANC, the movement I love’.
Her move, she said, was in no way caused by the spate of allegations linking her to the murders of the township activist Stompie Moeketsi and the Soweto physician Dr Abu-Baker Asvat and to other possible charges of kidnap, assault and theft.
These, she said, were ‘false’.
Mrs Mandela, self-styled ‘mother of the nation’, pointedly omitted to mention her position on the ANC's National Executive Committee, the top policy-making body, to which she was appointed by a ballot among members.
Five people were killed and 10 injured in overnight politically motivated violence in black townships around Johannesburg.
Letter to the Editor: Balanced bias
SIR — Neil Kinnock blames the tabloid press for the loss of the election (report, April 14).
I cannot understand why he should complain: he had the BBC on his side.
Col MAURICE WILLOUGHBY Storrington, West Sussex
Letter to the Editor: Time to resign?
SIR — In view of the proven pain and loss conferred uniquely upon children by divorcing parents, ought not the Princess Royal to reconsider her position as President of the Save the Children Fund?
Further, in response to the growing impression given to the public by the highest in the land that repudiation of the marriage vows is acceptable, ought not cardinals, archbishops and Christian leaders in general abandon their fears of seeming ‘judgmental’?
They should take the opportunity to re-state (without condemnation) the Christian principle of permanence in married love, the possibilities of achieving it, with a firm indication of the social evils that issue from its abandonment.
DAVID STEVENS Stoneygate, Leics
Letter to the Editor: Plane triumph
SIR — Glynn Jones's article (April 10) about the Japanese rediscovering Vertical Take-off and Landing transports contains a major error while making a valid point.
Ishida Aerospace has picked up on an Eighties Cold War idea generated by the US military, which has financed the design, construction and flight testing of a propeller-driven VTOL plane, namely the Osprey, whose features were shown in your illustration.
What Ishida is demonstrating is the ability to market a plane for commercial travel, where the major market exists, while the American aerospace and defence industry is still pleading for funds to develop the Osprey as an assault and/or anti-submarine helicopter replacement.
Maybe the American government should note this before it complains about the success of Japanese business.
This success, and the ability to challenge it, has some of its roots in its own backyard — namely Fort Worth, Texas.
MATTHEW BAKER Welwyn Garden City, Herts
Beware the monster of pacts and realignment
Labour needs to review its programme, but will never win by ditching the principles on which it is based, says Deputy Leader ROY HATTERSLEY
By ROY HATTERSLEY
THE IDEA that the Labour Party can sweep into office through a back door marked ‘pacts’ or ‘realignment’is a chimera in every sense of that word.
The hope of success through alliances of convenience is a ‘grotesque product of desperate imagination’(Webster's Dictionary).
And the coalition itself would become ‘an organism made up of two genetically different kinds of tissue’ which, since they were fundamentally incompatible, would certainly reject each other during the lifetime of a single Parliament.
The monster might breathe fire for a time but, sooner or later, the general public would forget about the lion's head and remember only the goat's body and serpent's tail.
The call for realignment comes from three distinct groups.
One, motivated only by despair, deserves sympathy and time to absorb the full implication of last Thursday's election.
Another, which consists of failed Social Democrats who now wish to clone the Labour Party in David Owen's image, have to be treated as we have treated other entryists.
I do not suggest that they should be expelled like Militant.
But our attitude towards them has to be based on the understanding that they want to transform us into a different party — a party which could never win, and might well not deserve to win, against a Conservative government which itself embraces the social market.
The third argument in favour of realignment is the most seductively dangerous.
It is, the theory goes, the only way in which to beat the Conservatives.
That is a wholly desirable aim.
My enthusiasm for that outcome will be increased with every hospital that becomes a market-orientated trust, every school which becomes self-governing and effectively selective, every Muslim family which is divided by arbitrary immigration regulations and every youth who is driven to sleep in a shop doorway.
But I do not believe that we can assemble a majority for anything as negative as ‘get the Tories out’.
I certainly do not believe that we can win anything by a formal arrangement with the Liberal Democratic Party.
The Liberals are the real declining force in British politics.
While Labour increased both its percentage of the vote and its Members of Parliament, the Liberal share of votes declined and it broke even on the ratio of seats lost and gained and because of its dubious victory in Cheltenham.
If the Liberals had increased their vote by the same percentage as Labour, Neil Kinnock would sleep tonight in Downing Street.
If they had polled the same plurality as they commanded in 1987, there would have been no overall party majority.
The last thing that the Labour Party now wants is a compact with failure — particularly since such an arrangement, formal or by implication, would require us to sacrifice our ideological identity.
For Labour to win — as I believe we can and will in 1996 or 1997 — we need a sharper edge to our reputation, not a blurring of the image.
It is important to judge last week's results with a little intellectual humility.
All our conclusions about the cause of defeat must be tentative.
But if we lost in 1992 — as we certainly lost in 1987 — because prosperous voters feared that we would reduce their disposable income, we will not win back those middle income families by pretending that we have abandoned the very purpose of our creation and our existence.
If we did not espouse the values of community and express them through policies which are designed to redistribute power and wealth, the electorate would be entitled to ask themselves two questions.
The first is: ‘Can Labour really have undergone so comprehensive a conversion?’
Those who came to the conclusion that such total apostasy is possible might then speculate on the cynicism, and the intellectual vacuum at the top of the party, which prompted such a sudden shift.
But they would also make a more damning inquiry: ‘If the Labour Party does not believe in democratic socialism, what is the Labour Party for?’
I WAS, and remain, an enthusiast for the proposals set out in John Smith's alternative budget — as Kenneth Clarke said, incredulously, during a television broadcast, an intentional exercise in redistribution.
I attempted something similar in 1987.
With the benefit of five years' hindsight and analysis, it is possible to understand at least some of the political consequences of that sort of robust egalitarianism.
Bryan Gould (then Shadow Chief Secretary) and I, lost the battle because we fought an accountant's war.
Whatever the newspapers said at the time, we knew where every penny of revenue was coming from and every penny of expenditure was going.
Indeed, we were so anxious to get the figures right that we had little time to spend explaining why what we proposed was morally necessary.
Our failure was not that we neglected the figures, but that we ignored the ideology…
By the time of the next election, Labour must have established a clear ideological alternative in the voters' mind.
By doing so, we will, of course, make new enemies.
But the old idea that governments lose elections was proved wrong on April 9.
We have to risk our political lives in order to save them.
We have to be progressive, positive and, above all, radical.
That requires a major re-examination of our programme — though not of the philosophy on which it is based.
In eight and a half years, Labour under Neil Kinnock has worked miracles in divesting itself of policies which, as well as being fundamentally unpopular, had no obvious connection with our central beliefs.
Unilateralism and European isolationism have nothing to do with socialism.
State regulation and control (like the domination of markets by government monopolies) is wholly incompatible with the more free and equal society which socialists aim to build.
We have at least begun to shed the unattractive reputation which association with such heresies creates.
Now, having spent a hard eight years making clear what we are against, the time has come to describe what we are for.
It is not a difficult task.
I propose to spend much of the next parliament applying the classical doctrines of equality — Green, Tawney, Crosland — to the world in which we now live.
Do not tell me that they are old ideas.
So are the precepts laid down in the Sermon on the Mount.
Principles endure through time.
At the next election we need to have persuaded more people to measure their votes against principle rather than tax tables.
Letter to the Editor: Sell off Scots assembly building
SIR — As a convicted British tribalist, Scottish branch, may I urge the new Government of Great Britain not to make the same mistake as the British tribalists, English branch, who failed for so long to find a use for County Hall in London after Livingstone et al.were ejected from it.
They should now act to deprive Scotland's discredited Nationalists of any chance of ‘kremlinising’ the Royal High School in Edinburgh.
This copy by Thomas Hamilton of the Temple of Theseus in Athens, which is one of the finest classical buildings in Edinburgh, was designated as the home of a Scottish assembly as far back as the late Seventies.
The building was completed in 1829 at a cost £34,199 11s 6d.
The pupils proceeded thither in a procession preceded by the 17th Lancers, each class with a master at its head.
According to Swarbrick's Old and New Edinburgh: ‘In the long roll of its scholars are the names of all professions in every branch of science and literature many of whom have helped to form British India.
‘Every branch of literature, reading, orthography, recitation, grammar and composition together with British history forms the prominent part of the system; while the entire curriculum of study which occupies six years embraces the Latin, Greek, French, Russian and German languages, history, geography, physiology, chemistry, natural philosophy, zoology, botany, algebra, geometry, drawing and painting, fencing, gymnastics and military drill.
In the library are 17,000 volumes.
‘It was described by Lord Provost Black in 1845 as a school which has conferred a lustre upon our city and which has given a tone to the manners and intellect of all its inhabitants.
Whether they remain in Edinburgh or betake themselves to other lands and whatever be the walk of life in which they were bred I believe the students of this seminary will be found everywhere and at all times promoting civilisation in the world.’
I now suggest that the new Government should immediately sell the building for the same price so that it can become a seat of learning for talented Scottish children, such as it then produced of every walk of life.
Sir NICHOLAS FAIRBAIRN, MP (Con) Fordell Castle, Fife
Leading Article: Ulster's latest hope
BECAUSE the issues at stake in Northern Ireland involve life and death, the appointment of a British Secretary of State always assumes special interest and importance.
There is speculation about new political initiatives, each one a triumph of hope over 20 years' experience.
There is discussion of the scope for fresh security measures, especially in the wake of some new terrorist horror, such as that in London last Friday.
Every new Northern Ireland Secretary takes office bearing the slender hopes of the British people that he will at last prove the man who can draw forth the sword from the stone, and translate into reality the ritual expressions of faith about restoring peace to the province.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the latest incumbent of this difficult office, is not thought to be expecting any great political breakthrough.
If that is so, he is wise.
Mr Peter Brooke's patience and good nature commanded widespread admiration, but few sensible observers ever felt much hope that he would succeed in reconciling irreconcilables around the negotiating table.
Sir Patrick, it is thought, will focus first upon strengthening security.
He should be helped in this task by Sinn Fein 's loss of its only parliamentary seat last week, to the SDLP.
The terrorists' claim to represent popular will in the Catholic community has seldom seemed less credible.
More important, Sir Patrick is dealing with a new Dublin government.
In recent weeks, Mr Albert Reynolds and his colleagues have been too preoccupied with their domestic abortion crisis to focus upon security.
But, when they get down to business with the British, it is at least certain that they will not be as difficult as Mr Haughey's government was.
If terrorism in Northern Ireland is to be beaten, better co-operation from Dublin is essential.
Successive Irish governments have prevaricated on this issue, protesting their goodwill while professing their inability to solve Britain's difficulties in the North.
This is disingenuous.
At the root of the Irish problem lies the duplicity — albeit understandable — of the Irish republic.
Dublin cannot bring itself publicly to renounce its territorial claim to the North, while privately living in dread of ever having to acknowledge a direct responsibility for Northern Ireland's Protestants.
The difficulties of capturing and extraditing terrorists from the South are notorious.
It is not that most of the people of southern Ireland are supportive or even tolerant of the terrorists.
They detest them.
But, for all the familiar historical reasons, they cannot bring themselves to take decisive steps to tighten the ring around the IRA south of the border.
Of course, there are issues to be addressed in Northern Ireland itself.
But it is the nature of the relationship between Belfast and Dublin that will determine whether Sir Patrick is successful in making real headway against the IRA.
The climate for doing so is more favourable than for some years past.
Peterborough: Cleaning up after Mrs Simpson
A FAMILY archive including sensitive letters concerning the Abdication of King Edward VIII has been saved for the nation.
It was feared the collection, offered for sale by Lord Brownlow, would go abroad, but it has been snapped up for £220,000 by Lincolnshire County Council, backed by the National Heritage Memorial Fund and the Victoria & Albert Museum.
Brownlow, a Jersey tax exile whose father was a close friend of the Duke of Windsor, originally offered the Abdication papers to the Royal Archives.
They include the 6th Lord Brownlow's diary of the crisis, draft statements by Wallis Simpson and letters in which she calls herself ‘Public Character Number One’.
The Queen, I hear, was anxious that the papers should remain in Britain, but still turned them down.
The 112 wooden boxes and 34 tin trunks have now been moved to Lincoln from the attics at Belton House, the former Brownlow seat.
The papers include an unpublished poem by Samuel Johnson, Non cito perit ruinam, qui primum timet (loosely: ‘When you see trouble coming, duck’).
Members of the Brownlow family are relieved.
‘There was a danger they would be sold abroad,’ says Peter Hoos, the 6th Baron's nephew.
The papers tell of Mrs Simpson's escape to France in December 1936.
As Brownlow recorded, a phone call bade him to Fort Belvedere, Windsor.
‘I want you to take Wallis abroad tonight,’ the King said.
‘I cannot say much on the telephone.
Will you come to the Fort at 7pm with your own car and luggage for 10 days?’
But the press had already been tipped off: Mrs Simpson's car had been booked on to the Channel steamer in her own name.
Peterborough: Making waves
YESTERDAY's round of Whitehall appointments worked well for Clare College, Cambridge.
Three of the senior mandarins promoted are Clare men: Richard Wilson, who becomes permanent secretary at the Department of the Environment; Hayden Phillips, who has secured the plum job as permanent secretary in the new Department of National Heritage; and Alex Allen, the new principal private secretary to the Prime Minister.
Allen, a fitness nut, was once photographed in pinstripe suit windsurfing down the Thames to get to work during a transport strike.
He is proud to call himself a ‘Deadhead’— not some obscure Whitehall term of abuse, but the name given to fans of the Grateful Dead, an American rock band.
SCHOOLBOYS know how to tweak gadgets.
A young scrap at St Ambrose College, Altrincham, had failed to produce his homework, and explained: ‘I've left it at home.’
The master expressed the usual scepticism.
‘OK, sir,’ replied the boy, ‘if you let me telephone home my mother will fax it to you.’
Crime is well organised too
The new Germany is now a clearing house for East European criminals.
As Robin Gedye reports from Bonn, each country has its own specialist racket
By ROBIN GEDYE
ZBIGNIEW Nowacki waited as his blonde 19-year-old companion tucked her legs into the passenger well of his Ferrari Testarossa, slammed the door and put his key in the ignition.
The explosion was heard half a mile away.
Nowacki, a Polish businessman whose interests included car dealing, was lucky to get away with serious injuries.
His friend will be scarred for life.
He had been warned.
Five weeks earlier a bomb had gone off at the entrance to the underground car park below the flat he rented in central Hamburg.
Police believe Nowacki was the victim of an attack by hit men hired by one of the Polish organised crime syndicates that have cornered the stolen car market in Germany.
The attack was a sensational reminder of the problem that is threatening to career out of control in Germany.
Organised crime is running wild since the collapse of Eastern Europe's borders allowed communist gangs, incubating for decades on meagre pickings, to burst their bounds.
And where better to settle than in the richest and nearest capitalist paradise?
German police, stretched to their limits in the west and beyond them in the east, are confronted with vast mafia-like structures bound firstly by nationality and secondly by existing criminal hierarchies.
Poles control the massive stolen car market, Yugoslavs run prostitution and illegal gambling, Russians specialise in fencing ex-army weapons and protection, and Romanians deal in babies and children for anything from illegal adoption to child pornography.
There is also a buoyant market for religious icons stolen in Russia and brought into Germany — the buying and selling of them in Germany is legal.
Moscow police have begun to work with Germany's federal criminal police by providing crucial information on an estimated 3,500 of the biggest and most violent CIS crime syndicates, which are now moving into Germany in their hundreds.
O RGANISED crime cost Germany more than 10 billion marks (£3.5 billion) last year.
If widened to include less obvious frauds in insurance, tax evasion and financial dealings, the costs rise to £52 billion, or 9 per cent of gross national product.
The government is desperately trying to push through a package of new measures to combat organised crime, including laws that will permit undercover policemen to infiltrate gangs and commit crimes as part of their duties.
‘An increasing number of foreign criminal groups are moving to Germany and acting with unprecedented violence,’ Herr Wolfgang Schauble, until recently Interior Minister, warned.
‘Even the Italian Mafia uses Germany as its favourite rest and recreation centre.’
Contrary to popular assumptions, German banks are preferred by criminals for money-laundering purposes because of their notoriously cavalier attitude towards the origins of their customers' finances.
At the same time they preserve a rigorously secretive banking tradition.
Unlike the rest of Europe, including even Switzerland, it is not a criminal offence to launder money in Germany, although a bill proposed last week would force credit institutes to identify customers who make transactions worth more than £10,500, or place deposits above £17,500.
Enhancing Germany's attraction as a criminal playground, hundreds of bureaucrats, local government officials and policemen have recently been exposed in a series of nationwide corruption trials.
Building contracts are sold to insiders, rubbish is disposed of on payment of massive backhanders and driving licences have been sold back to convicted drink-drivers.
The audacity of criminals faced with ineffective and ill-equipped police forces, not just in their East European homelands, is turning crime levels in Germany into ‘banana republic proportions’, lamented a federal criminal police spokesman.
Border police say they can only stand by helplessly as Poles, returning home with their stolen Mercedes and BMWs, suddenly accelerate past them.
Poles exported 10,000 of the 87,000 cars stolen in Germany last year to their homeland.
Many of the vehicles found their way back to the West, some were delivered to the Middle East and some to the Soviet Union.
‘Germany's Polish car thieves are organised on the lines of the Mafia,’ explained Peter Sehr, head of the national police car-theft division at Wiesbaden.
‘In most of our large cities there are so-called ‘residents’ who get their orders from a boss in Poland.
They have access to a ring of thieves who act as couriers, stripping streets of luxury cars or ramming the gates of car showrooms and disappearing with the entire fleet of vehicles.’
Herr Hans-Ludwig Zachert, head of the federal criminal police, warns of the immediate need to organise a European police force to combat a new breed of international criminal for whom the Schengen agreement — under which France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal and the Benelux countries have agreed to drop border controls — creates the ideal working environment.
‘National police forces will soon be quite unable to cope as a freshly unified and borderless European consumer paradise becomes a Disneyland for criminals,’ said Zachert.
Capital city of crime is Frankfurt, Germany's banking centre, where mobsters like to blend in with legitimate wealth, washing their illegal gambling and drugs money, stealing their luxury cars and working their financial scams.
More than 230 illegal gambling dens take £175,400 per day, most of which is used to finance the city's thriving illegal drugs trade; Frankfurt has 10,000 registered heroin addicts.
An estimated 3,000 prostitutes, many lured to the city from Eastern Europe on illegal visas with promises of glamorous jobs in nightclubs, turn over £52.6 million a year.
Behind the glitzy shopping arcades, ethnic criminal gangs fight for territory.
At weekends Albanians, Yugoslavs and Poles have gangland shoot-outs near Frankfurt's central railway station.
After Frankfurt, the cities worst affected by mob violence are Hamburg, Berlin and Munich.
Recep Demir, a 42-year-old Munich-based Turk, admitted at his trial last year that like many of his associates he had used Germany to hide the origins of his drug money by inventing a string of fake businesses.
He explained how he had smuggled £175.4 million into Germany in the last five years.
B ILLIONS of marks from the illicit Colombian and Panamanian drugs trade also have flowed and are flowing through German banks.
An American-based German policeman, specialising in the illicit money-laundering business, told Der Spiegel magazine: ‘We Germans are particularly loved — Lufthansa delivers the money boxes on time, they are scrupulously accounted for in our warehouses and the Deutsche Bank accepts the contents without a murmur.’
Cheque and banking frauds have seen a massive increase in Frankfurt, Berlin and Hamburg.
‘But we haven't seen anything yet,’ insisted Heinz Bachmann, chief of the Frankfurt police.
‘Just wait until the single European market.’
Obituary of Gerald Annesley
GERALD ANNESLEY, one of Ulster's most colourful landowners who has died aged 86, caused a mild sensation in the general election of 1951 when, although a former chairman of the local Unionist party, he stood as a Protestant Irish Nationalist candidate for South Down.
‘For many years people thought I was something of a rebel or a madman,’ Annesley recalled.
‘I did it because I was bored, and I rather believed Ireland should be a single country.’
Annesley inherited a substantial estate in Co Down, which at one stage covered not only the demesne and town of Castlewellan but the seaside resort of Newcastle and a large swathe of the Mountains of Mourne (including Slieve Donard), which, as Percy French sang, ‘sweep down to the sea’.
‘Gerry’ Annesley was regarded by the locals of the ‘Kingdom of Mourne’as a witty and idiosyncratic character.
He is said to have once turned off the water supply to Newcastle — which he owned — when a local hotel refused to serve him a drink.
He was the only son of Lady Mabel Annesley, eldest daughter of the 5th Earl Annesley by her husband Cdr Gerald Sowerby, of an English family landed in Hertfordshire and Cumberland.
Gerald Francis Sowerby was born in London on Nov 5 1905.
His father died in 1913, and the next year his maternal uncle, the 6th Earl Annesley, was killed in action in an aircraft over Ostend, Belgium.
Young Gerald assumed his maternal surname when his mother inherited the estates.
The Annesleys had settled in Ireland in the 17th century but did not build Castlewellan Castle until the 1850s, when the bachelor 4th Earl Annesley commissioned William Burn to erect an austere granite pile.
Gerald Annesley was educated at Wellington and then went out to Kenya by steerage.
On board, though, a party of bridge players in first class found themselves short of a fourth, and Annesley filled the gap.
On reaching Port Said, however, the captain declared that Annesley would have to be more respectably attired if he wished to continue in first class.
The bridge party duly clubbed together to buy him a dinner jacket.
In 1929, after some years farming and big-game hunting, Annesley returned to Ireland to manage the family property.
In 1962, three years after his mother's death, he sold the Castlewellan estate to the Ministry of Agriculture.
It became the National Arboretum for Northern Ireland.
Annesley, an authority on rare plants and trees, played a significant role in the development of the garden.
During the Second World War Annesley served in the Home Guard.
A keen follower of the Turf, he owned a number of useful racehorses including His Reverence, Ballywillwil and Ballymaginty.
He also had an interest in the stud farm at Kilcork, Kildare, where Arkle retired.
His other recreations included golf, rugby football and shooting.
He married first, in 1927 (dissolved 1940), Lady Elizabeth Jocelyn, elder daughter of the 8th Earl of Roden; they had two daughters.
He married, secondly, in 1941 (dissolved 1954), Mary MacDonald; they had two sons.
Annesley married, thirdly, in 1957, Lily Cromwell; they had twin sons.
Obituary of Sir Basil Fraser
Sir Basil Fraser, 2nd (and last) Bt.
Aged 72.
Served Second World War with Royal Engineers and Madras Sappers and Miners (despatches).
Obituary of Daniele Bovet
DANIELE BOVET, who has died aged 85, won a Nobel Prize in 1957 for his part in developing anti-histamines, and in adapting the poison curare to more beneficent purpose.
Few men can have done more to relieve human suffering, or shown less interest in profiting from the process.
When Bovet won the prize it was noted that he had never taken out a patent in his own name or sought to make a penny from the commercial expoitation of his research.
The son of an educationist, Daniele Bovet was born at Neuchatel, Switzerland, on March 23 1907, and was instantly treated as a subject of research.
‘We children were guinea pigs for testing father's educational theories,’ he remembered.
‘It was wonderful.’
Young Daniele demonstrated his proclivities by cultivating moulds in his mother's jam jars, before undertaking more formal education at Geneva University.
In 1929 he went to Paris to work at the Pasteur Institute.
When word came from Germany that a dye product called protonsil was proving efficacious in the treatment of streptococcal infections in mice, Bovet set himself to analyse this ‘clumsy, complex chemical’.
He succeeded in isolating the essential germ-killing element, and created sulfanilamide, the first modern drug to work directly upon the cause of infection.
He went on to develop a succession of life-saving sulfa drugs.
In 1936 Bovet became head of therapeutic chemistry at the Pasteur Insitute.
He had by then begun to investigate the failure of the human system to produce an antibody against the effects of histamine, associated with such allergic reactions as hay fever and asthma.
Between 1937 and 1941 he discovered drugs which mitigated the worst symptoms of these maladies.
He next turned his attention to curare, which South American Indians used to apply to the tips of their arrows to induce paralysis in their foes.
Bovet produced a curare-based compound that came to be widely used as a muscle relaxant during surgery on the chest and the abdomen.
In 1947 Bovet left the Pasteur Institute for the Insituto Superiore di Sanita in Rome, which was able to offer him better facilities.
Here he was increasingly concerned with the chemistry of the brain, which he believed held the key to the treatment of mental illness.
He became an Italian citizen in 1947.
Bovet married, in 1938, Filomeni Nitti, daughter of an anti-Fascist prime minister of Italy.
Appropriately enough, he experienced ‘a lightning chemical reaction’ on their first meeting.
They had a son.
Obituary of Wim Van Leer
WIM VAN LEER, who has died aged 78, was many things in his time — jazz-musician, pilot, cattle-rancher, industrialist, author, journalist, impresario, dramatist, film-maker and explorer — most of them with success, all of them with aplomb.
Where there was Wim Van Leer there was life.
Had he been English he might have been described as a typical eccentric.
As a Dutchman he was harder to classify.
He may have inherited some of his eccentricity from his father, Bernard, who built up a vast multi-national engineering company from scratch and then acquired a circus as a sideline, training his own Lippizaner stallions.
Old Van Leer left nothing to chance: not only did he plan his own funeral, he even made Wim rehearse a funeral oration, which he did with his usual brio.
He proved rather better at handling animals than his own family, who scattered in all directions — his wife to Israel, his younger son to America, and Wim to England.
Willem Van Leer was born in Amsterdam on May 29 1913 and left home at 18 —‘a remittance man,’ as he put it, ‘without a remittance’.
He supported himself playing alto-saxophone in a jazz band, and trained as an engineer in Switzerland.
While he was still in his twenties he set up his own factory in Welwyn Garden City and became a millionaire.
His family was nominally Jewish, but their connection with Jewish life was limited to the occasional hand-out to Jewish charities.
Wim, though, was politicised by the rise of the Nazis.
After the Kristallnacht in 1938 he helped rescue 14 young Jews from a German concentration camp, and he later became a Zionist.
He had trained as pilot and after the war, as the Jewish struggle for statehood intensified, he volunteered for the Israeli air force and found himself in a squadron of old Piper Cubs, Fokkers, Messerschmits, Dakotas and Avro Ansons, few of them airworthy.
His attempts to rectify this met with little encouragement.
It was a good job, as he observed later, that they were only fighting Arabs.
In spite of his frustrations, though, he fell in love with the country and eventually made his home in Jerusalem.
Van Leer inherited some of his father's acumen but none of his money and certainly none of his love for money.
When he built up one successful enterprise, he often lost interest in it and moved on to another.
He knew next to nothing about chemicals and crops, but established Israel's first aerial crop-spraying service — and, despite his ignorance of cattle, its first beef cattle ranch.
He also founded the Jersualem Cinematheque, which still flourishes in ornate premises in the Hebron Road, and the Israel Film Institute.
Unhappy with the quality of local films, Van Leer began to produce his own: his first effort won him the Golden Bear award at the Berlin film festival in 1964.
He also tried his hand as a film director, though less successfully, and wrote a play about a German who sought to take out a patent for gas ovens, which was staged to scant acclaim at the Arts Theatre in 1965.
As he confessed in his autobiogaphy, Time of My Life (1984), Van Leer carried a famous name but was prone to infamous conduct.
He was a lively and stylish writer, and contributed a column to the Jerusalem Post on high life and low living.
He loved cats as much as he loved women.
He loved Israel more than he did the Israelis.
To discover whether Jews were as compassionate as they claimed to be he donned dark spectacles and stuck a notice to the rear window of his Buick: ‘Careful!
Blind Driver’.
He found that drivers no longer tried to overtake him and that policemen stopped traffic to let him pass.
His conclusion was that Jews were indeed compassionate, ‘as long as you're blind.’
He had a long-running conflict with the rabbis.
Friday night was party night in Tel Aviv and Haifa.
In Jerusalem, though, there was a tradition that all places of entertainment were closed for the Sabbath.
Wim and Lia Van Leer were determined that their cinema should stay open every night, and it became the focus of almost weekly demonstrations.
They persisted, and eventually won.
Other establishments followed their example, with the result that Jerusalem is a less cheerless city than it used to be.
Van Leer's mother endowed the Van Leer Institute, which houses the Israel Academy and seeks to promote Arab-Jewish reconciliation.
In a way Wim Van Leer served a similar purpose, for a great diversity of individuals were reconciled to one another through their common affection for him.
He is survived by his wife and their daughter.
Obituary of Archie Binding
ARCHIE BINDING, who has died aged 105, was perhaps the last survivor of those Royal Naval Air Service and Royal Flying Corps airmen who crewed airships in the First World War.
He had earlier fought with the naval armoured car brigade which landed at Walfish (now Walvis) Bay in South-West Africa and helped Gen Botha to take the German colony.
By the end of the First World War Binding had logged more than 3,000 airship hours and established himself as one of the most experienced and, as his service record stated, ‘capable airship engineers.’
From his experience with the Navy's Coastal Airships on convoy escort and anti U-boat patrols, Binding was accustomed to the perilous practice of climbing out of the gondola cockpit high above the North Sea to service the airship's two eight-cylinder 150 hp Sunbeam engines.
‘We had a lot of trouble with magneto breakdown,’ he recalled, ‘and in every flight carried a spare one.
I remember having to change four magnetos in the air, and on one flight struggling home on one engine and one magneto.
‘Airship flying was pretty hard work, starting every day at 4am and lasting until sunset.
We were in open cockpits and the only food for a day was Horlicks tablets.’
Once, when stationed at Pulham in Norfolk, his commanding officer told him that a naval airship was drifting from the North Sea entirely out of control, as both its engines had broken down.
Binding later described how he was told ‘to arrange a crew and equipment, ladders, steps, scaffolding, cylinders of hydrogen and personnel for repair of airship skin and everything I thought necessary to salvage this airship.
‘After a cross-country pursuit it eventually landed in a tree and I had to organise a rescue.
My staff erected ladders to enable the riggers to patch up the envelope and refill it with gas to obtain lift.
‘Meanwhile, I went aboard and found that both engines had failed owing to leaking radiators.
I had both radiators removed and transferred to the lorry and told the driver to go to the nearest large town and to contact the best plumber to help me repair the radiators.
‘I duly repaired the leads and returned to the airship and refitted the radiators.
I started the engines and reported to the pilot that subject to sufficient lift he could fly back to base.
‘His engineer would not take over as he had had a full day's terror, so I volunteered to take over engine control in his place.
‘We duly became airborne and flew back to base with no further trouble.
Although I was complimented it did not prevent my being officer of the watch.
I released the crew that had had no food or rest all day and we were ready for the first watch next day.’
Archer Ormond Binding was born at Clevedon, Somerset, on Dec 12 1886.
His father, a builder and carrier, was one of the first carters to stable his horses in favour of steam traction lorries.
Young Archie was educated at the local National school until he was 14 and then apprenticed to Stephens & Sons, pioneers of the Stephens motor-car.
In 1907 he joined Straker Squires in Bristol and four years later teamed up with his father's engineering firm.
When war was declared in 1914 he replied to a Royal Naval Air Service advertisement for engineers.
‘On reporting,’ he recalled, ‘I was given a piece of steel (distorted), a hacksaw, a file and a square and told to make two sides square, which I quickly did.’
After an eye test he was given the rank of petty officer engineer and directed to Victoria Station to take charge of 20 similar recruits.
On arrival at Sheerness naval barracks Binding was told to train them himself.
He knew nothing about drill, but learned the necessary movements from books and soon gained promotion to chief petty officer.
His next posting was to south-west Africa.
At Walvis Bay he survived a severe attack of dysentery, while his comrades ‘were dying like flies’.
On his return home, he was asked: ‘Where have you been?
We want you for flying duties.’
He was promoted warrant officer in the RNAS and then, in 1918, the Royal Flying Corps commissioned him as a second lieutenant.
His knowledge of airships was at a premium, and his reputation had been enhanced by his patented invention of a carburettor that could burn hydrogen which was otherwise wasted on airship operations.
Later Binding was involved with the rigid airships R23 and R31.
R23 had a gun turret on the top of the envelope (for which Barnes Wallis carried out tests) and was used for experiments in launching a Sopwith Camel fighter slung below it.
He was awarded the Air Force Cross in 1919.
After the First World War Binding rejoined the family business.
During the Second World War he worked in the production of aero-engine components and served as engineer officer with the Clevedon Fire Brigade.
He remained associated with the business until 1966, when he sold it to TRW in America.
Archie Binding was a dedicated freemason and Rotarian.
Although diagnosed as having a weak heart in 1948, he survived his first wife and married again at the age of 85.
His second wife also predeceased him, as did one of the two sons of his first marriage.
International: CORRECTION
We apologise to Dr Fenech-Adami, Maltese Premier, for an incorrect photograph in some editions yesterday.