

Five-point try introduced in rugby changes
By Charles Randall
TRIES will be worth five points in the new rugby season, and three-day county championship matches may be scrapped in next year's cricket season.
The introduction of the five-point try was announced in Wellington, New Zealand, yesterday by rugby union's International Board, which has made a series of sweeping rule changes in an attempt to quicken the flow and generally brighten up the game.
The reforms are mostly technical adjustments aimed at penalising slow delivery of the ball into open play and reducing the number of place-kicks.
Five points instead of four for a try and the scrapping of a much-abused offside law had been regarded as inevitable, but experimental changes to rucks and mauls, switching the advantage to the defending side, received only a cautious welcome among leading coaches yesterday.
Some of the main changes are: In general play, offside players may not advance towards a player waiting to play the ball until they have been put onside.
The half-back may not take any action while the ball is still in the scrummage to convey to opponents that the ball is out.
When a player receives the ball outside his 22-metre line and runs behind the 22 to kick for touch, he may not gain ground from the kick.
When a penalty is kicked directly into touch the same team will have the throw-in.
From the kick-off, if the ball crosses the opposing team's goal line without being touched, that team may have a scrummage at the half way.
The kick-off after a score is to be a drop kick.
In experimental line-out changes that will be reviewed after a year, a jumper must use both hands or his inside arm to catch the ball, and the 50 centimetre space between the lines will be doubled.
A Test and County Cricket Board working party led by Mr Mike Murray, the Middlesex chairman, suggested scrapping three-day matches in favour of 17 four-day games for each county.
Sunday league matches would be of 50 overs a side instead of the existing 40, and group preliminary matches in the Benson and Hedges Cup would be replaced by a knock-out competition.
The proposals are to be debated at Lord's on May 19 and, if agreed, will come into force next year.
The counties, notoriously reluctant to embrace change in the past, will have to weigh the advantage of more rest for players with the financial losses arising from a smaller programme.
Third rod lands pike angler in deep water
The fishing habits of the angler banned from the British Pike Championship for allegedly using photographs of the same fish to claim three separate and spectacular catches have landed him in trouble again.
Mr John Watson, 41, of March, Cambs, has been fined £30, with £20 costs, by magistrates for simultaneously fishing with three rods where the limit is two.
He said yesterday: ‘What I have to do to clear my reputation is to catch more big fish.’
Friday Matters: NARROW VICTORY
A PLOT 70 15ft which just accommodates three people at a time hardly seems a typical garden to open to the public.
It's only when you visit Jane and Keith Hainge's modest patch behind their Edwardian terrace house in Chesham, Bucks, that you realise it is an inspiration for all gardeners with limited resources.
Keith Hainge, 37, has the advantage of being the parks area manager for Brent.
Nevertheless, even he was daunted by the sparse length of turf (with few plants) that he inherited when moving into his house three years ago.
His remedy was to divide the garden with a wicker arch into two sections, to create an illusion of space.
In the first, he dug scallop-shaped beds housing 250 herbaceous plants to give a cottagey look and, in the second, he has created a mini-woodland with a bark path and a miniature pond surrounded by peat blocks for a natural effect.
Unusual favourite plants such as arisarum (green foliage on top and dark brown flowers beneath), plus tellima with its lily-like smell, are intended to give a ‘cool, powdery effect’.
An open trellis (made of tree stakes) down one length of the garden prevents it from looking like a long, thin bowling alley and utilises next door's honeysuckle as an extension.
Similar thought went into the lawn.
The Hainges used a special sports turf to give it its clipped, fresh-green look and make it hard-wearing enough to withstand their two children (Martin, eight, and Carmen, 12).
All this took barely a year (and around £500 of plants) to establish mainly, says Hainge, because he grew only plants which suited their soil and conditions.
Pressure from his 33-year-old wife Jane — and the local NGS organiser — encouraged him to open up by appointment only (due to limited space).
Hainge maintains he doesn't make any special preparations for visitors apart from the three hours a week that he puts in routinely.
Most visitors — many of whom are in their early thirties — ask where to find the more unusual plants (like the white version of Jacob's Ladder) and how to lay them out.
‘Many come from much grander homes but still seem to learn something from mine.
And so far no one has pilfered any cuttings,’ Hainge says.
‘It's fun to show others what you can do with a small garden.’
The Hainges' garden is open by appointment from May to September.
Friday Matters: Opening up your borders SHOW TRIAL
Even ordinary back gardens are in demand to be put on public display, says Jane Bidder
By JANE BIDDER
THIS year as many as 2,600 home-owners — in both semi and stately — are displaying their herbaceous borders under the National Gardens Scheme.
‘We're looking for unusual colours and layouts rather than perfect weed-free gardens,’ says Monica Meads of the NGS.
‘We're just as keen on ordinary back gardens as parklands, because they give other people ideas.’
Many gardeners — and visitors — are getting younger, partly because of the current ecological obsession and also because gardens are often seen as an extension of the living room.
‘We're seeing a huge increase in young visitors in push-chairs,’ adds Ms Meads.
‘It's an inexpensive way of gleaning on-the-spot advice.’
Budding gardeners wondering whether their patch is up to scratch should contact the NGS which will send a local adviser round.
Some counties — such as Oxfordshire, where competition is tough — turn down about a quarter of applicants, although others have a higher acceptance rate.
Those who do pass then advertise their gardens through local NGS booklets and posters.
The Gardens of England and Wales, detailing open days, is available from bookshops, or from The National Gardens Scheme, Hatchlands Park, East Clandon, Guildford, Surrey GU4 7RT (0483 211535), price £2.75 inc p & p.
Friday Matters: GUARDIAN MAKING HER OWN MARK
DISCOVERING plant names is a bonus for Julie Weedon when she opens up her one-acre riverside garden in Goring, Oxfordshire.
She says: ‘I'm not a great one for names and visitors often tell me what my flowers are called.’
This is only the third year that 43-year-old Julie, a relationship counsellor, and her husband Mark have opened their gates under the NGS.
They were persuaded to do so by friends in aid of a ‘good cause’, although they keep their 17th-century house firmly locked with curtains drawn.
At the last opening, 400 visitors in one afternoon flocked in to admire the Weedons' strikingly formal walkways flanked by irises, lavender, peonies and closely clipped privet hedges.
Most visitors ask about the history of the garden, part of which is built on the site of a nunnery attached to the church next door.
‘We moved in nine years ago after my parents, so everything was already well established,’ says Mrs Weedon.
‘I see myself as a guardian, although I'm making my own marks with a herb garden and wild flower garden.’
The Weedons' garden is open on May 17, 2 pm–6 pm.
Peterborough: A la mode THERE is much excitement in the stiletto-heeled world of haute couture.
Dunhill is said to have pulled off ‘the deal of the decade’(that overused phrase again) and bought the Karl Lagerfeld fashion house.
Pig-tailed Lagerfeld is a strange flower, keen on Louis XV furniture and a hand-held fan.
The arrangement would bring him into the same stable as Hackett menswear, and people who mix in such circles believe that Lagerfeld, who designs for Chanel and Fendi, will also work for Chloe, Dunhill's fashion label.
Dunhill's chairman, Lord Douro (the future Duke of Wellington), was on holiday yesterday and so unable to comment on rumours that Sarajane Hoare will act as Lagerfeld's assistant.
The feisty Miss Hoare is fashion director of Vogue and was tipped, wrongly, to become its editor.
‘I'm quite happy with what I'm doing at the moment,’ she says, ‘but obviously, I'd be interested…’
THE letters page of the Guardian this week has resembled a wailing wall for the Left.
A former party apparatchik accused John Smith's supporters of a ‘leadership fix’, Neil Kinnock bopped News International's Andrew Knight squarely on the nose, while Peter Taafe, editor of Militant, wrote about ‘guilty men’ and (his forte)‘losers’.
But the leitmotiv has been the announcement of disenchanted Citizen Smiths that they intend, in the light of Labour's defeat, to emigrate.
‘Does anyone know how to obtain a visa for El Salvador?’ wrote one.
Another asked for the name of a good travel agent, while a third declared: ‘I do not think I can bear another five years of Andrew Lloyd Webber; I'm off.’
Commentary: Here's to the wobbly bits
By KATE SAUNDERS
AT , feminists have found something to replace that tired old tabloid cliche, the burning of the bra.New wave American feminists are destroying a far more potent symbol of oppression — their bathroom scales.
A federal government report revealing that diets don't work has triggered a revolt against the £20 billion slimming industry.
Starvation is out and curves are in — there's even a National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance.
At a recent anti-diet rally in West Virginia, women smashed their scales and toted banners proclaiming: ‘Scales are for fish, not women.’
Right on, sisters.
I believe the enormous pressure put on women to be skinny is the most important feminist issue in Western society.
Those who dismiss the cult of dieting as a frivolous wish to be beautiful are missing its sinister subliminal message — that you can't be a truly successful woman unless you resemble a stick insect, a pre-pubescent boy, or the late Duchess of Windsor.
Anything, in fact, except a normal, healthy, adult female.
Clinical obesity is, of course, both grotesque and unhealthy.
But things have come to a pretty pass when obesity is confused with the wobbly bits the good Lord designed for girls — the bits that should stick out at the front and back of a strapless ballgown.
Nowadays, you're never too young to start fretting about calories.
Last week a psychologist, Andrew Hill, revealed that of 213 nine-year-old girls interviewed, a third yearned to be thinner; some claimed to be dieting.
Boys of the same age couldn't wait to grow — to look like men.
The girls evidently dreaded looking like women.
What has caused this terror of female flesh?
Feminists can't blame it all on men — since time began, men have delighted in our wobbly bits, thank heaven.
We can, however, blame the culture that is dominated by masculine values, in which women are widely perceived as less intelligent, and as sex objects and prisoners of their biology.
No wonder nobody wants to be one.
Several recent books (notably Naomi Wolf's The Beauty Myth) show that as women have gained independence, their ‘ideal’ weight has declined.
Encouraging us to exist on the brink of starvation is one way of stopping us from getting too liberated.
When a woman lunches on a plate of raw spinach that wouldn't satisfy a tortoise, she simply won't have the energy to demand a seat on the board.
I have never been on a diet.
I have a reasonable body (it falls into the ‘I've no complaints’ category) the appetite of a dinosaur and a loathing for most forms of self denial.
But, like most other women, I wasted years of my teens and twenties feeling I would be happier if I was thinner.
It's high time the scales fell from our eyes, and our bathrooms.
Today's girls should be proud of their natural curves.
Modern feminists don't need charred bras — they need bigger ones.
BY the time you read this, I may be on my knees, along with millions of other Christian people, at the Solemn Liturgy for Good Friday.
Then again, I may be struck by lightning before I reach the church.
This week, so I hear, I have been publicly denounced from a Roman Catholic pulpit — by no less than the Provincial of the Dominican Order of monks.
In case you fail to appreciate the lustre of this honour, I should point out that you have to do something pretty dreadful to be singled out for vilification in a sermon.
It wasn't one of your pedestrian sins, like robbery or murder.
To Catholics, and indeed most Christians, there is one sin that stands head and shoulders above all the rest, and that is sex — thinking about it, and in this case, writing about it.
With Peter Stanford, the outgoing editor of the Catholic Herald newspaper, I have written a book, Catholics and Sex.
In it, we have argued, as practising Christians, that the Church should take a more liberal and compassionate view of sex, because we fail to see how intercourse between two consenting adults can be counted as a sin.
This is not a particularly original view, and we had every word checked by accredited theologians.
But the assumption that all morality means sexual morality is too widespread to go down without a few squawks of protest.
In Ireland last week, we were accused of writing a ‘dirty’ book for vulgar gain (would it have been any better if we'd done it for charity?) and worse, of racism.
Ouch, that really hurt — but not enough to make us regret a word.
I'll admit that hearing about that sermon gave me a cowardly frisson of fear.
I still believe we were right, but don't stand too near to me — just in case.
It's hard to keep your head above water if you play chess with Sergei Martyn Harris learns the secrets of a Russian atomic submarine officer
By MARTYN HARRIS
MY KING is a pepperpot which falls over each time the train brakes.
But all the other pieces are proper ones, apart from a pawn made from a marble and a blob of chewing gum.
Sergei draws black, so I open with a dull pawn to king four, which he mimics, as he does my next three moves.
I think: this is going to be a pushover.
‘You like this Giuoco Piano opening?’ says Sergei, and then I am not so sure.
We are strangers, sharing a sleeping car on the St PetersburgMurmansk express, which is tearing through the tundra at a good 7 mph.
He's been visiting family; I'm on my way to write about the Russian submarines in Murmansk — maybe interview a submarine officer if I am lucky.
We're eight hours into the journey with 20 to go, but small talk is wearing thin.
‘Ah, but I love getting back to the North,’ says Sergei, and I follow his gaze to a landscape like a sheet of cartridge paper.
‘You should see it in the summer.
Four, five different kinds of wonderful berries.’
I poke a sacrificial pawn at Sergei's knight and he falls for it, giving me space for an early castle.
I think: this is definitely going to be easy.
He is tall, bespectacled, with a mournful moustache.
‘You do cooking and washing-up in London?
My wife wants me to do these things.
Also she is crazy about embroidery art.
Always she wants more thread, cloth, more money.
I come home, there is no soup, she says, ‘Fix yourself, I am working’.’
He pushes forward a pointless bishop's pawn.
‘You have been to the Russian baths?’
‘I went to the Sanduny in Moscow…‘
‘Tschaa.
You should go to the black baths.
This is steam but also with smoke from green birch log.
In Sanduny baths they beat themselves like carpets, but here in the North the beating is an art.’
He borrows my scarf to demonstrate.
‘ON the chest you stroke the twigs.
On the legs you scratch, so.
And on the back you beat with great smartness.
So!’
I decide he is insane but harmless, and it's only someone to pass the time with after all.
He prods another pawn vaguely into play against the gathering might of my bishop and knights.
Sergei looks at his watch.
‘You know in four hours’ time I am free man.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Tomorrow I am 30 years old, which is first date I can retire.’
‘What is your job exactly?’
He moves the pointless pawn another square.
‘Communications officer on atomic submarine,’ he says, and I see with a sudden, sickening clarity that he has forked my bishop and knight.
In the cat and mouse game beneath the Arctic ice, Sergei is the whiskers, monitoring radar and sonar data from hostile submarines.
Until a few years ago this was deadly serious stuff: ‘The Americans would ram us if we came close — they knew it took us longer to get repaired.’
When a Russian sub surfaced it would be paint-bombed by US helicopters: ‘From the colours they could then track each submarine on their satellites.’
Ramming still takes place but generally things are more relaxed.
‘Sometimes we talk to the operators on the American and British submarines.
We send each other messages.’
‘What do you say?’
‘Oh you know.
How's your family?
What are you having for dinner?
I tell you those guys eat a lot better than we do.’
He is impressed, and depressed too, by the superior technology he has seen on exercises and on television during the Gulf War — the speed and accuracy of US helicopters, the manoeuvrability of their boats, the sensitivity of their detection equipment.
‘When you have to cut your own screws from old nails like we do, I tell you it's a real eye-opener.’
I don't think he should really be telling me all this, but he is demob happy and there is something of the anonymity of the confessional in this dimly lit train compartment, lurching slowly over the snowy plateau of the Kola Peninsula.
I am a pawn and bishop down after 12 moves, but have only half an eye on the game now, which seems to make me play better, or Sergei play worse, for he has pushed up his queen too far and is having trouble defending it.
Senior officers on the Russian submarines are paid a supplement in US dollars these days — $7 a day while they are at sea, which strikes me as an astonishing fact.
‘But it is necessary to stop them running away,’ Sergei explains.
‘Of all the people in my class at naval college I am the only one still in the service.’
‘But why run away?’
‘Conditions are so bad in the boats now.
Nothing to eat but instant mashed potato, pickles and maybe corned beef if you are lucky.
No fresh vegetable, so there are problems with ulcers and skin rashes and even eyesight.
And there is the paint they use which gives off really bad fumes.
Sore throats, tight chest, sometimes even hallucinations.
And there are rats everywhere.
Really big and completely unafraid of human beings.
They come sit on your neck when you are asleep.
There are stories of men who go to bed drunk and the rats will take their lips or tongue.’
He is a navy-brat, son of a captain in the surface fleet.
‘I went on a submarine trip when I was 16, and it was the greatest thing I could imagine then to serve my country in a submarine.
The best job in the Soviet Union, seriously.’
HE was brought up on bases in Tallinn and Gremicha — a former prison camp, now an isolated naval station way down the Kola Peninsula.
‘Beautiful in summer, but no theatre or music, and in the cinema only films that are passed by the political commissar.’
His wife Svetlana is worried about radiation from the nuclear test sites on nearby Novaya Zemlaya island, and its effect on their four-year-old son.
‘Now they say there has been secret dumping of waste from the submarines and nuclear icebreakers.
On the submarine they give us film badges to wear, but when they turn black they just give you new badges.
In the reactor room and missile bays there are transparent cockroaches like glass, I'm not kidding you.
They say there is no danger but how do you know?
They have lied to us about eveything else.’
And he moves his queen then, to take my rook's pawn, and to put my king in check — which is an insanely rash move, sacrificing his queen to my king.
‘My wife wants me to take the early retirement, move away from Murmansk.
She wants friends who are artists like herself.’
‘She is fed up with the naval life?’
‘On the point of breaking I think, and I do not know what to do.
Many people want to leave but there is no retraining, no after care for people who leave the military, and this is why there are so many of us who are frightened now and angry.’
And he moves his knight then, to check my king again, which is no problem, but there is another revealed check from his bishop, and only one square for me to move to.
‘Maybe I find work in computers.’
‘I love the North,’ he says again, though I understand by now that the North is only code for another, deeper loss.
‘It is not so easy to turn your whole life inside out,’ says Sergei, and moves in his knight to mate my pepperpot king.
‘Shall we make it the best of three?’
‘Bargain' cruises that leave tourists beached
By Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent
A WARNING against making telephone bookings for ‘bargain’ cruises with companies that may not to have a single seaworthy vessel was issued to charge card customers yesterday.
American Express said it had received about 100 complaints so far this year from card members who had booked accommodation — only fly-cruises in the Bahamas — some for as little as £99.50 — and who had been unable to board ship.
Some found the vessels unfit for sea, while others had been ‘dismayed’ by poor accommodation and had refused to travel.
At least one of the companies involved, which does not advertise its holidays with travel agents, is now the subject of a police investigation.
Mr Tony Walker, Port of London Authority liaison officer, said: ‘I do not believe that any of the reputable large cruise lines are involved in this fraud, but I can envisage trouble with some of the smaller, five-day Mediterranean cruise operators who might not have enough decent vessels.’
American Express, which has put a ‘fraud alert’ warning on its April statements, said it had refunded all complainants in full.
The alert was described by Barclaycard, with 8.6 million credit cardholders, as a ‘timely reminder’ that telephone bookings could be misused.
A spokesman said: ‘Cardholders should only offer their account number to companies when they themselves have initiated the call.
‘With travel or any other service, they should satisfy themselves that they know exactly what they are buying.’
Holidaymakers should book through member companies of the Association of British Travel Agents.
BA joins cut-price war
British Airways joined the Atlantic cut-price fare war yesterday with reductions of up to 45 per cent on flights booked 21 days in advance.
The airline's new all-year-round low Apex fares will be available on services to 16 cities in the United States from London, Manchester and Glasgow.
Fares available from today for midweek travel up to June 15 are £309 to seven East Coast destinations including New York; £389 to Miami and Orlando in Florida; and £369 to Chicago, Detroit, Dallas and Houston.
BA said that apart from booking 21 days in advance, passengers must stay at least seven days.
It has also trimmed peak season fares.
Rebuilt Laughing Man still sees joke
By Nigel Bunyan
THE Laughing Man, the Parisian robot which for beckoned generations of visitors through the doors of Blackpool's Fun House, lives on.
Only the clown's head survived when the Fun House burned down in a £10 million blaze four months ago.
But yesterday technicians were adding the final touches to a new ‘bionic’ body.
The original Laughing Man graced the Galeries Lafayette store in Paris, before being bought by the Blackpool Pleasure Beach Company in the 1930s.
Its replacement fibreglass torso has been manufactured by a German robotics company.
Concealed inside are three motors which control the movement of its limbs and activate a recording of its manic laugh.
The head, which was being given a facelift at the time of December's fire, has been graced with a new mop of blue hair.
A spokeswoman for the Blackpool Pleasure Beach said it was hoped the revitalised Laughing Man would be restored to his glass cabinet within a fortnight.
He will take up residence on the cleared site of the Fun House, whose place has been taken by a vintage carousel originally imported from Coney Island by Alderman W G Bean, the founder of the Blackpool funfair.
Duck lure for Easter shoppers
By Elizabeth Williamson
CONFIT de Canard, a gourmet dish originating in south west France, is available from supermarkets this Easter when duck sales hit their seasonal peak.
Once viewed as not ample enough for a family meal, duck is now available in boneless breast fillets and joints which make portion control and carving easier.
The dish is tenderised and given its unique flavour by rubbing portions of duck with garlic, salt and black pepper.
A 400g pack costs £2.99 from larger Sainsbury's, Harrods and the majority of Co-ops.
Whole Lincolnshire ducklings are on special offer at most Dewhurst branches for £1.25 a lb or £5.99 for a 5lb frozen bird.
Lower prices at the supermarket chains include £1.24 a lb from Tesco or Safeway.
Although trade sources quote £2.40 as the lowest price per lb for a whole, fresh farmed salmon, Sainsbury's have it on Easter promotion at £1.98 a lb.
Ribs of beef at the supermarket are reduced to £1.88 a lb.
Home grown leeks, a traditional Easter vegetable, are a best buy at 35–45p a lb for home grown, 65–70p a lb for Dutch.
‘Bargain' cruises that leave tourists beached
By Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent
A WARNING against making telephone bookings for ‘bargain’ cruises with companies that may not to have a single seaworthy vessel was issued to charge card customers yesterday.
American Express said it had received about 100 complaints so far this year from card members who had booked accommodation — only fly-cruises in the Bahamas — some for as little as £99.50 — and who had been unable to board ship.
Some found the vessels unfit for sea, while others had been ‘dismayed’ by poor accommodation and had refused to travel.
At least one of the companies involved, which does not advertise its holidays with travel agents, is now the subject of a police investigation.
Mr Tony Walker, Port of London Authority liaison officer, said: ‘I do not believe that any of the reputable large cruise lines are involved in this fraud, but I can envisage trouble with some of the smaller, five-day Mediterranean cruise operators who might not have enough decent vessels.’
American Express, which has put a ‘fraud alert’ warning on its April statements, said it had refunded all complainants in full.
The alert was described by Barclaycard, with 8.6 million credit cardholders, as a ‘timely reminder’ that telephone bookings could be misused.
A spokesman said: ‘Cardholders should only offer their account number to companies when they themselves have initiated the call.
With travel or any other service, they should satisfy themselves that they know exactly what they are buying.’
Holidaymakers should book through member companies of the Association of British Travel Agents.
British Airways joined the Atlantic cut-price fare war yesterday with reductions of up to 45 per cent on flights booked 21 days in advance.
The airline's new all-year-round low Apex fares will be available on services to 16 cities in the United States from London, Manchester and Glasgow.
Fares available from today for midweek travel up to June 15 are £309 to seven East Coast destinations including New York; £389 to Miami and Orlando in Florida; and £369 to Chicago, Detroit, Dallas and Houston.
BA also trimmed prices during the peak season from June 16 to September 30.
Fare levels for the low season from October l to March 31 are £229 for the East Coast; £309 for the West Coast; £279 for Florida and £289 for central U S destinations.
BA said that apart from booking 21 days in advance, passengers must stay a minimum of seven days.
Cut-away view of your dream home
By Tom Rowland, Property Correspondent
A CUT-AWAY show house bursting with the latest advances in house design, healthy materials and energy-saving equipment is featured in The Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Exhibition in Birmingham this weekend.
Built by designer Simon Clark, of consultants Constructive Individuals, it includes 13 new methods of wall insulation.
Also on view are money-saving underfloor heating, low energy glass in a high-technology conservatory and the latest in timber-frame and block construction for designing, extending or renovating a house.
Glass solar tubes, 6ft-long, installed on the roof boost free energy collection and, unlike conventional solar panels, work well on the diffused light of a grey English day.
Upstairs, the main heating is via warmed air, combined with a mechanical heat-recovery system which takes back the heat from the bathroom and kitchen exhausts to warm incoming fresh air.
Inside sisal matting, top-quality joinery, natural wood finishes and plant-based paints that are non-toxic create a gentle but stylish environment, highly efficient in fuel use yet cost-effective and, above all, the sort of light, airy place where it is a pleasure to live…
The exhibition is the highlight of National Individual Homes week, launched in association with the Royal Institute of British Architects, and is the biggest show ever staged for those wanting to create their own home.
It will introduce conventional and unconventional ways of building, has an array of stands to interest those refurbishing and renovating existing properties and demonstrations of the latest technical advances.
The self-builder is still Britain's largest housebuilder, with more than 10,000 finishes last year compared to 8,500 for the largest speculative developer.
Up to 100,000 people a year investigate the possibilities of building a home for themselves.
The Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Show opens at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham at 10.30am tomorrow.
It will run until 6pm each day over the Bank Holiday and 5pm on Tuesday.
Passengers cause jets' corrosion
By Roger Highfield Science Editor
PASSENGERS are causing corrosion of aircraft merely by being on board, say scientists, who are investigating an unexpected corrosion threat caused by smoke, condensation and ‘other emissions’ from travellers.
‘Not many people know that these days, in the aircraft industry, corrosion from the inside of the aircraft out is a much more important phenomenon than corrosion from the outside in,’ said Dr Andy Swift of the Centre for Surface and Materials Analysis, Umist.
He told the Annual Chemical Congress in Manchester yesterday: ‘Cigarette smoke, moisture from exhalation, aromas and smells from food and goodness knows what else are the cause.’
Behind the plastic fascia inside a typical aircraft is the metal fuselage, electrical contacts and pipework taking fuel from the wing tanks to the engines, cooling the interior of the aircraft en route.
Corrosion of these could be serious, said Dr Swift.
An investigation was ordered by the Chief Inspector of Air Accidents yesterday into how a British Airways Concorde lost a 6ft by 4ft section of its rudder while flying to New York last month.
The inquiry will look at why a Civil Aviation Authority directive and British Aerospace alerts apparently failed to prevent the accident.
Short poised to defeat Karpov
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
THE fourth game between Nigel Short and Anatoly Karpov in their World Chess Championship semi-final at Linares, Spain, was adjourned last night, with Short placing his 61st move in an envelope.
The move will be disclosed to Karpov when the game resumes tomorrow afternoon.
Short, England's No 1 chess player, is again poised to level the score against Karpov.
Playing White, he opened with customary king's pawn and Karpov replied with his favourite Caro Kann.
Short did not appear to obtain much advantage out of the opening and according to Karpov's friend, Dmitri Bjelica, Karpov could have secured a draw by exchanging queens as the players approached the time control at move 40.
In the fifth hour of play Karpov went completely wrong.
The ex-world champion voluntarily moved his beautifully-placed knight and overlooked a tactical stroke some moves later from Short, which won a pawn.
After 60 moves and six hours' play, Short has rook, bishop and two pawns against Karpov's bishop, knight and two pawns.
Although all the pawns are on the same side of the board, which increases the effectiveness of Karpov's knight, his king is on the back rank and Short's king is poised to advance.
Short now has 36 hours to reflect on the winning plan with his second, Grandmaster Lubosh Cavalek.
The position after 60 moves is: Short: king d4, bishop d5, rook b7, pawn f4, g3.
Karpov: king f8, bishop e7, knight h5, pawn f5, g6.
Personal View: Jam today, and the whole weekend
By PAUL BARKER
THERE we were, an hour into our journey for lunch, and we had gone about four miles.
I leapt out of the car into a phone box, and rang through with an apology.
We ended up almost two hours late.
Lunch became more of a northern high tea.
Yet this was Sunday morning, not the weekday rush hour.
During the week, I often shuttle easily to appointments in central London by car.
The recession has taken its toll of lorries, dump trucks and commercial reps' company cars.
So I reckoned on a quick Sunday journey out to Oxfordshire.
But I forgot that we are now in the era of the Leisure Jam.
A planner friend of mine used to predict, from California's experience, that this was the transport hazard of the future.
He turns out to be right.
This Easter weekend proves it yet again, with traffic queues stretching back from the West Country halfway to London and Birmingham.
Some getaway!
Leisure jams are the worst jams.
Not so long ago the most that a motorist did with his car on Sunday was wash it.
Suburban roads were alive with the squish of chamois leather.
But now everyone who has a car takes it out.
Girl-friends and great-aunts, safari parks and 16th-century ruins: this is their big day.
Everything conspires to make Sunday, more than ever, the Day of the Car.
British Rail on Sundays is a worse joke than on weekdays.
And, of course, Sunday is now central to the great shopping experience.
Tesco and Sainsbury are the new churches, vying with each other for congregations like the Methodists and the Anglicans in their Victorian heyday.
As every bank holiday weekend demonstrates, our love affair with the car shows no sign of abating, whatever environmentalists may hope.
The latest issue of the Government's annual Social Trends shows that while the level of rail travel has remained much the same for 30 years, car travel has increased fourfold.
And most of these new journeys have nothing to do with work.
Or, at least, not with work in the sense of going to an office or a factory.
From my neighbourhood observation, morning and evening rush hours are due less to commuters than to mothers driving children to and from school.
But this is where I must start to be careful in talking about ‘our’ love affair with the car.
Who are ‘we’, exactly?
‘We’ certainly does not mean everyone.
The forecasts that every British family would by now have access to a car (the thinking behind the design of Milton Keynes and other new towns) were plainly wrong.
In the Sixties, car ownership did rocket, but since then the social graph has levelled off.
It always does, whether you are talking about the spread of the car or the spread of Aids.
About a third of households still have no car (in Scotland, about half).
This is now the essential social divide.
The old classes — working, middle and upper — have had their day.
We should switch the focus: the no-car class; the one-car class; and increasingly the two-car class.
Social Trends makes clear that much of the recent increase in cars on the road is not due to more families buying a car.
What is happening is that car-owning families are buying another.
Alongside the Sierra or the BMW, the Peugeot 205 or the VW Golf.
It all comes to a head at weekends and bank holidays.
Leisure journeys usually follow routes that would be painful, or impossible, by rail.
With branch lines axed, the only practical rail journeys begin or end in a city.
But leisure journeys weave all over the place.
In any event, rail travel is becoming more like a dice game.
One train in 50 is cancelled (on Network SouthEast, even more).
It is also becoming less pleasant.
Over the past 15 years, Social Trends reports, British Rail has cut the number of its carriages by a quarter.
The unfortunate passengers are crammed into the remainder.
A psychological study (Californian again) once tried to explain why people were hard to tempt back to public transport.
It claimed that people feel more in control of their lives if they are inching forward on a journey, rather than waiting for something to happen.
On this interpretation, all but the grimmest traffic jam seems better than waiting on a cold, wet platform for the train that doesn't arrive.
I must say that this includes me.
Like many people, I am in favour of public transport in principle, but I will use a car, even on a holiday weekend like this, given half a chance.
I had plenty of time to think this through as I sat in my leisure jam that Sunday.
How else could we have got to our friends' lunch, I wondered?
Perhaps Robert Louis Stevenson had the right idea in his travels in the Cevennes.
Next bank holiday, I must see how much donkeys cost.
The great donkey leisure jam is some way off yet.
SPEEDWAY
Exeter must rerun world qualifier
By Ben Findon
THE Speedway Control Board have overturned a decision that the results of Monday's world championship British quarter-final at Exeter, abandoned with four heats remaining, should stand and have ordered that the meeting be rerun.
The round was called off after the injured Andy Galvin was taken hospital.
He was accompanied by the track doctor, who was unable to return in time for Exeter to complete the meeting by their 10pm curfew.
Each rider had taken four of his five allotted rides, and it was announced that the top four scorers, Eastbourne's Andrew Silver, Cradley's Simon Cross, Alan Mogridge, of Arena Essex, and home rider Richard Green, would progress to the semi-finals.
Following consultations with the British Speedway Promoters' Association, the Board overruled the decision, made by officials at Exeter, because they believed it to be unfair.
The meeting will be restaged on April 27.
Peter Brown, the Eastbourne co-promoter, said: ‘It is particularly unfair on our rider, Andrew Silver, because only a bizarre combination of circumstances would have prevented him from qualifying.
The fairest way would be to just run off the four remaining races, perhaps before another Exeter meeting.’
In last night's British quarter-final at Middlesbrough, Coventry's Paul Bentley led the four qualifiers with 14 points.
Daz Sumner, of Middlesbrough, finished second with 13 points, followed by David Blackburn (Berwick) with 12 and Wayne Carter (Wolverhampton) on 11.
Reading have returned to the blueprint of their 1990 title success by recalling Per Jonsson and Armando Castagna as they strive for the right formula to regain the league championship.
After a dismal 1991 spent in the lower reaches of the table, the revived Reading side have a 100 per cent record from six matches, head the Gold Cup southern section and enter a hectic Easter schedule buoyant.
Pat Bliss, the Reading co-promoter, said: ‘After our success in 1990, we had to weaken the side to comply with the sport's restrictions.
We wanted to get back to where we had been, and that was central to our winter planning.
Five of our seven riders this season were in our championship-winning side.’
Jonsson, the 1990 world champion, who failed to agree terms last season, was lured back after Todd Wiltshire injured his back.
Castagna has returned from a spell on loan with Eastbourne.
Reading face five meetings in four days over Easter, starting with a Gold Cup visit to Poole this afternoon.
Racing: Nijinsky's speed will always be a lasting memory
By JOHN OAKSEY
NO HORSE was ever given a better or more fitting name than Nijinsky and few have paid their namesake more graceful compliments.
He danced lightfooted across the European racing stage, and with just a little better luck, would have left it undefeated.
Instead, Nijinsky came to the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe after a uniquely testing season — unique because it included the first Triple Crown since 1935.
Much more serious, Nijinsky's summer holiday and then his preparation for the St Leger had both been painfully interrupted by an attack of ringworm, which cost him almost all his hair.
Even with modest opposition, the St Leger had never been trainer Vincent O'Brien's idea of a suitable warm-up for the Arc.
In fact, only just recovered from the ringworm, Nijinsky went to Doncaster chiefly to please his owner Charles Englehard who, not surprisingly, coveted the rare sporting distinction of a British Triple Crown.
His great horse earned it with apparent ease — but lost 29lb in the process and came home to Ballydoyle more exhausted than after any of his previous races.
On Arc de Triomphe day, therefore, facing much the most searching racecourse trial of his career, Nijinsky was almost certainly well below peak form.
When, in a pre-race tactical discussion, O'Brien stressed the importance of staying near the leaders, Lester Piggott's reply was ominously confident.
‘It won't matter if there are 100 horses in front of us,’ he said — and launched Nijinsky's challenge from a perilously long way back.
It still only failed by inches and you can argue, that, finishing farther in front of Gyr and Blakeney than at Epsom and Ascot, Nijinsky ran to form.
But he came a long way round from a long way back, and O'Brien, by no means a habitual blamer of jockeys, is still convinced they should have won.
In only 13 days, Nijinsky's shattered nerves could not recover in time for the Champion Stakes.
So, after another undeserved defeat, he retired to stud with two theoretical ‘failures’ on his record.
They were, I'm glad to say, the last he ever knew.
Because, in the rolling, tree-lined paddocks of Claiborne, Kentucky, and syndicated for a record $5.4 million, Nijinsky immediately proved himself an entirely worthy son of Northern Dancer, the most successful stallion of modern times.
Two years after his retirement, Nijinsky's first runner in England, Silky, won her first race.
Copernica, his first in the US, did likewise, and Dream Dancer, a Group 1 winner in France that year, has since become the sire of last year's Arc winner Suave Dancer.
His great English rival, Generous, is also, through Caerleon, a grandson of Nijinsky.
Two whole sizes bigger than his father Northern Dancer, Nijinsky has matched him at stud.
He has sired two Derby winners, Golden Fleece and Shahrastani, and in the year of his Epsom triumph, was also responsible for the Kentucky Derby winner Ferdinand.
But although his name will recur in pedigrees into the foreseeable future, it is more for his own deeds on the racecourse that Nijinsky will be remembered.
No one lucky enough to be at Newmarket when he first appeared can possibly forget it.
Before the Dewhurst Stakes, you felt sorry for his opponents and if he had been a man coming into a room for the first time, the rest of us would have looked round anxiously to see our wives' reaction.
Then you could put the glowing good looks and evident superiority down to ‘American precociousness’, but next year at Epsom, it was the same.
You still got the impression of a grown-up playing with schoolboys.
The Derby was the first time Nijinsky started at odds against — and if his full background story had been known, the odds would have been a good deal longer.
For one thing, Nijinsky started life so excitable and highly strung that O'Brien warned his owner he might not be trainable.
Skilful horsemanship overcame those problems, but then just 24 hours before the Derby, Nijinsky suffered a crippling attack of colic.
But all was well in the nick of time.
Half-way up the straight, Piggott picked up his whip for the first time and the resulting explosion was unforgettable.
That day and later at Ascot, rocketing clear in all his glory was how I want to remember the great Nijinsky.
EQUESTRIANISM
Huge jumps by Genesis cost time in World Cup warm-up
By Alan Smith in Delmar, California
BRITISH riders made a highly satisfying start to the Volvo World Cup Final in the warm-up competitions, though pride of place went to an expatriate, Lesley McNaught-Mandli, who now lives in and rides for Switzerland.
In the most competitive of the three preliminary rounds, designed to get horses used to the arena before the cup begins in earnest, she and Forester had easily the best of a four horse jump-off.
McNaught-Mandli has the worst possible start number for the first leg of the cup, which is against the clock from the start, for she is drawn to go first of 46 competitors from 13 countries.
Tim Grubb, who has kept his British nationality, though living in New Jersey, and his 11-year-old Ever, qualified for the jump-off with a fine clear round.
But Grubb, like a number of other riders, including Canada's World Cup favourite, Ian Millar with Big Ben, then decided that that was enough.
The three legs of the World Cup can take enough out of a horse without subjecting it to too much unnecessary effort beforehand.
Tina Cassan, Britain's other qualifier for the final, did not have to make that choice, as Genesis was fractionally over the time limit and collected three-quarters of a fault.
This was mainly due to his enormous leaps, wasting time in the air, for he is extremely fresh, having had only one outing since December.
If only Cassan can get him safely through the speed leg, which so often plays a decisive part in the overall result, he looks as though he would relish the bigger obstacles expected for the second and third legs.
Cassan has a good draw for the opening leg, going No 40, but Grubb, who starts fifth, is less fortunate.
Millar and Big Ben, winners of the World Cup in 1988 and 1989, have almost the best draw of all, last but one, by which time the Canadian will know exactly what he needs to do.
Only Terry Rudd, of the United States, goes after him.
Big Ben was lucky to get away with a mistake at the second fence in his warm-up round, but is likely to be more careful when it matters.
Only one of the three warm-up competitions was against the clock — the other two both had jump-offs — and the winner of this, Alain Vaillancourt, is not even qualified for the cup.
It does little to promote the general public understanding of the sport when riders whose only role will be in the supporting competitions are mixed in with those in pursuit of the World Cup.
Vaillancourt, a Canadian now living in California, had nothing to lose by his all-out effort, but would still have been beaten by George Lindemann if Larry, one of his two World Cup horses, had not hit the last fence.
Lindemann, who was third in the 1989 World Cup Final, also has Abound qualified here, and rode this one clear in the first warm-up, and then withdrew him.
Australian John Fahey, who won this year's Pacific League and also received a special award for having competed in 100 World Cup qualifiers, went into third place in the speed warm-up with a rousing gallop of Tony Barlow Sorrento.
Fahey, whose international experience goes back to the Tokyo Olympics in 1964, when he lost the bronze medal in a jump-off, qualified for last year's World Cup Final, but decided his horse was not then ready for it.
Otto Becker, a member of Germany's silver medal team in the 1990 World Championships, proved his two World Cup horses are in top form by winning the first warm-up on Leandra, and then going clear, though with no pressure, on Landmann in the speed class.
VOLVO WORLD CUP WARM-UPS. — 1st competition: 1, O Becker's Leandra (Germany); 2, E Macken's Bonheur (Ireland); 3 Miss T Rudd's Alf (US).
2nd comp: 1, A Vaillancourt's Lybelle (Canada); 2, G Lindemann's Lari (US); 3, J Fahey's Tony Barlow Sorrento (Australia).
3rd comp: 1, Mrs L McNaught-Mandli's Forester (Switzerland); 2, H Hansen's Mirage (US); 3, Miss B Underhill's Monopoly (Canada).
Racing: Sangster aiming for Classic double
Tony Stafford talks to the former owner of Vernons Pools who is hoping for a jackpot dividend in two weeks' time with Rodrigo de Triano and Musicale
By TONY STAFFORD
THREE YEARS ago, racing's insiders were ready to announce, in some cases with the glee of the envious, the imminent collapse of the once omnipotent Robert Sangster racing empire.
His family's Vernons Pools had been sold, his drought of Classic success in Britain had already gone five years and his Manton Estate was proving a costly exercise.
But now, with hopes of success in both Guineas races in two weeks' time, and the renaissance of Manton under his trainer Peter Chapple-Hyam, the leading British owner-breeder is better placed than at any period in the past decade.
From the time when the Maktoums latched on to a prime source of Classic talent — the Kentucky Sales in Keeneland, Kentucky — Sangster's lead was first questioned, then swamped, by the buying power of the Middle Eastern Royal families.
All the time, though, Sangster continued to build up operations in Australia and, in partnership with Vincent O'Brien and John Magnier, at Coolmore Stud in Ireland.
That stud, based on the prepotence of the Northern Dancer stallion line, has left Sangster with his joint-ownership of the brilliant Sadler's Wells as the only challenger to the powerful team at the Arab-owned British Stud.
Indeed, Sadler's Wells, with his ability to produce sons and daughters of equal, if not superior, ability to his own — evidence the superb performance of his four-year-old son Saddlers' Hall at Newbury last weekend — makes him the most commercial stallion in Europe.
Sangster agrees that there were some worrying times but points out that worldwide he has achieved a century of winners for each of the past 10 years.
Now, with Musicale, strong favourite for the 1,000 Guineas, and Rodrigo de Triano, whom he believes may displace Pursuit of Love at the head of the 2,000 Guineas market if the ground firms, he has first-rate prospects of Classic success after an eight-year gap since El Gran Senor's 2,000 Guineas win.
At Newmarket yesterday, Chapple-Hyam produced another talented three-year-old in the Thatching gelding King Olaf, who brushed aside a strong challenge from the well-fancied Hamas, owned by Hamdan Al-Maktoum.
Third and fourth were also owned by the Maktoums.
King Olaf's success brought Chapple-Hyam's score to four already this term and as Sangster said: ‘That can't be bad; two for Peter at Newbury and two at Newmarket.
It's nice to win races when the world is watching on Grade One tracks.’
Chapple-Hyam, not yet 30, runs England's most well-appointed stable complex.
There are 72 horses at Manton this year, and Luciano Gaucci has taken a big interest in the yard since acquiring Dr Devious last autumn.
Now the horse has yet another owner and will run against Arazi in the Kentucky Derby for an American whose birthday coincides with his country's greatest race.
The sale, and that of the class fillies Soiree and Red Slippers, confirmed Sangster's readiness to trade, ‘either as a buyer or a seller’ when the right deal materialises.
There would be many owners aghast at allowing a horse of Dr Devious's talent to be sold, but Sangster's approach has been much more beneficial to his trainer and also to the future development of Manton.
More than 20 years ago, the success of Nijinsky — whose death on Wednesday saddened Sangster — encouraged him, with Vincent O'Brien, to discern the potential of horses by Northern Dancer, Nijinsky's sire.
The sale of Vernons, generally viewed as a reflection of cash-flow difficulties at the time, can now be seen as yet another example of Sangster's far-sightedness, in part encouraged by expectations of a national lottery in Britain.
Yesterday, Sangster said: ‘It had to come and I'm delighted to hear that the government is committed to its introduction before long.
‘When I was still involved with Vernons, we participated in the introduction of the lotteries in both New York and Sydney, and our experience then told me that football pools would be swept away should lotteries ever come to Britain.
‘The experience in Australia was that the Lotto game, where six numbers out of 45 are drawn each week, reduced our football pools’ take to 10 per cent of the previous figure.
‘The football pools take around 33 per cent from the pool.
A Lotto-type pool here could generate big profits on a deduction of no more than four per cent.’
Sangster is more than willing to offer his lottery expertise and experience to the government, who may still be inclined to accept his suggestions, even though he was quoted during the Election campaign as believing a Labour win would be better for racing.
‘That opinion was largely based on the fact that in Robin Cook, Labour would have boasted a senior Cabinet minister with good understanding and enthusiasm for racing.
But the promotion of Gillian Shephard to the Cabinet should more than compensate for any misgivings’, Sangster said.
‘Certainly, her efforts on the VAT question where racing and breeding is concerned, have been most encouraging’.
That apparent change of attitude reflects Sangster's adaptability.
In the same way, he has been able to shrug off his failure to retain Frankie Dettori, who had been offered a lucrative sum to ride the Manton horses for the owner.
Sangster believes that the jockey's indecision was primarily because he was ‘waiting on Forest Tiger in the Craven Stakes’.
The total eclipse of that Newmarket-trained ‘Paper Tiger’ may well lead to Dettori's beating a path to Sangster's door.
I fear he will be too late, but Dettori can enjoy the consolation of knowing that Sangster rates him ‘on a par with Pat Eddery, Willie Carson and Steve Cauthen’ and will still employ him when the situation allows.
Jockey plans remain fluid, to say the least, for the first two Classics, but Sangster, like his Manton trainer, is quite relaxed.
Sangster said: ‘They say that if you have a good horse, a top jockey will invariably become available.
John Dunlop has worked quite comfortably under those circumstances and we are quite content with a similar situation for our good horses.’
Racing: Alnasr new favourite for Guineas RACING
Telegraph writers assess yesterday's Classic trial and mourn the loss of one of the greatest Champions of yesteryearJ A McGrath reports on the shake-up in the ante-post market after Forest Tiger's flop in Newmarket's Craven Stakes
By J A MCGRATH
MICHAEL STOUTE produced a 2,000 Guineas contender to match that of his great rival Henry Cecil when Alnasr Alwasheek made a brilliant seasonal debut at Newmarket yesterday, coming from last to first to land the Craven Stakes.
With a sweeping run down the outside, the Sadler's Wells colt displayed impressive acceleration to lead inside the two-furlong marker and draw clear for a length-and-a-half victory over Dr Devious, from whom he was receiving 5lb.
Immediately, Alnasr Alwasheek was burdened with the tag of new favourite for the 2,000 Guineas on May 2.
He is a top-priced 4–1 with Victor Chandler and also shares favouritism with Dr Devious at 16–1 for the Ever Ready Derby on June 3.
Just as the race rekindled Classic hopes for Stoute, the flame was snuffed out for Newmarket trainer Mohammed Moubarak, who blamed himself for the dismal performance of 11–4 favourite Forest Tiger, who trailed in last after coming under pressure at half-way.
Frankie Dettori, Forest Tiger's rider, told the stewards that the colt failed to quicken with the field at the three-furlong marker and then ‘died on him.’
Thereafter, Forest Tiger felt like a tired horse, Dettori reported.
‘It was just too bad to be true,’ he added.
But Moubarak argued that he might have misjudged the colt's preparation in not giving him sufficient work since he was found to be suffering from a minor skin infection on his legs after his previous race.
The stewards accepted the explanations of trainer and jockey but ordered Forest Tiger to be routine tested.
The name Alnasr Alwasheek somehow just doesn't roll off the tongue like that of a 2,000 Guineas winner and would rank high among a long list of awkward names of Arab-owned horses.
Maybe the English translation, ‘Imminent Victory,’ would mean more to the betting shop punter.
Stoute said Alnasr Alwasheek does not take a lot of getting ready for a race.
‘He is not the most robust horse but I knew he was in good shape.
‘Today, he was able to be dropped in behind, whereas last year when he ran third in the Tiffany Highflyer, he was drawn on the far side in a 30-runner race and Steve [Cauthen]had to ride him handy to the pace,’ Stoute said.
The colt is out of a half-sister to Milligram, who is out of the 1,000 Guineas winner One in a Million.
Stoute, who knows the family well, said: ‘He has grown to just over 15.2 hands, which is a nice size for a racehorse, and I am hopeful that he will get further than a mile.’
He added: ‘If he learns to relax, he will get a mile and a half.’
The fascinating feature of the Guineas betting is that Alnasr Alwasheek and the Cecil-trained Pursuit of Love are completely different types; Alnasr Alwasheek appeared sharp and able to quicken on fast ground, while his chief rival looked big, laid back and carrying enough condition for his trainer to work on when taking Wednesday's European Free Handicap.
Their progress over the next two weeks will solve the Guineas mystery, but that is of little concern to connections of Dr Devious, who heads now for the Kentucky Derby (for which he is 10–1 from 12–1) in Louisville on May 2 and returns to Epsom for the Ever Ready Derby in June.
Irish Memory finished two and a half lengths away third — a cracking good run considering he was responsible, with Bold Pursuit, for the fast early gallop which produced a race time only 0.09sec slower than standard.
Muhtarram, who finished fourth, looked to be travelling well at the three-furlong marker but had no answer to the first two when the pressure was applied.
Ladbrokes were the most impressed with Alnasr Alwasheek, making him 3–1 favourite from 20–1.
They then bet 4–1 Pursuit of Love, 6–1 Rodrigo de Triano, 8–1 Cardoun, 10–1 Tertian and Steinbeck, 12–1 bar.
Meanwhile Twist And Turn remains a 25–1 chance for the Ever Ready Derby with Ladbrokes following a gutsy win from Young Senor in the Feilden Stakes.
Steve Cauthen, who rode Twist And Turn, partnered Geoff Wragg's Marling in a six-furlong gallop with Dorset Duke after racing and then confirmed he would ride the unbeaten filly in the 1,000 Guineas.
JUDO
England are braced for tough test
By Nicolas Soames
ENGLAND claimed the bulk of the judo medals in the 1990 Commonwealth Games in Auckland but the Commonwealth Tournament at the National Sports Centre, Cardiff, this weekend will be more open.
The imminence of the Olympic Games means that the top British fighters, having competed at the British Open last weekend, are back in training, leaving the field clear for emerging figures in both the men's and women's events.
The Commonwealth Tournament, which is held every two years, has attracted an entry of more than 200 competitors from a total of 15 countries, including Australia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Kenya and Hong Kong.
The event is crucial in strengthening the role of the Commonwealth Judo Association.
Despite the success of the sport in Auckland, however, judo has been elbowed out of the next Commonwealth Games in Canada in 1994.
Skilful lobbying has meant that its place has been taken by wrestling on the curious promise that there will be both a men's and women's competition in 1994 even though women have never established a real presence in freestyle wrestling as they have in judo.
Hockey: Merger plan for leagues
By CHRIS MOORE
A WELSH club could be playing in England's Pizza Express National League in three years, following a new proposal to merge two regional competitions, writes Chris Moore.
The Sun Life West League and the South Wales League are planning to flow together in the 1993–4 season at first XI level, with the cream of the Welsh teams joining the West's Premier Division.
The proposal to move the top four Welsh teams into the English system, which has the backing of the West League committee, will be put forward for ratification at area meetings for clubs later this month.
‘If a Welsh team wins the West title in some future season we will have no objection to their moving into England's National League,’ said Stephen Baines, the Hockey Association chief executive.
‘We hope their arrival will strengthen the West League while helping to raise the standard of Welsh hockey.’
The two leagues have made previous attempts to merge but proposals have been blocked by failure to win the approval from the majority of West League clubs.
But with Firebrands, Isca and Brean now in the National League, more clubs are likely to believe that the regional competition needs to be strengthened.
The proposal calls for the four leading Welsh teams to be taken into the West's Premier Division, with four more going into North Division One.
MEN'S HOCKEY
Havant rely on Hill for sternest test
By Chris Moore
AFTER narrowly failing to win the European Cup Winners' Cup last season, Havant take on an even harder task when they compete in the European Cup in Amsterdam this weekend.
The Pizza Express National League champions should have little difficulty in beating Royal Leopold, of Belgium, today and Racing Club de France tomorrow, but face the holders, Uhlenhorst, in Sunday's final group match.
Uhlenhorst, from Germany, have held the European Cup for the past four years and during their reign only one club, Atletico Terrassa, of Spain, have maintained a challenge to this supremacy.
Terrassa will be back again, aiming to reach the final for the fourth successive year, and seem likely to head the other group at the expense of Dinamo Alma Ata, from Russia, Ireland's Lisnagarvey and Bloemendaal, of Holland.
The biggest threat to Havant will come from Carsten Fischer, Uhlenhorst's short-corner specialist, and the English team will be depending heavily on Rob Hill, their own striker, to match the German at the set-piece.
With winger Don Williams recovered from injury, Havant have the all-round strength to perform with some distinction in an event which has not seen an English winner since Slough in 1980.
But, against the experienced Uhlenhorst and Terrassa, both packed with international players, the Havant side, led by David Faulkner in his last season as captain, will do well to improve on Hounslow's fourth place last season.
If, as expected, they finish second behind Uhlenhorst in their group, they will play for the bronze medal against Terrassa or Bloemendaal — both formidable opponents.
Murray Howell, the Edinburgh Civil Service goalkeeper, will play his last games for the club this weekend in the European Cup Winners' Cup B Division tournament at Swansea.
Howell has taken up a job in Aberdeen and feels he may no longer be able to spare the time to travel back to Edinburgh each weekend.
Once he has settled into his new post he may again become actively involved in the sport.
If he does, it is likely he will turn out for the Aberdeen side, Touche Ross.
Howell has come to the fore this season, being instrumental in getting Civil Service into third place in the league behind Kelburne and Torbrex Wanderers with his impressive defensive record.
Civil Service have conceded fewer goals than any other team in the division, and had Howell not taken the decision to stand down from the top flight, he could have been elevated to the Scottish senior international training squad this summer.
Jason Hemmings is poised to take over from Howell in goal next season.
WOMEN'S HOCKEY
British players are back to lift clubs
By Cathy Harris
THE availability of Great Britain players has boosted the medal hopes of Glasgow Western and Sutton Coldfield as they undertake their European campaigns in Holland this weekend.
The British squad members may not be fully rested after their return yesterday from a 2½-week training trip to the United States, but their presence will serve as a psychological boost to their teams.
Alison Ramsay, Wendy Fraser and Sue Fraser play for Glasgow Western in the Club Championships, while Jane Sixsmith, Lisa Bayliss and Mandy Pickles help Sutton Coldfield challenge for a place in Monday's final of the Cup Winners' Cup.
Slough, winners of the English national league title for the last three seasons, welcome back goalkeeper Jo Thompson and midfield player Karen Brown against the powerful Dutch club and holders, HGC, in their opening match today.
With the draw being kind to them, Glasgow Western, Britain's most successful side in Europe, have a realistic chance of securing a medal for the fifth successive time.
England, silver medallists in the European Under-18 women's tournament in Dusseldorf last year, were surprisingly but deservedly beaten 2–1 by Spain, last year's fourth-placed side, on the opening day of this season's competition at Clifton College, Bristol, yesterday.
England, this season's home country champions, lacked drive in midfield and penetration in front of goal, scoring through Jenny Hodson from open play after 42 minutes, between Spanish goals by Victoria Lapeyra (34 and 63 minutes).
England's under-16 side opened their section at the same venue with an impressive 8–0 victory over Scotland after scoring six goals before the interval.
Holland opened their defence of the under-18 and under-16 cups in impressive style, their skilful play producing 6–0 and 7–0 victories over Scotland and Belgium, while Germany were also in good form, winning 3–0 and 6–0 against France and Spain respectively.
JUNIOR HOCKEY
Late goals hit English
By Peter Cross
ENGLAND drew 3–3 with Germany in the opening game of the Six Nations Under-18 tournament at Cannock HC yesterday.
England conceded two goals in the last quarter of an hour after building up a 3–1 lead.
Bell, the Rossall striker, put England ahead after 17 minutes, collecting an overhead pass and wrong-footing Wagner, the German goalkeeper, as he came off his line.
Allen increased the lead from a penalty corner but Germany soon narrowed the margin when Michel flicked a good goal following another corner.
Lewis, England's goalkeeper, made some splendid saves in the second half as Germany forced six penalty corners in quick succession, but an opportunist goal by Smith put England in a strong position.
Chorianopoulos scored a follow-up goal after 55 minutes and only three minutes remained when Eichel, the German captain, scored a rather fortunate equaliser with a mishit penalty corner.
In the Under-16 event England had their first-ever win over Germany, by 2–1, with first-half goals from Archer and Swan.
Domke, the German captain, converted a penalty corner after 50 minutes and England's weary defenders held out against a succession of corners for a special victory.
STUDENT RUGBY
England hold off the Irish
By Graham Tait
England28pts
Ireland19
IF ENGLAND had wanted a tough competitive fixture to complete their domestic programme before the Students World Cup in Italy in July 1, they could not have asked for better preparation that at Blundellsands yesterday.
Ireland, sporting a big abrasive pack inspired by Paddy Johns, fought hard for possession against the lighter but more organised England eight.
And with Conor O'Shea kicking five penalty goals, the Irish kept up a steady scoring rate.
Four penalties from four attempts by the full-back gave Ireland a 12–7 lead at the interval, Kerr responding with one penalty from three attempts before Bracken got the touch as England forced their way over the Irish line.
England went ahead after the break with a try by Sleightholme, converted by Kerr.
But their crucial score came 10 minutes from time when their wingers combined on the right and Sleightholme touched down.
Kerr added the goal points.
Ireland were quick to respond, scrum-half Matchett breaking from a scrum to touch down in the corner.
But Adams had the final word with a last-minute try.
England Students:— C Dossett; J Sleightholme, P Flood, S Ravenscroft, H Thorneycroft; A Kerr, K Bracken; C Clark, A Fields, J Mallett, A Milward (capt), P Thresher, E Peters, G Adams, C Barrow.
Tries: Bracken, Sleightholm 2, Adams.
Conversions: Kerr (3).
Penalty goals: Kerr (2).
Try: Matchett.
Penalty goals: O'Shea 5.
About Rugby: Fireworks and 10,000 voices for Cardiff fund-raiser
By Charles Randall
THE spectacularly ambitious plan by the Welsh Rugby Union to raise funds with a massed male-voice choir of 10,000 at the National Stadium in Cardiff next month is well under way.
The concert, involving about 150 choirs from the Britain, Ireland, Australia, South Africa and the Ukraine, will occupy the whole of the West Stand on May 23, with a stage at ground level to accommodate four military bands and three international soloists, including Oliver Sammons, Britain's choirboy of the year.
The Saturday evening will conclude with fireworks to accompany the 1812 Overture, and the WRU are hoping for a crowd of 40,000 to benefit the Cardiff Arms Park Trust and the Lord's Taverners.
And the good news is that this mind-boggling occasion will not be spoilt by the Welsh team trotting on when it has all finished…
MIKE RAFTER has been the white knight for Bristol Saracens, the Gloucestershire Division Two club, who invited him to halt a rapid downhill slide two years ago.
The former England and Bristol flanker took over the coaching, put up the blackboard and with one word — commitment — he has helped John Pullin's old club to promotion.
John Prean, a grateful committee man, said: ‘In two years the club has been completely transformed.
We were heading towards crisis, players were leaving and the motivation wasn't there.
Mike has given us back our respect.’
Saracens, formed in 1896 by a breakaway group from the YMCA, are captained by Nick Bridgman in the second row, but their backs are their strength, with Mike Baker outstanding at scrum-half.
ROSSLYN PARK'S captain, Richard Moon, who this season has seen more needle and thread than the Bayeux tapestry, was stitched up again last Saturday after his side were relegated following their defeat by Bath.
The eight stitches to his forehead took his tally to 23 from three knocks on the head this season.
‘I was trying to find Jonathan Webb, the Bath full-back, to see if he could do some quick cosmetic surgery,’ said the ever-cheerful Moon.
FRONT-ROW power has taken the Leicestershire club Vipers to the brink of a league and a cup double.
The first half of their attempt was completed when they defeated Hinckley 21–3 in the county cup final.
And with a superior points difference, Vipers seem set to clinch promotion from Midlands Two West after three times finishing runners-up.
Their success is partly down to a front three of David Hopper, the Australian prop who had a spell at Leicester; Richard Wareham, the former Leicester and England Under-21 international, and Karl Ashfield.
Burgess Hill, in Sussex Division One, are to pay tribute to a former RAF prop, Rob Hansford, who has had a playing career lasting 62 years.
A testimonial match has been arranged for April 25.
Hansford still plays at 70 and has no plans to retire.
LAURENCE SMITH, the former London and Saracens centre, whose livelihood as a fireman has been affected by a serious leg injury sustained while playing rugby a year ago, has an international benefit match at Southgate on Monday afternoon.
The organisers, with pledges of support from numerous internationals, are attempting an intriguing second-row pairing of Matt Keenan (Western Samoa) and Sam Domoni (Fiji).
Rugby Union: Andrew mines rich vein of good fortune
By ROB WILDMAN
BRIAN ANDREW, a controversial figure in the parochial world of Cornish rugby, will at last play in a county championship final tomorrow, having twice lost out to Graham Dawe for a place in the Twickenham spotlight.
Last September the Redruth hooker, 28, could have had no hope of playing at Twickenham as he had smashed an elbow in a minor club match and Dawe, his long-standing rival, had been appointed county captain.
The situation changed, firstly when Andrew confounded medical opinion by playing again in December and then when Dawe pulled out of the semi-final match against Yorkshire after his club, Bath, had rearranged a postponed Courage League match at Rugby.
Andrew first lost out to Dawe in 1989, when he was dropped after the semi-final victory over Warwickshire.
His second disappointment came last year when the Bath hooker returned for the deciding group game against Berkshire.
‘Some people told me I should have told the selectors to shove it and play for my club instead, but I thought if I kept quiet and plugged away I would get my chance — but I didn't think it would come this season,’ Andrew said.
‘I felt if I was dropped it was not too bad to be dropped in favour of the second-best hooker in England.’
Andrew is used to being the centre of attention, especially after last summer when he did the unthinkable by stepping down as captain of Camborne to join Redruth, their neighbours and rivals — Cornish rugby's equivalent of a footballer leaving Manchester United for City.
Andrew said: ‘I don't mind the controversy, I can handle it.
I left Camborne because I wanted a new challenge.
There was no one pushing me.’
Once Andrew, a former tin-miner, would have been your archetypal Cornish player — but not any more.
From tomorrow's team he is the only player who has a connection with the county's almost-defunct mining industry.
He left his job as a face worker two years ago and is now manager of the Bassett Steam House public house in Redruth.
‘I enjoyed mining, but there was no future in it,’ he said.
‘In mining there was a closeness and bond between us and I've still got friends who work there.
‘At one stage mining and rugby went together, with all the mines playing in a league of their own.
‘The mine companies knew if you played rugby well you were fit and could handle the hard, physical work.’
Andrew's background has made him a focal point for media interest this week, including an appearance on regional television filmed back at the last working tin mine, at South Crofty, near Redruth.
Once a match between Cornwall and Lancashire would have included the cream of English rugby, but tomorrow only a handful of players are from top clubs.
This does not worry Andrew.
‘Playing for Cornwall is the biggest thing down here.
It's like playing for a country and I think it will always remain so,’ he said.
Rugby Union: Surprise Ireland call for Etheridge
By Keith Peters
IRELAND'S selectors produced a surprise yesterday by summoning John Etheridge, the Northampton lock forward, to join the party to tour New Zealand next month.
Etheridge, English-born with Irish parentage, replaces Neil Francis, who withdrew last week because of business commitments, and he intends to play for the Irish Exiles side in their provincial championship debut next season.
The tour party was weakened when Gordon Hamilton, the World Cup flank forward, withdrew yesterday because of doubts about his back injury, which kept him out of the Five Nations Championship.
David Pegler, a former England B captain, would come under consideration as a replacement after his outstanding season with London Irish, though looking outside Ireland again for a player would fuel controversy.
Amid much grand talk about the dawn of a new era, an assorted bunch of international players, only some of whom are world-class, set out tomorrow to add to New Zealand's miseries by ruining a 100th birthday party, writes John Mason.
It is centenary year for the New Zealand Rugby Football Union, good enough cause for a three-match series in a week against the Rest of the World.
It is sufficiently important, too, the NZ RFU believe, for full caps to be awarded.
Following the failure to win the 1991 World Cup, the coach, two selectors, captain and 11 other members of the New Zealand squad have been replaced.
Nor, it seems, might the purge cease there.
Defeat is a serious business in this part of the world.
The inching up the cliff of dignified respectability begins tomorrow at Lancaster Park, Christchurch.
New coach Laurie Mains wants the Otago captain, Mike Brewer, as leader of the All Blacks.
So did Alex Wyllie, the World Cup coach.
But Brewer has an uncanny knack of getting injured at the wrong time and so hooker Sean Fitzpatrick will be in charge for the first time.
David Sole, Scotland's captain, has also had to dig out the speech-making file following the midweek injury in Sydney to Nick Farr-Jones, Australia's World Cup leader, who was to have headed this campaign which coaches Ian McGeechan and Bob Templeton hope will compound New Zealand's problems.
Dundee's Andy Nicol, to his astonishment, finds himself lining up against the All Blacks, having begun the season as the Scotland Students' scrum-half with hopes, possibly at best, of a B-team cap.
Outside-half Naas Botha, recently arrived from Italy, will be a reserve only tomorrow but should have more demanding duties in matches two and three in Wellington and Auckland next Wednesday and tomorrow week.
WORLD XV: G Hastings (Scotland); M Knoetze (S Africa), T Horan (Australia), J Guscott (England), P Hendricks (South Africa); D Camberabero (France), A Nicol (Scotland); D Sole (Scotland, capt), P Kearns (Australia), P Fatialofa (Western Samoa), O Roumat, M Cecillon (France), G Mackinnon (Canada), W Ofahengaue (Australia), D White (Scotland).
Rugby Union: Lancashire's hopes resting with a convert from Accrington Stanley
By GRAHAM TAIT
UNTIL two years ago Paul Grayson, Lancashire's young fly-half with unlimited potential, had never even thought of appearing in a major representative match at Twickenham.
To be honest, he had hardly given rugby the time of day as he spent his Saturday afternoons on the soccer pitch, writes Graham Tait.
Mind you it was not just any soccer pitch.
For all his undoubted talent Grayson may not have been a budding Ian Rush but he turned out for one of the country's most famous clubs, perhaps not the best but certainly one of the best known — Accrington Stanley.
‘It was a natural progression really,’ explained the play-maker, 20, from Chorley.
‘I played soccer all the way through school and never entertained the thought of rugby until a couple of friends took me down to Preston Grasshoppers.
I enjoyed it for a few weeks but then went to Stanley.’
Grayson played soccer for Parklands High School before going on to Preston College where he played a little rugby in 1989 but never thought of taking up the game.
His background with the round ball has stood him in good stead in becoming one of the country's leading goal-kickers.
His introduction to the art of place-kicking, however, was hardly a result of deep forward planning.
In one of his few appearances for the junior teams at Preston somebody threw the ball at him and said: ‘You play soccer, you have a go.’
Needless to say, Grayson duly guided the ball between the posts and, after a few practice sessions, graduated into the leading kicker at the club.
At the end of 1990 Grayson found his way into the Preston first team and was selected for Lancashire last year in his first real season.
His debut was delayed by the refusal of North Midlands to play due to the strength of the opposition.
‘Taking up rugby was one of my better decisions,’ he said.
‘The officials at Preston have been nothing but encouraging and in the early days the coaching staff put in a lot of time to make up for my lack of experience.
They were always supportive, even after the inevitable bad days.’
Though Lancashire are far below full strength, Grayson has earned his place on merit having captained the powerful North Under-21s to the ADT divisional age-group title and would have been in the side even had the Orrell contingent been available, Martin Strett being ineligible having represented the Northern Division in October.
‘Obviously it would be stupid to say we will not miss the Orrell lads,’ admitted Grayson.
‘They are a fine team and our chances against Cornwall have diminished with their absence, but we still have the players to take the championship.
‘The strength in depth of rugby in Lancashire has allowed the selectors to pick a team that has an even chance of winning.
We are as strong as Cornwall but they have the experience of having played in last season's final, and I suppose they'll be bringing their fair share of support.
‘For many members of the team this may be their one and only opportunity of playing in a major fixture at Twickenham and they will certainly be wanting to make the most of it.
There will be no lack of determination, after all Lancashire have a fine tradition in the competition.
‘This is probably my most important game to date, certainly I have never played in front of the kind of crowd that is expected, and I have never played at Twickenham, though I have heard about the swirling wind that can make life uncomfortable for kickers.
It's all part of the learning experience.’
Rugby Union: Day-trippers give Cornwall firm backing ADT COUNTY CHAMPIONSHIP
Twickenham finalists likely to play in front of near-capacity crowd
By Charles Randall
TICKET sales in Cornwall have approached the 30,000 mark for the ADT County Championship final at Twickenham tomorrow, confounding fears that the Easter holiday would deter supporters from travelling to London.
Ray Plummer, Cornwall's treasurer, had expressed fears that ticket sales would be lower than last year, when about 40,000 Cornishmen swelled the attendance to 56,000, cheering their side to victory over Yorkshire.
For the game against Lancashire — the county's third final in four years — the Cornwall union have experienced unprecedented demand, despite the traditional inflow of holiday-makers and rugby club tours that should, in theory, keep many black-and-gold supporters at home.
Plummer, a bank manager in Camborne, commented: ‘All sorts of arrangements have had to be made, which I thought would be difficult.
Several touring sides are having to play each other because there is no Cornish opposition to play, and we've had great difficulty in finding referees.
Some of them will be doubling up their games.’
He added: ‘What has come through is the essential Cornishness of this occasion.
People are going to the match because it's Cornwall's day out.’
Cornwall will be fielding an unchanged side from the semi-finals and Glyn Williams, their captain, stressed the importance within the county of the ADT championship, which is derided by some for its supposed second-class quality.
He said: ‘It is what gets us noticed nationally.
It is the big topic of conversation, and players experience local fame by being waylaid in the streets for a chat about the final.
I honestly believe that it could not be more inspirational playing in front of a home international crowd.’
The Twickenham authorities are predicting a virtual sell-out, but the fact that Lancashire tickets sold are numbered in hundreds rather than thousands suggests that without Trelawny's Army, the county final would be a mere speck on the rugby programme.
Orrell, who have not yet given up hope of winning the Courage League Championship despite last week's narrow defeat by Wasps, will have Shaun Gallagher back in the line-up for Monday's fixture at Harlequins.
The North Division No 8 was a late withdrawal at Sudbury.
Though Huw Davies had the last word in that game, Gallagher's work at the back of the line-out was missed.
Orrell, however, are confident he will be fit and name their regular side, with Chris Brierley and Brian Wellens likely to be on the replacements' bench.
Brierley is the obvious stand-in for Bob Kimmins, still not 100 per cent after his back troubles, while Wellens' inclusion depends on his coming through tomorrow's final, when he will be in the Lancashire centre.
Though they will travel well prepared, the Lancashire club have no idea as to the strength of opposition they will meet, Harlequins having indicated some time ago that a number of their senior players may have other commitments during the Easter break.
Rugby League: Hull fight to stay up
By JOHN WHALLEY
ALTHOUGH the biggest crowd today will be at St Helens to watch the runners-up play the champions, Wigan, more relevant fixtures take place at Bradford and Hull KR as the fight for First Division survival approaches its climax, writes John Whalley.
Hull's most important Humberside derby for years comes at the end of a sad week for the club which saw defeat by Widnes on Sunday, and the sacking of Noel Cleal as coach on Monday.
Defeat today would pass the initiative to Bradford and Salford.
Steve Crooks, Hull's caretaker coach, has made several changes to a 16-man squad in an effort to end a run of three successive defeats.
Andy Dannatt and Russ Walker, dropped from the pack last week, are recalled.
Rovers, also reeling from three successive defeats, need to defeat Hull, and Bradford on Monday, to secure a Premiership place.
Bradford, possibly playing their last match at Odsal, with continuing speculation of a move to Valley Parade, and desperate for a Rovers victory, need to thrash relegated Swinton by around 40 points to close the scoring difference on both Hull and Salford.
TODAY'S GAMES.
— Stones Bitter Ch'ship: Bradford v Swinton, Castleford v Wakefield, Hull KR v Hull (3.15), Leeds v Halifax, St Helens v Wigan, Warrington v Widnes.
Div 2: Carlisle v Ryedale York (2.30), London Crusaders v Workington, Rochdale v Oldham.
Div 3: Dewsbury v Keighley (6.15), Huddersfield v Hunslet, Scarboro Pirates v Barrow.
Cricket: Pringle's hundred enlivens dead game
By Peter Deeley at Lord's
England A (456–7 dec) drew with Essex (317–8 dec) A RARE century from Derek Pringle provided some spice at the very death in an opening to the season which had been all but strangled at birth by the bad weather.
His hundred, the ninth in a career which has now entered its 15th year, came off the last ball of the game after his captain, Graham Gooch, had delayed the final formality of a declaration.
With three wickets already to his credit, Pringle made a late run on the rails to snatch the £500 man-of-the-match award — made by the sponsors, Tetley Bitter — from Darren Bicknell, the England A century-maker.
Valuable and praiseworthy though these contributions were, however, everything in this game was overshadowed by the vignette of an innings played by Mark Waugh yesterday.
His slip catch on the first day — high to his left and almost beyond him — to dismiss Morris may not be bettered however long this season runs.
The Australian's 61 off 69 balls, at a time when Tim Munton was making other batsmen jump, was of the highest quality and serves as a warning to other sides what awaits them at Chelmsford.
He sees the ball early and strokes, rather than forces it through the gap in the field.
Devon Malcolm was not sparing himself on a pitch which was offering help to all the bowlers but Waugh seemed to have a ridiculous amount of time to ease him through the leg field twice in an over for two of his 10 boundaries.
It was only when Ian Salisbury came on that Waugh made one mistake, clipping the leg-spinner to mid-wicket in his first over.
Salisbury emerged from a cold day with great credit, bowling 24 overs and also claiming the scalp of Gooch.
There was a surprising amount of turn and lift so early in the year and when Gooch had reached 75, he gloved a catch to Paul Johnson at short gully.
The England captain had not allowed Salisbury to escape totally unscathed, however.
Anything short was imperiously hit away to the leg boundary and Gooch hit one classic six back over the spinner's head.
Essex were, for a time, in some trouble after Munton had claimed two wickets in as many balls but Gooch, still snuffling after his touch of ‘flu and coming in at an unaccustomed No 5 position, thwarted the hat-trick ball.
Then Dominic Cork — like Munton, another of the promising quick bowlers around the counties now beginning to mature — took two more wickets to leave the champions on 106 for six after only 29 overs.
Gooch and Pringle then added 113 for the seventh wicket and Neil Foster gave good support to remove all fears of an Essex follow-on.
Pringle hovered uncomfortably on 99, coming close to being stumped and leg before to Salisbury before the vital runs came on the stroke of the close.
With no victor in this game, Tetley are putting the £2,000 allotted to the winning side back into the prize ‘kitty’ for the season.
BADMINTON
Neilsen battles to medal
By a Special Correspondent
ANDERS NEILSEN, the English National champion, staged a fighting comeback against Finland's Robert Liljeqist to assure himself of a medal and join three Danes in today's men's singles semi-finals at the Pilkington Glass European Badminton Championships in Glasgow.
Having taken the opening game 15–4, but losing the second 14–17, the Surrey player, 24, came back from 8–13 down in the decider to claim his place in the last four.
It was a remarkable turn around in fortunes for the England No 3, and almost certainly assures him of a place in the British team for this summer's Olympics.
The Englishmen, seeded 5/8, now meets second favourite, Thomas Stuer-Lauridsen for a place in the final.
The Dane overwhelmed Christian Nyffenegger, a surprise quarter-finalist from Switzerland, 15–2, 15–1.
In the other semi-final top seed Poul-Erik Hoyer-Larsen will face compatriot Peter Espersen.
Cricket: Blueprint is well-suited to realities of the game CRICKET
Christopher Martin-Jenkins welcomes Murray report's recommendations for future of county competition
By CHRISTOPHER MARTIN-JENKINS
THERE are elements in the Murray committee's report on the future structure of county cricket with which many people will disagree.
There is no doubt, however, that the programme envisaged for 1993 and beyond is more coherent, better balanced and better attuned to the realities of a professional game which is increasingly dependent on the success or failure of the England team.
Mr Murray made it clear yesterday that he would like the counties to accept the whole plan, not just parts of it as has happened with earlier committees.
‘If they don't’, he said, ‘we go back to the status quo.
I think that would be very sad.’
So do I. To anyone capable of seeing beyond a county bank balance, it has been clear for a number of years that there is too much limited-overs cricket played by the counties and that the present mix of three and four-day Championship games is not only confusing, especially now that they start on different days of the week, but also unnecessarily exhausting for all involved.
For the England team, on whose success depends not only the financial viability of the counties themselves, but also the capacity of the game to attract young people to play and watch it as a part of their heritage, the preparation for Test cricket provided by the present hotch-potch is clearly unsatisfactory.
Regular England players would now miss only seven of the 17 games, as opposed to a possible 13 under the present system.
If adopted next year, the county programme will start nine days later than would be the case if the present structure remains.
It would end on Sept 20, five days later than this season.
The Championship would start on April 29 and the Sunday League on May 9.
That competition should attract a new sponsor whether or not the counties decide to follow the Working Party's advice to consider coloured clothes, names on the back of shirts, white balls and only two men outside the circle in the first 15 overs.
The greatest attraction of the alternative programme is the two free days which most players would have each week for rest, recovery from injuries and practice.
Provided the counties, or other entrepreneurs, do not try to fill the gaps with spurious additional games — a serious danger which must be avoided — they should be better prepared to play good cricket on pitches, moreover, which should also be better prepared.
They will have less exhausting and dangerous weekend travel and the cricket they play on Sundays, although some habitual spectators may object to missing their Sunday lunch, should be all the better for the extra 10 overs.
The most serious objections to the new plan are the effect on county finances of six or seven fewer home matches, the possible resultant loss of members and the fact that cricket on traditional peripheral grounds such as Aigburth, Harrogate or Bath might have to be eliminated.
Seven-day festivals will no longer be possible.
Some counties, among them Kent, Essex and Northamptonshire, are likely to oppose the proposals as a result.
But if the Working Party's estimate of an average loss of between £20,000 and £25,000 is correct, the financial consequences are small compared with the minimum of £300,000 which even the least rewarded county received last year from the TCCB, whose main source of income is the profit from international cricket.
The proposals sensibly resist any temptation to over-egg an already rich international pudding by staging more one-day internationals than are presently staged in England.
This season's quota of five such matches is suggested as the upper limit, with three planned for next season when Australia will play six Tests.
Personally, I regret that the effect of these changes would be to make professional cricket in England less different from the first-class game everywhere else in the world.
Perhaps the decision to accept covered pitches in the Championship in 1981 will be seen in time as the inevitable pre-cursor to the preference now for four-day games.
There is still a strong case for continuing with at least some three-day matches on uncovered pitches.
But the Murray committee is probably right to say that a minimum five-year experiment with a four-day game programme is now due.
Most four-day matches have not only been a better preparation for Test cricketers but have also produced generally more interesting cricket.
With a minimum of 110 overs a day, they do, it is true, enable the batting bore to take root on bland pitches.
The hope is that bowling skills will rise to counter them and the evidence is that they have begun to do so.
Moreover, counties take more spinners into four-day matches than they do into three-day games and to win the Championship two decent spin bowlers are essential in a year of normal weather.
Positive results in three-day games have hovered between 42 and 50 per cent over the last five seasons, apart from the freak year of green pitches in 1989 when 57 per cent avoided a draw.
In the last two years the number of contrived matches, with results achieved only by means of last-day declarations and sometimes by lollipop bowling, has grown.
Only 29 per cent of four-day matches have ended in draws over the last two seasons.
The proposals would mean at least 10 fewer innings for each batsman in the County Championship and bad weather could reduce their opportunities still further.
But at least most of the innings will be important ones.
The feeling of this being ‘just another day with another chance tomorrow’ will be that much less prevalent.
Overall, the reduction of cricketing days for each county would be only seven days, from a minimum of 94 to 87.
It is crucial to the success of the new format that the pitches themselves should produce a fair balance between bat and ball.
I would prefer two divisions of the Championship and, in time, perhaps of the Sunday League, with promotion and relegation.
Matches in the second half of the season would inevitably have more significance as a result.
To have been too radical, however, would have been to invite the same fate as the reports of previous committees.
This one has been produced on the basis of wide consultation, with the views of those who actually play professional cricket rightly given the strongest consideration.
Cricket: Cambridge tail-enders teach Leicestershire a lesson
By Doug Ibbotson at Fenner's
Leicestershire won by 133 runs IN MAKING a laudable attempt to sustain interest in a foreshortened contest at Fenner's, Leicestershire learnt something of long-term disadvantage: their spin-bowling is not of county championship quality.
Declaration and double forfeiture invited Cambridge University to score 280, with the whole day at their disposal.
Shortly after lunch they had been reduced to 57 for eight.
Nigel Briers, the Leicestershire captain, thereafter persevered with his slow bowlers, Peter Hepworth and Laurie Potter, and the remaining two wickets put on 89 runs.
Simon Johnson, whose highest first-class score had been 20, romped to a maiden half-century which included nine fours and a six before blithely giving up his wicket in the belief that, if there was much more of this, Briers would surely bring back the brisk and uncharitable Millns and Parsons.
These two had certainly sorted out Cambridge's bespoke batsmen — Parsons three for 12 and Millns three for 27 — on a Fenner's pitch which, though faster than one normally expects in the chill spring, was by no means hostile.
It seemed at first that Hepworth, too, might make a telling contribution when he began with three maidens, in the course of which he comprehensively bowled Pearson.
Then, having changed ends, he was so savaged by the burgeoning Johnson that his next nine overs conceded 52 runs.
Another beneficiary was the freshman, Pitcher, brought into the side as a bowler but who proved rather more successful as a batsman.
He was looking a prime candidate for another maiden fifty when Abington, his last-wicket partner, like Johnson before him, strolled down the pitch and was well and truly Pottered.
That left Pitcher undefeated on 32 and the Light Blues to mull over a 133-run defeat that might have been much more comprehensive.
For what it is worth, Leicestershire's batting looks attractive and the seam bowlers sound, butthey must improve their slow bowling form.
Cricket: Barbadian stayaway threatened
By Geoffrey Dean in Barbados
BARBADIAN cricket fans are calling for a boycott of tomorrow's historic Test match, not because of any anti-South African sentiment but as a protest over the omission of local fast bowler Anderson Cummins.
It will be only the second time in 27 Tests at the Kensington Oval that no Barbadian fast bowler is included.
An informal group formed this week has been mobilising the support of cricket clubs throughout the island to stay away from the game.
Local radio stations have been flooded with vitriolic complaints about Cummins's exclusion, and the local press has strongly criticised the West Indian selectors.
There have even been attempts to pressurise Desmond Haynes, the island's sole representative, into joining the boycott.
His mother has received phone calls threatening her should her son play.
Haynes says he will play.
South Africa's Omar Henry, who has had ‘flu, is certain to miss the game.
Cricket: Glendenen soon off the mark with fine century
By Jeremy Allerton in The Parks
Durham (286–2 dec) drew with Oxford University (105–2) THIS match assumed merely academic interest yesterday, after only two hours’ play on the first day and none on the second.
This was disappointing for all and sundry, except for the Durham players, who achieved records by virtue of their newly-acquired first-class status.
Pride of place went to John Glendenen, who scored 117 off 171 balls, including 17 fours and a six, just beating Paul Parker to his century.
Glendenen is a positive and powerful striker of the ball who will prosper even more on firmer and quicker wickets.
He and Parker resumed their opening partnership on 119 and added 103 in 19 overs before Parker, who hit 15 fours and a six, jumped down the wicket to Gallian, who shortly afterwards also bowled Glendenen as he aimed a heave.
Parker's 42nd century was a mixture of flowing drives and some sketchy mistiming on a slow, low-bouncing wicket which resulted in Oxford losing only two matches last season and none the year before.
Jones, shoulders hunched against the numbing cold, contented himself with a quiet display.
He leant on the ball for seven fours in a quick partnership of 51 with Bainbridge, who batted in thermal trouserwear more associated with Liberace.
Oxford's bowling was never threatening and looked rather ordinary when Glendenen and Parker began to hurry after a quiet first half-hour.
But Jeh's 20 overs for 74 runs was a decent enough performance in the conditions.
The easiness of the wicket was further confirmed when Durham's bowlers also failed to extract any joy from it.
Gallian and Montgomerie batted quietly and sensibly, putting on 45 in 24 overs, until Bainbridge induced one to lift and leave Montgomerie.
Gallian (53), who has played in the Lancashire League, drove firmly through extra-cover, hitting six fours, and looks a useful cricketer.
On this early evidence, Durham will have difficulty in bowling out other counties and success will devolve on fourth-innings run chases.
Botham may find himself having to bowl rather more than his contract anticipated, and with nearly half the team aged 35 or more they will need a fit physio-therapist.
Cricket: Notts in £35,000 sponsorship deal
NOINGHAMSHIRE yesterday announced a £35,000-a-year sponsorship deal which will guarantee winter employment to some playing staff.
The agreement with Swithland Motors means players not invited to take part in a winter tour will be retained for the full year, to promote the game by working with young players.
Notts' team manager, John Birch, said: ‘It is something we have been working towards but which would not have been possible without Swithland's backing.’
Cricket: Smith ready to work out World Cup frustrations
Ian Ridley finds England's Player of the Year straining at the leash as he gets in some practice against Sussex
By IAN RIDLEY
IT WAS a beautiful, sunny, crisp winter's day with spring but a whisper, summer a rumour.
Still, there was cricket of a sort being played, mostly by Robin Smith.
England's Player of the Year was not really timing the ball, but heaven help the opposition when he does.
Yesterday Sussex felt the power, or rather half-power, of the man in a 50-over friendly against Hampshire at Southampton.
Smith, opening the innings, made 74 from only 53 deliveries in the first hour of the day, striking two sixes and 13 fours, before retiring to give someone else some practice.
The boundaries may have been short, with netting to protect the club's offices, but it was worthwhile practice for Smith, and a glimpse of warmer times ahead for a remarkable crowd; there were about 100 well wrapped-up diehards, one of whom plonked himself in a red deckchair on the outfield, dangerously at midwicket.
Smith compiled his innings despite a cold picked up since his return to ‘work’ on Monday, which forced him home prematurely in his new car, number plate JII DGE — which from a distance appears to spell out his nickname of Judge, acquired because of his wavy hair.
It was his first innings since returning from the World Cup a more disappointed member of the England squad than most.
He had missed the semi-final against the land of his birth, South Africa, with a pinched nerve in his back, and was then left out of the final against Pakistan.
The pain of the injury has gone, that of the experience is still receding.
‘I was devastated,’ he says of missing the semi-final.
‘Depressed,’ is his summary of his state at the final exclusion.
‘I am not a good watcher.
I just did not enjoy it.
‘I have to try and accept it.
Life is full of ups and downs and I know that there are going to be bad times to go with the good ones.
I can't enjoy the good ones if I don't experience the bad ones.
‘I have just tried to learn the positive things from people before me who have been dropped.’
He reels off a list of names which shows he is in good company: Graham Gooch, Allan Lamb, David Gower, Ian Botham…
‘They have had their ins and outs and have all got back into the side,’ he says.
‘I think I can do that.
David has become very philsophical about it and I have to learn from that.
No-one has a divine right to play for England.’
Hampshire gave Smith two weeks' holiday on his return from the World Cup, to allow him to get to know his 17-month-old son Harrison and his new house near Salisbury.
‘I was champing at the bit, but I knew I needed a break,’ he says.
He feels not in the least jaded by his winter, refreshed more.
Although the World Cup was ‘mentally a strain’, he points out that little batting was required, so well did England bowl.
‘I feel really excited about this season,’ says the 28-year-old from Durban, who came via Northlands High School to Northlands Road, Southampton, and is now without the company of brother Chris, new marketing manager of Western Australian cricket.
‘Hampshire have been so good to me since I was a youngster here that I really want to win something again for them,’ he says.
‘Malcolm Marshall coming back has given the whole place and all the players such a lift.’
And England?
‘I just want to score runs and see what happens.
I feel very happy about my form and technique, very content,’ he adds, having learnt from a poor tour of Australia the winter before last to adapt his technique and not commit himself too soon to a stroke.
The reward was two centuries against the West Indies last summer and that England Player of the Year award, which was also for his fielding.
Smith is embarrassed about the award, believing that it should have gone to Graham Gooch.
Now he is simply hoping that he is eligible to try to win the award again.
Given his record in Test matches in England, it is almost unthinkable that he will not re-appear against Pakistan.
One senses that a few bowling attacks are likely to feel the frustration of Smith as he works out his disappointment at missing the latter stages of the World Cup.
TABLE TENNIS
England to host 1994 tournament
By John Woodford
England will host the 1994 European Championships at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham from March 25-April 4.
England's bid succeeded yesterday at the European Table Tennis Union Congress in Stuttgart, beating off a strong challenge from Croatia.
In the last 26 years England have staged only two major events — 1966 European Championships at Wembley and the 1977 World Championships in Birmingham.
Delegates from 36 nations gave England 21 votes and Croatia 15.
Alan Ransome, chairman of the English Table Tennis Association, said: ‘The England teams have had their most successful season for some years, and now to get this vote in our favour is a bonus.’
The cost of the 1994 championships will exceed £1 million.
Carl Prean and Alan Cooke, who were beaten only once as England soared to promotion in the European League, suffered a shock defeat in the first round of the men's doubles at the European Championships in Stuttgart last night.
The English pair, who have played a major part in England's promotion to the Super Division of the European League, were beaten 21–18, 22–20 by German pair Peter Franz and Torben Wosik.
DISABLED SPORT
Medal hopes for boccia foursome
By Mike Watkinson
THE team entrusted with the task of putting the little-known sport of boccia on the British sporting map has been selected following last week's national championships at York University.
Boccia is a high-precision game of Italian origin which resembles the French sport of boule, and the quartet going to the Barcelona Paralympics are confident of improving on Britain's fifth place at the Seoul Games.
The British challenge will be led by Peter Pearse, 20, a psychology student from Nottingham who won the Class One national title at York.
Nigel Baguley, 36, of Manchester, Anne Woffinden, 20, of Reading, and Carol Johnson, 27, of Edinburgh, complete the line-up.
Baguley, who works for Manchester City council, is the national Class Two champion while runner-up Woffinden was a member of the British team who won silver medals in the 1991 World Cup in Portugal.
National coach David Tillotson said: ‘We have made significant progress this year and are aiming for a place in the top two at Barcelona.’
Great Britain's wheelchair basketball teams will be seeking to book their passages to Barcelona at the three-day World Pre-Paralympic Qualification Tournament which starts in Stoke Mandeville today.
ROUND-UP
Akers forces rare defeat on Wilson
STEPHEN AKERS recorded a surprise victory over Ian Wilson, the European silver medallist, in the 1,500-metre freestyle at the fifth Edinburgh International Swimming Meet last night, writes Anita Lonsbrough.
In Wilson's first defeat by a British competitor over this distance for 2½ years the two swam neck and neck for just over half the race before Akers suddenly pulled ahead as he searched for an Olympic qualifying time.
He finished in 15min 35.93sec — 2.32sec outside his target time.
Wilson, one of four British swimmers pre-selected for Barcelona, admitted afterwards that he was ‘disappointed’.
Fogarty, riding a Ducati, is eighth in the championship — second only to the Grand Prix series — while Rymer is 10th on the Mobil 1 Kawasaki.
WATER POLO: Great Britain's new manager, Noel Winter, makes his competitive debut with his squad this weekend, when the first men's international tournament in this country for six years takes place at Crystal Palace, writes Tony Jefferies.
Winter, a former Great Britain international, was appointed after his predecessor, Mike Proudfoot, moved to the United States.
The new appointment runs until the next European championships, in two years' time.
The six-nation round-robin tournament also involves Greece, Egypt, Sweden, Czechoslovakia and Lithuania.
There are five sessions spread over five days, starting this morning and finishing at lunchtime on Sunday.
Yachting: Billionaire Koch puts steel into a grand obsession AMERICA'S CUP
Tim Jeffery profiles a man who has sunk a fortune into yachts
By TIM JEFFERY
BILL KOCH'S personal and business life is the stuff of a page-turning book and a movie, so it is fortunate that he has had the foresight to bring his own biographer and film maker into his campaign to defend the America's Cup for his country.
Whether the book or film ever see the light of day depends on whether he is successful.
In an event which has always been enriched by its personalities — from Lipton, through Sopwith, Vanderbilt, Bich, Bond and de Savary, to Fay — the 52-year-old billionaire, born in Kansas, is the persona of the 1992 Cup, eclipsing even Dennis Conner — the most successful Cup skipper in modern times — in his home town.
But who is the real Bill Koch?
A man of intriguing contradictions, he espouses Ivy League courtesy yet thinks nothing of hiring private investigators to snoop on his former tactician; he adheres to Corinthian values yet his syndicate is heavily sponsored; he professes the scientific and analytical approach yet can be impulsive and petulant in his decision-making.
Above all else, perhaps, he is a man who has everything except recognition.
Until nine years ago he was heir to one of the biggest private fortunes in America, comfortably in step with the Gettys, Basses and Mellons, but had to ask for enough money to buy a house.
His father, Frederick Koch, was one of the first Westerners to do business with Stalin, having patented the cracking process, to convert crude oil into petroleum.
That exposure to extreme communism, which included Stalin dispatching Fred Koch's chauffeur to Siberia for becoming infected by Western ideas, prompted Koch's father to swing to rabid right-wing beliefs.
He was a founding member of the John Birch Society, an ultra-right group named after the first US soldier to be killed in the Korean War.
Bill's father's absences, and those of his mother, meant that Koch and his brothers enjoyed little childhood warmth.
The division of the family fortune created extra tensions.
Fred, the eldest son, was never interested in the business, his homosexuality and leaning towards the arts alienating him from his conservative father.
He was given a smaller share than Bill, his twin David, and the youngest son, Charles.
Bill was, and is, close to Fred.
To their growing alarm, the £10.5 billion revenues that Koch Industries were earning from oil trading, refining, piping and ranching were yielding only a one per cent return to shareholders.
More worrying still was that Charles was spending huge sums of the company's money on the Libertarian Party, which espoused a society so liberal that drugs would be legalised.
Bill Koch became acutely embarrassed that money was being donated to this party in his name, yet he had little cash of his own.
‘I was one of the richest people in the country, and I had to go to the bank to borrow money to buy my house,’ recalls Koch.
In 1980, he decided to act.
A coalition to buy a 51 per cent share of Koch Industries was trumped at the last moment when Charles approached the Marshall family, four per cent stakeholders, with an offer too good to reject.
That set Bill and Fred against David and Charles.
When Charles formed an executive board to make decisions without reference to the shareholders, Koch saw his control of 74 per cent of the stock counting for nothing.
He had had enough and decided to sue.
It was a question of principle.
The case was dubbed Koch 1.
The three-year legal battle ended in 1983 when Charles and David bought out their brothers' stake for well over half a billion pounds.
Koch's share was £364.5 million.
The legal battle has not ended.
Koch 2 followed when Bill and Fred claimed that Charles and David had wilfully undervalued Koch Industries to reduce the payout.
That case has been followed by Koch 3, still to be heard.
Koch claims his brothers undervalued Koch Industries by as much 65 per cent.
‘I don't ever want to forget what happened,’ says Koch.
‘A lot of business depends on trust.
One of my biggest mistakes is that I am too trusting.’
He is also a risk-taker.
Claiming there is only so much hedonism you can take, Koch started Oxbow Industries to make a second fortune on his own account.
Geo-thermal power is one source of it.
In Nevada is one of the world's most expensive holes in the ground.
Turbines driven by natural steam generate electricity from there, and because California's laws require the state to buy as much ‘green’ energy as it can before fossil fuel power is bought, the plant sells all the electricty it can produce.
It was profitable almost from day one — and now Koch has built a series of these plants.
He has also pumped millions of dollars into Kendal Square Associates, a leading computing company.
The outlet for this fortune, apart from an art collection which shames the San Diego Museum of Art, is his sailing.
Koch started at the top seven years ago with an 85ft cruising boat, a 65ft fishing boat and an 81ft racing maxi named Matador, after the family ranch in Kansas.
He has stuck with yacht racing, first modifying Matador, then running a five-year test programme which produced the world championship-winning Matador.
It was that massive research and development effort, unprecedented in yachting, that prompted his decision to build yachts for the America's Cup.
Koch has a special reason for wanting to beat Dennis Conner for the right to defend the America's Cup.
By his own estimate he has spent £38 million in little over a year in his attempt to do so.
But rivals estimate the total to be much higher.
He has built four boats for the America's Cup trials.
Jayhawk and Defiant were the first, both entered in the January trials and then retired as the newer America and Kanza were flown in from their builders in Rhode Island.
So far, Koch's scientific approach is working.
Each boat is faster, and each change made to each boat is a progressive improvement.
Against all this, Conner is fielding one boat with a £7 million budget — and there is no love lost between the two men.
For all his ‘aw shucks’ manner and faltering delivery, Koch clearly has a spine made of steel.
Any man who has taken his brothers to court three times since 1980 must have a cutting edge to his personality.
In this America's Cup, he has played the game harder than anyone.
The investigation into his former tactician, Gary Jobson, was begun because Koch believed Jobson was publishing privileged information.
Nor does Koch deny that his team scavenge the airwaves off San Diego for the telephone calls and radio traffic of other teams.
He is proud that his ‘spy ship’, Guzzini, shadows rival yachts to create full polar diagrams of their performance, and that his helicopter can take photographs of rival yachts, which are then computer-manipulated to see through water and permit their keels to be studied.
And for all his claimed Corinthian ethics, he lets Corvette advertise their cars by using his boats in their advertisements.
But he does not carry advertising on his boats.
‘That's why we call them donors,’ he says.
‘We don't carry their advertising, but we license our name for their use and let them take pictures of our boats.’
The careful distinction between sponsors and donors is important for tax reasons.
Koch gains huge advantages by having created a charitable foundation to mount his challenge, whose public good is ‘to train sailors for international competition’.
The fact that his team is full of professionals has not worried the Internal Revenue Service, though there is some sensitivity about just how close to the wind the foundation sails.
While Koch's helmsmanship and the inconsistent selection of his afterguard have made headlines for yachting writers, it would be a mistake to dismiss him as a rich fool.
Rich, he is; foolish, he is not.
FRENCH WOMEN JUNIORS' CHAMPIONSHIP
Knuth is six shots clear as batch of Britons survive
By Lewine Mair in St-Nom-la-Breteche, France
ESTEFANIA KNUTH, a former winner of the World Junior Championship, finished six shots clear of the other 31 qualifiers for the match-play stages of the French Women Juniors' Championship, here yesterday.
On a day when the pin positions and the weather conspired to have the second round asking still more difficult questions than the first, Knuth added a 77 to her opening 73.
There are 11 British survivors, with Joanne Hockley and Caroline Hall having led the way with aggregates of 157.
Hockley, an assistant in a bakery, was only three over par for yesterday's round as she stood to her second, a nine iron, at the 15th.
A moving spectator caught her eye as she swung and she hooked into sand on her way to the first of three successive bogeys.
Hall, whose second round score was 79, missed from seven feet at the first and from much the same distance at the last.
But the putt she will take rather longer to forget was her seven-footer at the sixth.
She scarcely touched it, for it was downhill, but the ball chased past the hole and was still gathering pace as it disappeared off the other side of the green.
The former English Girls' champion was able to compare notes with Fiona Brown, for the Cheshire player had the same experience during her 79.
The second of Rachel Bolas's 79s was a score worthy of note.
After seven holes, Bolas, who hails from Beau Desert, was as many as seven over par.
For the rest of the round she was level having, at the 324-yard 15th, chipped in from 30 feet.
Nicola Buxton who, like Hall, will be playing in the Curtis Cup at Hoylake on June 5 and 6, finished on the same 160 tally as Mhairi McKay, the Daily Telegraph's Young Golfer of 1991.
Where Buxton's second-round score, put together in the worst of the weather, was an 81, McKay had another 80 in which she was left kicking herself for having chipped through the green at the 295-yard 14th on her way to a six.
McKay was joined among the qualifiers by another West of Scotland girl, Janice Moodie.
Having opened with an 83, Moodie yesterday returned a 78 in which she was cheered by the news from home that she had been awarded a golf scholarship at the University of Hawaii.
The third Scot, Myra McKinlay, missed the cut, this part-time lifeguard having, somewhat inappropriately, come to grief in the water hazard behind the home green.
McEVOY TROPHY
Scare for Davis in chill wind
By Bill Meredith
COMPARED to Wednesday's winter blizzards, which had reduced the first day to 27 instead of 36 holes, the conditions for the Peter McEvoy Trophy at Copt Heath yesterday were wonderful — icy winds and leaden skies with just the occasional hint of a watery sun.
Not quite ideal for golf, but good enough for Brian Davis, 17, of East Herts, to manage a two-over-par final round of 73 and stave off the challenge of his club colleague David Hamilton, who shot a third-round 72, including five birdies.
That was two strokes better than Davis, who went into the final round with a three-stroke advantage over his great county rival.
Only last week Davis scored a course record 65 at Knebworth (unoffical because he enjoyed preferred lies) to win the Hertfordshire boys' title at the expense of Hamilton, who also lost out to Davis in 1991.
Davis, after dropping three strokes on the last three holes in the third round, promptly dropped three more on the opening three holes of his final round.
That rapidly closed the gap, as Hamilton reached the turn in par in the afternoon and had victory in his sights.
Then it all went wrong for Hamilton, who dropped four strokes in four holes from the 11th as the chill wind began to take its toll and Davis romped away to win by five strokes.
Golf: Piggotts' caution pays dividend
By Ted Barrett
OVERPOWERING the golf course was never the game plan of John and Richard Piggott from West Middlesex, who won the Father and Son final on the 15th green at West Hill yesterday.
Instead, they used wood off the tee only once, sacrificing driving distance to keep their ball in play, and hit their long-iron approaches with commendable accuracy.
The Piggotts reached the final in 1979 at their second attempt and it has taken them 13 years to get as close again.
John (handicap 9) and Richard (4), gave four strokes to their opponents, David (9) and Toby Sykes (15) from East Devon.
Only once, at the third hole, could the Sykeses use the advantage to win a hole — at the other three stroke holes it was needed merely to scramble a half.
Toby Sykes putts boldly and hits a mighty tee shot but too many over-delicate chips, two of them into bunkers at close range.
David Sykes has also competed here with his other son, Paddy.
The winners' semi-final victims, Terry and Richard Betts, caddied for the Piggotts in the final.
Both semi-finals ended at the 16th.
Terry Betts said on the third day that he and his son had peaked too soon and errors put them four down after 13 holes, with the Piggotts to receive their second and final shot on the 14th.
But the elder Piggott went out of bounds off the tee and the 15th was lost through bunker trouble.
John Piggott atoned for these scenes with a cool chip around the trunk of a mighty tree behind the 16th, his son holing out for a match-winning four when a six had threatened to open the door to the Betts.
Deric Baxter, at 79, found the youthful power of Toby Sykes off the tee a severe handicap and the failure of both Deric and son David to escape from a bunker at the 16th was the final blow.
Golf: Tumba's ban reduced
JOHAN TUMBA, the Swedish professional found guilty of cheating and banned for 10 years in January, had the sentence reduced to three years on appeal yesterday.
British Ryder Cup captain Bernard Gallacher was among four members of the European Tour's Board of Directors who heard the appeal at Wentworth, and decided the original punishment was too severe.
The Board's general counsel, Michael Friend, said afterwards: ‘The finding was that he did change his scorecard at the qualifying round for the European Tour School last October, but the Board felt the sentence of 10 years was too severe given that it was a first offence.’
Yachting: Santana buys Farr ketch
By TIM JEFFERY
JAN SANTANA, skipper of the Spanish Fortuna Extra Lights in the 1989–90 Whitbread Round the World Race, has bought Fisher & Paykel, the Bruce Farr-designed ketch which was runner-up in the race, for the next Whitbread starting a year next September, writes Tim Jeffery.
The Class A boat had belonged to Gianni Varassi's aborted Italian Challenge 93 syndicate, and has been bought under the colours of Publiespana, a Spanish adertising agency owned by the Italian media mogul, Silvio Berlusconi.
Santana is hoping that one of the agency's clients will come aboard with sponsorship.
The first new boat built for the 1993–94 race has been launched in Auckland.
She is a joint Japanese-New Zealand venture, sponsored by Yamaha and skippered by Ross Field.
Yamaha will build a second boat, to the design of Bruce Farr, using data learnt from the prototype, the first yacht designed to the new Whitbread Offshore Rule for the 60ft Class B.
ROWING
Two-way chance for the Searles
By Geoffrey Page
THE emergence of the Searle brothers as the stars of this week's Olympic rowing trials at Holme Pierrepoint, Nottingham, was not totally unexpected, though the manner of their defeat of the world champion coxless pair, Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent, was.
Jonny Searle, who rowed three times for Oxford, and his younger brother, Greg, both won world junior gold medals while at Hampton School.
Greg's medal came in 1990, when he achieved the distinction of being selected for the British senior world championship eight in the same year.
They have three world bronze medals between them, both brothers being in last year's eight.
Both the pairs will compete at Cologne and Essen, the Searles in the coxed and coxless events.
Redgrave and Pinsent have been given the option of trying both if they wish.
At Cologne, in two weeks' time, an eight and two separate fours will compete.
Yesterday, a good coxless four, stroked by Rupert Obholzer, emerged from a time trial.
These four were not from the top trialists and, apart from the top two pairs, the rest will go into the eight.
This is an exciting prospect as future policy could depend on how the eight perform at Cologne and Essen.
Last year's eight, from the lower end of the squad, excelled in taking the bronze medal in Vienna, where both fours failed.
Should the new eight not succeed, there is at least a potential medal-winning coxed four to be drawn from them.
Also at Cologne will be a double, Rorie Henderson and Wade Hall-Craggs, and a quad stroked by Peter Haining, with Guy Pooley, Roger Brown and Mike Harris.
Although all are good single scullers, they are not to Olympic singles standard, but combined they looked yesterday to have good potential.
Haining and Pooley, the holder, will compete in the Wingfield Sculls, the championship on the Thames, on Thursday evening from Maltlake to Putney.
The women's squad look likely to be headed by last year's bronze medal pair, Fiona Freckleton and Miriam Batten, who return on Tuesday from altitude training in Mexico.
Last year's four, who finished fifth in Vienna, are likely to be chosen again.
The sculling situation has been confused by illness and injury to last year's double scullers, Alison Gill and Annabel Eyres.
Tish Reid beat Gill in a trial but is not considered to have Olympic potential in a single.
Reid insists on being considered only as a single sculler and her only chance now is to enter Cologne and Essen privately to try to make her case.
TALKING TV SPORT
ITV hoping for finale before contract ends
By Paul Fox
AS ITV Sport come to the end of their Football League contract, fingers are being crossed that the championship will be decided before ITV run out of matches.
On Easter Monday, ITV are at Elland Road for Leeds against Coventry, while next Wednesday they plan to show recorded highlights of Manchester United's visit to West Ham.
The big match — either the decisive one or the celebratory one — comes on Sunday week when United go to Liverpool in front of the ITV cameras.
But in case Leeds are still involved, Trevor East, executive producer of The Match, has a recording of Sheffield United v Leeds available.
If the championship is still undecided, a plea will have to be made to the Football League for another match for TV.
In reports I read, Jim Smith, the Portsmouth manager, blamed television as well as the FA for ending the FA Cup semi-final replay with a penalty shoot-out.
Television is blameless.
As far as the BBC was concerned there couldn't be enough semi-finals like Portsmouth v Liverpool.
But there are some red faces at the BBC over the ending of the London Marathon.
It was not one of their finest hours.
The producer, one of the BBC's most experienced operators, missed the finish of the men's race.
He concentrated on the women finishing and seemed to forget that the men's race finished elsewhere.
It looked a shambles on the live broadcast, but by the evening showing it had been cleaned up thanks to some additional mobile camera coverage.
Not only were viewers outspoken in their complaints but the athletics writers, who rely on TV coverage, were quick to point out that the London Marathon is not one of the BBC's happiest events.
One of the sufferers from the Marathon mix-up was David Coleman.
But there is a more cheerful day ahead for him next Tuesday when he introduces the last Question of Sport in the present series.
What happens next?
Series 22 is already being planned for the autumn.
What is the reason for the phenomenal success of Question of Sport?
One of the factors is that it is a simple format, involving everyone and it is done with gusto and enthusiasm.
A great deal of the credit must go to David Coleman.
All the sporting figures who appear on the programme — and they include most major stars — know they can trust Coleman and that he will not embarrass them.
What comes through the screen is the sheer sense of enjoyment of the game and that is why more than 10 million people have watched the programme on Tuesday nights over the past 26 weeks.
Few events get more thorough television coverage than the World Snooker Championship, which begins at the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, tomorrow.
BBC television will show 70 hours of the championship, beginning in Grandstand tomorrow afternoon and ending on BBC 2 on Sunday, May 4.
Most of the coverage will be on BBC 2, with sessions in the morning, the afternoon, the early evening and late night.
To charges that this is too much of a good thing, the BBC say they have always given the World Championship around 70 hours and the audience figures remain high.
Last year nearly seven million people watched the final, some way below the 12 and 13 million who used to be enthralled by snooker.
For the first time, the World Championship is being produced by an independent production company, Grand Slam Sports.
Amid the general rejoicing at South Africa's return to international sport, there is a reservation in my mind.
What will South African television do about the World Rugby Cup due to be played there in 1995?
The fiasco of the Cricket World Cup in Australia is still fresh.
After their years of isolation, the South African Broadcasting Corporation may not be fully aware of the problems involved in televising a major sporting event.
If I may make one suggestion to the South Africans that is meant to be helpful, it is this: call on Bob Burrows, the ITV producer who was in charge of the Rugby World Cup in this country, and invite him to be your consultant.
It was Burrows who ensured that the television coverage of a tournament played in five countries was so successful.
He would need all his diplomatic skills to do a similar job in South Africa.
Soccer: United's dream kept alive by Kanchelskis SOCCER
Focus on the battle to win the First Division title and the struggle to stay in the Second
By Colin Gibson
Manchester Utd1
Southampton0
ANDREJ KANCHELSKIS, blissfully unaware of Manchester United's long struggle for the First Division championship until last summer, kept the dream alive at Old Trafford last night.
Plucked from the disintegrating world of Soviet football by Alex Ferguson last year, Kanchelskis made his most meaningful contribution to United's title quest last night.
Just as indisciplined and uncompromising Southampton threatened to turn United's post-Wembley celebration into a night of disappointment, Kanchelskis came to life.
Nervous pressure was building up in the United team when Irwin put a 64th-minute corner kick deep into the heart of the Southampton penalty area.
It came to Kanchelskis waist high and the Ukranian, who struggled in the last month to retain his place, scored with a perfect volley.
The ball flew beyond the startled Flowers and United's investment in a player signed for £1 million from Donetsk, suddenly became a bargain.
Relieved Old Trafford supporters celebrated a goal that takes United back to the top of the League, two points clear of Howard Wilkinson's dogged Leeds.
More importantly, Mr Ferguson's team embark on three matches in the next five days knowing that they need a maximum 11 points to lift that elusive championship trophy.
It would be a fitting coincidence if United are in a position to win the title at West Ham next Wednesday night.
For it was at Upton Park that United lifted the title for the last time 25 years ago.
Mr Ferguson would enjoy nothing more than to arrive at Liverpool on April 26 as champions.
Before he can contemplate a victory that would establish him as United's most successful manager since the days of Sir Matt Busby in the 1960's, United must first overcome relegation-threatened Luton at Kenilworth Road tomorrow and Nottingham Forest at Old Trafford on Easter Monday.
Both have much to play for, for Luton have again given themselves a chance of escaping the drop into the Second Division while Forest are still smarting from their Rumbelows Cup defeat by United at Wembley last Sunday.
Mr Ferguson admitted the game was ‘something of a grind and we needed that flash of brilliance from Kanchelskis.
But now our destiny is in our own hands.’
Anyone in United's famous championship sides of old would have been delighted to have scored the goal Kanchelskis produced at Old Trafford last night.
He had been moved alongside the combative Hughes in the second half, to try and expose a lack of pace at the heart of Southampton's aggressive and rough defence.
The Ukranian had been one of United's most inventive players in a dour struggle made even more frustrating by Southampton's bruising march towards a Football Association hearing.
Ian Branfoot's side had collected 73 bookings and six sendings off before the match.
The 74th caution left United with another long-term injury.
Widdrington, only needed because Cockerill was the 11th Southampton player to be suspended this season, caught Ince with a late and crude challenge in the 18th minute.
Ince needed long treatment and it was later discovered he had damaged ankle ligaments.
Mr Ferguson had to concede that Ince's huge contribution to the season was now over, but he has Webb and Robson waiting in reserve.
Webb, relegated to the substitute's bench since March 21, was always behind United's best attacks in the second half.
Southampton went on to collect three more bookings, but they still had the remarkable talents of Le Tissier and Shearer, who is reported to be a summer target for United.
They both might have caused disruption to the Old Trafford celebrations.
Le Tissier twice showed his outstanding ability.
Maddison headed wide from one of his crosses and neither Shearer nor Maddison could just reach another.
But, within two minutes of the second chance, Kanchelskis had scored his outstanding goal and the championship was back within United's grasp.
Manchester United: Schmeichel; Parker, Irwin, Bruce, Phelan, Pallister, Kanchelskis, Ince (Webb, 23), McClair, Hughes, Giggs.
Southampton: Flowers; Kenna, Adams, Horne, Moore, Ruddock (Hall, 64), Le Tissier, Widdrington (Dowie, 67), Shearer, Maddison, Benali.
Referee: K Cooper (Pontypridd).
Manchester United are determined that if they win their first championship for 25 years the celebrations will be in front of their own supporters.
Last night they confirmed they will be offering only 619 seats to Tottenham fans for the final League game of the season at Old Trafford on May 2.
Soccer: World Cup ‘94 to exploit Disney dollars in a multi-million Mickey Mouse affair
John Ley looks forward to an international showpiece in which opening and closing ceremonies could rival the main event
By JOHN LEY
THOSE who believe that the 1994 World Cup finals in the United States will be a Mickey Mouse affair are quite right — Mickey, Pluto and friends will help turn World Cup ‘94 into a multi-million dollar extravaganza.
The news two weeks ago that Orlando had beaten both Miami and Tampa Bay to the Florida vote to become one of the nine World Cup venues was a considerable surprise.
However, the way in which Joanie Schirm, chairwoman of the Orlando bid, prepared and presented the area's offer was enough to persuade Alan Rothenburg, chairman of World Cup ‘94, that the American razzmatazz of Disney can work hand-in-hand with soccer.
The nine venues will be split into three groups: Boston, Detroit and Chicago in the North; Dallas, Los Angeles and San Francisco in the Mid-West and West and Washington, New York and Orlando in the East.
Though Orlando's population is the smallest of all the competing cities — around 1.1 million — the area attracted 15 million visitors last year, primarily to Walt Disney World.
The fact that a large percentage of those visitors were British suggests there is a better than average chance that Graham Taylor's England could be based there.
Certainly that is the hope of the Orlando organisers, who include a Scot from Motherwell, John Higgins, and a Welshman named Dylan Thomas.
Travelling around the United States to the different venues could become costly but, at present, American Airlines, the competition's official airline and the company that will fly England, are leading a price war which is bringing down internal flight prices by up to 50 per cent .
John Dreyer, publicity manager of Disney World, said: ‘We are the world's number one tourist attraction.
Combine that with the world's greatest sporting occasion and we have the ability to be a great success.’
Disney have applied to produce both the opening and closing ceremonies of the tournament.
The standard of the games matches cannot be guaranteed but the magnificence of the ceremonies can, especially if the entertainment presented at the Los Angeles Olympics can be used as an example.
The stadium in Orlando is the Citrus Bowl, a basic arena with 70,000 white seats in huge banks.
Home to gridiron team Orlando Thunder, who play in the World League, it is not on a par with the Joe Robbie stadium in Miami — their bid failed because of the clash with the baseball season — but it is huge and comfortable.
Two-thirds of the World Cup games will kick off in the afternoon for television purposes.
That means that teams in Orlando will play in the heat of 85–90F.
The Citrus Bowl requires some work, with seats being taken out to accommodate the corners of a football pitch.
The surface, currently the local blue grass, will be re-seeded with more traditional grass.
Security does not seem to worry the Americans, which will be a relief to those who suffered in Italy because of the over-cautious drink bans and heavy-handed police.
Mr Rothenburg said: ‘The Olympics were played without a hitch at a time of increasingly intense international situations.’
With two years before the opening of World Cup ‘94 there is an immense amount of work to be done.
In Dallas, the plastic-pitched Cotton Bowl needs more than $20 million of work, of which $13m has already been promised by the local council.
The Giants Stadium in New York looks likely to use a pitch smaller than FIFA specifications, while the problems associated with growing grass in an indoor stadium — the Pontiac Silverdome in Detroit — are still under consideration.
However, problems in such a money-orientated country can be overcome.
In an effort to raise $40m, a bill to issue a commemorative coin has already been passed by the House of Representatives and will now be heard by the US Senate.
Soccer: Sunderland anxiety grows
By Ian Whittell
Sunderland0
Plymouth1 SUNDERLAND continued along their unpredictable road to Wembley when they allowed bottom-placed Plymouth to comfortably record their first win at Roker Park last night.
Dwight Marshall scored the game's only goal — racing on to Evans's head-on to beat Welsh international Norman with great calm in the 67th minute.
While the result gives Peter Shilton's side hope in their efforts to stay in the Second Division, the FA Cup finalists will face their own anxious battle against relegation between now and May 9.
Sunderland failed badly to reproduce the form that had accounted for the division's runaway leaders, Ipswich, by a comfortable 3–0 scoreline just 48 hours earlier.
It was the visitors who created the first half's best chance through their lively striker, Marshall.
On the half-hour, Cross's driven shot fell kindly for Marshall, who drew a fine block from Norman.
The home fans were relieved to see the rebound strike defender Kay and cannon over the crossbar.
Marshall's close control provided early problems for the home team.
In the 11th minute he threaded the ball through for Evans whose shot brushed the outside of a Sunderland post.
Armstrong provided Shilton with his one real concern of the evening in the 55th minute when he latched on to Byrne's deft touch and tested the former England goalkeeper from 20 yards.
Sunderland: Norman; Kay, Rogan, Bennett, Hardyman (Owers 74), Rush, Mooney, Goodman, Armstrong, Byrne (Davenport 74), Atkinson.
Plymouth: Shilton; Cross, Morgan, Morrison, Marker, Lee, Hodges, McCall, Evans, Marshall, Smith.
Soccer: Souness suffers relapse after heart surgery
By John Ley
GRAEME SOUNESS, the Liverpool manager, is back in intensive care after suffering a setback in his recovery from triple bypass heart surgery yesterday.
Mr Souness was treated for 30 minutes and then transferred to a high-dependency, progressive care unit at Alexandra Hospital in Cheadle, near Manchester.
The setback for Mr Souness came hours after the Liverpool board had announced that they would meet to discuss public protests at the manager's dealings with a national newspaper.
He was pictured in the Sun kissing his girlfriend Karen Levy on the same day that the club held a third anniversary memorial service for 95 fans who died in the Hillsborough disaster.
England's supporters will be punished for their team's success in the European Championship.
If England qualify for the semi-final or final of the tournament in Sweden the Football Association will receive just 2,500 tickets.
Because of the small size of the stadiums being used in Sweden and the fact that Swedes have 238,000 of the 430,000 available few will be available for travelling fans.
England play Yugoslavia on June 11 and France three days later, both in Malmo's 26,800 capacity stadium.
The final Group One game, on June 17, is against the host nation at 27,700 all-seated Stockholm, where the 5,321 England fans will also have to pay up to £43.50 for a ticket.
A spokesman for the FA said: ‘We have tried all avenues in an attempt to increase the allocation, but without success.’
Billy Bingham, the Northern Ireland manager, has recalled Anton Rogan, the Sunderland defender, after a 13-month absence for the World Cup qualifier against Lithuania in Belfast later this month.
Jimmy Quinn, the Bournemouth striker, has also been brought back.
Wales have called up uncapped Sheffield United goalkeeper Mel Rees for the friendly against Austria in Vienna on April 29.
Rees, 25, was on loan to Norwich from West Bromwich Albion when Dave Bassett signed him for £25,000 on transfer-deadline day.
Rees has since proved a reliable deputy for Simon Tracey.
Rees gets the chance in place of Sunderland's Tony Norman, the usual second choice, because the Welsh manager, Terry Yorath declined to pick Portsmouth or Sunderland players, who have important League games that week.
N IRELAND (v Lithuania, Belfast, Apr 28): T Wright (Newcastle), A Fettis (Hull), M Donaghy (Man Utd), G Taggart (Barnsley), A McDonald (QPR), A Rogan (Sunderland), N Worthington (Sheff Wed), J Magilton (Oxford), K Black (Nottm Forest), D Wilson (Sheff Wed), I Dowie (Southampton), C Clarke (Portsmouth), K Wilson (Notts Co), M Hughes (Man City), S Morrow (Arsenal), J Quinn (Bournemouth), G Fleming (Barnsley), M O'Neill (Dundee Utd).
WALES (v Austria, Vienna, Apr 29): N Southall (Everton), M Rees (Sheffield Utd), M Bowen (Norwich), C Blackmore (Man Utd), R Giggs (Man Utd), M Hughes (Man Utd), D Saunders (Liverpool), I Rush (Liverpool), M Pembridge (Luton), G Speed (Leeds), A Melville (Oxford), M Aizlewood (Bristol City), E Young (Crystal Palace), D Phillips (Norwich), B Horne (Southampton), C Coleman (Crystal Palace).
Fire has destroyed the clubhouse at Newport AFC's Somerton Park ground, putting their Beazer Homes League home fixture against Barry Town on Monday in doubt, writes Tony Jefferies.
That game was scheduled as Newport's last fixture at Somerton Park, as they will be ground-sharing at Gloucester City next season after disagreeing with the Welsh FA over joining a new league structure.
Diadora League Croydon have dismissed manager Peter Gaydon with only three games of the season left.
Lying fourth from bottom of Division One — one place clear of relegation — they have appointed midfielder Dave Boyton as player-manager for the rest of the season.
A club spokesman said Gaydon, who joined the club from Winstonlead Kent League Cray Wanderers, was made aware when appointed that a low league position had to be avoided.
Snooker: Wattana becomes honed to ideal sharpness SNOOKER
Bob Holmes on a fearless Thai player and a three-times losing finalist aiming to capture the sport's biggest prize
By BOB HOLMES
JAMES WAANA, of Thailand, does not have to read Rudyard Kipling to know that ‘there is neither East nor West…’ when he comes ‘face to face’with his rivals for the Embassy World Championship.
Born in Bangkok and based in Bradford, the fifth favourite for the £850,000 event which begins in Sheffield tomorrow, Wattana is acutely aware he has divided his recent years between ‘two ends of the earth’.
But in attempting to become Asia's first holder of the game's ultimate prize, the rising star of the East aims to prove that the ‘the twain’ can not only meet but, by harnessing the best of both hemispheres, he can bring a new dimension to the green baize.
Having arrived in Britain as a raw but gifted teenager, Wattana has honed his game to match-play sharpness by three seasons on the professional circuit.
And he is now able to say: ‘I'm afraid of nobody.’
To the delicate intricacies of his play he has added tactical steel and, after a difficult apprenticeship, he has gained substance without losing his natural spice.
Blessed with a talent considered sublime even in the cynical schools of northern England, Wattana is now regarded as the only player outside the leading ‘gang of four’ with the technique and temperament to survive 17 days in one of sport's most demanding cauldrons.
The daunting confines of the Crucible Theatre have been known to make strong men tremble over the simplest of pots, but after what has happened to the unassuming Thai in recent weeks, it will be a shock of seismic proportions if the occasion affects him — even on his debut.
With out-of-sorts Tony Jones his first-round opponent over 19 frames on Monday, Wattana's moment of truth is likely to come in the second round when he will almost certainly face favourite Stephen Hendry, the world No 1, over 25 frames.
But when your father has been murdered the day you make only the fourth televised maximum break, when you win your first major title and receive a hero's reception on returning to your native land, even the prospect of meeting Hendry is going to cause no more than a flutter of the eyelid.
And so it is with Wattana, who, in a psychological move during a recent Matchroom League clash, showed he is hardly in awe of Hendry when he won five successive frames before scattering the balls to ‘allow’ the Scot the first of three consolation frames.
He acquired the rudiments of the game in a tougher prep school than many of his Western contemporaries who have long since been cosseted by snooker's new-found respectability.
Tong, as he is known in Thailand, graduated from the classic Jimmy White academy of excellence and, in taking time off from the classroom and money off mugs, he, like White, enjoyed some memorable moments.
Wattana was keen to sample the richer fare of the international circuit — especially when he notched the scalps of Steve Davis, Terry Griffiths and Dennis Taylor on his way to winning the Camus Masters at 18.
But two ill-fated sojourns to Britain, where he found the language, the climate and the cuisine too harsh for his exotic tastes, left him vowing never to return.
Wild horses appeared in the shape of Tom Moran, a Yorkshire-born engineer who had become an official of the Thai Snooker Association after spending 20 years in the country.
No sooner had Moran taken Wattana under his wing than the boy landed the World Amateur Championship.
Then, after he had earned his professional ticket, he reached the final of the 1989 Asian Open in Bangkok — and caused the evening news bulletin to be delayed by prime ministerial decree.
But with a nation glued to its sets, Hendry handed out the first of many tutorial beatings, which heralded a largely unproductive 2½ seasons for Wattana.
But while Wattana gracefully accepted his defeats, he treated them as part of his education.
Gradually, he confounded everyone with his burgeoning vocabulary and tactical nous.
Suddenly last autumn, he began reaching semi-finals instead of quarter-finals, and then finals.
The dignified way he handled the tragedy of his father being gunned down in Bangkok impressed everyone and, although he went 7–0 down to White in the British Open final, he still had the bottle to capture seven frames before losing 10–7.
He was now a force to be reckoned with.
His first major title — the Strachan Professional — received little publicity, but his 38-minute four-frame coup de grace on Parrott to wrap up a 9–3 win took him to fifth in the rankings and made anything seem possible.
Even a world title at the first attempt.
Soccer: Belgian fans held over rocket attack
By Richard Bright
THREE Belgian fans were arrested after a 38-year-old German supporter was gravely injured by a signal rocket in the European Cup Winners' Cup semi-final second leg match between Bremen and Bruges which the German side won 2–0.
Police said that rowdy fans fired the rocket, which tore into the left side of the man's chest causing major lung injuries.
His condition was later described as critical.
The Belgians, all in their early 20s, were arrested in connection with the shooting and a signal flare gun in their possession was confiscated.
Police arrested 12 Belgians and nine Germans before and during the game on Wednesday which Bremen won through goals by Marco Bodo and Manfred Bockenfeld.
Daniel Amokachi, of Bruges, was sent off in the 77th minute for a foul on Bremen goalkeeper Oliver Reck.
Bremen travel to Lisbon for the final on May 6 to face AS Monaco, who qualified on away goals by drawing 2–2 against Feyenoord Rotterdam through scores by George Weah and Rui Barros.
Real Madrid never recovered from an own goal by Brazilian defender Rocha and crashed to a 2–0 UEFA Cup defeat against Torino at Turin.
Luca Fusi's 76th-minute strike sent the Italians to the final where they will meet Ajax.
The Dutch drew 1–1 with Genoa at Amsterdam, having won 3–2 in Italy a fortnight ago.
Real, defending a 2–1 lead from the first leg, faced a Torino side urged on by 120,000 fans and suffered an early setback when Rocha deflected a shot from Gianluigi Lentini into his own net.
This put the sides level on aggregate but Torino qualified on the away goals rule after Fusi pounced on a loose ball in a goalmouth mix-up.
The Spaniards were thrown out of their stride by a Torino side superbly marshalled by former Real player Rafael Martin Vasquez and Belgian midfielder Enzo Scifo.
EUROPEAN CUP
Mini-leagues set to gain UEFA seal of approval
By Graham Turner
UEFA must feel they have reasons to describe the new European Cup formula as a qualified success.
Its continuation is likely to be confirmed by European soccer's governing body at a special meeting next Thursday.
Sampdoria and Barcelona will meet in the European Cup final at Wembley on May 20 after finishing top of the new mini-leagues which were completed on Wednesday.
Attendance figures for the 24 matches played by the eight European Cup quarter-finalists present, superficially at least, a healthy aspect.
Approximately 900,000 spectators created an average gate of 37,500.
What's more, UEFA can argue that the unique predicament of Red Star Belgrade has had a negative effect on the figures.
Whereas the Yugoslavian champions averaged 62,000 at home en route to last season's European title, their imposed exile to Hungary and Bulgaria led to attendances as low as 2,000 for the match against Anderlecht in Budapest.
Next year, UEFA will argue, a similar situation is unlikely to arise.
On the other hand, the new system has generated matches involving eliminated, unmotivated teams.
There followed distasteful allegations of bribery (after Benfica's 5–0 win over eliminated Dynamo Kiev) and doping (Sampdoria's 3–1 win over Red Star with a 5–1 defeat by AC Milan four days later).
Financially, the implications have also been unpalatable.
Only 10,000 watched struggling Panathinaikos play Anderlecht and, deeming Benfica down and out, a loss-making crowd of 5,500 was in the 120,000-capacity Estadio da Luz to watch the demolition of Dynamo Kiev.
Despite ticket prices of 2p, only 3,000 Ukrainian fans gave tuppence for their team in Wednesday's final game against Sparta Prague.
With this in mind, the Benfica president Joao Santos proposed to UEFA officials in Barcelona on Wednesday that the top two sides in each group should participate in semi-finals, thus minimising the number of ‘nothing games’.
Diego Maradona played in a charity exhibition on Wednesday in apparent defiance of his worldwide suspension for use of cocaine.
Maradona labelled the authorities of the International Federation of Association Football who tried to enforce his suspension ‘inhuman robots’.
Snooker: White determined to go one better
IF insatiable desire was the principal factor in deciding the outcome of the World Championship, James Warren White could be handed the trophy as the curtain rises.
Indeed, it is doubtful if anyone in sport — let alone his main rivals Stephen Hendry, the 7–4 favourite, Steve Davis and defending champion John Parrott — craves a title as much as the mercurial left-hander does the honour of being king of the green baize.
But as White, a frustrated three-times finalist, is well aware, that longing is not enough without self-discipline — a quality he amply demonstrated last year in his most concerted attempt yet to land the elusive prize.
That he did not was largely down to an opening seven-frame blast from Parrott.
It took White the best part of this season to repair the psychological damage, but are we to believe him when he claims that he will win the World Championship unless he gets ‘a terrible illness or someone plays like God’?
The only one of the top four never to lift the crown, White, a 9–2 shot, is building confidence on coming good at the right time, winning the British and European Opens.
If the form book is followed, his semi-final opponent will be Parrott whose season, after wins in Dubai and the United Kingdom Open, has fallen away under a welter of off-the-table commitments.
But both Davis and Hendry can put more convincing cases, with the latter's hunger to regain the crown more persuasive even than Davis's six wins.
Hendry also possesses a greater range than Davis, who may be hamstrung by his reluctance to take on long pots.
The 1990 champion is — White apart — also the most positive.
‘The player I fear most is myself,’ says Hendry.
If he can survive James Wattana, he will take some stopping.
He has, after all, a divine touch when it matters most.
Rugby Union: England condemn new ruck and maul rules SPORT IN THE FUTURE
Rugby and cricket reflect on the repercussions of the winds of change
By John Mason in Wellington
MORE than 40 sweeping law changes aimed at banishing the penalty-ridden, slow-coach version of rugby football were adopted by the International Rugby Board yesterday.
But further changes at line-out, maul and ruck, most of which were condemned by England's players and management, will be experimental variations for a limited period only.
While speed of thought and deed will be the name of the game 1992-style, rugby union worldwide has 12 months in which to decide whether controversial alterations to ruck and maul are workable.
The other changes, including five points for a try instead of four, are mandatory next season — or, as far as Australia, South Africa and New Zealand are concerned, in mid-season, including incoming tours if the visiting country agree.
The law-makers, roundly condemned by Brian Moore, England's hooker, on the nonsensical grounds that they have not played for 40 years, have decided that when a maul — ball in hand — grinds to a halt, or the ball becomes unplayable, the team not in possession at the start of the maul should put the ball into an ensuing scrum.
The ruck — ball on the ground — attracts the same experimental variation except when the referee is unable to determine the team responsible.
The five members of the IRB's laws committee sifted more than 300 proposals and amendments covering 78 closely typed pages.
Their decisions, together with the previously announced siting of the 1995 World Cup in South Africa, became the principal business of the Board's annual meeting, which ended here yesterday.
The laws committee required four additional sittings in London and Wellington to complete the first in-depth overhaul of rugby union's laws for four years.
In addition to Moore, neither Geoff Cooke, England's manager, nor Dick Best, the coach, were greatly impressed by the experimental ruck and maul variations, which have been in force at under-19 level in England this season.
Cooke said: ‘It puts the responsibility on the ball-carrier but gives an incentive to the tackler.
‘Players will be encouraged to go to the ground when tackled to form a ruck, which goes against the whole purpose of staying on your feet to play rugby.’
Best said: ‘I can see the thinking but I think it's stupid.
You are encouraging people to get on the wrong side of mauls and to cheat.’
Moore said: ‘If people get into wrong positions inadvertently, there will be such a desperate desire to get out of them because they need the ball, I think it could increase violence.’
Ed Morrison, the English international referee, who will be officiating at tomorrow's county final at Twickenham, said: ‘My first reaction was surprise that there were so many changes.
Overall I'm quite pleased.
They're opening the game up and making it more attractive to spectators.’
Alan Davies, the Wales coach, commented: ‘It's lovely to see clear commitment to improve running with the ball — which is what rugby is all about.’
Generally, the handful of professional club coaches, the men who lead the way in exploiting the laws to suit their teams, welcomed the changes, though not without reservation.
Alex Keay, of Moseley, said: ‘Effectively devaluing the penalty encourages more cheating.
The maul changes are comical — it encourages negative play.’
Mike Mahoney, of Newcastle Gosforth: ‘We will lose good driving forward play.
A lot will depend on how long referees give for the ball to appear.’
Tony Russ, of Leicester: ‘The skill of smothering the ball in the tackle will be greatly enhanced.’
Dr Roger Vanderfield (Australia), chairman of the laws committee as well as of the IRB, said in Wellington: ‘The law changes stem from careful and long debate of differing viewpoints.
Twelve penalty provisions have also been changed to free kicks.
‘Our decisions do not result from the challenge of other sports but as a desire to add to the appeal of rugby union at all levels.
Indeed, I don't recall league ever having been mentioned.
‘A number of changes have been made to reduce practices that cause irritating stoppages rather than to speed up the game.
‘In a maul when the ball becomes unplayable or the maul stationary, the team not in possession at the start will put the ball into the ensuing scrummage.
‘The same will apply to a ruck if the ball becomes unplayable except when the referee is unable to determine the team responsible.
‘Many of these proposals have been looked at together as being inter-related.
The more significant changes concern the activities of offside players who until now have not been penalised if they do not advance closer than 10 metres from a player waiting to play the ball.
In future they will be out of the game until they have been put on-side.
Dropped goals from free kicks are no longer permissible; hookers may raise their feet the moment the ball leaves the scrum-half's hands; and in the tackle the next player (other than the tackler) must be on his feet when he plays the ball.
If a free kick is kicked into touch on the full, the team will not gain ground and when a penalty kick is kicked directly to touch, the same team will have the throw-in.
The long punters will have plenty of sport with that one though there could be considerable confusion at a quick kick where the revised law says that it may be taken without waiting for the kicker's team to retire behind the ball — provided they do not become involved in play.
More happily, a proposal that at a quick throw-in the ball could be thrown in any direction, other than forward, has not been agreed.
GOLF
Short circuit problems for women's tour
Lewine Mair on the difficulties of keeping dates on this year's European professional calendar
By LEWINE MAIR
THE women's European golf tour, which in the mid-1980s comprised more than 20 tournaments, may be cut to 11 this year.
The Italian Classic, due to have been played next month, has been moved from its original slot and is in danger of not been played at all.
And there is strong talk in France that the Longines Classic, which had an October date, will not now take place.
If this is correct, the women's calendar will be cut to 11 tournaments, though that figure does not take in the Solheim Cup or the New World Cup to be held in Taiwan.
The anticipated loss of two events is not the end of unwelcome news.
According to French sources, the problems with the Longines Classic started at last year's event when, though the sponsors paid out the prize money, it did not reach the players.
The WPGET, by all accounts, ended up having to use their own funds.
Andrea Doyle, who became the tour's new executive director last August, has worked furiously to build up the circuit.
When Lufthansa pulled out of sponsoring the Women's European Open, Mrs Doyle replaced them with The European newspaper.
She has reintroduced a Dutch Open, and has made impressive strides in terms of organising the first European-based Solheim Cup, the women's equivalent of the Ryder Cup.
But her work is getting tougher all the time.
This year, for example, is the last in an arrangement whereby the International Management Group underwrite a minimum of five tournaments a season.
Last year, a couple of their events were not fully covered by sponsorship income and it is doubtful whether Mark McCormack will want to add to the £2million or so he has already poured in.
There was a stage when he was anxious to have a shop window for European clients such as Laura Davies, Florence Descampe, Helen Alfredson and Marie Laure de Lorenzi.
Now, with the exception of Lorenzi, who has a young daughter to think about, they can all play full-time in the States — or even, were it to materialise, on the women's world tour McCormack has long had at the back of his mind.
Many other talented players are thinking of trying for their American players’ cards this summer.
They much appreciate the work being done by Mrs Doyle, but they are not in a walk of life where they can sit back and wait for better times.
If all the leading players were to head elsewhere it might actually make it easier for the WPGET to cater for those left behind with a series of small tournaments; perhaps multi-sponsored events in the £30,000 bracket — a small sum when set against the £300,000 prize fund for this year's Weetabix British Open, but a realistic figure at which to aim.
The Solheim Cup should help to nurture interest among prospective sponsors, while there are players — Scotland's Dale Reid to name but one — who believe that the WPGET could even now have three or four tournaments up their sleeve which they are not prepared to announce until everything is signed and sealed.
In other words, there is still the feeling that Mrs Doyle and her team, in spite of a lingering recession, could succeed in turning things round.
No-one, though, should be under any illusions as to how difficult it is going to be.
Travel USA: A favourite movie come alive
From the boardwalks of Atlantic City and on to Route 66, visiting the U.S. really does feel like walking into an old familiar scene, says Bernice Davison, Travel Editor
By BERNICE DAVISON
I have fallen in love with American names, The sharp names that never get fat, The snakeskin-titles of mining claims, The plumed war-bonnet of Medicine Hat, Tucson and Deadwood and Lost Mule Flat.
SO WROTE Stephen Vincent Benet, who also penned the immortal line ‘Bury my heart at Wounded Knee.’
He may have had his tongue firmly planted in his cheek, but there is something rather wonderful about American place names.
Visiting the States is like walking into your favourite old movie…42nd Street does exist; there are boardwalks at Atlantic City; West Coast girls do have permanent tans; Route 66 does take you to Oh so pretty Oklahoma City…
The U.S. of A is fixed in our mind as a never-ending procession of movie clips and song lines.
Freight trains are a mile long and their lonely whistles do blow whoo-whoo in the night; Coney Island hot dogs do come with a million toppings; hamburgers are gigantic.
Perhaps it is the legacy of my Fifties upbringing, when the States always had that image of the cornucopia of goodies and pleasureable things, with no whiff of European austerity and rationing.
The tables are turning now, though, with even George Bush making TV advertisements to remind us that The Big Country is waiting with open tills for our holiday spending money.
More than two million Brits did not need his invitation: that was the U.K. visitor figure for 1990.
But the U.S. has space and a welcome for even more of us: with travel and tourism its third-largest retail industry, the ailing American economy cannot afford to leave it up to our own tour firms to persuade us that the time — and price — is right.
The British contributed $5.3 billion to America's pocketbook in 1990 (only the Japanese out-spent us), and this figure is likely to be beaten easily this year: most U.K. visitors in 1990 were repeat business.
But as President Bush puts more goods on the counter for us with his TV spiel about’…our culture, our sense of history…rolling green fields, sandy white beaches, red-hot jazz,’ is he selling caviare to a market that only has an appetite for candy floss?
For where did we go?
Florida?
DisneyWorld?
Surprisingly not: New York just pipped Florida in the visitor stakes, though only just.
The Sunshine State certainly offers the perfect family holiday combination of good beaches, reasonably-priced hotels and lowest-common-denominator entertainment in the form of theme parks and adventure playgrounds, but the Big Apple is still tops.
It is a short-stay winner, however; the most interesting growth area in recent years has been outside the big cities and the theme parks: we are following the President's advice to ‘Discover America.’
And the value-for-money aspect cannot be overlooked at present.
The current Atlantic airfares price war (traditional at this time of year planes are at their emptiest) is not going to last long enough to offer £99 flights in the busy summer months, but prices will stay keen.
Getting there may be the costliest part of the holiday; hotel or motel rates compare very favourably against Euro prices, and eating out is still cheap in comparison to most U.K. restaurant tabs.
Bear in mind, however, that although their President may have invited you personally, many of his elecorate may be vague about precisely where you're coming from.
I spent a perplexing evening in a Georgia bar some years ago endeavouring to persuade a local that I could NOT have driven from London.
He was convinced there was an overland route.
Look upon your American holiday as broadening their horizons as well as our own.
Travel USA: ‘Discover our dynamic story — past, present and future’
By R G H Seitz, U.S. Ambassador to Britain
THROUGH the technology of television, President Bush has extended an invitation to British travellers to discover America this year.
I am sure our British friends can appreciate that American presidents have not always extended such a warm welcome.
President James Madison, who occupied the White House when it was burned by British troops in 1814, probably thought the British overdid their visit.
Fortunately, the relations between the American and the British peoples have improved a great deal since then.
As I have learned on both sides of the Atlantic, the British and Americans invariably extend warm hospitality to each other when they get together.
The welcome you will receive is just one reason why this is a good time to visit America.
You will find that since Mr Madison's British visitors left Washington, we have added a number of attractions and have greatly improved the roads.
Moreover, your sterling will go a long way — not a small consideration.
We Americans are proud of our history and culture and would like you to learn more about it in the museums, theatres, galleries and concert halls that span our country.
From the Smithsonian Institute's many museums and the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington DC, to the Hollywood Bowl and Getty Museum in Los Angeles, visitors will discover the dynamic story of America, past, present and future.
I have lived in many parts of America, and I can assure you all that Hawaii is as breathtaking as you imagine, that the charm of the Old South is living on in Charleston, and that colonial America will come alive in the small towns of New England, particularly in the autumn when, in the words of Henry James, the ‘weather is like tinkling crystal and the colours like molten jewels.’
This is my third posting in London.
I have had ample opportunity — along with 2.7 million Americans last year — to experience the history and beauty of this land and the warmth of the British people.
The American people would like the chance to return that hospitality in the many ways that are possible in our vast country.
Travel USA: Vivaldi and maybe Mel Brooks too
CHEAP, cheerful and the new funky ‘in’ hotspot of America — South Beach, Miami — is taking over from nearby Coconut Grove as the place for late night dancing and eating, Hugh Davies writes.
There's capuccino with proper croissants for breakfast, and Vivaldi on the sound system at the News Cafe on Ocean Drive.
Hotel rooms are still quite reasonable — $90 (£54) to $100 (£60) a night.
You can wander down small rinky-dink sidestreets, and check out the bikes in Wings of Steel, once a deli that sold matzoh-ball soup but is now offers Harley-Davidson memorabilia.
Night on the red-painted sidewalks is the true time.
Pastel neon lights up the streets, the sounds of rock and salsa waft through the warm air, and the beautiful and tanned watch the world go by, sipping cocktails on verandahs.
It is certainly an eclectic resort, with plenty of celebrity to be seen.
Spotted there in recent weeks: Micky Rourke, Roy Scheider, Hal Prince, Spike Lee, Roy Lichtenstein, Glora Estefan, John F. Kennedy Jnr, Anne Bancroft and Mel Brooks.
Travel USA: Where Old South and fax culture collide
Florida is the place most of the Brit tourists go.
Julie Moline offers a guide to its endless attractions
By JULIE MOLINE
FLORIDA is the Sybil of U.S. travel destinations, a state where multiple and wildly contrasting personalities coexist surprisingly peacefully.
This is a place where the American equivalent of landed gentry revolves its social season around polo, yet where 30 miles away haute couture is denim overalls and a feed-store cap.
The panhandle is, in look and sentiment, antebellum South, with enormous estates shaded by oaks draped in Spanish moss, and horse farms spread along rolling bluegrass hills.
Yet the city of Tampa, gleaming with new skyscrapers and teeming with businessmen using portable faxes in their imported cars, is strictly New South.
There's the spectacle of Orlando, the world's largest man-made tourist destination, counterbalanced by the ineffable natural beauty of the Everglades and the great stretches of unspoilt beaches, where the sand is the colour and texture of confectioner's sugar and the sea — turquoise, cobalt and phosphorescent green — is clear to 100 ft.
Florida is the shock of the new jutaposed with '40s and '50s kitsch and the magnificent turn-of-the-century beachfront resorts that date back to the days when the Northern grandees, steamer trunks and servants in tow, would descend by private rail to the exclusive enclaves of Sarasota, Palm Beach and Miami.
Whatever its inconsistencies, Florida's lure, especially for Brits, is undeniable.
There are enough expats in Orlando and Tampa Bay to support their own newsletter.
Still, it's easy, almost a reflex, to think of Florida only in terms of its star attractions, the DisneyWorlds and Cape Canaverals and Busch Gardens.
The point, now belaboured, is how rich the state is in possibility, no matter what the taste or budget.
Ever-improving direct air service from Britain to the gateways of Miami and Orlando is helping keep travel costs down, and tourist living expenses in Florida benefits from competition in the hotel, car rental and tour business, especially in the off-season.
Several airlines, notably American and Delta, offer a wide variety of fly-drive packages.
For the independent traveller, car rentals are special bargains.
A subcompact weekly rate, excluding taxes, insurance and petrol, can be a mere £55.
Keep in mind that the off-season for all of Florida, except the panhandle, is the summer, which is consistently hot and sultry.
Nevertheless, there are many advantages off-season, if you can handle the sun and humidity.
Crowds are manageable, hotel rates, even at the swankiest resorts, can be half their winter levels, and golfers' greens fees are drastically reduced.
Orlando is a huge all-season attraction.
Locals call it ‘The Wall’ because so many people like it that they never venture outside it till it's time to go home.
DisneyWorld alone can draw in 13 million a year.
Sea World runs a close second with its marine exhibits, including one that takes you ‘through’ a shark tank on a rolling sidewalk.
The latest attraction, Universal Studios Florida, opened last year to rave reviews, and although it's popular with kids it's really one of the few theme parks built for adults.
You go not just for the rides (one of the most popular, Earthquake, puts you in San Francisco just as the Big One hits) but for the chance to see how filmmakers, animators and special effects wizards all conspire to create the magic of film.
Significantly lower down on the status scale is Gatorland, where you can watch a Seminole Indian wrestle an alligator and later treat yourself to fried alligator tail at the snack bar; it's actually not as vile as it sounds.
Other area highlights: the Flying Tigers Warbird Air Museum, with restored aircraft from WWII; the small but intriguing Elvis Presley Museum.
Orlando is also within easy reach of the popular attractions on the east, or Atlantic coast, of Florida: the Kennedy Space Center, a hands-on space museum; and St Augustine, America's oldest city.
An hour's drive west of Orlando, along the Gulf of Mexico, is Tampa Bay, known for lovely beaches, outstanding golf resorts and yet another theme park — Busch Gardens, which combines a zoological park with thrill rides.
Tampa area attractions include the Museum of Fine Arts and the Salvador Dali, both in St Petersburg Ybor Square, a restored Cuban marketplace where Cuban refugees still hand-roll cigars.
An hour south, Sarasota features one of the finest museums in the South, the Ringling, with a world-renowned collection of Ruben works.
Heading south along the coast are the highbrow resort towns of Naples, Fort Myers, and the more rustic barrier islands of Sanibel and Captiva.
All offer golf, fishing, and water sports.
Travel USA: Mizz Wilkes serves up manna in Savannah
Eating out in the U.S. isn't just fries at McDonald's.
Julia Brookes reports on the delights of down-home Southern style boarding-house victuals
By JULIA BROOKES
IT WAS 11.30 am at Mizz Wilkes's boarding house in Savannah, Georgia.
Mizz Wilkes, eighty-something, said grace and we sat down, eight to a table, to tuck into some old-fashioned Southern cooking: fried chicken, gumbo, sweet potato, mashed potato, beef stew, cornbread, macaroni and every sort of vegetable, followed by banana pudding, all washed down with iced tea.
I knew it must be good because my neighbour turned out to be a local millionaire who brought his whole family along every week.
But the biggest surprise was the bill — $7.
It is easy to eat cheaply and well in America and, despite the ubiquitous McDonald's, it isn't all hamburgers with squares of gloopy cheese on top.
The cooking pot of cultures and races that makes up this vast nation has created distinct regional specialities and major cities will offer everything from kosher to Korean.
The most popular ethnic cuisines are Chinese, Italian, Mexican and Japanese, and just about the only restaurants you won't find in any great number are Indian.
Californian — the freshest ingredients in bizarre but wonderful combinations — and Cajun and Creole from New Orleans are some of the native cuisines worth sampling, while lobster can be gorged in New England for a fraction of the U.K. price.
The day starts with the great American breakfast, which, if you haven't managed to get as part of your hotel deal, should be eaten in a local coffee shop or diner and will set you back $3-$4 for eggs, bacon, toast and unlimited coffee.
Add two dollars for freshly squeezed orange juice.
This is quite enough until lunchtime when you might hunt down some dim sum, steamed pork buns and the like for $1-$2 a basket in the local Chinatown, or hit the deli for another American institution, the sandwich.
By ‘sandwich’ we're not talking undernourished British Rail.
A good Americansandwich will be a Dagwood Bumstead special — at least six inches long, four multi-layered inches high and need two hands to control it.
As for an evening meal, the golden rule is that, apart from New York, Americans eat early.
I know this after a dispiriting tour of San Francisco looking for a place to eat at 10 pm.
Six o'clock is quite normal, and if you're in the right area, pre-theatre specials are always good value.
The extremely plush Checkers hotel in downtown Los Angeles, for example, offers a starter and main course followed by a limo to and from the Music Center (the main theatre downtown) and then dessert for $28.50 (£16) per person.
For cheap deals a copy of the local newspaper is essential.
Americans are coupon crazy, and there are always two-for-one or free dessert offers.
Another wheeze is the ‘complimentary dinner buffet’ in hotels, usually between 5–7 pm where, for the price of a drink, you can stuff yourself on hot and cold canapes.
At the other end of the scale there are meals that will linger in the mind long after the credit card has recovered, and blowouts at top restaurants still tend to be cheaper than their London counterparts.
The wonderful set dinner menu at New York's fashionable Aureole is $55 (£31.50) for dishes like crisp potato-topped scallop sandwiches, wood-smoked lamb chops, and magnificent desserts.
Wherever you are, precious dollars can be saved at dinner by remembering that American portions are huge and often quite enough for two if not more.
My bowl of fettucine Alfredo at the Cheescake Factory in Marina del Ray cost $8.95 (£5) and was enough for three.
Fortunately, this is the land of the doggy bag.
A big slice was wrapped up, complete with whipped cream, to be devoured in the early hours of the morning, when jet lag said it was breakfast time…
Travel USA: Manhattan on the rocks
By HUGH DAVIES
FOR the perfect Manhattan, go straight to the Assembly at 16 West 51st in Rockefeller Centre, New York, writes Hugh Davies.
The cocktail is carefully dispensed by barman Lou Barbara.
He describes this particular potion as pure ‘liquid velvet.’
The only drink in America named after a city, it comprises sweet vermouth and rye whisky.
As Lou explains, the concoction is created in a shaker and stirred exactly 23 times in a counter-clockwise motion.
He has a special production — at no extra charge — called ‘a Manhattan on the rocks.’
Lou explains this as a drink reflecting the state of the island under its current mayor, the increasingly unpopular David Dinkins.
Travel USA: Hold the mustard on my Hush Puppies, Peggy Sue
You find your restaurant.
You're ready to order.
Now your troubles start, says Clive Barrow
By CLIVE BARROW
FIRST-TIME travellers to America should be aware that ordering a meal in the Land of the Free is an art form in itself, given the copious choice.
Those U.S. immigration officials who inquire suspiciously if you have a permanent address to go to and sufficient funds to keep you going for 90 days would be providing a more humanitaran service were they to refuse admission to anyone unable to produce documentary proof of passing a course in how to order a American-style breakfast.
Don't think that having learned from TV how to say ‘Hold the mustard’ will help.
The waitress —(God preserve you if she catches you calling her a waitress): ‘Hi, my name is Peggy Sue and I am your server this morning.
How may I be of assistance?’— won't let you get away with: ‘Er, egg and bacon and toast and coffee please, miss.’
‘Sir, would that be the honey-glazed Virginia ham or the Down-Home Hickory-Smoked?‘
‘Sir, you may have your eggs over-easy, scrambled, sunny side up, poached, coddled or boiled.
We have hard-boiled or three-minute.’
‘Sir, would that be three eggs or four?’
‘Sir, hash browns or grits?’
(Grits, ground dried corn, are delicious when done properly in the South.
Done improperly elsewhere they resemble semolina substitute infested with shotgun pellets).
You erred by ordering coffee.
That comes automatically, together with iced water, before Peggy Sue begins interrogating you, and is replenished so often and so generously that you make a note to speak harshly to the next British rip-off artist who rushes you 80p for a niggardly Nescafe.
Peggy Sue naturally has six different kinds of bread options for toast, while the choices of preserves to go on it are enumerated practically to the power of 10.
And do yourself a favour by not wanting tea instead of coffee: ‘Sir, would that be hot tea or iced tea?
Twinings or Earl Grey?
Milk, cream, or lemon?’
Should you be pleb enough to require chips with breakfast, remember to ask for fries.
Ask for chips and you get crisps.
Ask for crisps and Peggy Sue will give you a smile of dazzling incomprehension and go: ‘Sir????’
Since it's breakfast, you are mercifully spared ordering salad, because salad comes with a metronomically-recited choice of dressing: ‘Sir, we have Thousand Island, we have vy-nay-grette, we have blue cheese…’
I thought I had sufficiently mastered the vernacular to be idiot-proof until one time in the Smoky Mountains resort of Gatlinburg, Tennessee.
Mountain trout are the big culinary thing there.
You can choose from shoals of them lazily circling in tanks near your table; some restaurants even let you catch your own meal from a pond out the back of the premises (’ NO FISHING LICENSE REQUIRED!!!!’).
We had navigated the 10-minute ritual of telling Peggy Sue which of the nine alternative piscatorial preparations we preferred; coffee and iced water were in place; salad and Thousand Island on the way.
Then she said: ‘Y'all want Hush Puppies with your Trout Eisenhower?’
That removed the middle stump.
Was suede footwear de rigueur for scoffing fish in Tennessee?
Or perhaps, having selected one's trout from the tank, one was expected to kick it to death, and with traditional Southern courtesy they wished to prevent my Italian loafers getting messed.
It transpired that Hush Puppies were cornmeal fritters, seasoned with eggs and beer, and very tasty.
But you feel such a fool going ‘Er…’
Travel USA: Stay in big John Ford country
By HUGH DAVIES
HIDDEN way off the tourist track is the ultimate cowboy landscape — Monument Valley, along the northern border of the 14 million acre Navajo Nation.
Only reachable by car in a remote section of the reservation, halfway between Mexican Hat, Utah, and Kayenta, Arizona, it is as dramatic as anything in America.
Across the flat tableland are almost 100 red and orange monolithic sandstone buttes and mesas jutting skywards.
The place is usually empty; the silence is deafening, and often there is no one to collect the entry levied by the tribal park.
Or, if he is, he's asleep in the sun.
Stay at Goulding's Lodge, a ranch built for the set of the movie She Wore A Yellow Ribbon (this, remember, was John Ford country) and surrounded by high open desert.
Peace is the keyword here.
Eat Navajo tacos and green-pepper steak.
Liquor cannot be sold on the reservation, but you may take your own.
Four-wheel drive Jeep tours take you through the canyons, past Hopi villages, Navajo homes with their hogan shelters and trading posts, and along winding trails.
Magpies and bluebirds dart through the ponderosa pines
Just before dusk, go to a canyon rim overlook called Donkey Point and cook a steak on the hot rock.
At sundown the sky turns a multitude of colours from scarlet through aquamarine to inky black.
The experience is quietly sensational.
Travel USA: Take me out to the ballgame; it's food and drink for a Bosox fan
Clive Barrow on the American appetite for watching the Boys of Summer
By CLIVE BARROW
A HUMID evening in Boston early last summer; afternoon rain has cleared, and at Fenway Park the lead-off batter for the visiting Baltimore Orioles steps up for the first pitch from the Red Sox.
Baseball in Boston possesses the elements of Homeric tragedy; for 73 years lofty aspirations and noble skills have brought the cup of ultimate triumph close to the lips of the Old Towne team — but not once have they downed the draught.
They last won the World Series in 1918.
After the next season their owner, Harry Frazee, an aspiring Broadway producer strapped for business cash, sold his star player Babe Ruth (at that stage renowned as a pitcher) to the hated Yankees.
Thus began the Curse of the Bambino, which has not been lifted to this day.
The Yankees went on to assemble an unequalled record of 22 World Series victories; generations of Sox fans have not a single one to cherish.
It is not that the Bosox are chronically hapless in the manner of the Chicago Cubs or the Seattle Mariners.
Fenway fans have simply grown resigned to seeing fine teams commit one horrendous play to throw away a crucial championship game as good as won.
The Sox do not merely snatch defeat from the jaws of victory; they reach right down the oesophagus to retrieve it.
Hopeless romantics, Sox fans come back each Spring for more, but by the time of this Orioles game last year were already conceding that the 1991 team was not one on which to pin their perennial dreams.
The pitching is inadequate, and the hitters are not hitting.
Nevertheless, some 33,000 faithful pack into Fenway, probably the loveliest old ballpark left in the country as the traditional grass arenas give way to Astroturf colosseums.
It is a scene to make a British Minister of Sport weep with envy.
Everyone is seated.
Huge video screens profile each new batter and replay how he fares at the plate.
Families are everywhere, the kids' faces shining with excitement, no obscene chanting or vomiting hooligans to spoil their delight.
(A couple of drunks do eventually square up in the third base bleachers, but by Stamford Bridge standards it is almost a mating ritual).
Although it will be close to midnight before the game ends, the trains of Boston's admirable underground, the T, will be waiting to carry us away in orderly and good natured hordes.
It is a paradox that such a gun-conscious and violent society conducts itself so decorously at its summer game.
With the exception of the boorish bleachers at Yankee Stadium, baseball crowds retain an innocence reminiscent of county cricket before the beer-tent raucousness of the one-day game became fashionable.
And nowhere will you see better demonstrated the conditioning of Americans to fast food.
First a guy comes round with a tray of Cokes; 10 minutes later another guy brings peanuts; 10 minutes after that is a guy with ice creams; then a guy selling the legendary Fenway frankfurters; and then the sequence begins again.
The arrival of each vendor is greeted by the crowd rather as the appearance of a man with a sackful of rice would be greeted in a Kurdish refugee camp in midwinter.
Hands flutter beseechingly; voices plead; dollar bills are entrusted to strangers to pass along to the aisles; low-flying choc ices and cans of Coke come hurtling back.
And all this merely supplements and whets the appetite for the serious nourishment of hot dogs and beer, in search of which you must leave your seat and descend below the stands.
It is, indeed, the dedication to eating which provides the lasting memory of this night, rather than the lacklustre game.
When the Orioles' designated hitter lifts a three-run homer over the right field fence in the ninth to wrap it up at 9–3, the resigned Sox faithful begin heading for the exits.
They shuffle out to a soft rhythmic crunching underfoot, reminiscent of how the boots of Napoleon's legions must have sounded trudging back through the Russian snows.
Belatedly, I realise that people are walking on peanut shells, wall to wall.
Only around our seats is a small island of unlittered concrete visible — testimony to the dietary discipline of the Brits in this land where sport is, in every sense, food and drink to its followers.
Travel USA: It's mighty fine golfing in Carolina
Roy White puts a new perspective on fly-drive holidays, flying to the Ocean course at Kiawah Island and driving off
By ROY WHITE
FOR MANY years British golfers in search of winter sunshine headed for the fairways of Spain or Portugal, but with good exchange rates against the dollar the Atlantic seaboard of the United States has become an alternative.
Florida was one of the first areas to attract the golfer, but in recent years South Carolina has become popular as European golfers discover the delights of Hilton Head (27 courses) and Myrtle Beach (66 courses).
Now Kiawah Island in South Carolina is firmly on the golfing map following September's Ryder Cup match when the Americans snatched back the pot in that agonisingly close finish.
It is an exciting place to play golf, with plenty of water and long sandy wastes just waiting to gobble up the wayward shots.
Off the front tees it is less daunting than it appeared on TV, but not much.
However, long before Pete Dye's Ocean course was planned, other big names in the world of golf course design had made their mark with courses at Osprey Point (Tom Fazio), Marsh Point (Gary Player), where 13 of the 18 holes are framed by water, and Turtle Point (Jack Nicklaus), which is rated among the top ten in South Carolina (Golf Digest, a leading U.S. golf magazine, refers to it as one of America's top resort courses).
I stayed at the Kiawah Island Inn, which is on the edge of a 10-mile undisturbed stretch of Atlantic beach 21 miles from the lovely old southern city of Charleston.
Golfers who stay at the Inn are thoroughly spoilt.
On leaving the restaurant after breakfast you pass the bell stand, an open-air reception area manned by porters who ask: ‘Which golf course are you playing today, sir?’
‘Mighty fine,’ they nod in response to the information.
On returning to the bell stand to catch the transport to the course in question, I couldn't find my golf clubs.
One of the porters beamed at me from under his large straw hat.
‘Thems gone to the course, sir,’ he explained.
When I arrived at the course, there they were in a rack being watched over by a young man, who, in turn, placed them in a buggy.
‘There's a practice area just around the corner and the starter will call you to the tee five minutes before you are due to tee off,’ he said.
After the round the same young man was there to greet me.
He cleaned my clubs and shoes and returned them to the Inn's store room ready for the next round of golf.
This, of course, is the norm.
A far cry from the take it or leave it attitude in Europe.
The island is the home of some fascinating wild life including alligators, which should be treated with respect.
They are said to be very fast over the first 40 yards, and the advice offered by the locals is that you should run on a zig-zag course if one of them takes a fancy to you.
It's not unusual to find them basking on the slopes of the teeing areas.
Some 50 miles to the north of Charleston, between Georgetown and Southport, is Myrtle Beach, known as Carolina's Golden Golf Coast.
It has 66 courses and 75 hotels, motels and condominiums offering a wide selection of accommodation, with all sorts of deals for the visiting golfer.
The Myrtle Beach Golf Holiday Association produces a 100-page brochure containing 73 different golf packages and a guide to the area's top courses.
For example, at the Sea Mist Resort, a week's bed and breakfast and golf costs $356 (about £205) in September.
In November, when it's not quite so hot, this drops to $296 (£171).
In many cases a golf cart is included, and some packages add a free beer after the round!
Prices do not include air fares.
The most famous course at Hilton Head is Harbour Town, the venue of this week's Heritage Classic, which always follows the Masters at Augusta and attracts a large international field.
Harbour Town, believe it or not, is a rather superb public course, with its 18th laid out alongside the Calibogue Sound, where a lighthouse forms the backdrop to the green — no excuse for missing this one.
Green fees here are about $150 (£86).
On the other hand, a week at Harbour Side III, with free golf, starts at £599 for a week, including flight.
Much further south, Orlando in Florida has become popular for family holidays because of nearby DisneyWorld and plenty of golf for mum and dad.
In the heart of the Disney complex there are three championship courses, the Magnolia, the Palm and Lake Buena Vista, as well as a beginner's course called Wee Links.
Many of the courses are privately owned and out of bounds to casual visitors, but this is no problem as Florida has more golf courses than any other state — 930.
Travel USA: This is a whole new world for book-lovers Sea to shining sea, America is Bibliophile Heaven.
Hugh Davies offers a browsing guide
By HUGH DAVIES
DON'T take books to America.
Buy them there, often at half price, and almost always at a discount.
In New York, on the east side of Central Park, wooden tables are laden with cut-price volumes, all brand new, from Greenwich Village's Strand bookstore.
One section is stuffed full of reviewer's copies of the latest best-sellers.
Another shelf is packed with new travel guides, all half the original price.
If nothing catches the eye, walk a few blocks to West 47th street, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues, to browse at the Gotham Book Mart (’ Wise men fish here,’says the sign), which, for 70 years has specialised in literature and arts.
Past customers have included Henry Miller and T. S. Eliot, and, if you're lucky, you'll find yourself squeezing along a dusty aisle of used books alongside John Updike, a regular client.
The best-kept literary secret of Manhattan is the chap (’ Call me Ed’) who pops up on the West Side, on the pavement opposite the Beacon Theatre, for two hours every Saturday and Sunday afternoon.
He offers brand-new tomes from the New York Times best-seller list at exactly half off — with no tax to pay.
In Washington, the trend-setting Crown bookstores, sited in numerous malls, all offer deep discounts, although for sheer pleasure Bridge Street Books in Georgetown is the ultimate spot for a bibliophile.
Shelves are devoted to displaying the complete works of individual authors.
The late Jack Kerouac, for instance, has every one of his works for sale, together with just about all the wild books written of his hard-driving life.
The magical aspect of the store is that alongside the works of many writers are volumes of interviews with them, as well as critical texts.
Kramer's books, on Dupont Circle, offers cups of cappucino as books are mulled over.
San Francisco, of course, is the home of the City Lights bookshop, where Kerouac's Beat generation came of age.
This is also where neglected works of the Englishman Colin Wilson (of Outsider fame) are on display.
In Los Angeles, for show-bizzery, there are the Theatre Book Shop at 6658, Hollywood Boulevard, and Book City, across the street at 6627, just a couple of blocks from the star-encrusted sidewalk by Mann's Chinese Theatre.
Back along the Eastern Seaboard is Boston's Brattle Books, America's oldest antiquarian bookshop.
The original store and its entire stock of rare books, letters and autographs, was destroyed by fire in 1980.
However, it has been completely re-built, and the new shop on West Street, a block south of the renowned Boston Common, is still the place to track down out-of-print volumes, first editions and signed copies.
If, Heaven help a reader, Detroit is a traveller's destination, right on Lafayette Boulevard, close to what's left of Motown's business district, an oasis awaits: John K. King's Used and Rare Books, a pleasure-drome for used book lovers.
The shop boasts half-a-million volumes on everything from alchemy to Zen.
Travel USA: You need a year to see California So if you only have a fortnight a plan is really essential, John Hiscock says
By JOHN HISCOCK
ASK native Californians the best thing about their state and the chances are they will reply that for a good part of the year it is possible to spend the mornings on the beach getting a suntan and the afternoons in the mountains skiing.
It's unlikely that anybody does it too often, since trippers tend to make skiing an all-day outing, but I've often been on the beach with people planning a ski trip next day.
It does, however, illustrate the wild contrasts of California, where large cities, near-deserted beaches, scorching deserts and cool redwood forests all lie within less than half a day's drive of each other.
Stretching 1,100 miles along the edge of the continent, California is one of the most popular travel destinations in the world.
From the Mexican border to Oregon there is enough to see and do to occupy a full-time tourist for at least a year.
Given that most visitors only have a couple of weeks, it is necessary to arrive with some sort of plan.
A popular way of seeing the coastline and some of rural California as well as taking in the contrasting cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco is to drive up — or down — Highway 1, known as the Pacific Coast Highway, or simply PCH.
It begins just north of the Mexican border and continues as far as Vancouver, sometimes winding inland, occasionally merging with the multi-laned 101, but always providing fascinating variety.
Coastal fog is common and the temperatures rarely rise above the mid-70s ordrop below the 40s along the way.
Spring and autumn are probably the best times to visit, avoiding the early-year rains and the high season crowds…
The Los Angeles-San Francisco drive can be completed in about nine hours, but to digest the scenic delights fully and sample the occasionally bizarre sights along the way will take take two or three leisurely days, stopping on a whim at one of the hotels or bed and breakfast inns that proliferate along the way.
Heading north from Los Angeles, through Santa Barbara, the towns of Pismo Beach, Morro Bay, Carpinteria and Guadalupe — where architects are in the process of unearthing the replica pyramids buried by film director Cecil B. De Mille after he finished making The Ten Commandments on the beach — all offer pretty and uncrowded beaches and interesting restaurants and bars.
Those with a taste for the bizarre could do worse than make their first night's stop at the Madonna Inn, ready for a tour of the Hearst Castle next day.
At the Madonna Inn (reservations necessary) every room is designed to convey a theme, be it a jungle, a cave or ancient Rome.
Hearst Castle also provides an assault on the senses.
Newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst stuffed the complex with furniture, paintings and works of art from around the world; the effect is an overwhelming jumble of artifacts.
Again, reservations are desirable.
On to the beauty of Big Sur country; Carmel, where Doris Day runs a guest house where animals are not only welcome but expected; and Monterey, where Steinbeck's Cannery Row is, sadly, overwhelmed with souvenir shops and seafood restaurants.
Through Santa Cruz and on towards San Francisco, whose sky-scraper-stacked skyline stands out as a silent rebuke to the Manhattanisation of the city, for which many residents blame ex-mayor and gubernatorial candidate Dianne Feinstein.
Once famed as ‘Baghdad by the Bay’ in the days when such an appellation was a compliment, San Francisco has gone the way of many major U.S. cities and is burdened by a high number of homeless and beggars, and rising crime.
Its cable cars, soaring hills and profusion of bars and restaurants neverthless make it an abiding favourite with tourists.
There is still a wonderful tolerance about a place that has spawned the Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence headed by Sadie the Rabbi Lady; Dykes on Bikes; the Pagan Drumming Circle; the prostitutes' rights group COYOTE; and the Ethel Merman Memorial Choir.
Over the Golden Gate bridge are the hills of northern Sonoma County and the town of Healdsburg, less well known than the Napa and Sonoma but the wine centre for three valleys — Dry Creek, Russian River and the Alexander, all major viticulture locations.
To take in the Napa Valley there is the Wine Train which makes two trips a day; the wines, are, of course, plentiful and varied.
Travel USA: Just playing being home on the range
Paul Mansfield on a dude ranch finds great steaks and catfish.
But who'd have expected great lasagna?
By PAUL MANSFIELD
PLAYING at being a cowboy has always held a certain atavistic appeal, particularly for Americans.
But dude ranching — staying on a working ranch — has other attractions too.
Beautiful scenery, fresh air and good food, a chance to live the simple life, staying in accommodation with more character than a motel and more comfort than a tent.
Ranches come in all sizes.
The most luxurious have bars, swimming pools and air-conditioned cabins.
By contrast, I once stayed on a tiny Wyoming ranch where the teetotal owner dragged us out of bed at 5 a.m. for long, freezing horse rides into the Rockies.
The most popular dude ranch states with British holidaymakers are Arizona, Colorado and Wyoming.
My own favourite, though, is Texas — largely because of the people.
Believe everything you hear about Texans: they are larger than life: noisy, and inexhaustibly friendly.
At the Dixie Dude Ranch near the town of Bandera in the Texas hill country it was clear that my arrival was to be the excuse for a night out.
Half a dozen of us piled into an old station wagon driven by Clay Conoly, the rancher, and headed into town.
Bandera looks like a set from a Hollywood western.
Our first stop was the Forge, where a bunch of Old-Timers sat drinking beer on the wooden porch.
Here we met country and western singer Dusty Britches (I kid you not), and a bunch of other cowboys, and moseyed off to eat.
In the Grocery Store at Tarpley we ate huge steaks and catfish fresh from the river.
The biggest steak on the menu was 20oz, ‘although,’ the owners conceded, ‘it gits smaller in the cookin'.‘
Buoyed by a tidal wave of beer, around 10 of us ended up at the Silver Dollar saloon, a noisy local landmark full of cowboys.
Dusty Britches pulled out his guitar and started to play.
It was 2 a.m. —‘last call’— when we piled into Clay's wagon and rolled back out to the ranch.
I slept that night in a large airy cabin, and breakfasted on coffee and hotcakes.
Then Clay and I rode out on horseback for a tour of the beautiful sage-covered landscape which seemed to stretch to Mexico.
Days on a dude ranch — particularly after a night like that one — tend to be restful.
You won't be asked to mend fences or brand steers, but you will have the chance to watch the ranch hands — the wranglers — at work; go riding or walking, or take a drive into town for some shopping.
One excellent option is an overnight pack ride, with camping equipment carried by mules.
This is when you really get to sample sitting round the campfire at night with a bunch of the boys, a cup of coffee or (more likely) mug of bourbon in hand.
Some ranches organise hay wagon rides, which are expecially popular with kids.
Most will hold a ‘cook-out’ or two — every week.
Ranch meals are invariably big and hearty, and the smaller the ranch the more likely it is you'll be sitting down to eat with the wranglers, many of whom are great characters.
At the Dixie Dude, I spent my time between riding in the hills and just sitting on the porch doing nothing.
The morning after our big night out, Clay's Aunt Dottie produced for lunch one of the best lasagnas I have ever tasted.
We washed this down with iced tea, which in the heat of a Texas summer tastes better than the best wine could.
Clay declared that Aunt Dottie ‘was like to feed us all to death with this amount of food.’
I took a siesta in the shade, and when evening rolled around was feeling fit enough to head back into Bandera for a few more beers at the Silver Dollar.
Once you get accustomed to life on the range, it's hard to go back to being a city slicker.
U.K. specialists in dude ranch holidays are Ranch America, 250 Imperial Drive, Rayners Lane, Harrow, Middx HA2 7HJ.
Tel: 081 868 2910.
Their 1992 programme features the Dixie Dude Ranch.
Travel USA: The song of the raggle taggle motorised gipsies
By MARIA HARDING
TOURING America with your home at your back is a popular option for familes and travellers on a budget who want to free themselves from the hassle of searching for somewhere to get their heads down each night.
Motorhomes now come in all shapes and sizes, with minihomes available for smaller parties.
Daily rates vary according to whether you've requested a set or unlimited mileage, and include collision damage waiver.
But look out for hidden extras: most operators will charge a preparation fee of around £30 for airport transfers and installation of toilet chemicals and a starter tank of propane gas.
And if you want to pick the motorhome up in one place and leave it in another, you face some hefty one-way surcharge of between £250 and £300.
Camp site fees, local taxes, petrol and fuel costs will also be down to you, so you need to budget carefully.
To hire a motorhome you need to hold a full U.K. driving licence and be over 25, although some operators will accept drivers over 21 at premium prices.
It is advisable for drivers to carry one of the major credit cards to cover ‘unexpected outgoings;’ it is also a good idea to have additional ID.
Be aware of crime, especially in major cities.
Take cash and valuables with you at all times; never leave your motorhome unlocked; stick to main roads, and don't be tempted to go exploring down minor ones.
If you get lost, find a major garage or a well-lit street before stopping to ask directions, and don't keep anything smash-and-grabbable on show in the driver's cabin.
Finally, operators recommend that motorhome clients spend their first night in a hotel or motel.
The vehicles are sometime rather complicated to run, and it is essential to have the workings explained to you.
A fresh and un-jetlagged mind is advisable before you set off.
Travel USA: Into the wild frontier
Maria Harding looks at some of the great adventures for those who like to do their own thing
By MARIA HARDING
BRITISH visitors heading off the beaten track in the States will find the adventurous spirit of the frontiersmen alive and kicking.
In a hired car, a motorhome or even on horseback, America is the place for British visitors to go it alone.
The growing trend towards independent travel and demand for escapes to the Great Outdoors have prompted operators to court would-be explorers with adventurous options from high-speed, white-water rafting to camping, canoeing, mountain-climbing and ranching.
American Pioneers (0793 881882) offers holidays at the Lazy L&B Ranch in Wyoming's Rocky Mountains.
Guest cowhands sleep in log cabins and learn square dancing as well as horsemanship.
The operator also offers trips to the majestic Yellowstone and Grant Teton National Parks, plus white-water wilderness adventures from Las Vegas through the Grand Canyon.
Prices cover ground arrangements only and cost from $745 (about £440) for a week at the Lazy L&B on full-board, double-occupancy basis, inclusive of horse riding.
Packages including flights are available on request.
Other options for bold spirits include water-rafting expeditions on the Colorado River, canoeing trips through canyons, mountain-biking treks and Jeep safaris.
Tag-a-Long Expeditions (091 430 1448) and Sheri Griffith Expeditions (0752 664944) are just two of the many operators specialising in the off-beat.
To tailor your own holiday, try American Adventures (0892 511894), the camping specialists, Suntrek-owned Adventures USA (0793 881884), which gives long-stay tourists the option of buying a car, with repurchase guaranteed at going-home time, or Frontiers (081 994 6958).
Travel USA: Vegas gambles on niceness
Glitter City has become a family show, John Hiscock reports
By JOHN HISCOCK
WHILE the rest of the country is still trying to grapple with the effects of the recession, Las Vegas, the desert oasis created by gambling, continues to boom and prosper in much the same way as it has always done.
The fastest growing city in the United States, with a population of over one million, Las Vegas, once home to the heavy mob and every form of conceivable vice, has cleaned up its act.
Although corporate jets still ferry in high rollers to the tables of Caesars Palace, the Mirage and the Desert Inn, the hotel and casino industry is working hard on improving its image and, at the same trying to attract the family crowd as much as those who take their gambling seriously.
The emphasis is now firmly on Disney-style resorts and theme parks, with hotels such as the 4,000-room Excalibur packing in the tourists with its medieval motif and kitschy Camelot exterior.
It will soon be up-staged by the enormous 5,000 room MGM Grand, which guests will enter along a yellow brick road and which will contain, as the casino, a life-sized version of the Emerald City.
One of the most popular tourist attractions on the Strip is not a building but a giant volcano that every hour erupts in flames, spurting out great rivers of fake molten lava.
The brainchild of Mirage owner Steve Wynn, it attracts the crowds like bees round a honey pot to his Polynesian-themed Mirage hotel.
One of the spearheads of the new Las Vegas movement, Wynn says proudly: ‘I'm more of a Disney person than a casino guy.’
And: ‘What keeps Las Vegas powerful is every few years it becomes more fabulous and more outrageous.’
There is much more to Nevada than Las Vegas, however.
And a good place to recover from the excesses of Glitter City is Death Valley.
This is where the forces of the earth are exposed with a dramatic clarity and where billion-year old rocks, deposited at a time when seas extended right across the valley give the stark harshness of the area a startling and a rare and sometimes unexpected beauty at different times of the day.
Although the visitors' centre at Furnace Creek, the scenically-stunning Zabriskie Point and the Death Valley National Monument are across the border in California, they are an easy drive from Las Vegas, the nearest major city.
Peterborough: Mogg minor
ONE could never accuse Jacob Rees-Mogg, 22, fogeyish son of Lord Rees-Mogg, of being a road hog.
But motorists on the M4 the other day who glanced in their mirrors would have seen him bearing down on them at great speed in his newly acquired 1968 Bentley T-series.
His brakes had failed.
‘There was a wobbly moment,’ concedes the unflappable young Mogg, frowning at the memory.
‘I was passing Slough and the brakes just refused to work.
I had to coast along until I stopped.
I discovered a leak of brake fluid — just a small problem but I was in the fast lane so it was a bit worrying.’
The car's previous owner was the late cricketer, Sir George ‘Gubby’ Allen, and was snaffled up by Mogg for £8,000 at the recent auction of Allen's belongings.
MY mention of Flattened Fauna, a handbook to squashed animals, has brought a welter of enquiries.
One reader was reminded of a more practical book: Florida's Road Kill Cookbook.
Written by 69-year-old Louise Lum, it carries recipes for dishes such as Possum Parfait, Squirrel Surprise, Crunchy Raccoon Gizzards and Frog Chips.
Novices scouring the roads should beware.
‘The neophyte,’ says Mrs Lum, ‘will, on occasion, mistake a flattened oil filter for a Muscovy duck.’
Peterborough: Well briefed
SHOULD the personable Steve Norris fail to impress as an under-secretary at the Transport Department, it should not be for want of preparation.
In the early 1980s, when a Berkshire county councillor, Norris would arrive in his Rolls-Royce at the Shire Hall, Reading, brandishing a copy of How to be a Minister (written, incidentally, by Gerald Kaufman).
During debates on gravel extraction he could be seen flicking through its pages.
Norris's reputation as a man who got things done was dented when the Tories lost a vote on extra primary school places because Norris was away from his seat (leading to the crack that he ‘spent a penny and cost the ratepayers £250,000’), but he left his mark on the place.
‘We are now the only county council with a voting button in the gents,’ says a spokesman for the Royal County.
BOW-TIED wine buff, self-importantly, to long-suffering acquaintance: ‘I'm off to Bordeaux for Easter.’
Acquaintance, once wine buff has left the room: ‘Poor old Deaux.’
Peterborough:
IT WILL be a hectic Easter weekend for Lord Petre, who is to open his family seat, Ingatestone Hall, to the public for the first time.
Restoration of the 16th-century house has taken two years, most attention going to the creation of women's lavatories and space for tea urns.
Managing the operation is Petre's son Dominic, 25, who actually lives in the house and will have to put up with disrupted weekends.
The 18th baron, who inherited the title three years ago, has sensibly decided to stay on at the Dower House, where he has been for many years.
Visitors to Ingatestone, one of the few houses in Essex to boast original mullioned windows, should watch out for Siddy the green parrot, who flaps around the garden performing his imitation of a ringing telephone.
‘I've known this parrot for 35 years and he still bites me,’ says Petre.
‘We inherited him from a friend of my mother.
He isn't that talkative, but manages the occasional, strangulated ‘allo’.
He hates me, and I hate him right back.’
Peterborough: Mogg minor
ONE could never accuse Jacob Rees-Mogg, 22, fogeyish son of Lord Rees-Mogg, of being a road hog.
But motorists on the M4 the other day who glanced in their mirrors would have seen him bearing down on them at great speed in his newly acquired 1968 Bentley T-series.
His brakes had failed.
‘There was a wobbly moment,’ concedes the unflappable young Mogg, frowning at the memory.
‘I was passing Slough and the brakes just refused to work.
I had to coast along until I stopped.
I discovered a leak of brake fluid — just a small problem but I was in the fast lane so it was a bit worrying.’
The car's previous owner was the late cricketer, Sir George ‘Gubby’ Allen, and was snaffled up by Mogg for £8,000 at the recent auction of Allen's belongings.
MY mention of Flattened Fauna, a handbook to squashed animals, has brought a welter of enquiries.
One reader was reminded of a more practical book: Florida's Road Kill Cookbook.
Written by 69-year-old Louise Lum, it carries recipes for dishes such as Possum Parfait, Squirrel Surprise, Crunchy Raccoon Gizzards and Frog Chips.
Novices scouring the roads should beware.
‘The neophyte,’ says Mrs Lum, ‘will, on occasion, mistake a flattened oil filter for a Muscovy duck.’
Peterborough: Well briefed
SHOULD the personable Steve Norris fail to impress as an under-secretary at the Transport Department, it should not be for want of preparation.
In the early 1980s, when a Berkshire county councillor, Norris would arrive in his Rolls-Royce at the Shire Hall, Reading, brandishing a copy of How to be a Minister (written, incidentally, by Gerald Kaufman).
During debates on gravel extraction he could be seen flicking through its pages.
Norris's reputation as a man who got things done was dented when the Tories lost a vote on extra primary school places because Norris was away from his seat (leading to the crack that he ‘spent a penny and cost the ratepayers £250,000’), but he left his mark on the place.
‘We are now the only county council with a voting button in the gents,’ says a spokesman for the Royal County.
BOW-TIED wine buff, self-importantly, to long-suffering acquaintance: ‘I'm off to Bordeaux for Easter.’
Acquaintance, once wine buff has left the room: ‘Poor old Deaux.’
Peterborough:
IT WILL be a hectic Easter weekend for Lord Petre, who is to open his family seat, Ingatestone Hall, to the public for the first time.
Restoration of the 16th-century house has taken two years, most attention going to the creation of women's lavatories and space for tea urns.
Managing the operation is Petre's son Dominic, 25, who actually lives in the house and will have to put up with disrupted weekends.
The 18th baron, who inherited the title three years ago, has sensibly decided to stay on at the Dower House, where he has been for many years.
Visitors to Ingatestone, one of the few houses in Essex to boast original mullioned windows, should watch out for Siddy the green parrot, who flaps around the garden performing his imitation of a ringing telephone.
‘I've known this parrot for 35 years and he still bites me,’ says Petre.
‘We inherited him from a friend of my mother.
He isn't that talkative, but manages the occasional, strangulated ‘allo’.
He hates me, and I hate him right back.’