

BIRMINGHAM, THE BIG HEART OF ENGLAND: HISTORY AND HERITAGE
The big city at the heart of England, that's Birmingham, a lively centre surrounded by lovely countryside and historic towns and villages.
Birmingham offers a feast of entertainment and culture — music, theatre, cinema, sport, a spectacular range of hotels and restaurants, and a warm welcoming atmosphere.
A market centre since the 12th century, Birmingham is a major industrial and business city, with a proud heritage of enterprise and craftsmanship.
From the 16th century onwards Birmingham's manufacturers have made and sold quality goods.
In the Civil War Birmingham's swords, pikes and armour equipped the parliamentarians, and the city's fame spread.
By the 18th century, and the Industrial Revolution, Birmingham had become the commercial capital of the Midlands, and the ‘workshop of the world’, with expertise in jewellery, guns, swords, buckles and buttons.
Many of Britain's great inventors and innovators came from Birmingham:Matthew Boulton , the industrialist — his partner James Watt spent most of his life here — and John Baskerville , the printer.
Their presence is still obvious around the city, in statues and monuments, in buildings used by them and restored for other purposes now, and at the church they attended,St Paul's in the Jewellery Quarter .
Traditional crafts are still practised in the Jewellery Quarter, and at the Discovery Centre you can still see these skills in action and learn about the history of the area.
Birmingham is also a leading centre for food and drink production, with Cadbury, the food and confectionery giant starting life in Birmingham in 1824 with a tea and coffee shop.
Now you can visit Cadbury World and see the history of chocolate and its manufacture from cocoa bean to the finished product.
Cars and auto components have been made in Birmingham since their invention, and the  Rover Group still manufactures here.
A marvellous selection of transport museums with cars, trains, motorcycles and aeroplanes, in and around the city, bears witness to this tradition.
In 1889, Queen Victoria granted Birmingham the status of a city in recognition of its commercial importance, and the municipal enterprise which swept away terrible slums, creating great thoroughfares, and made Birmingham ‘the best governed city in the world’ under Joseph Chamberlain.
The grand Victorian and Edwardian architecture of this period still gives the civic centre of Birmingham its character.
The great Council House of 1879 and the neo-Classical Town Hall rub shoulders with the bold and modern.
Birmingham is still famed for its vision and enterprise building the National Exhibition Centre (NEC), the International Convention Centre (ICC), the beautiful new open space outside it —Centenary Square — and the National Indoor Arena (NIA) for sport.
The canal network put Birmingham at the centre of Britain's transport system in the 1780's, and these lovely waterways still provide green corridors through the city, where people can walk, row or cruise on traditional style narrowboats.
The canals form a backdrop to many new developments, linking the ICC, NIA with tourist attractions in the suburbs.
The city centre shops offer an amazing variety, from Victorian arcades, to modern fashion malls, from department stores to 1,000 market stalls.
Birmingham's museums hold a wealth of artistic treasures, with the finest Pre-Raphaelite collection in the country and a marvellous Impressionist one too.
Birmingham is an ideal base for enjoying culture and entertainment, shopping, sport, theatre, music, as well as for touring the Heart of England area.
Why not try a Warm Hearted Weekend, in an excellent hotel at bargain rates, and explore for yourself?
THEATRE, MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT
Birmingham's lively musical scene has won it the title ‘UK City of Music 1992’ in the Arts Council's Arts 2000 scheme linking a different city or region with a particular art form each year to the year 2000.
SOUNDS LIKE BIRMINGHAM is the name of the year long festival marking the award.
Highlights are rare performances of huge scale outdoor musical works, and a marvellous range of top musical performers visiting the city in 1992.
For music lovers, Birmingham's attractions include the acclaimed City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra (CBSO) under the dynamic baton of Simon Rattle.
The CBSO now performs regularly in its new home — Symphony Hall in the ICC — which opened in 1991 to universal praise for its perfect acoustics.
A dazzling programme of visiting performers in all types of music complements the CBSO AT Symphony Hall .
Birmingham's neo-Classical Town Hall now hosts concerts by many visiting orchestras and smaller ensembles too.
Jazz is very popular in Birmingham too, with a ten day festival each July, where every type of jazz is heard in all kinds of places — indoors and out.
Adding to the already extensive number of jazz venues in Birmingham,Ronnie Scott's new club attracts top artists from around the world.
The NEC's 12,000 seat Arena and the new 13,000 seater National Indoor Arena welcome the world's top rock and pop stars in the exciting and colourful live shows.
Birmingham's theatres are some of the best in the country, for variety, quality, and facilities.
The Birmingham Hippodrome is home to The Birmingham Royal Ballet (formerly Sadlers Wells), which performs in the city for six weeks each year.
Visiting ballet and opera companies include the best in the world, the Kirov Opera, the Moscow City Ballet, and regular seasons by the Welsh National Opera.
Contemporary dance, comedy, cabaret, pantomime and drama make up a packed schedule.
THEATRE, MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT.
The Birmingham Repertory Theatre stages acclaimed productions of the classics, contemporary drama and comedy with highly acclaimed costumes and sets made in-house.
Its Studio Theatre has a life of its own at the forefront of creative theatre.
The Alexandra Theatre is home to the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company , masters of the Gilbert and Sullivan light opera tradition.
It also features serious drama festivals, touring shows, lively musicals and pantomime.
Film buffs have a field day in Birmingham, with both mainstream cinemas, and avant garde, minority interest and foreign films at the Triangle Cinema and the Midlands Arts Centre in Edgbaston.
The annual Film and TV Festival each autumn offers the chance to view new films early, and to see some off beat films.
There is also an annual Readers and Writers Festival at the Midlands Arts Centre, with well known authors talking and listening to their readers.
Beyond the city boundaries but just a short drive away is the Royal Shakespeare Theatre on the River Avon at Stratford, the Grand Theatre at Wolverhampton and the Arts Centre at Warwick University.
Birmingham's nightclubs offer a variety of attractions, from spectacular discotheques to small live music venues.
There are wine bars and pub sin every setting from a converted canalside warehouse to the ground floor of a theatre!
The major Birmingham venues share the world's largest ticket booking service.
Tickets for all theatre, concert and sports events are available from BCVB's Ticket Shop and Tourist Information Centre in City Arcade.
SHOPPING
Birmingham's shops are well worth a visit.
Every taste is catered for — from large department stores to small high class specialist shops in charming Victorian arcades.
The city is famed for its markets.
The Bull Ring is the centuries sold site of Birmingham's original market, established in 1166 when Henry II granted Peter de Bermingham a Royal Charter to hold a market.
Now the five retail markets are still held, and a new traditional style market square is being built as part of the new Bull Ring.
Major new shopping developments have given Birmingham the best facilities in the region.
The Pallasades , the Pavilions are bright new malls, with the top fashion chain stores in comfortable and convenient surroundings.
City Plaza is the glittering home of many designer labels, and Rackhams is Birmingham's own House of Fraser store — the Midlands' answer to Harrods!
The many specialist jewellery and silverware and watch shops in the famous Jewellery Quarter offer quality craftsmanship at amazing prices.
EATING OUT
The world's cuisine in one city: Thai, Indian, Chinese, Spanish, South American, Californian, French, Austrian, Italian and magnificent English cooking of days gone by are all available at Birmingham's restaurants.
From fast food to elegant banqueting, all tastes are catered for.
In the city centre a variety of quality restaurants provide an excellent business lunch, tasty snack, a whole evening out, or a pre or post-theatre dinner.
In the heart of the city, there's live music while you eat in several restaurants, with a host of restaurants convenient for shops and theatres.
Chinatown in Birmingham is close to the Hippodrome area and there are several highly recommended Chinese restaurants there.
Birmingham is the capital of ‘Balti’ in Britain — a delicious type of Kashmiri cuisine, with numerous excellent Balti houses around the Stratford Road area.
The Jewellery Quarter is home to several excellent restaurants in interesting historic surroundings — an 18th century former bucklemaker's shop off St Paul's Square , and fascinatingly restored warehouses and Victorian houses.
A few minutes out of town there's a famous Victorian restaurant where unusual dishes of days gone by are served in intimate, candlelit rooms, a medieval moated manor house now a hotel, and lovely country house hotels with excellent restaurants.
BIRMINGHAM — SO MUCH TO SEE AND DO
Birmingham has a fascinating heritage which has left is with a wealth of attractions for the visitor.
Trace the network of canals which threat their way throughout the city, by narrowboat or by strolling along the attractively renovated towpaths.
See the city's fine Victorian architecture, and visit its excellent museums.
At the heart of the city is the magnificent Council House completed in 1879, crowned by a splendid dome, and a mosaic depicting Britannia rewarding the city manufacturers.
Across Victoria Square stands the Georgian neo-Classical Town Hall , based on the Temple of Castor and Pollux in ancient Rome.
Chamberlain Square is a lively amphitheatre flanked by the Museum and Art Gallery and the Central Library which houses over 1 million books on nine floors, with Britain's largest Shakespeare collection numbering over 50,000 items.
The City Museum and Art Gallery houses the world's finest collection of Pre-Raphaelite art, and displays of 17th and 18th century painting and sculpture.
The Barber Institute of Fine Arts at the University of Birmingham is one of the finest small collections in the world with about 200 paintings from the Middle Ages to the 20th century.
The Museum of Science and Industry is the home of the world's oldest working steam engine, veteran cars, motorcycles and aircraft.
The Patrick Collection at Kings Norton houses a unique collection of vintage cars and supercars of today.
Birmingham has a whole range of historic buildings.
There are three cathedrals, the lovely St Philip's Anglican cathedral, a Palladian style building complete din 1725,St Chad's Roman Catholic cathedral and a little known Greek Orthodox one too.
BIRMINGHAM — SO MUCH TO SEE AND DO
Aston Hall is a marvellously preserved Jacobean mansion;Sarehole Mill , the inspiration for J.R.R. Tolkien's ‘The Hobbit’;Selly Manor , a half-timbered early 15th century house, and Blakesley Hall , a prime example of an Elizabethan half-timbered farmhouse.
Cadbury World is a major attraction set in Cadbury's famous garden factory in Birmingham's Bournville.
Visitors trace the history of chocolate and small, taste and drink it too through a multi-media exhibition following the trail of cocoa and chocolate from its beginnings in Aztec Central America, to the Cadbury story in Victorian Birmingham.
Chocolate production is demonstrated in a miniature factory area where a Cadbury World assortment is manufactured from a cocoa bean to chocolate product.
Visitors also see part of the Bournville packaging plant, as well as displays on distribution, marketing and the famous Cadbury advertisements.
Green Spaces
Parks and gardens are a feature of Birmingham.
The spectacular Botanical Gardens in Edgbaston with their tropical glasshouses, giant lily pool and fantastic palms are set in acres of landscaped grounds just minutes from the city centre.
The formal walled gardens of Castle Bromwich Hall contain rare 18th century examples of fruit and vegetables, herbs and shrubs, in beautifully restored surroundings.
THE JEWELLERY QUARTER
Birmingham has a Quarter, world famous for jewellery, gold and silversmithing.
Just ten minutes' walk from the city centre, the Jewellery Quarter is home to over 200 manufacturing jewellers and 50 silversmiths, as well as the Birmingham School of Jewellery and Silversmithing .
The new Jewellery Quarter Discovery Centre provides an excellent introduction to this unique area, its craft and people.
A visit includes a tour around a ‘time capsule’ jewellery works which remained little changed between 1914 and its closure in 1981, where visitors see the processes involved in jewellery craft.
The Quarter can trace its roots as far back as 1460, when work in precious metals is first recorded in Birmingham.
The trade grew rapidly in the 18th century, when brassfounders, bucklemakers, button manufacturers, gunsmiths, toymakers and jewellers all moved in.
In 1774 Birmingham's own Assay Office was set up, thanks to the campaigning of one of the city's great industrialists, Matthew Boulton.
It stands today in Newhall Street, where it settled in 1977.
The anchor is still the city's mark.
There is a spectacular new landmark in the Quarter, courtesy of the Duchy of Cornwall: massive sculptured gates representing a metaphorical ‘tree of life’ form the entrance to the Jewellery Business Centre on Spencer Street.
The Centre, designed for use by the jewellery industry and related businesses, is an inner city regeneration scheme created by the Prince of Wales through the Duchy.
The gateway to the Jewellery Quarter from the city centre, is the elegant St Paul's Square with its many bars and restaurants.
Its focus is St Paul's, the ‘jewellers church’, where many of the early manufacturers worshipped, who later made Birmingham famous as ‘the city of a thousand trades’.
There are over 100 shops in the Quarter, selling a wide range of beautiful jewellery, clocks and watches, often at very competitive prices.
SPORT AND LEISURE
Birmingham is home to the UK's National Indoor Arena for sport, which opened in 1991.
World championships in several sports are already lined up for the Arena, as well as national and local sports events to drawn sports fans from all over Britain.
The NIA is equipped to stage 30 different indoor sports with various configurations of seating.
A six lane demountable running track makes the NIA Britain's top venue for indoor athletics.
Other top sporting events in the Birmingham calendar include outdoor athletics at the Alexander Stadium , the Dow Classic Ladies Tennis tournament at the Edgbaston Priory Club , the Royal International Horse Show , best and county cricket at the Warwickshire County Ground in Edgbaston, and top golf tournaments at the Belfry , the National Golf Centre.
First division football is on offer at Aston Villa and rugby, speedway and greyhound racing are also regularly staged.
Sports enthusiasts can also use the city's excellent facilities to participate in swimming, golf, soccer, tennis, s quash, rock climbing, canoeing, go-carting, BMX, roller hockey, dry skiing, orienteering and narrowboating.
Open spaces and parkland are a feature of Birmingham, with the lovely city parks,Cannon Hill and the Botanical Gardens and the wilder country parks at Sutton Coldfield and Woodgate Valley.
Watersports are also widely available.
BIRMINGHAM — ONE OF THE WORLD'S GREAT MEETING PLACES
Birmingham is the UK's top convention and exhibition city, with its unrivalled facilities for business meetings, conferences, conventions and trade fairs.
The National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham , hosts over 100 large scale trade and public exhibitions each year, covering the whole spectrum of industry, commerce and leisure.
The complex provides 125,000 square metres of exhibition space in 12 halls, and expansion plans are set to double the NEC's original size by the end of the century.
Adding 20,000 square metres, the recently completed Atrium complex is linked to the main Piazza by ‘Skywalk’, the longest moving pavement in the UK.
Large conventions are spectacular rock concerts are held in the 12,000 seat Arena.
The International Convention Centre in the heart of Birmingham, opened in 1991 to universal acclaim.
The ICC has 11 meeting halls to house meetings from 30 to 3,000 people.
The most advanced technical facilities are complemented by the expertise of skilled event planners, technicians and caterers.
There are halls for banqueting up to 3,000, for small exhibitions, industrial theatre and simultaneous translation.
The Symphony Hall at the ICC is Britain's ‘virtuoso among concert halls’ according to national music critics, home to the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and host to the world's top visiting musicians.
It also houses plenary conference sessions for up to 2,200 people.
the National Indoor Arena is adjacent to the ICC.
Designated Britain's premier venue for international athletics events, it can also house conventions or concerts for up to 13,000.
The whole area round the ICC is being rejuvenated, with the marvellous Centenary Square providing a grand setting for new works of public art specially commissioned by the City to complement the ICC, and give another attractive open space to the city centre.
There are many other conference centres and hotels with conference suites throughout the city.
Birmingham's popularity with meeting planners owes much to its ease of accesses from all parts of the UK and Europe.
Birmingham is a the hub of the motorway and railway networks of Britain.
Its excellent airport voted ‘Best Overall UK Airport’ by the Consumers' Association, now offers even more direct flights to all parts of Europe from its new terminal ‘Eurohub ’.
With over 34,000 hotel beds within a 30 mile radius of Birmingham, the city can accommodate even the largest international events.
Birmingham Convention and Visitor Bureau offers a hotel reservation service for groups and individuals both before you arrive or on the day.
Tourist information, advice on conference venues and help with social events and excursions are also available free from BCVB.
Tel. 021 780 4321 .
AROUND THE BIG HEART OF ENGLAND
Birmingham lies in a wealth of beautiful countryside, historic houses, interesting towns and pretty villages.
From the rugged Peak District to the north to the rolling Cotswolds Hills in the south, the Big Heart of England region offers a wide range of attractions for the visitors to Birmingham.
25 miles from Birmingham, Shakespeare's home town of Stratford upon Avon boasts five beautifully preserved Shakespearian houses, the playwright's birthplace,Anne Hathaway's Cottage, Halls Croft, New Place, and Mary Arden's House , with their period furnishings, and displays on contemporary life.
See Shakespeare's plays at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre or other plays at the Swan Theatre .
Stroll by the river and enjoy the delightful speciality shops.
Warwick Castle is the finest medieval castle in England, it its magnificent grounds on the banks of the River Avon.
A Madame Tussauds waxworks display illustrating ‘A Royal Weekend Party of the 1890's’, brings the sumptuous state apartments to life.
Other charming stately homes in the area include the National Trust properties of Charlecote, Packwood House and Baddesley Clinton near Solihull,Coughton Court near Alcester, and Hanbury Hall at Droitwich.
Also well worth a visit are Hagley Hall, Ragley Hall, Weston Park and Shugborough Hall .
AROUND THE BIG HEART OF ENGLAND
The Cotswolds villages with their honey-coloured buildings are worth exploring, and the towns of Worcester, Hereford, Gloucester and Lichfield whose magnificent medieval cathedrals dominate the skyline.
Coventry has a marvellous modern cathedral completed in the 1960's next to the ruins of the old.
Industrial heritage is the highlight of Ironbridge Gorge in Shropshire and the Black Country Museum in Dudley, working museums demonstrating the skills of the 18th and 19th centuries.
The crystal glassware factories at Stourbridge offer the chance to see glass manufactured and marvellous factory shop bargains.
Stoke-on-Trent, the ‘Potteries’ and the lovely Peak District are an hour's drive away to the north.
15 miles to the west, the scenic Severn Valley Railway with its steam trains runs from Kidderminster to Bridgnorth through the pretty Georgian town of Bewdley.
Transport enthusiasts are spoilt for choice in the Heart of England.
The Museum of British Road Transport at Coventry, the Patrick Collection , the National Motorcycle Museum near the NEC, and the huge Aerospace Museum at RAF Cosford are all well worth a visit.
WHERE TO STAY
Birmingham offers a wide range of accommodation, from prestigious five star hotels to friendly B & Bs, and at prices to suit every budget.
The Birmingham Convention & Visitor Bureau offers a free accommodation booking service for visitors to the city.
Just call 021 780 4321 for information and reservations.
Alternatively, accommodation can be booked direct with the hotel or B & B of your choice.
The rates quoted are per person, based on shared occupancy of a twin or double room, including English breakfast, service and VAT, without private bath unless all rooms are with private bath.
Single room supplements are normally charged.
NOTE: Inclusion does not necessarily imply recommendation.
Alma House Hotel E 
Superior budget accommodation.
Ideally located for easy access to National Indoor Arena, International Convention Centre, all motorway connections, the NEC and public transport to city Centre.
Access and Visa cards accepted.
Ashdale House Hotel E ETB Listed 
Victorian character hotel in a quite convenient location overlooking part 10 minutes to City/NEC.
Colour TVs, drinks facilities, radio alarms in all rooms.
We serve delicious free-range, organic English breakfasts and happily cater for special diets.
Les Routiers approved.
Asquith House Hotel D 
Dine and relax in comfortable elegant surroundings that evoke the very best of the Victorian era.
The ideal venue for conferences meetings, receptions.
Dining is a pleasurable necessity and our menu delicious.
Victorian splendour with an atmosphere of  homely friendliness.
Atholl Lodge Guest House E 
We are a very friendly guest house, and pride ourselves on our excellent service.
All rooms have TV, central heating and tea/coffee facilities.
Some rooms are en-suite.
We are convenient for NEC, airport and City Centre and have off street parking.
Bearwood Court Hotel E 
Family run by the Doyle family.
3 miles Birmingham City Centre.
2 miles junction 1 M5 West Bromwich.
Very convenient to host of facilities.
20 minutes to NEC. 10 minutes to the Black Country Museum.
Beech House Hotel D 
Well appointed, homely hotel, having nine rooms, some en-suite with colour TV, all with H & C, central heating, double glazing, shaver points, tea/coffee facilities, situated two  minutes from Railway Station, ten minutes from City Centre, on A5127, within 500m.
M6 junction 6 Midland links motorway.
Berni Royal Hotel C 
Georgian hotel close to Sutton Coldfield town centre.
Easy access to motorway network.
Within 15 mins NEC, ICC and Birmingham Airport, 22 rooms all with private bath/shower, TV, tea/coffee, trouser press.
Ample parking, 2 bars, restaurant and meeting room.
Copthorne Hotel B 
Situated in the heart of the City, close to Museum, Galleries and Shopping the Copthorne offers a friendly welcome with first class accommodation and excellent facilities which include Indoor Pool and Leisure Centre, Goldsmiths Restaurant and complimentary Car Parking.
Idea base for touring the Cotswolds and Stratford.
Crown Midland Guest House E Ideally positioned near Birmingham City Centre, the Airport/NEC and the motorways.
The accommodation offered is of a high quality with private facilities, toilet, room telephone, colour television, private car park and evening meals are available on request.
French, German and Spanish spoken on premises.
Elmdon Guest House C 
Elmdon House is a friendly, family run Guest House situated near to The National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham Airport, Birmingham International Railways Station and is within easy reach of Birmingham City Centre and Solihull.
Fairlawns Hotel and Restaurant C 
A tastefully extended and refurbished Victorian building set in own grounds with views over open countryside and yet within easy driving distance of Birmingham and the NEC.
Award winning restaurant servicing superior cuisine.
Facilities for meetings and training seminars.
Forest of Arden Hotel, Golf & Country Cub A 
A few minutes' drive from the NEC, M42, M6 and Birmingham International Airport.
Forest of Arden is uniquely located in a mature parkland  setting surrounded by two 18 hole golf courses and offering a  comprehensive range of conference and leisure facilities.
Forte Crest (Formerly The Albany) C 
Minutes away from the ICC and NEC, the Forte Crest is a modern stylish hotel offering high standards of comfort and quality cuisine.
Amenities include health and fitness centre with squash courts and indoor pool.
Extensive conference and banqueting facilities.
The George Hotel B 
The hotel is a delightful blend of traditional hospitality and the most modern elegant facilities.
At is heart lie the timbered frames of a 16th Century coaching inn.
The hotel has expanded over the years and complex of buildings surrounds the hotel's historic bowling green — the second oldest in Britain — complete with a protected 600 year old yew tree.
Grand Hotel B 
A traditional Victorian hotel, The Grand has been refurbished City Centre opposite Birmingham Cathedral, the hotel is minutes away from New Street Station, the ICC and new Indoor Arena.
A choice of restaurants together with a carvery and Chamberlains A La Carte restaurant.
Great Barr Hotel & Conference Centre C 
This modern hotel, renowned for its warm welcome is situated on the outskirts of Birmingham, easily accessible by road, just five miles from the City Centre, ICC and NIA, the hotel is perfect for both the leisure and business traveller.
Greswolde Park Hotel C 
Family run hotel of high standard offering a personal, friendly and efficient service.
All rooms have colour TV/tea/coffee making facilities.
Ten minutes from NEC, International Convention Centre and City Centre.
Close to rail, bus and motorway links.
Holiday Inn Birmingham A 
Modern 295 room hotel situated City Centre close to International Convention Centre, National Indoor Arena, downtown Shopping and Theatres.
Conservatory restaurant, two bars, well equipped health club and pool.
Parking free on site to residents.
Weekend break rates available on request.
Hyatt Regency Birmingham A 
The Hyatt Regency Birmingham brings the celebrated Hyatt touch to the United Kingdom's second city.
Located in the centre of Birmingham, it looks back to the city's rich heritage with its colourful canalside setting; and forward to a dynamic future through its direct link with the International Convention Centre and renowned Symphony Hall.
Kerry House Hotel E 
Comfortable and private house near to NEC and Airport.
All rooms have en-suite facilities, colour TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Reduced weekend rates.
Lea Marston Hotel & Leisure Complex C 
3 Star private hotel in 20 landscaped acres in Heart of England.
Ten minutes from Birmingham Airport, NEC and ICC.
Leisure pursuits — golf course, driving ranges, bowls, tennis, skittles.
Excellent Restaurant, Conference and Private Party facilities.
Extensive parking.
The Lodge, Hall Green E 
The Lodge offers 51 comfortable en-suite double and single rooms.
All rooms have colour TV, radio, coffee and tea making facilities.
Our price includes continental buffet breakfast and VAT, plus the use of our Greyhound Stadium complex amenities.
Lyndhurst Hotel D 
This friendly family run hotel has 14 en-suite bedrooms, with colour TV, hostess trays and  hairdryers .
Situated within 1/2 mile M6 Junction 6 and only 3 miles from City and International Convention Centre.
National Exhibition Centre and Airport just 9 miles.
The Midland Hotel C 
Conveniently close to the ICC and NEC, only minutes from road, rail and international air links.
The newly refurbished Midland Hotel has 111 individually designed bedrooms.
The Castillane Restaurant, four bars, all of which recapture the splendour of the Victorian era.
Moor Hall Hotel B 
Set in beautiful parkland 15 minutes only from Birmingham City Centre, 20 minutes from Birmingham Airport and The NEC the hotel is the perfect location for the travelling business person, easy access from M6, M5, M40 and M42.
Gymnasium, sauna, steam room, beauty salon, indoor pool.
New Cobden Hotel B 
Set in scenic gardens on the Hagley Road (A456) with easy access to the motorways, NEC, ICC, National Indoor Arena and Cit Centre.
Our fully equipped leisure centre, en-suite rooms with 100 premier quality rooms make a superb venue for conferences or leisure.
New Hall Country House Hotel A 
personally run by Ian and Caroline Parkes, New Hall is the oldest moated manor house in England.
Guests dine sumptuously in the 16th Century oak-panelled, non-smoking restaurant renowned for its award winning food.
All rooms have finest facilities complete with welcoming decanter of sherry.
New Norfolk Hotel B 
The New Norfolk is situated on A456 Hagley road 2 miles from the City.
It has a wide variety of rooms and ten well appointed conference rooms.
Parking for over 100 cars and a Leisure Centre at nearby Cobden Hotel.
Novotel Birmingham Airport B 
Situated opposite the main terminal building at Birmingham International Airport, Novotel has a direct link with the NEC.
Easily accessible by road, rail or air Novotel is a convenient stopover point for your visit to Birmingham.
Novotel Birmingham (City Centre) B 
Novotel Birmingham (City Centre) is a 148 bedroomed hotel, situated just 200 yards from the International Convention Centre and a National Indoor Arena and a brief drive from the National Exhibition Centre.
With conference facilities to cater up to 300 people.
Old Farm Hotel & Peaches Restaurant B 
Set in picturesque surroundings of Bournville opposite ‘Cadbury World’, 5 mins from train connections to Birmingham International and NEC, M42, M5 and M6.
Our Peaches Restaurant is renowned for a warm and welcoming atmosphere with quality and personal attention from Gill and Doug.
Olton Cottage Guest House E Commended 
A family run Guest House with a friendly atmosphere.
Built in 1806 with lots of original features set in pleasant surroundings, guest lounge with open coal fire.
Evening meals on request.
Park International Hotel B 
The hotel is situated in the city centre, 200 yards from New Street Station.
The National Exhibition Centre and Birmingham International Airport are only a few miles away whilst the new International Convention Centre is only a short walk away.
Penns Hall Hotel A 
Penns Hall is situated just 6 miles from the centre of Birmingham and Birmingham International Airport.
The hotel can be found in its own extensive grounds alongside a beautiful lake.
Originally a spacious country house, the hotel offers every conference and leisure facility.
Plough & Harrow Hotel B 
In the year 1704 local craftsmen built a wayside inn with extensive stabling.
It was aptly named the Plough & Harrow.
Today offering traditional service and hospitality the Plough & Harrow has established an enviable reputation as one of Birmingham's finest hotels.
Portland Hotel C 
63 bedrooms all en-suite rooms include satellite TV, radio, trouser press, hairdryer, tea/coffee tray, direct dial telephone and central heating.
We offer an informal and relaxed atmosphere to enable your stay in Birmingham to be an enjoyable one.
Rollason Wood Hotel E 
Hotel is located close to Spaghetti Junction and includes 35 rooms all with TV, tea and  coffee making facilities.
Accommodation ranges from en-suite to budget rooms.
A la carte restaurant, bar, games rooms and lounge.
Special  weekly and weekend rates available.
Royal Angus Thistle Hotel B 
situated just off the main motorway network and within walking distance of the ICC and New Street Station.
All 133 bedrooms are furnished to a high standard with en-suite bathroom.
Raffles restaurant offers English/French cuisine.
Free overnight parking available.
San Roque Hotel E 
Bed and breakfast, evening means and licensed.
A small family run hotel with 18 bedrooms.
Single, Twin, Double and en-suite rooms all with colour TV, telephones, tea and coffee  facilities.
Situated 1 1/2 miles from ICC.
2 miles from City Centre.
Parking available.
WARMHEARTED WEEKENDS IN BIRMINGHAM THE BIG HEART OF ENGLAND — Weekend breaks in top hotels at bargain prices
Why not see one of the marvellous shows at Birmingham's theatres, hear a concert at the magnificent new Symphony Hall, Town Hall or NEC , take in a sporting event at the National Indoor Arena ?
Enjoy the shops, museums, historic houses, parks and gardens, or take in a public exhibition at the NEC.
Indulge your special interest in Birmingham.
Warm Hearted Weekend breaks are ideal for individuals or groups.
Contact the Birmingham Convention and Visitor Bureau, NEC, Birmingham B40 1NT.
Tel: 021 780 4321 for Warm Hearted Weekend bookings.
Prices start at just £22 per person per night including full English breakfast.
Solihull Moat House B 
A purpose-built four star luxury hotel with exceptional standards of accommodation and service.
Brookes A La Carte Restaurant overlooking the lake.
Jaspers Brasserie for informal dining.
Seven purpose-built conference suits, exclusive health club and heated indoor pool and gymnasium.
Standbridge Hotel E 
A highly individual place to stay.
Set in substantial mature gardens and possessing a quiet and relaxed atmosphere.
Enjoy the freshly prepared food and a high degree of personal attention.
The Strathallan Thistle Hotel B 
The Strathallan Thistle Hotel is renowned for its high standards of service, food and facilities.
It is convenient to Birmingham City Centre, Birmingham International Airport, train stations, M5/M6/M40 Motorway Network.
Also within easy reach of many places of interest, including the new International Convention Centre.
Sutton Court Hotel B 
Close to the M42, M6, M5, A38, A5, 20 minutes from NEC and Birmingham Airport.
½ mile from train station.
½ mile from centre of Sutton Coldfield.
All bedrooms en-suite.
Good restaurant facilities.
Close to Sutton Park and very large leisure centre.
Swallow Hotel A 
Situated at Five Ways, at the top of Broad Street near to the International Convention Centre.
The hotel is luxurious and elegant, offering two choices of restaurants, Langtry's English Restaurant and Sir Edward Elgar Restaurant.
Ample car parking on site.
Villanova Hotel D 
Comfortable friendly hotel.
Every attention given.
Tea and coffee making facilities and colour TV.
Three miles from City Centre.
Evening means and licensed bar.
Quiet Cul-de-Sac.
Personal supervision.
West Bromwich Moat House Hotel C 
Ideally located at the heart of the country's motorway network for national or international travel connections, this modern 180 bedroomed hotel, conference and banqueting centre offers a warm friendly welcome in comfortable surroundings to the discerning traveller.
Birmingham City and the International Convention Centre are only 4 miles away.
Westfield Court Hotel E 
Small friendly family-run hotel (licensed).
En-suite rooms with TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Budget rooms available.
15 minutes from NEC and International Convention Centre.
Wheatsheaf Hotel C 
2 miles from the NEC, Birmingham International and Birmingham Airport.
3 miles from Junction 5, M42, 6 miles from International Convention Centre and National Indoor Arena.
All rooms with modern facilities and corporate terms available on request.
Woodlands Hotel D 
Family-run hotel ideally situated for all the local amenities including the City Centre, bus routes, universities, Q.E.
Medical Centre, Dudley Road Hospital and new International Convention Centre.
Five minutes from M5 and M6 motorways.
Large car park at the rear.
Woodville House E 
First class accommodation just one mile from City Centre.
Full English breakfast.
All rooms colour TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
En-suite bedrooms available.
Car Parking.
Full fire protection system.