

The Great Gilly Hopkins Katherine Paterson
Day 1 A Fresh Start
Introduction
Today's reading is the first part of an American novel called The Great Gilly Hopkins written by Katherine Paterson.
Gilly gets off to a bad start in life by having a mother who deserts her when she is only three years old but her problems since then are all of her own making.
You could say that Gilly is her own worst enemy.
She seems all the more objectionable because so many people have been falling over themselves to help her.
The story starts with Gilly being taken by her social worker to a new foster home….
‘Gilly,’ said Miss Ellis with a shake of her long blonde hair toward the passenger in the back seat.
‘I need to feel that you are willing to make some effort.’
Galadriel Hopkins shifted her bubble gum to the front of her mouth and began to blow gently.
She blew until she could barely see the shape of the social worker's head through the pink bubble.
‘This will be your third home in less than three years.
I would be the last person to say that it was all your fault.
The Dixons' move to Florida, for example.
Just one of those unfortunate things.
And Mrs Richmond having to go into the hospital’— it seemed to Gilly that there was a long, thoughtful pause before the caseworker went on —‘for her nerves.’
Pop !
Miss Ellis flinched and glanced in the rear view mirror but continued to talk in her calm, professional voice while Gilly  picked at the bits of gum stuck in her straggly hair and on her cheeks and chin.
‘We should have been more alert to her condition before placing any foster child there.
I should have been more alert.’
Cripes, thought Gilly.
The woman was getting sincere.
What a pain.
‘I'm not trying to blame you, Gilly.
It's just that I need, we all need, your co-operation if any kind of arrangement is to work out.’
Another pause.
‘I can't imagine you enjoy all this moving around.
Will you do me a favour, Gilly?
Try to get off on the right foot?’
Gilly had a vision of herself sailing around the living room of the foster home on her right foot like an ice skater.
With her uplifted left foot she was shoving the next foster mother square in the mouth.
She smacked her new supply of gum in satisfaction.
‘Do me another favour, will you?
Get rid of that bubble gum before we get there?’
Gilly obligingly took the gum out of her mouth while Miss Ellis's eyes were still in the mirror.
Then when the social worker turned her attention back to the traffic, Gilly carefully spread the gum under the handle of the left-hand door as a sticky surprise for the next person who might try to open it.
Two traffic lights further on Miss Ellis handed back a towelette.
‘Here,’ she said, ‘see what you can do about that gunk on your face before we get there.’
Gilly swiped the little wet paper across her mouth and dropped it on the floor.
‘Gilly —’ Miss Ellis sighed….
‘My name,’ Gilly said between her teeth, ‘is Galadriel.’
Miss Ellis appeared not to have heard.
‘Gilly, give Maime Trotter half a chance, OK?
She's really a nice person.’
That cans it, thought Gilly.
The Newman family, who couldn't keep a five-year-old who wet her bed, had been ‘nice’.
Well, I'm eleven now, folks, and, in case you hadn't heard, I don't wet my bed anymore.
But I am not nice.
I am brilliant.
I am famous across this entire country.
Nobody wants to tangle with the great Galadriel Hopkins.
I am too clever and too hard to manage.
Gruesome Gilly, they call me.
She leaned back comfortably.
Here I come, Maime baby, ready or not.’
They had reached a neighbourhood of huge trees and old houses.
The social worker slowed and stopped beside a dirty  white fence.
The house it penned was old and brown with a porch that gave it a sort of potbelly.
‘Hey, there, I thought I heard y'all pull up.’
The door had opened, and a huge hippopotamus of a woman was filling the doorway.
‘Welcome to Thompson Park, Gilly, honey.’
‘Galadriel,’ muttered Gilly, not that she expected this bale of blubber to manage her real name.
Jeez, they didn't have to put her in with a freak.
Half a small face, topped with muddy brown hair and masked with thick metal-rimmed glasses, jutted out from behind Mrs Trotter's mammoth hip.
The woman looked down.
‘You want to meet your new sister, don't you?
Gilly, this is William Ernest Teague.’
The head immediately disappeared behind Mrs Trotter's bulk.
She didn't seem bothered.
‘Come on, come in.
You belong here now.’
Gilly could feel Miss Ellis's fingers on her backbone gently prodding her through the doorway and into the house.
Prayer
All of us feel sometimes that life is treating us unfairly.
Let us make sure that we do not direct our anger and frustration onto people who are only trying to help us.
May we use our anger in a productive way to try and change things for the better.
Amen 
Day 2 Being Gentle with Ourselves
Introduction
Teenage magazines often have stories about girls who fall in love with handsome, exciting young men who don't care for them at all while ignoring the nice, but rather ordinary, boy-next-door who thinks the world of them.
The stories often have a happy ending where the girl finally realises what a wonderful husband or boy-friend the boy-next-door could be.
Gilly Hopkins idolises her mother who, as you may guess, doesn't really care about Gilly at all.
In today's extract, Gilly spoils all her chances of having a happy and permanent relationship with Maime Trotter — someone who, unlike Gilly's  mother, is prepared to be completely kind, affectionate and forgiving.
The extract starts where Gilly has just received a postcard from her mother.
It was a postcard showing sunset on the ocean.
Slowly she turned it over.
My dearest Galadriel, The agency wrote me that you had moved.
I wish it were to here.
I miss you.
All my love, Courtney.
That was all.
Gilly read it again.
And then a third time.
No.
That was not all.
Up on the address side, in the left-hand corner.
The letters were squeezed together so you could hardly read them.
An address.
Her mother's address.
She could go there.
She could hitch-hike across the country to California.
She would knock on the door, and her mother would open it.
And Courtney would throw her arms around her and kiss her all over her face and never let her go.
‘I wish it were to here.
I miss you.’
See, Courtney wanted her to come.
‘All my love.’
Inside her head, Gilly packed the brown suitcase and crept down the stairs.
It was the middle of the night.
Out into the darkness.
She'd steal some food.
Maybe a little money.
People picked up hitch-hikers all the time.
She'd get to California in a few days.
Probably less than a week.
People were always picking up hitch-hikers.
And beating them up.
And killing them.
And pitching their dead bodies into the woods.
All because she didn't have the money to buy a plane ticket or even a bus ticket.
Oh, why did it have to be so hard?
Other kids could be with their mothers all the time.
Dumb, stupid kids who didn't even like their mothers much.
While she —
She put her head down and began to cry.
She didn't mean to, but it was so unfair.
She hadn't even seen her mother since she was three years old.
Her beautiful mother who missed her so much and sent her all her love.
‘You all right, honey?’
Tap, tap, tap.
‘You all right?’
Gilly sat up straight.
Couldn't anyone have any privacy around this dump?
She stuffed the postcard under her pillow and then smoothed the covers that she'd refused to straighten before school.
‘Can I come in?,
‘No!’ shrieked Gilly, then snatched open the door.
‘Can't you leave me alone for one stupid minute?’
Trotter's eyelids flapped on her face like shutters on a vacant house.
‘You OK honey?’ she repeated.
‘I will be as soon as you get your fat self outta here.’
‘OK.’
Trotter backed up slowly towards the stairs.
‘Call me, if you want anything.’
As an afterthought she said, ‘It ain't a shameful thing to need help, you know.’
‘I don't need any help.’
Gilly slammed the door, then yanked it open —‘from anybody!’
She slammed it shut once more.
‘I miss you.
All my love.’
I don't need help from anybody except you.
If I wrote you — if I asked, would you come and get me?
You're the only one in the world I need, I'd be good for you.
You'd see.
I'd change into a whole new person.
I'd turn from gruesome Gilly into gorgeous, gracious, good, glorious Galadriel.
And grateful.
Oh, Courtney — oh, mother, I'd be so grateful.
Later, Gilly ripped out a sheet of paper through the rings of her notebook, lay down on the bed, and pressing on her maths book wrote:
1408 Aspen Ave: Thompson Park, MD.
Dear Courtney Rutherford Hopkins,
I received your card.
I am sorry to bother you with my problems, but as my real mother, I feel you have a right to know about your daughter's situation.
At the present time, it is very desperate, or I would not bother you.
The foster mother is a religious fanatic.
Besides that she can hardly read and write and has a very dirty house and weird friends.
There is another kid here who is probably mentally retarded.
I am expected to do most of the work including taking care of him (the mentally retarded boy) which is very hard with all my school-work too.
She wrote ‘Love’ then changed it to:
Yours sincerely, your daughter, Galadriel Hopkins 
P.S. I have checked the cost of a bus ticket to San Francisco.
It is exactly 136 dollars 60 one way.
I will get a job and pay you back as soon as possible.
She listened at the top of the stairs until she heard Trotter go into the downstairs bathroom.
Then she crept into the kitchen, stole an envelope and a stamp from the kitchen drawer, and ran to the corner to mail her letter before she could change her mind.
Conclusion
It's hard to accept that the people we care for may not feel the same way about us.
One-sided relationships, however, can be not only hurtful but can spoil our chances of building up friendships with people who might care for us much more.
Prayer
We often pray in Assembly that we may be gentle and kind with other people.
Let us pray today that we may be gentle with ourselves, guarding ourselves from relationships that might exploit us or be hurtful.
Let us strive for relationships that are mutual and be careful not to impose ourselves on people who don't want or need us.
Amen 
Day 3 Theft
Introduction
Gilly's foster mother, Maime Trotter, has befriended an elderly, blind neighbour called Mr Randolph.
After Mr Randolph has eaten a meal with the Trotter household, Gilly is sent round to his house to collect a book for reading aloud to him.
Gilly dragged a heavy stuffed chair backward to the shelf and climbed up on the very top of its back.
On tiptoe, leaning against the rickety lower shelves to keep from toppling, she could barely reach the book.
She pulled at it with the tip of her fingers, catching it as it fell.
Something fluttered to the floor as she did so.
Money.
She half-fell, half-jumped off the chair, and  snatched it up.
Two five-dollar bills had fallen out from behind the encyclopedia just when she was needing money so badly.
Here they'd come floating down.
Like magic.
Ten dollars wouldn't get her very far, but there might be more where these came from.
She climbed up again, stretching almost to the point of falling.
Although she could just about reach the top shelf with her fingertips, she was very unsteady.
Heavy footsteps thudded across the front porch.
The front door opened.
‘You all right, Gilly, honey?’
Gilly nearly tripped over herself, leaping down and grabbing up ‘Sarsaparilla to Sorcery’ from the chair seat, stretching her guts out to tip the book into its place on the shelf as Trotter appeared at the door.
‘You was taking so long,’ she said.
‘Then Mr Randolph remembered that maybe the bulbs was all burned out.
He tends to forget since they really don't help him much.’
‘There's a light here,’ Gilly snapped.
‘If there hadn't been, I'd have come back.
I'm not retarded.’
‘I believe you mentioned that before,’ said Trotter dryly.
‘Well, you find anything you wanted to read to Mr Randolph?’
‘It's a bunch of junk.’
‘One man's trash is another man's treasure,’ Totter said in a maddeningly calm voice, wandering over to a lower shelf as she did so.
She pulled out a squat leather-bound volume and blew the dust off the top.
‘He's got a yen for poetry, Mr Randolph.’
She handed the book up to Gilly, who was still perched on the chair.
‘This is one I used to try to read to him last year, but’— her voice sounded almost shy —‘I ain't too hot a reader myself, as you can probably guess.
Ready to come along?’
‘Yeah, yeah,’ she replied impatiently.
Holding her neck straight to keep from looking up at ‘Sarsaparilla’, she followed Trotter's bulk back to her house.
‘What did you bring?’
Mr Randolph's face looked like a child's before a wrapped-up present.
He was sitting right at the edge of the big brown chair.
‘The Oxford Book of English Verse ,’ Gilly mumbled.
He cocked his head.
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘The poems we was reading last year, Mr Randolph.’
Trotter had raised her voice as she always did speaking to the old man.
‘Oh, good, good,’ he said, sliding back into the chair until his short legs no longer touched the worn rug.
Gilly opened the book.
She read:.
‘Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
The soul that rises with us, our life's Star,
Hath had elsewhere its setting,
And cometh from afar:
Not in entire forgetfulness,
And not in utter nakedness
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
From God who is our home…’
‘Can I go now?’
Gilly's voice was sharp like the jagged edge of a tin-can top.
‘I do appreciate more than you know —’ but Gilly didn't wait to hear Mr Randolph's appreciation.
She ran up the stairs into her room.
Behind the closed door, she pulled the two bills from her pocket, and lying on the bed, smoothed out the wrinkles.
She would hide them beneath her underwear until she could figure out a better place.
‘I'm coming, Courtney,’ she whispered.
‘Trailing clouds of glory as I come.’
It was only a matter of getting back into Mr Randolph's house and getting the rest of the money.
There was sure to be more.
Conclusion
Taking money from an elderly blind person is obviously wrong, but Gilly felt that her need was greater than Mr Randolph's and also assumed that she wouldn't get found out.
Many people try to justify stealing like that.
If someone is given too much change in a supermarket, for instance, they might keep the money claiming that they need it much more than the supermarket does and, anyway, nobody would find out.
If we think that stealing is wrong, then it's just as wrong whether we are likely to be found out or not.
It's wrong for us to steal from someone who seems to be richer than we are just as it's wrong for someone to steal from us if they think their need is greater than ours.
Prayer
May we give careful thought to questions of what is right and what is wrong and try to live according to our beliefs.
May  we not fall into the temptation of thinking something is right just because we can get away with it.
May we come to respect ourselves for sticking to our principles and living our lives with honesty and integrity.
Amen 
Day 4 Running Away
Introduction
Gilly finds an excuse for going back to Mr Randolph's house and she manages to steal the rest of his money, but there is still not enough to pay for her ticket to San Francisco .
Then she sees Trotter's purse lying open with the money she has cashed from the county welfare.
Gilly takes the money and plans her departure….
She crept down, keeping her suitcase under her right arm to conceal it as best she could with her body.
Crossing the short, bright strip before the door, she glanced in.
Neither head turned.
She was safely to the front door.
She took her jacket off the hook and poked it above the suitcase, so that she had a free hand…
‘Where you going?’
She jumped around at William Ernest's whisper.
In the dark hallway his glasses flashed.
‘Just out,’ she whispered back.
Oh, god, make him shut up.
He did shut up and stood silently, looking first at her, then at the suitcase, then back at her.
‘Don't go.’
His little face squeezed up at her like his tiny voice.
‘I got to,’ she said through her teeth.
Opening the door, pulling it shut behind her, shifting the suitcase and jacket to either hand, and running, running, running, down the hill, the pulse in her forehead pounding as hard as her sneakered feet pounded the sidewalk.
She got to the bus station, stood up straight and went out to the ticket counter.
The man didn't even look up.
‘I want a ticket to California, please.’
As soon as the words were out, she heard her mistake.
‘California where?’
He glanced up now, looking at her.
through half-open lids.
‘Uh — San Francisco.
San Francisco, California.’
‘One-way or round trip?’
Whatever happened to Lady Cool?
‘One — one-way.’
He punched some buttons and a ticket magically emerged.
‘One thirty six sixty including tax.’
She had it.
She had enough.
With trembling hands, she took the wad of bills from her pocket and began to count it out.
The man watched lazily.
‘Your mother know where you are, kid?’
Come on, Gilly.
You can't fall apart now.
She pulled herself straight and directed into his sleepy eyes the look she usually reserved for teachers and principals.
‘I'm going to see my mother.
She lives in San Francisco.’
‘OK,’ he said, taking her money and recounting it before he handed her the ticket.
‘Bus leaves at eight thirty.’
‘Eight thirty?’
He nodded to the seats across the waiting room.
‘Just sit down over there.
I'll call you.’
Gilly didn't even see the policeman until she felt his hand on her arm.
She snatched her arm back as she looked to see who had touched her.
‘Where you headed, little girl?’
He spoke quietly as though not to disturb anyone.
‘To see my mother,’ said Gilly tightly.
Oh god, make him go away.
‘All the way to San Francisco by yourself?’
She knew then the clerk had called him.
Damn!
‘Yes.’
‘I see,’ he said with a quick look at the clerk, who was now staring at them with both eyes well open.
‘I haven't done anything wrong.’
‘Nobody's charging you with anything.’
The policeman pulled his cap straight and said in a very careful, very patient voice, ‘Who you been staying with here in the area?’
She didn't have to answer him.
It was none of his business.
‘Look.
Somebody's going to be worried about you.’
Like hell.
He cleared his throat.
‘What about giving me your telephone number?
So I can just check things out?’
She glared at him.
He coughed and cleared his throat again and looked up at the clerk.
She might have gotten away in that instant — except for the money.
Where could she go without the money?
‘I think,’ the policeman was saying, ‘I'd better take her in for a little talk.’
The clerk nodded.
He seemed to be enjoying himself.
‘Here's the money she brought in.’
He held up a manila envelope.
The policeman took her gently by the arm and walked her over to the counter.
The clerk handed him the envelope.
‘That's my money,’ Gilly protested.
‘I'll just bet it is, kid,’ the clerk said with a fake smile.
If she had known what to do, she would have done it.
She tried to make her brain tell her, but it lay frozen in her skull like a woolly mammoth deep in a glacier.
All the way to the station she asked it, Shall I jump out of the car at the next light and run?
Should I just forget about the damn money?
But the woolly mammoth slept on, refusing to stir a limb on her behalf.
Conclusion
Many young people run away from home rather than face up to their problems.
They often think it might demonstrate to their parents how dissatisfied they are without having to talk about it and explain.
Running away brings far more problems than it solves.
Parents feel betrayed because their children have caused them so much worry and, later on, children often feel guilty for upsetting their parents so much.
You can cope with parents so much better if you feel that you've tried your best with them and you don't feel guilty because you've hurt them.
If life at home ever does become unbearable, there are older relatives, school counsellors, Samaritans and social workers who can sometimes, as a last resort, find you somewhere else to live.
The best solution to dealing with problems at home, however, is just to talk things out calmly and honestly and try to reach a compromise.
Prayer
May we learn to face up to our problems and try to sort them out instead of pretending that they don't exist or trying to  run away from them.
May we be patient with people who find it hard to understand us.
Amen 
Day 5 Living with Mistakes
Introduction
Gilly is taken to the police station and confesses to stealing the money for her fare to San Francisco.
Maime Trotter says she doesn't want to press any charges so Gilly is allowed to go back home with her.
During the next few months, Gilly starts to become very fond of her new foster family.
She helps William Ernest with his reading and encourages him to stick up for himself at school.
She hardly spares a thought for the letter she wrote to her mother complaining about her foster home and asking to be moved….
Trotter was at the door, opening it before they reached the porch.
Gilly went cold.
You could tell something was badly wrong by the way the woman's smile twisted and her body sagged.
Sure enough, Miss Ellis was sitting on the brown chair.
Gilly's heart gave a little spurt and flopped over like a dud rocket.
She sat down quickly on the couch and hugged herself to keep from shaking.
Suddenly Miss Ellis began to speak, her voice bright and fake like a laxative commercial.
‘Well, I've got some rather astounding news for you, Gilly.’
Gilly hugged herself tighter.
The announcement of ‘news’ had never meant anything in her life except a new move.
‘Your mother…’
‘My mother's coming?’
She was sorry immediately for the outburst.
Miss Ellis' eyebrows launched into the twitchy dance they always seemed to at the mention of the words, ‘my mother.’
‘No.’
Twitch, twitch.
‘Your mother is still in California.
But your grandmother….’
‘What have I to do with her?’
‘…your mother's mother called the office this morning and then drove up all the way from Virginia to see me.
She and your mother’— twitch —‘want you to go with her.’
‘With who?’
‘With your grandmother.
Permanently .’
The social worker seemed to be dangling that last word before Gilly's nose, as if expecting her to jump up on her hind legs and dance for it.
Gilly leaned back.
What did they take her for?
‘I don't want to live with her,’ she said.
‘Gilly, you've been saying ever since you were old enough to talk….’
‘I never said I wanted to live with her !
I said I wanted to live with my mother .
She's not my mother.
I don't even know her!’
‘You don't know your mother, either.’
‘I do, too!
I remember her!
Don't tell me what I remember and what I don't!
Miss Ellis suddenly looked tired.
‘Your mother wants you to go to your grandmother's.
I talked to her long distance.’
‘Didn't she tell you she wanted me to come to California like she wrote me?’
‘No, she said she wanted you to go to your grandmother's house.’
‘They can't make me go there.’
Gently.
‘Yes, Gilly, they can.’
She felt as though the walls were squeezing in on her; she looked around wildly for some way to escape.
She fixed on Trotter.
‘Trotter won't let them take me, will you Trotter?’
Trotter flinched but kept on looking wooden-faced.
‘Trotter!
Look at me!
You said you'd never let me go.
I heard you.’
She was yelling now.
‘Never!
Never!
That's what you said!’
She was on her feet stamping and screaming.
The two women watched her, but numbly as though she were behind glass and there was no way they could reach in to her.
It was William Ernest who broke through.
He slid from under Trotter's big hand and ran to Gilly, snatched the band of her jacket, and pulled on it until she stopped screaming and stood still.
She looked down into his little near-sighted eyes, full of tears behind the thick lenses.
‘Don't cry, Gilly.’
‘I'm not crying’— she jerked her jacket out of his hands —‘I'm yelling!’
He froze, his hands up as though the jacket were still between his fingers.
Trotter shuddered to her feet like an old circus elephant.
‘You tell the child what's got to be done.
C'mon William Ernest, honey.’
She stuck out her big hand.
‘We ain't helping here.’
When he hesitated, she reached down and gently  pulled him to his feet.
They closed the door behind them, leaving Gilly cold and alone.
‘So you goofed it, right?’— Gilly didn't answer.
What did it matter?
‘I'd really like to know what you wrote that fool letter for?’
‘You wouldn't understand.’
‘You bet I wouldn't.
I don't understand why a smart girl like you goes around booby-trapping herself.
You could have stayed here indefinitely, you know.
They're both crazy about you.’
Miss Ellis shook her long blonde hair back off her shoulders.
‘Well, it's done now.
Your grandmother will come to pick you up at my office tomorrow.
I'll come about nine to get you.’
‘Tomorrow?’
‘Gilly, believe me, it's better.
Waiting around is no good in these situations.’
‘But I got school’—
‘They'll send your records on.’
Miss Ellis stood up and began to button her coat.
‘I must admit that last month when you ran away, I thought, Uh — oh, here we go again, but I was wrong, Gilly.
You've done well here.
I'm very pleased.’
‘Then let me stay.’
Galadriel Hopkins had rarely come so close to begging.
‘I can't,’ Miss Ellis said simply.
‘It's out of my hands.’
Conclusion
The story of Gilly Hopkins is very sad: Gilly has the opportunity to gain everything she's always wanted — someone who cares about her and forgives her and is willing to provide her with a loving home, but Gilly throws all this away simply by writing a letter when she's feeling very upset.
The hardest lesson for Gilly to learn is that she and nobody else is responsible for her own actions and that she has to live with her own mistakes.
Prayer
Let us remember that we are in charge of our own destiny.
No matter how many things seem to be working against us we are, ultimately, responsible for our successes and our failures, our sadness and our joy.
May we learn to accept responsibility for our own actions and inactions and for our mistakes as well as for our success.
Amen 
Possessions
Day 1 Treasure on Earth
Do not store up for yourselves treasure on earth, where it grows rusty and moth-eaten, and thieves break in to steal it.
Store up treasure in heaven, where there is no moth and no rust to spoil it, no thieves to break in and steal.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Therefore I bid you to put away anxious thoughts about food and drink to keep you alive, and clothes to cover your body.
Surely life is more than food, the body more than clothes.
Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow and reap and store in barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them.
You are worth more than the birds!
And why be anxious about clothes?
Consider how the lilies grow in the fields; they do not work, they do not spin, and yet, I tell you, even Solomon in all his splendour was not attired like one of these.
But if that is how God clothes the grass in the fields, which is there today, and tomorrow is thrown on the stove, will he not all the more clothe you?
How little faith you have!
No, do not ask anxiously, ‘What are we to eat?
What are we to drink?
What shall we wear?’
All these things are for the heathen to run after, not for you, because your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.
Set your mind on God's kingdom and his justice before everything else and all the rest will come to you as well.
So do not be anxious about tomorrow; tomorrow will look after itself.
Each day has troubles enough of its own.
Matthew 6: 19–34 New English Bible 
Conclusion
If someone were ill with starvation, it would be cruel and thoughtless to advise them to look after their spiritual life and not worry about where their next meal was coming from.
None of us is starving, however, and we all have more than enough clothes to wear, but we still spend a large part of our lives worrying about our material needs — what should we eat?
What should we wear?
What should we buy…?
Advertisers keep telling us that if only we were to buy all the right things, wear the right clothes, be seen at the right places, then we could be happy and popular and successful.
You might have noticed however, that people can spend small fortunes on themselves, go out to all the trendy places and stand around admiring themselves in their fashionable clothes but find that no one thinks any better of them for it.
Wearing fashionable clothes might give us more confidence, but we can gain that through thousands of other more important things.
We mustn'tmake buying things a substitute for developing the skills that will give us real and lasting confidence in ourselves.
Prayer
May we learn to recognise those things that are of lasting importance to us.
In our life-long quest for true fulfilment and for happiness may we not be too often diverted by striving for things which are worldly and too easily discarded.
Amen 
Day 2 Howard Hughes
Most people wish they were rich.
It is the main reason for filling in football coupons and entering all kinds of competitions.
It is one of the reasons behind ambition to get a ‘good’ job.
Almost everyone would like to have more money and many people daydream of being millionaires.
In 1976 one of the richest men in the world died.
He was called Howard Hughes and had lived what appeared to be a glamorous, exciting life.
By the age of 19 he controlled a company he had inherited from his father.
He was interested in aeroplanes and became an aviator.
He not only  designed and tested his own planes but, for a time, held most of the air speed records as well as the land speed record.
He founded an airline and eventually controlled the American company, TWA.
Hughes also bought a top Hollywood film company and produced many successful films with stars such as John Wayne, Bette Davis, Jane Russell, Ingrid Bergman, Katherine Hepburn, Ava Gardner and Ginger Rogers.
Hughes had a constant supply of glamorous female companions.
Yet, in spite of his wealth and success, he died isolated and friendless, feeding on fantasy and drugs.
Howard Hughes hardly ever had a close friend.
He felt upset if anyone touched him.
He had a brilliant technical mind but found little time for people.
He could remember minute details of planes he had helped to design but not the names of people with whom he worked.
He married twice but lived apart from both wives most of the time.
From 1940 until his death, he never owned a home because that would mean paying state taxation.
He wanted to control the lives of everyone around him, dictating even what food they should eat.
He was gripped by obsessions.
He became completely obsessed about germs, eventually sealing himself in a hotel room with masking tape over the doors and windows and paper towels over the bed and chairs.
Anything handed to him had to be wrapped in Kleenex tissues.
His money had not brought happiness and perhaps it had contributed to his strange sense of values.
His desire to be always in absolute control made it impossible for him to seek the medical and psychological help he needed and he had no close friends to persuade him.
Howard Hughes suffered a total breakdown.
Towards the end of his life, he had to be surrounded by bodyguards to protect him from germs and from contact with reality.
Emaciated, naked, hair and nails uncut for many months, addicted to drugs and tranquillisers , reduced to almost infantile dependency, the man who had wished to control everything, died controlling nothing.
He had been a recluse, completely isolated from the world, for the last ten years.
Conclusion
It is easy to believe that owning money brings happiness.
Wealth can make life easier, but the things that really make us happy, like friendship, love and the feeling that we are doing something worthwhile, are things that money cannot buy.
Prayer
Let us pray that we may find the contentment which comes from living our lives to the full and being concerned and thoughtful in our dealings with others.
May we find an inner peace and happiness which is beyond the price of money.
Amen 
Day 3 The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾
Introduction
Today's reading is an extract from a book called The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾ ; by Sue Townsend.
Adrian is envious of his schoolfriend, Nigel, whose parents seem to have much more money than Adrian's.
Monday, January 5th 
Nigel came round today.
He has got a tan from his Christmas holiday.
I think Nigel will be ill soon from the shock of the cold in England.
I think Nigel's parents were wrong to take him abroad.
He hasn't got a single spot yet.
Wednesday, January 7th 
Nigel came round on his new bike this morning.
It has got a water bottle, a milometer, a speedometer, a yellow saddle, and very thin racing wheels.
It's wasted on Nigel.
He only goes to the shops and back on it.
If I had it, I would go all over the country and have an experience.
My spot or boil has reached its peak.
Surely it can't get any bigger!
Friday, April 10th 
Nigel asked me if I wanted to stay the weekend.
His parents are going to a wedding in Croydon.
My father said I could.
He looked quite pleased.
I am going round to Nigel's in the morning.
Saturday, April 11th 
Nigel is dead lucky.
His house is absolutely fantastic!
Everything is modern.
I don't know what he must think of our house, some of our furniture is over a hundred years old!
His bedroom is massive and he has got a stereo, a colour television, a tapedeck, a Scalextric track, an electric guitar and amplifier.
Spotlights over his bed.
Black walls and a white carpet and a racing car continental quilt.
He has got loads of back issues of Big and Bouncy so we looked through them, then Nigel had a cold shower while I cooked the soup and cut the French loaf.
I had a go on Nigel's racing bike.
I now want one more than anything in the world.
We went to the chip shop and had the works.
Fish, chips, pickled onions, gherkins, sloppy peas.
Nothing was too expensive for Nigel, he gets loads of pocket money.
We walked round for a bit then we came back and watched The Bug-Eyed Monster Strikes Back on the television.
I said the bug-eyed monster reminded me of Mr Scruton the headmaster.
Nigel had hysterics.
I think I have got quite a talent to amuse people.
I might change my mind about becoming a vet and try writing situation comedy for television.
When the film finished Nigel said, ‘How about a nightcap?’
He went to the bar in the corner of the lounge and he poured us both a stiff whisky and soda.
I hadn't actually tasted whisky before and I never will again.
How people can drink it for pleasure I don't know.
If it was in a medicine bottle they would pour it down the sink!
Don't remember going to bed, but I must have done because I am sitting up in Nigel's parents' bed writing my diary.
Sunday, April 12th Palm Sunday 
This weekend with Nigel has really opened my eyes!
Without knowing it I have been living in poverty for the past 14 years.
I have had to put up with inferior accommodation, lousy food and paltry pocket money.
If my father can't provide a decent standard of living for me on his present salary, then he will just have to start looking for another job.
He is always complaining about having to flog electric storage heaters anyway.
Nigel's father has worked like a slave to create a modern environment for his family.
Perhaps if my father had built a formica cocktail bar in the corner of our lounge my mother would still be living with us.
But oh no.
My father actually boasts about our hundred-year-old furniture.
Yes!
Instead of being ashamed of our antiques, he is proud of the old rubbish!
Conclusion
Adrian probably knows lots of boys whose standard of living is lower than his own.
Instead of comparing himself with them and feeling satisfied, he compares himself with a boy who's much better off financially.
In doing that he makes himself miserable.
Even people we think of as being extremely rich will often grumble because they compare themselves with those who earn even more money than they do.
In the American state of California, people have a life-style which most of us would envy.
Many own luxury homes with swimming pools and no end of household gadgets.
But California has what is probably the highest suicide rate in the world.
So wealth doesn't make the people happy.
Prayer
May we reserve our admiration for the qualities people have rather than for what they own.
May we respect those who give of their time, their friendship and their talents rather than those who strive always to gain more for themselves Amen 
The Fox and the Grapes
One summer's day a fox was passing through
A vineyard; faint he was and hungry too.
When suddenly his keen eye chanced to fall
Upon a bunch of grapes above the wall.
‘Ha!
Just the thing!’ he said.
‘Who could resist it!’
He eyed the purple cluster — jumped — and missed it.
‘Ahem!’ he coughed.
‘I'll take more careful aim,’
And sprang again.
Results were much the same,
Although his leaps were desperate and high.
At length he paused to wipe a tearful eye,
And shrug a shoulder.
‘I am not so dry,
And lunch is bound to come within the hour…
Besides,’ he said, ‘I'm sure those grapes are sour.’
The moral is: We seem to want the peach
That always dangles just beyond our reach.
Yet, like the fox, we must not be upset
When sometimes things are just too hard to get.
Joseph Lauren 
Conclusion
One of the commandments which was given to Moses was: ‘Thou shalt not covet’ which means, ‘You must not be envious.’
The Commandment says: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour's.’
Most of our neighbours have neither manservants nor maidservants, let alone oxen or assess — but the principle of the Commandment still applies.
There will always be people who own more than us as well as plenty who own less than us.
Spending our lives in jealousy and envy can only isolate us from other people and make us unhappy.
Prayer
May we not waste our lives in jealousy and greed, but play our part in working towards a more just and equitable future where resources can be divided equally between all the peoples of the world.
Amen 
Day 5 Speak to Us of Giving
Introduction
Today's reading is written by the famous poet, philosopher and artist, Kahlil Gibran.
Gibran was born near Mount Lebanon in 1883.
He wrote his prose poems originally in Arabic and they have now been translated into more than 20 other languages.
His drawings and paintings have been exhibited all over the world.
He is one of the few writers whose books are read and loved  by people in the East and the West.
He died in 1931 in Greenwich Village, New York.
Then a rich man said, Speak to us of Giving.
And he answered: You give but little when you give of your possessions.
It is when you give of yourself that you truly give.
For what are your possessions but things you keep and guard for fear you may need them tomorrow?…
And what is fear of need but need itself?
Is not dread of thirst when your well is full, the thirst that is unquenchable?
There are those who give little of the much which they have — and they give it for recognition and their hidden desire makes their gift unwholesome.
And there are those who have little and give it all.
These are the believers in life and the bounty of life and their coffer is never empty.
There are those who give with joy, and that joy is their reward.
Prayer
May we learn to experience the joy of giving.
Even if we have few possessions or little wealth to give away, may we seek out opportunities to give of our time, our skills and our concern to those who need us.
Amen 
United Nations Week
Day 1 Swords into Plowshares
Many people throughout history have dreamed of a world without war.
One of the earliest men we know of to have such a dream was the Old Testament prophet, Micah.
This is what he wrote:
And he shall judge among many people and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree and none shall make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.
For all people will walk every one in the name of his god and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.
Micah 4: 3–5 Authorised version 
Conclusion
Although Micah's words were first heard thousands of years ago, you can find them today inscribed on a very modern building:
On the island of Manhattan in the middle of New York amidst all the noise and the traffic and the bustle, there's a  huge stone wall on which Micah's words have been written.
The wall stands outside the building of the United Nations — an organisation founded after the end of the last world war to try and bring about peace between all the different countries of the world.
October 24th is United Nations Day.
Recommended music: Last Night I had the Strangest Dream .
Prayer
Let us give thanks for the many people throughout history who have dedicated their lives to working for peace and justice.
May we try by our own example to show that a world of peace and compassion can be more than just a hopeful dream.
Amen 
Day 2 The Work of the United Nations
The United Nations Organisation was set up in 1945, just after the second world war, with the aim of keeping peace throughout the world.
All member states of the United Nations have pledged that they will settle their international disputes by peaceful means and will refrain from the threat or use of force against any other state.
The United Nations body responsible for maintaining peace and security is the Security Council.
When there is a dispute between nations that could bring a threat to peace, the Security Council listens first to all sides of the argument.
It will probably make its own investigations into the conflict as well.
It may then mediate in the dispute — rather like a referee at a football match — trying to keep the sides apart and probably insisting on a ‘cease-fire’ until a peaceful settlement can be negotiated.
If the cease-fire is not respected, the United Nations can call on its own peace-keeping force.
This is an army of soldiers from many different nations who can be brought into a country to preserve law and order and to stop two opposing sides from attacking each other.
Such peace-keeping forces  from the United Nations are, at the moment, situated in several different areas of tension throughout the world.
The United Nations General Assembly has been called the nearest thing to a world parliament.
All member nations who wish to be represented are allowed to have one vote — no matter how large or small the nations are.
The Assembly exists to discuss and make recommendations on all matters within the scope of the United Nations charter.
Unlike the Security Council, it has no power to force any government to act on its recommendations but, because those recommendations carry the weight of world opinion behind them, they are usually acted upon.
The General Assembly has stressed the need for what it calls a new economic order.
The gap must be narrowed between the rich countries of the world and the poorer countries where 70 per cent of the world's people live on only 30 per cent of its income.
The General Assembly has asked the richer countries to give one per cent of their annual budget to try and wipe out poverty in the third world.
Today's prayer is one that has been specially written for United Nations Day — October 24th.
Prayer
O God, give your grace to the United Nations Organisation in all its manifold work; in its work for the children who suffer so much from the injustices of our society, in education and in health, in the relief of poverty and hunger, and in its work for peace.
So guide the United Nations that by word and deed it may promote your glory and establish peace and goodwill among the peoples of the world.
Amen 
Day 3 The Beatitudes
And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain and when he was set, his disciples came unto him.
And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled.
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness, sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 5: 1–10 Authorised version 
Conclusion
Today's prayer is one which was offered throughout the world with special focus on the Special Session on Disarmament held at the United Nations General Assembly in 1982.
People all over the world were asked to offer this prayer for one minute each day at midday so that there would be a continuous vigil of prayer for peace throughout the earth.
Lead me from Death
to Life, from Falsehood to Truth.
Lead me from Despair
to Hope, from Fear to Trust.
Lead me from Hate
to Love, from War to Peace.
Let Peace fill our Heart,
our World, our Universe.
Amen 
Day 4 The Mouse and the Plum Cake
UNICEF, the United Nations Children's Relief organisation works in 112 countries to help those children in the world who are suffering most.
In 1981 it had a total income of 171 million pounds for the whole year.
This sounds a great deal of money but was the same amount that the world spent on weapons in four hours and ten minutes.
Each child born in the industrialised world consumes between 20 and 40 times as much as a child living in one of the poorer countries.
Our reading today is about sharing.
A mouse found a beautiful piece of plum cake,
The richest and sweetest that bakers could make;
It was heavy with lemon and fragrant with spice,
And covered with sugar as sparkling as ice.
‘My stars!’ cried the mouse, while his eye beamed with
glee,
‘Here's a treasure I've found; what a feast it will be!
But, oh dear, there's a noise; it's my brothers at play;
So I'll hide with the cake, lest they wander this way.
‘Not a bit shall they have, for I know I can eat
Every morsel myself, and I'll have such a treat.’
So off went the mouse, as he held the cake fast,
While his hungry young brothers went scampering past.
He nibbled, and nibbled, and panted, but still
He kept gulping it down till he made himself ill;
Yet he swallowed it all, and it's easy to guess
He was soon so unwell that he groaned with distress.
His family heard him, and as he grew worse,
They sent for the doctor, who made him rehearse
How he'd eaten the cake to the very last crumb,
Without giving his playmates and relatives some.
‘Ah me!’ cried the doctor, ‘advice is too late,
You must die before long, so prepare for your fate;
If you had but divided the cake with your brothers,
T'would have done you no harm, and been good for the
others.
‘Had you shared it, the treat had been wholesome enough;
But eaten by one, it was dangerous stuff;
So prepare for the worst;’ and the word had scarce fled,
When the doctor turned round, and the patient was dead.
Now all little people the lesson may take,
And some large ones may learn from the mouse and the
cake;
Not to be over-selfish with what we may gain,
Or the best of our pleasures may turn into pain.
Eliza Cook 
Conclusion
Many of the diseases from which people suffer in Western society are caused by over-eating.
People who are overweight are more likely to have heart attacks; there is also a link between certain forms of cancer and people eating too much stodgy food.
Like the mouse in the poem, when we consume more than our fair share of the earth's resources, we not only force our brothers and sisters in other countries to go without, but we damage ourselves as well.
Prayer
Let us give special thought today to those people who have devoted their lives to helping the poor and needy in impoverished parts of the world.
May we try to play some part in making their task easier.
Amen 
Day 5 A Cup of Water
Today's readings are taken from a book called A Cup of Water written by Janet Lacey who has devoted many years of her life to working for Christian Aid.
In his foreword to the book, Professor Sir Robert Birley says of Janet Lacey: ‘One meets energetic people and unorthodox people and efficient people, but it is rare to meet them making up one person…add to that the power to speak forcefully and clearly…she was the first woman to preach in St Paul's and Liverpool Cathedral and St George's Cathedral in Jerusalem…she is also exceedingly good company…
‘She has played a vital part in some of the most important movements and problems of the last 25 years, the ecumenical movement, the problem of refugees, the problems of world poverty and hunger, the problem of race relations.
She has inspired thousands of people to work to solve them and she has organised their efforts.’
Janet Lacey says: ‘We live in a world where, in many places, social injustice is the order of the day, where 15,000 people die of hunger each day, where racial discrimination  is practised unnoticed on our doorsteps and where political action is disappointing…
In the West although we are only 20 per cent of the world's 3,000 million we have 90 per cent of the world's income, 90 per cent of its gold reserves, 95 per cent of its scientific knowledge, 70 per cent of its meat and 80 per cent of its protein.’
In her chapter, ‘What do you know about hunger?’
Janet Lacey quotes an African proverb:The pot is boiling because somebody makes it boil ….
On a dark and icy cold morning in January 1946 I flew in an RAF plane from Berlin to Kiel and then drove in a jeep to a British Army Church House a few miles outside the city.
We passed through what had been the city centre but now the main street was a narrow, bumpy lane and the sides piled up with rubble.
All round us were stark-naked ruins and such people as there were about were white-faced and grim.
A man was searching in the filth for cigarette ends.
Outside the city we passed by a refugee camp where white-faced, unsmiling boys and girls gazed at us through the railings.
The next morning I looked out of the window of my warm bedroom into the backyard and saw a child enter the open gate from the garden, look cautiously round, lift the lid from an over-flowing garbage can and quickly and efficiently pick out the scraps of bread and other left-overs from our supper tables the previous night.
She ran off with breakfast for her respectable middle-class family.
I have never forgotten that little girl.
This was what war had done to innocent children, not only had it starved them of food but reduced them to be scavengers.
I thought of her in 1955 when I was in Kenya at the height of the Mau Mau and saw hungry children huddled in corners of African huts.
They were afraid of us until we managed to reassure them.
Their parents had been taken off to detainee camps, and they were lonely and desolate.
She came into my mind when a woman in the slums of West Kingston, Jamaica, with a child at her breast and another three hanging around her skirts followed me around for two hours repeating, ‘Some milk would be better than nothing.’
She was there again when I helped in a feeding centre in Seoul in Korea, when the people came from broken down shacks once a day to get soup and rice.
Walking about at night in the streets of Calcutta and of necessity stepping over emaciated bodies too lethargic to move, or visiting refugee  shacks in beautiful Hong Kong, or standing helplessly in the filthy slums of Kampala, always the same agony and anger assailed me as it did on that cold morning in Kiel.
I asked myself each time, Why can't I make the pot boil?
It is easy for a well-fed English-woman like myself to shake with anger about the futility of war, to protest about the iniquity of racial prejudice and to deplore the helplessness of little people in the face of vast political forces fighting for power.
It is less easy to take a full share of the blame and almost impossible to understand the feelings and aspirations of the legions of hungry people in the world.
I know nothing about hunger.
I thought of that little girl last week when I nibbled some chocolates at a London theatre.
The price of those chocolates would have paid for food for an Indian family for a whole day.
Conclusion
It's possible to give some help to the poor and needy of the world without having to give the dedication that Janet Lacey did.
Christmas cards and other gifts can be bought from organisations such as Oxfam, UNICEF and Christian Aid.
These organisations also have charity shops where people give unwanted goods.
Young people are often the best-equipped for giving to shops like this.
They grow out of their clothes very quickly or they have clothes which they think are no longer fashionable.
They often have expensive toys they've grown out of or they've records and tapes they do not listen to anymore.
If you give items like this, you not only help alleviate poverty and hunger overseas, but you help the less wealthy people in your area who can buy cheap clothes or toys for their children.
Prayer
Let us resolve that we will give something during the coming months, even if it is only something that we no longer need, to help those who are hungry and in desperate need.
May we play our small part in helping to alleviate the poverty and suffering of the world.
Amen 
Assemblies for Remembrance Week
Day 1 The Eighteenth Emergency
Introduction
Today's reading, from The Eighteenth Emergency by Betsy Byars, is about a boy called Mouse Fawley.
Mouse gets his nickname because he is small and weedy.
In this extract, Mouse knows that the biggest, toughest boy in the school, Marv Hammerman, is looking for a fight with him.
Mouse talks about it with his friend, Ezzie….
‘You ever been hit before, Mouse?
I mean, hard?’
Mouse sighed.
The conversation had now passed beyond whether Hammerman would attack.
It was now a matter of whether he, Mouse Fawley, could survive the attack.
He said thickly, remembering, ‘Four times.’
‘Four times in one fight?
I mean, you stood up for four hits, Mouse?’
There was grudging admiration in his voice.
Mouse shook his head.
‘Four hits — four fights.’
‘You went down each time?
I mean POW and you went down, POW and you went down, POW and you went —‘
‘Yes!’
‘Where did you take these hits?’
Ezzie asked, straightening suddenly.
Ezzie had never taken a single direct blow in his life because he was a good dodger.
Sometimes his mother  chased him through the apartment, striking at him while he dodged and ducked, crying, ‘Look out Mom, look out now!
You're going to hit me!’
He asked again, ‘Where were you hit?’
Mouse said, ‘In the stomach.’
‘All four times?’
‘Yeah.’
Mouse suddenly thought of his stomach as having a big red circular target on it with HIT THERE printed in the centre.
‘Who hit you?’
‘Two boys in Cincinnati when I was on vacation, and a boy named Mickey Swearinger and somebody else I don't remember.’
He lowered his head because he remembered the fourth person all right, but he didn't want to tell Ezzie about it.
If he had added the name of Viola Angotti to the list of those who had hit him in the stomach Ezzie's face would have screwed up with laughter.
‘Viola Angotti hit you?
No fooling, Viola Angotti?’
It was the sort of thing Ezzie could carry on about for hours.
‘Viola Angotti.
The Viola Angotti?’
And Mouse would have had to keep sitting there saying over and over, ‘Yes, Viola Angotti hit me in the stomach.
Yes, the Viola Angotti.’
And he would have to tell Ezzie all about it, every detail, how one recess long ago the boys had decided to put some girls in the school trash cans.
It had been one of those suggestions that stuns everyone with its rightness.
Someone had said, ‘Hey, let's put those girls over there in the trash cans!’ and the plan had won immediate acceptance.
Nothing could have been more appropriate.
The trash cans were big and had just been emptied, and in an instant the boys were off chasing the girls and yelling at the tops of their voices.
It had been wonderful at first, Mouse remembered.
Primitive blood had raced through his body.
The desire to capture had driven him like a wild man through the school yard, up the sidewalk, everywhere.
He understood what had driven the cavemen, and the barbarian, because the same passion was driving him.
Putting the girls in the trash cans was the most important challenge of his life.
His long screaming charge ended with him red-faced, gasping for breath — and with Viola Angotti pinned against the garbage cans.
His moment of triumph was short.
It lasted about two seconds.
Then it began to dim as he realised, first, that it was Viola Angotti and, second, that he was not going to get her into the garbage can without a great deal of help.
He cried, ‘Hey, you guys, come on, I've got one,’ but behind him the school yard was silent.
Where was everybody? he had wondered uneasily.
As it turned out, the principal had caught the other boys, and they were all being marched back in the front door of the school, but Mouse didn't know that.
He called again, ‘Come on, you guys, get the lid off this garbage can, will you?’
And then, when he said that, Viola Angotti had taken two steps forward.
She said, ‘Nobody's putting me in no garbage can.’
He cried, ‘Hey, you guys!’
It was a plea.
‘Where are you?’
And then Viola Angotti had taken one more step, and with a faint sigh she had socked him in the stomach so hard that he had doubled over and lost his lunch.
He hadn't known it was possible to be hit like that outside a boxing ring.
It was the hardest blow he had ever taken.
Viola Angotti could be heavyweight champion of the world.
As she walked past his crumpled body she had said again, ‘Nobody's putting me in no garbage can.’
It had sounded like one of the world's basic truths.
The sun will rise; the tides will flow.
Nobody's putting Viola Angotti in no garbage can.
Conclusion
Mouse had what people call an ‘inferiority complex’ about being small.
Dumping Viola Angotti in the garbage can was a way of re-establishing his pride — of making himself feel big and important.
Mouse underestimated Viola Angotti.
He probably thought that, because she was a girl, she must be weaker than him.
Obviously, that was not the case but it may be that Viola was so used to people thinking like that about her that she felt a need to assert herself as well.
She might have made her point a lot better by picking up Mouse and dumping him in the garbage can — instead she responded with violence that was really out of proportion to Mouse's attack.
This week's assemblies are about war.
One of the ways in which wars start is by nations trying to assert themselves by insulting, humiliating and attacking other countries.
When this happens they often find that, like Viola Angotti, other countries make a response that is out of proportion in order to rescue their damaged pride.
Before anyone knows what's happening, a full-scale war has developed.
Behaving peacefully on a personal level w ill make life much more pleasant but, by itself, it will not stop war.
If everyone can learn to understand, however, how wars can be started so easily, there is a hope that more people might work to prevent them.
Prayer
None of us is perfect.
There will always be people stronger, cleverer and more popular than all of us.
Let us ensure that we do not try to make ourselves look better than we really are by humiliating others.
May we take pride in our achievements and accept our limitations.
Amen 
Day 2 For the Fallen
Introduction
The poem you're about to hear is one that's recited all over the country on Remembrance Day — the fourth verse, in particular, you'll hear recited on its own or see inscribed on war memorials.
The poem wasn't written to give a realistic account of war but to glorify those men who were killed in the war, to give some comfort to their friends and relatives.
With proud thanksgiving, a mother for her children,
England mourns for her dead across the sea,
Flesh of her flesh they were, spirit of her spirit,
Fallen in the cause of the free.
Solemn the drums thrill: Death august and royal
Sings sorrow up into immortal spheres,
There is music in the midst of desolation
And a glory that shines upon our tears.
They went with songs to the battle, they were young,
Straight of limb, true of eye, steady and aglow.
They were staunch to the end against odds uncounted,
They fell with their faces to the foe.


They shall not grow old as we that are left grow old:
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn.
At the going down of the sun and in the morning
We will remember them.
They mingle not with their laughing comrades again;
They sit no more at familiar tables of home;
They have no lot in our labour of the day-time;
They sleep beyond England's foam.
But where our desires are and our hopes profound,
Felt as a well-spring that is hidden from sight,
To the innermost heart of their own land they are known
As the stars are known to the Night.
As the stars that shall be bright when we are dust
Moving in marches upon the heavenly plain,
As the stars that are starry in the time of our darkness,
To the end, to the end, they remain.
Laurence Binyon 
Conclusion
We have Remembrance Sunday each year in November to remember the two World Wars and the men who fought in them.
Many people think that is just a waste of time.
They say that, as the wars happened such a long time ago we should simply forget about them now.
One of the sad things about history is that nations keep making the same mistakes.
In our own lives, when we look back over things we've done, we try to learn something from them — if we know we've done something stupid, we try to make sure that we don't keep on making the same mistakes over and over again.
That's one of the important reasons why we need to study history.
If we didn't know that terrible things like war had happened, or why they had happened, it would be so easy for us as a country to continue with the same policies that had led to these mistakes in the past.
Prayer
Let us remember today the suffering and pain that are caused by war and be mindful of all those throughout the world today who are caught up in areas of conflict.
Let us pray that the leaders of the world will learn from history and not repeat the mistakes of the past.
When they plan out their policies for the future, may they keep the interests of humanity at heart.
Amen 
Day 3 Hiroshima (1)
Introduction
On 6 August 1945, the first atomic bomb was dropped by the Americans on the town of Hiroshima in Japan.
In 1945 John Hersey, an American journalist, was sent by The New Yorker to interview survivors of Hiroshima.
The following extract is taken from his account of what happened to a Japanese doctor, Dr Sasaki:
He arrived at the hospital at seven forty and reported to the chief surgeon.
A few minutes later he went to a room on the first floor to take a blood test.
With the blood specimen in his left hand…he started along the main corridor on his way toward the stairs.
He was one step beyond an open window when the light of the bomb was reflected, like a gigantic photographic flash, in the corridor.
He ducked down on one knee and said to himself, ‘Sasaki,gambare !
Be brave!’
Just then the blast ripped through the hospital.
The glasses he was wearing flew off his face; the bottle of blood crashed against one wall….
Dr Sasaki shouted the name of the chief surgeon and rushed around to the man's office and found him terribly cut by glass.
The hospital was in horrible confusion: heavy partitions and ceilings had fallen on patients, beds had overturned, windows had blown in and cut people, blood was spattered on the walls and doors, instruments were everywhere, many of the patients were running about screaming, many more lay dead.
A colleague working in the laboratory to which Dr Sasaki had been walking was dead; Dr Sasaki's patient whom he had just left was also dead.
Dr Sasaki found himself the only doctor in the hospital who was unhurt.
Dr Sasaki, who believed that the enemy had hit only the building he was in, got bandages and began to bind the  wounds of those inside the hospital; while outside, all over Hiroshima, maimed and dying citizens turned their unsteady steps toward the Red Cross Hospital to begin an invasion that was to make Dr Sasaki forget his own private nightmares for a long, long time….
By nightfall, ten thousand victims of the explosion had invaded the Red Cross Hospital, and Dr Sasaki, worn out, was moving aimlessly and dully up and down the stinking corridors with wads of bandages and bottles, binding up the worst cuts as he came to them.
Other doctors were putting compresses of saline solution on the worst burns.
That was all they could do.
After dark, they worked by the light of the city's fires and by candles the ten remaining nurses held for them.
Dr Sasaki had not looked outside the hospital all day; the scene inside was so terrible and so compelling that it had not occurred to him to ask any questions about what had happened beyond the windows and doors.
Ceilings and partitions had fallen, plaster, dust, blood and vomit were everywhere.
Patients were dying by the hundreds, but there was nobody to carry away the corpses.
Some of the hospital staff distributed biscuits and rice, but the charnel-house smell was so strong that few were hungry.
By three o'clock the next morning after 19 straight hours of his gruesome work, Dr Sasaki was incapable of dressing another wound.
He and some other survivors of the hospital staff got straw mats and went outdoors — thousands of patients and hundreds of dead were on the driveway and in the yard — and hurried around behind the hospital and lay down in hiding to snatch some sleep.
But within an hour wounded people had found them; a complaining circle formed around them: ‘Doctors!
Help us!
How can you sleep?’
Dr Sasaki got up and went back to work.
Prayer
On Remembrance Sunday, ministers w ill be asking their congregations to remember their fellow countrymen who have died in war.
Let us also remember the untold thousands in other countries who have died as a result of our bombs, our guns, the lands mines we have planted, the artillery we 
May we use our knowledge of history and our memories of war to strive for a world in which people live together in peace.
Amen 
Day 4 Hiroshima (2)
Introduction
Today's reading is another account by John Hersey of the effects of the bomb on Hiroshima.
He tells the true story of a clergyman, Father Kleinsorge, who was helping to tend the wounded….
His description of the injuries caused by the bomb was shocking and horrific.
The morning again was hot.
Father Kleinsorge went to fetch water for the wounded in a bottle and a teapot he had borrowed.
He had heard that it was possible to get fresh tap water outside Asano Park.
Going through the rock gardens, he had to climb over and climb under the trunks of fallen pine trees; he found he was weak.
There were many dead in the gardens.
At a beautiful moon bridge, he passed a naked living woman who seemed to have been burned from head to toe and was red all over.
Near the entrance to the park, an Army doctor was working, but the only medicine he had was iodine, which he painted over cuts, bruises, slimy burns, everything — and by now everything that he had painted had pus on it.
Outside the gate of the park, Father Kleinsorge found a tap that still worked — part of the plumbing of a vanished house — and he filled his vessels and returned.
When he had given the wounded the water, he made a second trip.
This time the woman by the bridge was dead.
On his way back with the water, he got lost on detour around a fallen tree, and as he looked for his way through the woods, he heard a voice ask from the underbrush, ‘Have you anything to drink?’
He saw a uniform.
Thinking there was just one soldier, he approached with the water.
When he had penetrated the bushes, he saw there were about 20 men, and they were all in exactly the same nightmarish state: their faces were wholly burned, their eyesockets were hollow.
They must have had their faces upturned when the bomb went off; perhaps they were anti-aircraft personnel.
The fluid from their melted eyes had run down their cheeks.
Their mouths were mere swollen wounds which they could not bear to stretch enough to admit the spout of the teapot.
So Father Kleinsorge got a large piece of grass and drew out the stem so as to make a straw, and gave them all water to drink that way.
Father Kleinsorge told them as cheerfully as he could, ‘There's a doctor at the entrance to the park.
He's busy now, but he'll come soon I hope….'
Conclusion
A hundred thousand people were killed from the effects of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima — many of the casualties were children.
Many more stories could be told of the effects of the bomb — of terrible burns and of people dying slowly from radiation.
Prayer
Let us think for a few moments of the wonderful achievements of the human race — the towns that have been built, the works of art that have been produced — the books, plays, films, pictures, music…the progress that has been made in science and technology.
The human mind is vast and boundless.
It has the capacity for great creativity, reason and love.
It also has the capacity to do more evil than any other species known on earth.
May we nurture the good that lies within us and seek to overcome the seeds of violence and hate.
Amen 
Day 5 Nuclear Weaponry
In comparison with modern nuclear weapons, the bomb dropped on Hiroshima seems insignificant.
By 1958, both the United States and the Soviet Union had carried out test explosions with single bombs at least a thousand times more deadly.
If the world's 1984 stockpile of nuclear weapons were compressed into bombs of the size dropped on Hiroshima, it would take 4,600 years to go through them all if they were let off at the rate of one a day.
If all the gunpowder which has ever been used in war throughout the world could be contained on a single train with 50 tons of gunpowder in each freight car, the train would be 50 miles long.
The world's nuclear stockpile now stands at 16 thousand million tons of TNT.
To carry that would need a train two and a half million miles long.
It would stretch round the equator 97 times or reach to the moon and back five times.
Some of the world's top scientists attended an important conference in 1983, to study the effects of nuclear weapons.
They concluded that a conflict involving only I per cent of the world's supply of nuclear weapons would produce enough dust to block out the rays of the sun.
It would cause a long and harsh ‘nuclear winter’ with Arctic conditions and continuous darkness.
Temperatures would drop below freezing in many parts of the world and, even if the war occurred in summer, many areas would have snowfall for months.
Animals would die of cold and thirst, food supplies would soon run out and most of the human survivors would starve or freeze to death.
Only insects and grasses might remain.
The English writer, Arthur Koestler, commenting on the magnitude of the destruction in Hiroshima, stated:
‘If I were asked to name the most important date in the history of the human race, I would answer without hesitation August 6 1945.
From the dawn of consciousness until August 6 1945, man had to live with the prospect of his death as an individual; since the day when the first atomic bomb outshone the sun over Hiroshima, he has had to live with the prospect of his extinction as a species.’
Prayer
Let us give thanks for the progress made in scientific research, for the luxuries and comforts it has given us, for the assistance in curing disease, with storing information and with improving communications.
May we play our part in the use of scientific discovery for the benefit of the human race.
Let us pray that we may never misuse the knowledge and the skills which have been given to us.
Amen 
The Child Is Father of the Man
Day 1 Parents Are People Too
Today's reading comes from Skulker Wheat , a collection of short stories by John Griffin which tell about a young boy's working-class childhood.
The extract is taken from the beginning of a story called ‘Gaffer Roberts’.
If my Mam got mad with me for something I'd done — or more often something I hadn't done — she used to make moaning noises and stagger about the house as if she was dying.
My Dad used to say, ‘Now look what you've done to your mother,’ and if I answered back, he would start pelting things at me — plates, cups, his dinner, the carving knife, and once a picture of Jesus floating up to heaven with a lamb tucked under each arm.
When he started his pelting I ran, either to my bedroom upstairs or to the toilet at the bottom of the garden.
Both places had latches and as long as I got ten yards' start on him, I could slam the door shut and slip my half clothes-peg under the latch — I always carried a half clothes-peg for the purpose — and no matter how much he blasphemed and kicked at the door he couldn't get in.
One Monday morning I lay in bed looking out of my skylight window at nothing in particular; there wasn't anything to see except sky because the window was merely a hole in the roof which you could open or shut with a long wooden handle.
I had to sleep with it closed because if I left it open the cat would jump in and more likely than not land from ten feet on to my face — a nasty way to wake up.
Anyway  this particular Monday morning I didn't feel like getting up although my Mam had already shouted: ‘If he thinks he's going to have me at his beck and call just to get him his breakfast when he wants, he's got another think coming.’
She never addressed me directly when she was mad.
When I eventually got downstairs she said to my Dad, ‘Tell him his breakfast's in the oven if he wants it.’
I was feeling pretty fed up but I shouldn't have said what I did.
‘Tell her to stuff her head in the oven.’
I know it wasn't very witty but it certainly galvanised my Dad.
‘Right you great wammock,’ he shouted and looked round for something to pelt.
I was still a bit sleepy and I hesitated a moment, not knowing whether to run to the bog or the bedroom.
The last time I'd made for the bog he'd broken my back when he caught me straight between the shoulder blades with a loaf of bread.
If you think that wouldn't hurt, I'd better tell you it was one of Albert Rowe's specials — stale and very crusty.
Anyway that thought decided me to make for the bedroom but I was late starting and had only just reached the top of the stairs when he was half-way up with the big brown teapot held in his pelting position.
I wasn't going to make it!
I couldn't possibly get the peg in the door before he got his foot in it.
I turned to face him.
He stopped.
Neither of us knew what to do.
Then he put his head down, growled and took the last few stairs three at a time.
Just as he reached the top step I gave him a push — not a hard push, just defensive.
He lost his balance and he and the teapot clattered downstairs.
He reached the bottom first and the teapot, a close second, hit him on the head and smashed, spilling luke-warm tea down his navy-blue shirt.
He looked up at me with a scowl, a scowl of surprise.
I looked down at him in astonishment.
It was a significant moment.
Neither of us spoke.
He picked up the broken pot and went away.
After that he still chased me, firing away with wellington boots, sugar bowls and other unlikely weapons.
But both of us knew he didn't intend catching me.
We both went a bit slower.
What used to be a real chase had become a ritual.
I had become as strong as my Dad.
Conclusion
Young children often idolise their parents.
They think they're wonderful people who can never do anything wrong.
When children are older, they often feel angry that their parents aren't as wonderful as they once thought.
They become disillusioned when they realise that their parents have just as many faults as everyone else.
At some stage, children become stronger than their parents; they often become more intelligent, quicker-thinking…they may also be better-educated than their parents were and even better-off financially.
The roles of parents and children gradually become reversed and children start to look after their parents and worry about them instead of the other way around.
Many parents find this change of role quite difficult.
They know that their children are stronger than them in many ways and it is hard for them to come to terms with that and still keep their dignity and self-respect.
Many family arguments are made worse because people are afraid of losing their dignity.
It is possible, however, to disagree with people and still treat them with respect.
Prayer
Let us remember that parents are people too.
Bringing up children is a difficult job and parents work very hard at it.
May we treat our parents with respect and consideration, even when we disagree with them.
Amen 
Day 2 The Rainbow
Introduction
The early Vikings believed that the rainbow was a bridge for the gods to walk over when they wanted to visit the earth.
In the Old Testament, after the Great Flood, we're told that God sent his rainbow as a sign of his agreement or covenant, that he would never again attempt to destroy the peoples of the world.
This is what it says in Genesis:
‘I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud…’
A rainbow seems like a miracle — it appears out of no-where, it forms a perfect arc — it's made up of beautiful colours, always the same ones in just the same order — and it always mysteriously disappears.
A young child will marvel at a rainbow.
In the poem you are about to hear, the famous poet, William Wordsworth tells us that the day we lose the ability to marvel at something as wonderful as a rainbow, we lose something very important.
My heart leaps up when I behold
A rainbow in the sky:.
So was it when my life began;
So is it now I am a man;
So be it when I shall grow old,
Or let me die!
The Child is father of the Man:
And I could wish my days to be
Bound each to each by natural piety.
Prayer
Let us give thanks for the beauty of the world.
May our minds never become so tarnished with worries and cares that we fail to find joy and wonder in the world about us.
Amen 
Day 3 Suffer the Little Children
And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them.
But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, ‘Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.’
And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them.
Mark 10: 13–16 Authorised version 
As we become older, we often try to appear more sophisticated and, in doing so, we lose much of the sense of wonder and excitement we felt when we were younger.
Those people who have had deep religious experiences often talk about them with a sense of awe — the feeling many of us have had as little children when we've been in the presence of something powerful and magnificent.
The key to religious understanding is not cleverness.
In order to appreciate something which is above and beyond ourselves we have to rid ourselves for a time of our sophistication and, in the words of Jesus Christ, become as little children again.
Prayer
May we never become so worldly that we close our eyes to the miracle and mystery of life.
May we give pleasure to other people by sharing our joy and happiness with them.
Amen 
Day 4 I Like Youngsters
God says: I like youngsters.
I want people to be like them.
I don't like old people unless they are still children.
I want only children in my kingdom.
Youngsters — twisted, humped, wrinkled, white-bearded
-all kinds of youngsters, but youngsters.
So, when I gently lean over them, I recognise myself in
them.
I like them because they are still growing, they are
still improving.
They are on the road, they are on their way.
But with grown-ups there is nothing to expect any more.
They will no longer grow, no longer improve.
They have come to a full stop.
It is disastrous — grown-ups think they have arrived
In my heaven, there will be only five-year-old eyes, for
I know of nothing more beautiful than the pure eyes of
a child.
It is not surprising, for I live in children, and it is I who
look out through their eyes.
When pure eyes meet yours, it is I who smile at you
through the flesh.


But on the other hand, I know of nothing sadder than
lifeless eyes in the face of a child.
The windows are open, but the house is empty.
And, saddened, I stand at the door, and wait in the cold
and knock.
I am eager to get in.
And he, the child, is alone.
He fattens, he hardens, he dries up, he gets old.
Poor old
fellow!
Alleluia!
Open, all of you, little old men!
It is I, your God, coming to bring back to life the child
in you.
Hurry!
I am ready to give you again the beautiful face of
a child, the beautiful eyes of a child…
For I love youngsters, and I want everyone to be like
them.
(abridged ) Michel Quoist
Prayer
In the Bible it says:
Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him Revelation 3: 20 
May we come to know again the trust and faith of little children.
May we not be afraid of opening the door when we feel aware of God waiting to enter our lives.
Amen 
Day 5 The Great Lover
Today's reading is a poem written by the British poet, Rupert Brooke, who was born in Rugby in 1887.
He fought in the first World War and died in the Aegean in 1915 at the age of 27.
These I have loved:
White plates and cups, clean-gleaming,
Ringed with blue lines; and feathery, faery dust;
Wet roofs, beneath the lamp-light; the strong crust
Of friendly bread; and many-tasting food;


Rainbows; and the blue bitter smoke of wood;
And radiant raindrops couching in cool flowers;
And flowers themselves, that sway through sunny hours,
Dreaming of moths that drink them under the moon;
Then, the cool kindliness of sheets, that soon
Smooth away trouble; and the rough male kiss
Of blankets; grainy wood; live hair that is
Shining and free; blue-massing clouds; the keen
Unpassioned beauty of a great machine;
The benison of hot water; furs to touch;
The good smell of old clothes; and other such —
The comfortable smell of friendly fingers,
Hair's fragrance, and the musty reek that lingers
About dead leaves and last year's ferns….
Firm sands; the little dulling edge of foam
That browns and dwindles as the wave goes home;
And washen stones…the cold
Graveness of iron; moist black earthen mould;
Sleep; and high places; footprints in the dew;
And oaks; and brown horse-chestnuts, glossy-new;
And new-peeled sticks; and shining pools on grass;—
All these have been my loves.
And these shall pass,
…
This one last gift I give: that after men
Shall know, and later lovers, far-removed,
Praise you, ‘All these were lovely’; say, ‘He loved.’
Rupert Brooke found pleasure in simple things — most of which didn't cost anything at all.
The famous American film star, W C Fields, has been known to earn as much as £1,000 a day and yet he has said that his greatest thrill in life is the luxury of stretching out at night between freshly laundered sheets.
At one time in his life, he didn't sleep in a bed for four whole years.
He slept on park benches, in packing boxes, and he even slept in holes in the ground with a strip of linoleum for a blanket.
Having a comfortable bed to sleep in is a luxury that most of us take for granted.
We tend not to appreciate pleasures like that unless we have had to manage without them.
All too often we fall into the trap of thinking that the only really joyful experiences of life are those that we don't have; we can miss out on so much happiness if we don't appreciate what we have already.
Prayer
Let us remember that life is very short.
May we learn to appreciate its beauty and its comforts whilst we still have them to enjoy.
Amen 
Run Baby run — the Story of Nicky Cruz
Day 1 Arrival in New York
Introduction
Our readings this week are extracts from a book called Run Baby Run which tells the true story of a young man called Nicky Cruz.
Nicky was born on the small island of Puerto Rico close to the United States of America.
Nicky's parents found him impossible to look after: he was always picking fights, especially with smaller children; he had a fight with his teacher at school and ran away from home five times in two years.
In desperation, Nicky was sent by his parents to New York to stay with his older brother.
Nicky, however, had no intention of even looking for his brother in New York.
As soon as his plane touched down in New York airport, he was running away again…
A large bus was sitting at the curb, door open, engine throbbing.
People were boarding and I elbowed my way into line.
The driver grabbed me by the shoulder and asked for my fare.
I shrugged my shoulders and answered him in Spanish.
He gruffly shoved me out of line, too busy to fool with a silly kid who could barely understand English.
As he turned his attention to a woman who was fumbling with her purse, I ducked my head and squeezed behind her through the door and into the crowded bus.
Glancing over my shoulder to make sure he hadn't seen me, I jostled my way to the rear and sat down next to a window.
As the bus pulled from the curb, I saw the fat gate-guard and two others puff out the side door of the terminal looking  in all directions.
I couldn't resist knocking on the window, waving and grinning through the glass.
I had made it.
The bus ground its way through the heavy New York traffic toward the middle of the city.
Outside there was snow and slush along the streets and sidewalks.
I had always pictured snow as clean and beautiful, stretched out over acres of fairyland.
But this was dingy, like dirty mush.
My breath made fog on the window and I leaned back and ran my finger through it.
It was a different world entirely from the one I had just left….
…
The bus jerked to a stop.
Outside, the bright lights and multicoloured signs blinked and gleamed in the cold darkness.
The man across the aisle got up to leave.
I followed him out the back door.
The doors swished shut behind me and the bus pulled away from the curb.
I was left alone in the middle of eight million people.
I picked up a handful of dirty snow and brushed the crust off the top.
There it was, sparkling white and pure.
I wanted to put it to my mouth and eat it but as I watched, small dark spots began to appear on the surface.
I suddenly realised the air was filled with soot from the chimneys above and the snow was taking on the appearance of cottage cheese sprinkled with black pepper.
I threw it to one side.
It made little difference.
I was free.
For two days I wandered through the city.
I found an old coat thrown across a garbage can in a back alley.
The sleeves drooped over my hands and the hem scraped the sidewalk.
The buttons had been ripped off and the pockets torn open, but it kept me warm.
That night I slept on the subway, curled up on one of the seats.
By the end of the second day the excitement had worn off.
I was hungry…and cold.
On two occasions, I tried to talk to people and ask for help.
The first man simply ignored me.
He walked by like I wasn't there.
The second man pushed me back against the wall.
‘Beat it, Spic.
Don't put your greasy hands on me.’
I was afraid.
I kept trying to keep the panic from bubbling up from my stomach into my throat.
That evening I walked the streets again.
The long overcoat dragging the sidewalk, my little suitcase clutched in my hand.
People would move around me and look back but no one seemed to care.
They just looked and walked on.
That night I spent the ten dollars Papa had given me.
I stopped in a little restaurant and ordered a hot dog by pointing at a picture of one that hung over the greasy counter.
I  gobbled it up and pointed that I wanted another.
The man at the counter shook his head and held out his hand.
I reached in my pocket and pulled out the wadded up bill.
Wiping his hands on a towel, he opened it up, stretched it a couple of times, and then slipped it in the pocket of his dirty apron.
He then brought me another hot dog and a bowl of chili.
When I finished, I looked for him but he had disappeared into the kitchen.
I picked up my bag and went back into the cold street.
I'd had my first experience with American enterprise.
And how was I to know that American hot dogs didn't cost five dollars each?
Prayer
Let us give thanks for our homes and for our families, for the people who care for us and look after us and for all the comforts we enjoy.
Amen 
Day 2 Mugging
Introduction
Our assemblies continue with the true story of Nicky Cruz, the young Puerto Rican boy who is sent to New York by his family and then runs away.
Nicky finds himself in Brooklyn where most of the other Puerto Ricans live.
The other teenagers he meets there are mainly criminals — thieves, prostitutes and drug pedlars — and most of them are members of the infamous teenage gangs which sometimes turn the city into a battleground.
Nicky has to find somewhere to live, and for that he needs money….
I knew that if I tried to rob someone and got caught, I'd go to jail.
But I was desperate…a room was going to cost money and I didn't have a penny.
It was almost 10 pm and the winter wind was freezing cold.
I shrank back into the shadows of the alley and saw people passing by on the sidewalk.
I pulled the switchblade out of my pocket and pressed the button.
The blade snapped open with a soft click.
I pressed the tip against the palm of my hand.
My hand was shaking as I tried to imagine just how I would  perform the robbery.
Would it be best to pull them into the alley?
Should I go ahead and stab them or just scare them?
What if they yelled…?
My thoughts were interrupted by two people talking at the entrance of the alley.
An old wino had stopped a young man in his late teens who was carrying a huge sack of groceries.
The old man was begging him for a dime to buy a cup of coffee.
I listened as the young man tried to get away — telling the wino he didn't have any money.
The thought ran through my mind that the old man probably had a pocket full of money he had begged and stolen.
He wouldn't dare scream for help if I robbed him.
As soon as the boy left I'd pull him into the alley and take it from him.
The young man was putting his grocery sack on the sidewalk.
He fished in his pocket until he found a coin.
The old man mumbled and shuffled away.
‘Damn,’ I thought to myself.
‘Now what will I do?’
Just then the boy tipped over his sack of groceries.
A couple of apples rolled onto the sidewalk.
He bent to pick them up and I pulled him into the alley and smashed him up against the wall.
Both of us were scared to death but I had the advantage of surprise.
He was petrified with fear as I held my knife in front of him.
‘I don't want to hurt you, but I need money.
I'm desperate.
Give it to me.
Now!
Quick!
All you got before I kill you.’
My hand was shaking so badly I was afraid I'd drop the knife.
‘Please.
Please.
Take it all.
Don't kill me,’ the boy pleaded.
He pulled out his billfold and tried to hand it to me.
He dropped it and I kicked it down the alley.
‘Take off,’ I said.
‘Run, man, run!
And if you stop running for two blocks, you're a dead man.’
He looked at me, eyes wide with horror, and started to run.
He tripped over his groceries and sprawled on the pavement at the mouth of the alley.
Scrambling to his feet, he tripped again as he half-crawled, half-ran down the sidewalk.
As soon as he turned the corner, I grabbed the wallet and sprinted down the alley.
Emerging in the darkness, I vaulted the chain-link fence surrounding the park and ran through the high grass into the trees.
Squatting behind an embankment, I paused to catch my breath and let my pounding heart  settle down.
Opening the wallet I counted out 19 dollars.
It felt good to hold the bills in my hand.
I tossed the wallet into the high grass and counted the money again before I folded it and put it in my pocket.
Not bad, I thought.
The gangs are killing hobos for less than a dollar and I get 19 on my first try.
This isn't going to be so bad after all.
But my confidence did not remove all my fear, and I stayed hidden in the high grass until after midnight.
By then it was too late to get the room and I walked back to the spot where I had committed the robbery.
Someone had already picked up all the spilled groceries with the exception of a crushed box of crackers.
I picked up the box and shook it as the crumbs fell out on the pavement.
I relived the experience in my mind and grinned.
I should have cut him, just to find out what it felt like, I thought.
Next time I will.
Conclusion
In the Lord's Prayer we say the words: ‘Lead us not into Temptation.’
All of us have to face temptation and there are times, as with Nicky in the reading, when the pressures on us to do something wrong are very strong.
We do always, however, have a choice about what we do — nobody forces us to do wrong.
Even when other people around us do things we disapprove of, we don't have to follow their example.
Prayer
We know that there is evil in the world.
May we struggle against evil with courage and determination.
May we draw on God's power to strengthen us when we feel tempted to do wrong.
Amen 
Day 3 Meeting with a Preacher
Introduction
Nicky is initiated into a world of robbery and violence.
Before very long he becomes the leader of one of the most powerful teenage gangs in Brooklyn.
His life is devoted to  fights with rival gangs, stabbing, mugging, drinking and taking drugs.
Then he meets a man called David Wilkerson, a preacher, who stands on street corners telling the young people about God.
The skinny man walked over to me and stuck out his hand.
‘Nicky, my name is David Wilkerson.
I'm a preacher from Pennsylvania.’
I just stared at him and said, ‘Go to hell, Preacher.’
‘You don't like me, Nicky,’ he said, ‘but I feel different about you.
I love you.
And not only that, I've come to tell you about Jesus who loves you, too.’
…
No one loved me.
No one ever had.
As I stood there my mind raced back to that time so many years ago when I had heard my mother say, ‘I don't love you, Nicky.’
I thought, ‘If your own mother doesn't love you then no one loves you — or ever will.’
The preacher just stood there, smiling, with his hand stuck out.
I always prided myself on not being afraid.
But I was afraid.
Deeply afraid that this man was going to put me in a cage.
He was going to take away my friends.
He was going to upset everything and because of this I hated him.
‘You come near me, Preacher, and I'll kill you,’ I said, shrinking back towards the protection of the crowd.
The fear overwhelmed me.
I was close to panic.
I was running, and I knew it.
But I couldn't fight this kind of approach.
If he had come at me with a knife, I would have fought him.
If he had come begging and pleading, I would have laughed at him and kicked him in the teeth.
But he came saying, ‘I love you.’
And I had never come up against this kind of approach before.
Some of the boys followed and we went down into the basement and I turned the phonograph on as loud as it would play.
Suddenly, there was a commotion at the door and I looked up and saw the skinny preacher walk in.
He seemed so out of place, with his nice suit and white shirt and neat tie, walking into this filthy basement room.
He asked one of the boys, ‘Where's Nicky?’
The boy pointed across the room where I was sitting with my head in my hands, cigarette dangling out of my mouth.
Wilkerson walked across the room like the place belonged to him.
He had a big smile on his face.
He stuck out his hand  again and said, ‘Nicky, I just wanted to shake hands with you and…’
Before he could finish, I slapped him in the face — hard.
He tried to force his grin…he held his ground and the fear once again welled up inside me so that I was sick to my stomach.
I did the only thing I knew to retaliate.
I spat on him.
‘Nicky, they spat on Jesus too, and he prayed,Father forgive them, for they know not what they do .’
I screamed at him, cursing, ‘Get out, you crazy priest.
You don't know what you're talking about.
I'll give you 24 hours to get off my turf or I'll kill you.’
Wilkerson backed out the door, still smiling.
‘Remember, Nicky, Jesus loves you.’
It was more than I could take.
I reached down and picked up the empty wine bottle and smashed it to the floor.
I had never felt so frustrated, so desperate, so completely undone.
…
I had never gone to my room this early.
It was 10.30…
I closed the door behind me and locked it.
I was shaking as I crossed the room…
I took my gun out of the closet and put two bullets in the magazine and laid it on the table beside my bed.
I kicked off my shoes and changed clothes.
Laying my pack of cigarettes on the table, I lay back on the bed and looked at the ceiling.
I could hear those words of David Wilkerson over and over, ‘Jesus loves you, Nicky, Jesus loves you.’
I reached up and flipped off the light and lit a cigarette.
I was chain smoking again.
I couldn't rest.
I twisted one way and then another.
I couldn't sleep.
The hours went by
The next morning I sat on the front steps with my head in my hands.
I heard a car pull up in front of the apartment and heard the door slam shut.
A hand clasped me on the shoulder.
I lifted my weary head and saw the skinny preacher standing in front of me.
He was still smiling and he said, ‘Hi, Nicky.
Do you remember what I told you last night?’
I jumped to my feet and made a motion for him.
Wilkerson looked me straight in the eye and said, ‘You could kill me, Nicky.
You could cut me in a thousand pieces and lay them out on the street.
But every piece would cry out, Jesus loves you.
And you'll never be able to run away from that.’
I tried to stare him down but he kept talking.
‘Nicky, I'm not scared of you.
You talk tough but inside you're just like all the rest of us.
You're lonely.’
Something clicked.
How did he know that I was lonely?
The gang was always with me.
I had any of the girls I wanted.
People were afraid of me — they would see me coming and move off the sidewalk and into the street.
How could anyone think I was lonely?
And now this preacher knew it.
‘Nicky, you didn't sleep much last night, did you?’
Again I was amazed.
How did he know that I hadn't slept?
Wilkerson continued, ‘I didn't sleep much last night either, Nicky.
I stayed awake most of the night praying for you.
But before I did, I talked to some of your boys.
They tell me that no one can get close to you.
They are all afraid of you.
But Nicky, I've come to tell you that somebody does care.
Jesus cares.
He loves you.’
And then he looked me straight in the face, ‘One day, soon, Nicky, God's spirit is going to deal with you.
One day, Nicky, you are going to stop running and come running to him.’
I said no more.
I got to my feet and walked back into the apartment.
I climbed the steps to my room and sat on the side of the bed looking out the window.
In the east, the sky was beginning to turn a rosy hue.
The huge building across the street blocked my view of the horizon.
But suddenly, like catching a whiff of the sea when you're still miles up the river, I had a feeling there was more to life than this.
More than these towering concrete buildings — these prison walls of glass and stone.
I thought of his words, ‘One day you will stop running and come running to Him’.
I didn't even know who He was.
But I thought, sitting there on the side of my bed looking out over the trash-filled street with the sound of the trucks grinding and roaring down the thoroughfare, that He must be something like the sun rising out of the ocean on a cloudless day.
Or maybe something like the morning star that still hung in the dawning sky.
Maybe…
Someday….
The time was closer than I knew.
Prayer
David Wilkerson's message to Nicky was very simple:Jesus loves you .
No matter how wasted our lives seem to be, no matter what we do, or how often we turn our backs on Him, God is still there waiting for us whenever we choose to make contact with him.
May we have the courage to respond when we sense that He is speaking to us.
Amen 
Day 4 The Offering
Introduction
David Wilkerson organises a huge Christian rally.
He invites all the teenage gangs in Brooklyn and provides free transport for them.
Nicky Cruz and his gang, the Mau Maus, decide to go along for the ride….
More than 50 Mau Maus crowded onto the bus.
The harried men tried to keep order but finally gave up and let us take over.
The gang was pulling at each other, shouting obscenities, opening windows, smoking, drinking wine, pulling the bell cord and shouting for the bus to get under way .
When we arrived at the arena, we opened the emergency doors and some even crawled out the windows.
Israel and I pushed by the startled and helpless usher and swaggered into the arena dressed in our Mau Mau uniforms.
We paraded down the aisle, tapping loudly with our canes and shouting and whistling to the crowd.
Looking out over the crowd, I could see members of rival gangs.
The arena was almost full and it had all the makings of a full scale rumble.
This might not be so bad after all.
The din of noise was deafening.
We took our seats and joined in, whistling and shouting and tapping our canes against the floor….
Suddenly the skinny preacher stepped forward.
I hadn't seen him since that early morning encounter several weeks before.
My heart skipped a beat and the fear came flooding back.
It was like a dark foreboding cloud that settled on every aspect of my personality.
Israel was on his feet.
‘Hey, Dave!
Here I am.
See, I told you I'd come.
And look who's here,’ he said, pointing to me.
I knew I had to do something or I was going to crack from the fear.
I jumped to my feet and shouted, ‘Hey Preacher, watcha gonna do…convert us or something?’
The Mau Maus joined in the laughter and I sat back down, feeling better.
They still recognised me.
Despite the fact that I was petrified with fear, I was st ill their leader.
I was back in control of the situation.
Wilkerson began to speak: ‘This is the last night of our city-wide youth crusade.
Tonight, we're going to do something different.
I'm going to ask my friends, the Mau Maus, to receive the offering.’
Pandemonium broke loose.
Gang members all over the audience knew our reputation.
For the Mau Maus to take up the offering was like asking Jack the Ripper to baby sit.
The people began to laugh and shout.
But I was on my feet in a second.
I'd been waiting for some opportunity to show off, to draw attention to myself.
I pointed at five others, including Israel.
‘You, you, you,…let's go.’
The six of us walked to the front and lined up in front of the stage.
Behind us things got quiet — deathly quiet.
Wilkerson bent down and handed each one of us a big ice cream carton.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘I want you to line up here in front of the platform.
The organ will play and I'm going to ask the people to come forward and give their offerings.
When it is finished, I want you to come around behind that curtain and up onto the stage.
It was too good to be true.
There was no doubt in anyone's mind what we would do.
Anyone who didn't take advantage of a situation like this was a fool.
The offering was large.
The aisles were full of people who were coming to the front.
Many of the adults put in large bills and others put in cheques.
Nearly everyone made some kind of a contribution.
When all had come forward, I motioned with my head and we all marched out the right side of the auditorium through the drapes that hung along the wall.
Right above our heads was a huge red-lettered sign that said EXIT.
It was noticeable to everyone and as we disappeared behind the curtain, the laughter began.
It was low at first, then we could hear it rising until the whole auditorium was engulfed in gales of laughter at the poor preacher who had been duped by the Mau Maus.
We gathered behind the curtain.
The boys looked at me expectantly.
But something inside me was tugging in the other direction.
The preacher's trust ignited a spark inside of me.
I could do what was expected of me by the crowd, or I could do what he trusted me to do.
Instead of flicking my eyes toward the exit door, I shook my head no.
‘Come on,’ I said.
The boys couldn't believe me but they had to do what I told them to do….
‘Now, let's go,’ I said.
We walked single file onto the stage.
A lot of kids began to boo.
They thought we had made a fool out of the preacher and were sorry we hadn't ducked out the door as they would  have done.
But it gave a warm, satisfying feeling to know I had done something right.
Something honourable.
For the first time in all my life I had done right because I wanted to do right.
I liked the feeling.
‘Here, Priest!’
I said, ‘this is yours.’
I was nervous standing there in front of the crowd.
But as I handed him the money the room grew quiet again.
Wilkerson took the cartons from us and looked me straight in the eye.
‘Thank you, Nicky.
I knew I could count on you.’
We turned and filed back to our seats.
The auditorium was quiet enough to hear a pin drop.
Conclusion
Nicky responded because, probably for the first time in his life, someone had shown trust in him and had treated him with respect.
Prayer
When we make it obvious that we expect the worst from people, the worst is usually what we get.
May we learn to treat with respect everyone that we come into contact with.
May we search consistently for the best in other people.
Amen 
Day 5 Conversion
Introduction
At David Wilkerson's rally, tension increases between the different teenage gangs and, before long, fighting breaks out in the arena.
All of us were on our feet.
The room was charged with hatred.
I was looking for a way out into the aisle.
A full scale riot was building.
Suddenly I had a compelling urge to look at Wilkerson.
He was standing calmly on the stage.
His head bowed.
His hands clasped tightly in front of his chest.
I could see his lips moving.
I knew he was praying.
Something clutched at my heart.
I stopped and looked at  myself.
All around me the bedlam continued but I was looking inward.
Here was this skinny man, unafraid, in the midst of all this danger.
Where did he get his power?
Why wasn't he afraid like the rest of us?
I felt shame.
Embarrassment.
Guilt.
I slumped down in my chair.
All around me the pandemonium continued.
Israel was standing up looking backward.
He was shouting, ‘Hey!
Cool it!
Let's hear what the preacher has to say.’
The Mau Maus sat down.
The noise died.
Like a fog moving in from the sea the silence swept toward the back of the room and then up into the balconies.
Something was happening to me.
I was remembering.
I remembered my childhood.
I remembered the hate for my mother.
I remembered the first days in New York when I ran like a wild animal set free from a cage.
It was as though I were sitting in a movie and my actions were flashing in front of my eyes.
I saw the girls…the lust…the sex.
I saw the stabbings…the hurt…the hatred.
It was almost more than I could stand.
Wilkerson was speaking again.
He said something about repenting for your sin.
I was under the influence of a power a million times stronger than any drug.
It was as though I had been caught in a wild torrent of a rampaging river.
I was powerless to resist.
I didn't understand what was taking place within me.
I only knew the fear was gone.
Beside me I heard Israel blow his nose.
Behind me I heard people crying.
Something was sweeping through that massive arena like the wind moving through the top of the trees.
Wilkerson was speaking again.
‘He's here!
He's in this room.
He's come especially for you.
If you want your life changed, now is the time.’
Then he shouted with authority: ‘Stand up!
Those who will receive Jesus Christ and be changed — stand up!
Come forward!’
I felt Israel stand to his feet.
‘Boys, I'm going up.
Who's with me?’
I was on my feet.
I turned to the gang and waved them on with my hand.
‘Let's go.’
There was a spontaneous movement out of the chairs and toward the front.
More than 25 of the Mau Maus responded.
Behind us about 30 boys from other gangs followed our example.
We stood around the bottom of the stage looking up at Wilkerson.
He dismissed the service and told us to follow him to the back rooms for counselling.
Israel was in front of me, his head bowed, his handkerchief to his face.
We went through the door and into a hallway that led to the dressing rooms….
Nothing else mattered at the moment except the fact that I wanted to be a follower of Jesus Christ — whoever He was.
A man talked to us about the Christian way of life.
Then Wilkerson came in.
‘All right, fellows,’ he said, ‘kneel down right here on the floor.’
I thought he was crazy.
I had never knelt down in front of anyone.
But an invisible force pressed down on me.
I felt my knees buckling.
I couldn't remain erect.
It was as though a giant hand were pushing me downward until my knees hit the floor.
The touch of the hard floor brought me back to reality.
It was summer.
It was time for the rumbles.
I opened my eyes and thought to myself, ‘What're you doing here?’
Israel was beside me, weeping, loudly.
In the midst of all this tension I giggled.
‘Hey, Israel, you're bugging me with that crying.’
Israel looked up and smiled through the tears.
But as we looked at each other I had a strange sensation.
I felt the tears welling up in my eyes and suddenly they spilled over the sides and dripped down my cheeks.
I was crying.
For the first time since I cried my heart out in Puerto Rico — I was crying.
Israel and I were both on our knees, side by side, with tears streaming down our faces, yet laughing at the same time.
It was an indescribably exotic feeling.
Tears and laughter.
I was happy, yet I was crying.
Something was taking place in my life that I had absolutely no control over…and I was happy about it.
Suddenly I felt Wilkerson's hand on my head.
He was praying — praying for me.
The tears flowed more freely as I bowed my head and the shame and repentance and the wonderful joy of salvation mixed their ingredients in my soul.
‘Go on, Nicky,’ Wilkerson said, ‘Go ahead and cry.
Pour it out to God.
Call on Him.’
I opened my mouth but the words that came out were not mine.
‘O God, if you love me, come into my life.
I'm tired of running.
Come into my life and change me.
Please change me.’
That's all it was.
But I felt myself being picked up and swept heavenward.
Marijuana!
Sex!
Blood!
All the sadistic, immoral thrills of  a million lifetimes put together could not begin to equal what I felt.
I was literally baptised with love.
After the emotional crisis passed, Wilkerson quoted some Scripture to us.
‘If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.’
(2 Corinthians 5:17)
It made sense.
For the first time in my life it made sense.
I had become new.
I was Nicky and yet I was not Nicky.
The old way of life had disappeared.
It was as though I had died to the old way — and yet I was alive in a new kind of way.
Happiness.
Joy.
Gladness.
Release.
Relief.
Freedom.
Wonderful, wonderful freedom.
I had stopped running.
Conclusion
Nicky's conversion to Christianity shows that we don't necessarily need to be clever and learned to find God — religion is not like finding out about astronomy or physics.
In the Muslim religion, for instance, the word ‘Muslim’ means ‘one who submits to the will of God.’
What Nicky discovered is that responding to God is an act of submission — of giving in to a force much more powerful than our own.
Prayer
Dear God, we call on you to take our lives over for carrying out your work.
Show us what you want us to do and give us the strength to submit our will to yours.
Amen 
Christmas
Day 1 Carol
The Palm Court Lounge is snug and warm
There's Scotch on every table
It's not our fault it's not so hot
Next door in the hotel stable.
The passengers are drunk tonight
The crew have cash to burn
So who will hear the drowning man
We've left ten miles astern?
Let's all go down the Motorway
And see who's first at Chester
Let's forget the scruffy dog
We knocked for six at Leicester.
0 we're all right and so is Jack
(He's underneath the table)
It's not our fault it's not so hot
Next door in the hotel stable.
God rest us merry Gentlemen,
This is no time for sorrow
Because ten thousand refugees
Will get no grub tomorrow.


The Landlord smiles and lays the bill
Quite gently on the table
The man who'll pay has just been born
Next door in an ice-cold stable.
Ronald Deadman 
Prayer
Let us give thanks for the example of love and compassion shown to us by the life of Jesus Christ.
May we use his example to remind us to be caring and compassionate to everyone this Christmas time.
Amen 
Day 2 Nativity
It was a terrible time to have Christmas.
He'd only just got right from flu.
The icicles froze on the end of his nose
And Rudolph's red nose had turned blue.
His cheeks they were frozen like fishcakes
as he wearily trudged door to door.
Both his feet in his wellies were squelchin' like jellies
and his knees they were swollen and raw.
He'd got rid of most of the presents
when he suddenly heard a strange sound;
it came from a car near a pub called ‘The Star’
on an acre of derelict ground.
So he pulled up the brakes on the reindeer
for the cry of a baby he'd heard;
but the car was in darkness — the engine was off
and so were the wheels, he observed.
Then he reached in his sack for a pressie
but those left were all spoken for.
All he'd got for the mite was a tatty old kite
that he'd used twice for moppin' the floor.


So Santa Claus finished his journey
though the air was so cold, so they say,
dewdrops formed on his nose and they instantly froze
and icicles hung round his sleigh.
They were just about reaching exhaustion
when they found it was time to go back.
And the reindeer fair flew down Artisan View
now the weight had gone out of their sack.
They were all looking forward to supper
with cocoa and rum and mince pies
when Santa Claus thought that he still hadn't brought
a gift for the babe he'd heard cry.
There was quite a big crowd round the car now
for the parties were ending, of .
There were three Pakistanis with crepe paper crowns
and the front legs of a pantomime horse.
Father Christmas felt guilty and sorry
that all the best pressies had gone
and the kid had a fright when he took out the kite
from a bag that said ‘Made in Hong Kong’.
For the kite was all tattered and torn now.
It didn't look much of a toy:
it looked more like a cluster of bats in a duster
than a gift for a new baby boy.
But Santa Claus put down the pressie
next to the small child in the car
then in two minutes flat he was waving his hat
and shooting off home — like a star.
The wind blew all night round the baby;
it howled like a vampire in pain.
All the stuff off the kite blew right out of sight —
and all that was left was the frame.
And there if you went you could see them:
the kite with its cloth torn away; the boy clinging tight to
his cross all the night —
the sole gift for his first Christmas Day.
Conclusion
Christmas is a celebration of the joy and hope which the birth of Jesus Christ has brought to millions throughout the ages.
Contained within that joy is the message of the cross — the symbol of sacrifice and giving.
Prayer
Let us remember that Christmas is a time of giving.
As well as giving presents, let us make sure that we also give of our time and attention to those who care about us and our thanks to those who have given to us.
Amen 
Day 3 The Magnificat
And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth.
To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.
And the angel came in unto her, and said, ‘Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among woman.’
And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.
And the angel said unto her, ‘Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God.
And behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David.
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever and of his kingdom there shall be no end.
And Mary said, ‘My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.
For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden, for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
For he that is mighty hath done to me great things, and holy is his name.
And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.
He hath showed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
He hath put down the mighty from their seats and exalted them of low degree.
He hath filled the hungry with good things and the rich he hath sent empty away.
Luke 1 : 26–33, 46- 53 Authorised version 
Prayer
Mary's poem of thanks is called the Magnificat.
Her words are a celebration of the miracle of birth.
In our own celebrations this Christmas, may we join with Mary in giving thanks for the amazing gift of human life.
Amen 
Day 4 The Nativity
And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed.
And all went to be taxed, everyone into his own city.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.
And so it was, that while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered.
And she brought forth her first-born son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flocks by night.
And lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them, ‘Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.
For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.
And this shall be a sign unto you, Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.’
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying:
‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.’
And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, ‘Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known to us.’
And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.
And when they had seen it they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning the child.
And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds.
But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
Luke 2:1–19 Authorised version 
Conclusion
The significance of the birth of Christ is not the sudden appearance of angels all over the place, but the fact that such an important person was born in the most humble surroundings — in a poor and lowly stable.
Prayer
May we be wary of judging people by their wealth.
Let us remember that it is often the most poor and humble who have the most to teach us.
Amen 
Day 5 The Wise Men
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, saying, ‘Where is he that is born King of the Jews?
For we have seen his star in the east and are come to worship him.’
When Herod the king heard these things, he was troubled and all Jerusalem with him.
And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together he demanded of them where Christ should be born.
And they said unto him, ‘In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written by the prophet.’
And Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared.
And he sent them to Bethlehem and said, ‘Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.’
When they had heard the king, they departed; and lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was.
And when they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down and worshipped him; and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts: gold and frankincense and myrrh.
And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream saying, ‘Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.’
When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt.
Matthew 2: 1–14 Authorised version 
Prayer
Let us give thanks for the example given to us by Jesus Christ.
May we find room in our hearts this Christmas for his message of hope and love.
Amen 
Faith
Day 1 God Knows
Our reading today is the first part of a poem written by Minnie Louise Haskins who died in 1957.
This particular verse, about the New year, was used by King George VI in his Christmas radio broadcast in 1939.
This was the year in which war had just been declared and was a time of great worry and foreboding.
No one, of course , would want to compare the first week of school term with the outbreak of a world war, but we are at the beginning of a New Year and a gateway to the future.
I said to the man
who stood at the gate of the year,
‘Give me a light that I may tread safely
into the unknown.’
And he replied, ‘Go out into the darkness
and put your hand into the hand of God.
That shall be to you better than light
and safer than a known way!’
So I went forth and,
finding the hand of God,
trod gladly into the night.
And he led me towards the hills
and the breaking of day in the
lone east.
Prayer
At this breaking of day and at this dawning of a new year  may we have the courage to put our hands into the hand of God.
May we allow Him to lead us into the unknown, may we draw our courage from Him and may we place our trust in His loving kindness.
Amen 
Day 2 Abou Ben Adhem
Our readings this week are about having faith and trust in God.
Many of us find it difficult to have faith and trust and feel love for someone that we cannot see and often feel that we cannot hear or get close to.
Today's reading is quite a well-known poem about a man who had such a difficulty:
Abou Ben Adhem — may his tribe increase —
Awoke one night from a deep dream of peace,
And saw, within the moonlight in his room,
Making it rich and like a lily in bloom,
An angel writing in a book of gold.
Exceeding peace had made Ben Adhem bold,
And to the presence in the room, he said:
‘What writest thou?’
The vision raised its head,
and with a look made of all sweet accord,
Answered: ‘The names of those who love the Lord.’
‘And is mine one?’ said Abou.
‘Nay, not so,’
Replied the angel.
Abou spoke more low,
But cheerily still; and said: ‘I pray thee then,
Write me as one that loves his fellow-men.,
The angel wrote, and vanished.
The next night
It came again with a great wakening light,
And showed the names whom love of God had blest,
And lo!
Ben Adhem's name led all the rest.
Leigh Hunt 
Prayer
Ben Adhem said, ‘Write me as one that loves his fellow men., And it was through his caring and concern for other people that Ben showed his love for God.
May we also learn to care for each other and, through our concern and love for other people, come to be blessed by God.
Amen 
Day 3 The Lord Is My Shepherd
The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.
He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
Psalm 23 Authorised version 
Prayer
Today's prayer was written by St Richard of Chichester who lived from 1197 to 1253.
O most merciful Redeemer, Friend and Brother,
May we know Thee more clearly,
Love Thee more dearly,
Follow Thee more nearly;
For ever and ever.
Amen 
Day 4 Mediation
Recommended music: A useful opening for this assembly would be an extract from one of Beethoven's pieces composed after he had begun to go deaf.
The beginning of the third movement of  the Ninth Symphony, or the third movement of the Archduke Trio would be appropriate .
Introduction
It's easy for us to keep our religious faith when things are going well for us and we feel successful.
When we're unhappy and nothing seems to be turning out right, it's tempting to despair — to feel as though God is abandoning us.
Today's reading, by Cardinal Newman, gives us the reassurance that there is a purpose in our lives.
God has created me to do Him some definite service.
He has committed some work to me which he has not committed to another.
I have my mission.
I may never know it in this world but I shall be told it in the next.
I am a link in the chain, a bond of connection between persons.
He has not created me for nothing.
I shall do good.
I shall do His work.
I shall be an angel of peace — a preacher of truth in my own place, if I do but keep His commandments.
Therefore will I trust Him.
Wherever, whatever I am, I can never be thrown away.
If I am in sickness, my sickness may serve Him; in perplexity, my perplexity may serve Him;, if I am in sorrow, my sorrow may serve Him.
He does nothing in vain.
He knows what he is about.
He may take away my friends.
He may throw me among strangers.
He may make me feel desolate, make my spirits sink, hide my future from me…still…
He knows what He is about.
Conclusion
Today's prayer was written by someone who must have experienced the terrible sense of desolation that Cardinal Newman spoke about — it was written by the great composer, Beethoven, at a time when he realised that his deafness was incurable.
Prayer
O God give me the strength to be victorious over myself, for nothing may chain me to this life.
Please guide my spirit and raise me up from depths of misery, so that my soul may be  carried through your wisdom and may struggle fearlessly upwards in fiery flight.
For you alone can understand me and you alone can inspire me.
Amen 
Day 5 I Am the Great Sun
Today's reading is a poem based on an inscription found on a Normandy crucifix, dated 1632.
It tells how essential God's presence is in making our lives rich and meaningful and bemoans the fact that so many people turn away from him.
I am the great sun, but you do not see me,
I am your husband, but you turn away.
I am the captive, but you do not free me,
I am the captain you will not obey.
I am the truth, but you will not believe me,
I am the city where you will not stay,
I am your wife, your child, but you will leave me,
I am that God to whom you w ill not pray.
I am your counsel, but you do not hear me,
I am the lover whom you will betray,
I am the victor, but you do not cheer me,
I am the holy dove whom you will slay.
I am your life, but if you w ill not name me,
Seal up your soul with tears, and never blame me.
Charles Causley 
Conclusion
One of the most wonderful things about religion is that it's always there waiting for us.
We might turn away from our own particular church — we might go through a period of not knowing what we believe in — we might change from being a Catholic to a Buddhist or from a Jehovah's Witness to an Anglican; but, no matter how many times we reject religion, we know it will never reject us.
Prayer
Today's reading compares God with a great sun — a source of tremendous strength and energy which never goes away.
May we turn our eyes towards this great sun, draw warmth and strength and comfort from it and receive its blessing.
Amen 
Those Less Fortunate Than Ourselves
Day 1 Anything You Do For Others
When the Son of Man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, he will sit in state on his throne, with all the nations gathered before him.
He will separate men into two groups, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, and he will place the sheep on his right hand and the goats on the left.
Then the king will say to those on his right hand, ‘You have my Father's blessing; come, enter and possess the kingdom that has been ready for you since the world was made.
For when I was hungry, you gave me food; when thirsty, you gave me drink; when I was a stranger you took me into your home, when naked you clothed me; when I was ill you came to my help, when in prison you visited me.’
Then the righteous will reply, ‘Lord, when was it that we saw you hungry and fed you, or thirsty and gave you drink, a stranger and took you home, or naked and clothed you?
When did we see you ill or in prison, and come to visit you?’
And the king will answer, ‘I tell you this: anything you did for one of my brothers here, however humble, you did for me.’
Then he will say to those on his left hand, ‘The curse is upon you; go from my sight to the eternal fire that is ready for the devil and his angels.
For when I was hungry you gave me nothing to eat, when thirsty nothing to drink; when I was a stranger you gave me no home, when naked you did not clothe me; when I was ill and in prison you did not come to my help.’
And they too will reply, ‘Lord, when was it that we saw you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, and did nothing for you?’
And he will answer, ‘I tell you this: anything you did not do for one of these, however humble, you did not do for me.,Matthew 25: 31 —46 New English Bible 
Conclusion
It's easy for us to be friendly and kind to people that we think highly of or that we want to impress.
But Jesus said, ‘anything you did not do for one of these,however humble , you did not do for me.’
Prayer
Let us remember that there is something of God in everyone — even people we find it difficult to like.
May we try to do something to make other people's lives happier and easier — even those people who seem to be doing nothing at all to help us.
Amen 
Day 2 Timothy Winters
Timothy Winters comes to school
With eyes as wide as a football pool,
Ears like bombs and teeth like splinters:
A blitz of a boy is Timothy Winters.
His belly is white, his neck is dark,
And his hair is an exclamation mark.
His clothes are enough to scare a crow
And through his britches the blue winds blow.
When teacher talks he won't hear a word
And he shoots down dead the arithmetic-bird,
He licks the patterns off his plate
And he's not even heard of the Welfare State.
Timothy Winters has bloody feet
And he lives in a house on Suez Street,


He sleeps in a sack on the kitchen floor
And they say there aren't boys like him any more.
Old Man Winters likes his beer
And his missus ran off with a bombardier,
Grandma sits in the grate with a gin
And Timothy's dosed with an aspirin.
The Welfare Worker lies awake
But the law's as tricky as a ten-foot snake,
So Timothy Winters drinks his cup
And slowly goes on growing up.
At Morning Prayers the Master helves
For children less fortunate than ourselves
And the loudest response in the room is when
Timothy Winters roars ‘Amen!’
So come one angel, come on ten:
Timothy Winters says ‘Amen
Amen amen amen amen.,
Timothy Winters, Lord .
Amen 
Charles Causley
Prayer
No matter how sorry we may feel for ourselves at times, there are always people worse off than us.
Let us pray for children who are poor, unloved, lonely and uncared for.
May their teachers be kind to them and may they find good friends to help them.
Amen 
Day 3 The Pinballs (1)
One summer two boys and a girl went to a foster home to live together.
One of the boys was Harvey.
He had two broken legs.
He got them when he was run over by his father's new Grand Am.
The day of his accident was supposed to be one of the happiest of Harvey's life.
He had written an essay on ‘Why I Am Proud to Be an American’, and he had won third prize.
Two dollars.
His father had promised to drive him to the meeting and watch him get the award.
The winners and their parents were going to have their pictures taken for the newspaper.
When the time came to go, Harvey's father said, ‘What are you doing in the car?’
Harvey had been sitting there, waiting, for fifteen minutes.
He was wearing a tie for the first time in his life.
‘Get out, Harvey, I'm late as it is.’
‘Get out?’
‘Yes, get out.’
Harvey did not move.
He sat staring straight ahead.
He said, ‘But this is the night I get my award.
You promised you'd take me.’
‘I didn't promise .
I said I would if I could.’
‘No, you promised.
You said if I'd quit bugging you about it, you'd take me.
You promised.’
He still did not look at his father.
‘Get out, Harvey.’
‘No.’
‘I'm telling you for the last time, Harvey.
Get out.’
‘Drive me to the meeting and I'll get out.’
‘You'll get out when I say!’
Harvey's father wanted to go to a poker game at the Elks Club, and he was already late.
‘And I say you get out now .’
With that, the father leaned over, opened the door and pushed Harvey out of the car.
Harvey landed on his knees in the grass.
He jumped to his feet.
He grabbed for the car door.
His father locked it.
Now Harvey looked at his father.
His father's face was as red as if it had been turned inside out.
Quickly Harvey ran round the front of the car to try and open the other door.
When he was directly in front of the car, his father accidentally threw the car into drive instead of reverse.
In that wrong gear, he pressed the accelerator, ran over Harvey and broke both his legs.
The court had taken Harvey away from his father and put him in the foster home ‘until such time as the father can control his drinking and make a safe home for the boy.’
The girl was Carlie.
She was as hard to crack as a coconut.
She never said anything polite.
When anyone asked how she was, she answered ‘What's it to you?’ or ‘Bug off’.
Her main fun was watching television, and she threw things at  people who blocked her view.
Even the dog had been hit with TV Guide when he stepped in front of the set when Sonny and Cher were singing ‘I Got You, Babe’.
Carlie had to go to the foster home because she couldn't get along with her stepfather.
She had had two stepfathers, but the new one, Russell, was the worst.
He was mean to everybody in the family, but especially to Carlie.
He resented everything she did.
Once he had hit her so hard when she wouldn't tell him where she'd been that she had had concussion.
Even with concussion she had struggled up and hit him with a frying pan.
‘Nobody hits me without getting hit back,’ she had said before she collapsed.
Carlie was to stay at the foster home ‘until the home situation stabilises’.
‘Stabilises!’
Carlie had said to the social worker in charge of her case.
‘What does that mean?’
‘It means until your mother and your stepfather work out their problems.’
‘Whoo,, Carlie said, ‘that means I'll stay until I'm ready for the old folks home.’
The first thing Carlie did when she got to the foster home was pull the plastic footrest up close to the TV: ‘Don't talk to me when ‘Young and Restless’ is on,’she warned the foster mother who was standing behind her.
‘I just wanted to welcome you,’ Mrs Mason said.
She put one hand on Carlie's back.
Carlie shook it off.
‘Welcome me during the commercials,’ she said.
Betsy Byars 
Conclusion
The two children in this story have been through very bad experiences.
Carlie and Harvey feel bitter and resentful about the way they've been treated.
Because of this, they don't find it easy to make friends and are very difficult to get on with.
It's easy to be friendly to nice people.
It takes a lot of patience to be friendly towards people who at first seem hostile and resentful.
Prayer
Jesus Christ said: ‘Anything you did not do for one of these, however humble, you did not do for me.’
May we be patient with those people whose lives have been difficult and who feel bitter and resentful.
May we try to show them by our own example that there is something good in everyone.
Amen 
Day 4 The Pinballs (2)
Carlie had been suspicious of people since the day she was born.
She swore she could remember being dropped on the floor by the doctor who delivered her.
‘You weren't dropped,’ her mother had told her.
‘All right then, why is my face so flat?
Was I ironed ?’
Carlie also claimed that when she was two months old a baby-sitter had stolen a gold cross from round her neck.
‘No baby-sitter stole a gold cross from you,’ her mother had told her.
‘All right then, where is it?’
Carlie believed everyone was out to do her in, and she had disliked Mrs Mason, the foster mother, as soon as she had seen her standing in the doorway.
‘I knew she'd have on an apron,’ Carlie said to the social worker.
‘She's trying to take off Mrs Walton — unsuccessfully, I might add.’
‘Maybe she had on the apron because she was cooking, Carlie.’
‘I should be the social worker.
I'm not fooled by things like aprons.’
She also didn't like the Mason's living room.
‘This is right out of‘Leave it to Beaver’,’ she said.
She especially distrusted the row of photographs over the fireplace.
Seventeen pictures of — Carlie guessed — 17 foster children.
‘Well, my picture's not going up there,’ she grumbled to herself.
‘And nobody had better snap me when I'm not looking.’
She sat.
Mrs Mason waited until ‘Young and Restless’ was over and then she said, ‘Carlie?’
‘I'm still here.’
‘Well, come on and have some lunch.
Then afterwards you can help me get the boys' room ready.’
Carlie turned.
She looked interested for the first time.
‘The boys?’ she asked.
‘There're going to be some boys here?’
‘Yes, two boys are coming this afternoon — Thomas J and Harvey.’
‘How old?’
‘Eight and thirteen.’
‘Oh, boo, too young.’
Carlie got up from the footstool.
‘What's wrong with them?’
‘Wrong with them?’
‘Yeah, why do they have to be here?
I'm here because I got a bum stepfather.
What's their trouble?’
‘Well, I guess they'll have to tell you that.’
Carlie lifted her hair up off her neck.
‘How about the 13-year-old?’ she asked.
‘What's he like?
Big for his age, I hope.’
‘He has two broken legs.
That's about all I can tell you.’
‘Well,’ Carlie said, ‘that lets out dancing.’
Carlie was sitting in front of the television when Harvey arrived.
He had to be carried in because of his legs.
They set the wheelchair down by Carlie's footstool.
She looked round.
‘What happened to your legs?’ she asked.
She was interested in medical matters.
He said, ‘Nothing.’
‘Well,something must have happened.
They don't just put plaster casts on your legs for the fun of it.’
There was a long pause.
Harvey looked down at his legs.
In his mind the shiny Grand Am lunged over him again.
He felt sick.
He said, ‘If you must know, I broke my legs playing football.’
He wished it had happened that way.
A boy at school had broken his ankle playing football, and everyone in school had autographed his cast.
Girls had even kissed the cast and left their lipstick prints.
Harvey's casts were as white as snow.
He wished he had thought to forge some names on them.
‘Love and kisses from Linda.’
‘Best wishes to a wonderful English student from Miss Howell.’
Carlie was still looking at him, eyeing the casts, his toes sticking out at the end.
Then she glanced up at his face.
‘What position were you playing?’
Harvey hesitated.
‘Quarterback,’ he said.
Carlie snorted.
‘You're no quarterback.
I've seen Joe Namath in person.’
She looked him over.
‘If you were playing football at all, you were probably the ball.’
Harvey kept looking at his legs.
Carlie decided to give him one more chance.
‘So what really happened?’
‘I was playing football,’ he insisted.
‘Listen,’ Carlie said.
‘This is one of my favourite shows, so if you're going to tell me a bunch of big lies about what happened to your legs, well, I'll just go back to watching my show.’
‘Go back to watching it,’ Harvey said.
Betsy Byars 
Prayer
It's always difficult to be aware of other people's pain when we are hurt ourselves.
Let us pray that we may use our own experiences — our grief, our worries and our disappointments — to help other people cope with their problems.
May we seek, as teachers and as pupils, to become sensitive and caring.
May the lives of those we meet become richer for having known us.
Amen 
Day 5 On the Swag
His body doubled
under the pack
that sprawls untidily
on his old back
the cold wet deadbeat
plods up the track.
The cook peers out:
‘oh curse that old lag
here again
with his clumsy swag
made of a dirty old
turnip bag.’
‘Bring him in, cook,
from the grey level sleet,
put silk on his body,
slippers on his feet,
give him fire
and bread and meat,
‘Let the fruit be plucked
and the cake be iced,
the bed be snug
and the wine be spiced
in the old cove's nightcap:
for this is Christ.’
R A K Mason 
Prayer
Let us remember that it's not the popular, attractive people who need our help most, but the lonely and the unpopular…those it might be easier to laugh at than to be seen helping.
Let us learn to treat other people as we would like them to treat us.
Amen 
Am I My Brother's Keeper?
Day 1 Cain and Abel
Introduction
Today's reading, about Cain and Abel, is one of the stories from the book of Genesis in the Old Testament.
In the story, Cain and Abel were supposed to be the sons of Adam and Eve.
Abel was a shepherd and Cain was a farmer.
As was the local custom, they both made sacrifices to God from the products of their labour, Cain sacrificing one of his sheep and Abel some of his vegetables.
For some reason, Abel's offering seemed to go down much better with God than his brother's did.
Cain was jealous and upset to think that his brother was more highly favoured with God.
When Cain made his feelings known, the only explanation he received was that he had to master his sin before God would be impressed with him.
We pick up the story with Cain plotting fiendishly against his brother.
Cain said to Abel his brother, ‘Let us go out to the field.’
And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and killed him.
Then the Lord said to Cain, ‘Where is Abel your brother?’
He said, ‘I do not know; am I my brother's keeper?’
And the Lord said, ‘What have you done?
The voice of your brother's blood is crying to me from the ground.
‘And now you are cursed from the ground which has opened its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand.
‘When you till the ground, it shall no longer yield to you its strength; you shall be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth.’
Cain said to the Lord, ‘My punishment is greater than I can bear.
‘Behold, thou hast driven me this day away from the ground; and from thy face I shall be hidden; and I shall be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth and whoever finds me will slay me.’
Then the Lord said to him, ‘Not so!
If anyone slays Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold.’
And the Lord put a mark on Cain, lest any who came upon him should kill him.
Then Cain went away from the presence of the Lord and dwelt in the Land of Nod, east of Eden.
Genesis 4: 8–16 Revised Standard version 
Conclusion
When Cain asked, ‘Am I my brother's keeper?’ he was trying to say that he was not responsible for his brother.
And, of course, that wasn't true.
Cain had killed his brother because he was jealous of the fact that Abel seemed to be the one that was favoured by God.
The question: ‘Am I my brother's keeper?’ is one that we often hear quoted.
When we use the words, ‘brothers’ and ‘sisters’we usually mean the people in our immediate families, but it can also mean other people in the world who might be in need of our help.
Prayer
May we learn to be caring and considerate and come to look upon everyone in the world as our brothers and sisters — people whose lives might be improved through something we can offer.
Amen 
Day 2 No Man Is An Island
Today's reading was written nearly 400 years ago by a poet  called John Donne who was a clergyman, the Dean of St Paul's Cathedral in 1621.
The poem mentions the tolling of a bell; we say that a bell ‘tolls’ when it sounds one repeated single note.
Nowadays, the tolling of a bell is often used to summon people to church.
It would be used in the past as a sign that someone had died.
When people heard the tolling of the local church bell, they would go outside and ask ‘for whom the bell tolls?’
No man is an island
Entire of itself;
Every man is a piece of the continent,
A part of the maine;
If a clod be washed away by the sea,
Europe is the less,
As well as if a promontory were,
As well as if a manor of thy friends
Or of thine own were;
Any man's death diminishes me
Because I am involved in mankind.
And therefore never send to know
For whom the bell tolls;
It tolls for thee.
Conclusion
We seldom nowadays hear the tolling of a bell to signify disaster or misfortune.
Nevertheless, the message of the poem still applies: all of us are involved in the human race — or, as John Donne says, ‘in mankind’; when disaster affects others, it reaches us as well.
‘Therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.’
Prayer
Let us pray that we may develop our ability to feel compassion.
May we grow towards a deeper awareness of other people — their joys, their fears and their suffering.
May we strive to become involved, not just in ourselves, but in the rest of the human race.
Amen 
Day 3 Dormitory Suburb
Today's reading is a short poem called ‘A Dormitory Suburb’.
A Dormitory Suburb is an expression used to describe an area outside a large town where people have their homes and sleep but don't do anything else very much — they work in the town and very often come into the town for their social life as well.
‘Will it rain?,
‘Do the rose trees need pruning?’
Oh, infinitesimal trivialities!
Does it matter?
Oh, God, is it important?
Nature, tender the rose trees.
If I stood a starving child before you,
I think you would say:
‘Ah, poor thing,’
And go on clipping your hedge.
Jenny Scott 
May we open our eyes to the problems in the world around us and may we do whatever we can to make other people's lives happier.
May we never become so wrapped up in our own trivial problems that we forget to care about anyone else.
Amen 
Day 4 Z for Zachariah (1)
Introduction
Today's reading is the first part of a book called Z for Zachariah by Robert O'Brien.
It takes place in the future after a terrible war and is written in the form of the diary of a girl called Anna.
Anna's family are all dead and she now believes that she is the last person left in the world.
May 20th
I am afraid.
Someone is coming.
That is, I think someone is coming, though I am not sure, and I pray that I am wrong.
I went into the church and prayed all this morning.
I sprinkled water in front of the altar, and put some flowers on it, violets and dogwood.
But there is smoke.
For three days there has been smoke, not like the time before.
That time, last year, it rose in a great cloud a long way away, and stayed in the sky for two weeks.
A forest fire in the dead woods, and then it rained and the smoke stopped.
But this time it is a thin column, like a pole, not very high.
And the column has come three times, each time in the late afternoon.
At night I cannot see it, and in the morning, it is gone.
But each afternoon it comes again, and it is nearer.
At first it was behind Claypole Ridge, and I could see only the top of it, the smallest smudge.
I thought it was a cloud, except that it was too grey, the wrong colour, and then I thought: there are no clouds anywhere else.
I got the binoculars and saw that it was narrow and straight; it was smoke from a small fire.
When we used to go in the truck, Claypole Ridge was 15 miles, though it looks closer, and the smoke was coming from behind that.
Behind Claypole Ridge there is Ogdentown, about ten miles further.
But there is no one left alive in Ogdentown.
I know, because after the war ended, and all the telephones went dead, my father, my brother Joseph and Cousin David went in the truck to find out what was happening, and the first place they went was Ogdentown.
They went early in the morning; Joseph and David were really excited, but Father looked serious.
When they came back it was dark.
Mother had been worrying — they took so long — so we were glad to see the truck lights finally coming over Burden Hill, six miles away.
When they got out, the boys weren't excited any more.
They looked scared, and my father looked sick.
Maybe he was beginning to be sick, but mainly I think he was distressed.
My mother looked up at him as he climbed down.
‘What did you find?’
He said, ‘Bodies.
Just dead bodies.
They're all dead.’
‘All?’
We went inside the house where the lamps were lit, the two boys following, not saying anything.
My father sat down.
‘Terrible,’ he said, and again, ‘terrible, terrible.
We drove around, looking.
We blew the horn.
Then we went to the church and rang the bell.
You can hear it five miles away.
We waited for two hours, but nobody came.
I went into a couple of houses — the Johnsons', the Peters' — they were all in there, all dead.
There were dead birds all over the streets.
My brother Joseph began to cry.
He was 14.
I think I had not heard him cry for six years.
May 21st 
It is coming closer.
Today it was almost on top of the ridge at the crossroads.
He has stopped there and is deciding whether or not to come over the ridge.
I say he because that is what I think of, though it could be they or even she .
But I think it is he.
If he decides to follow the highway he will go away, and everything w ill be all right again.
But if he comes to the top of the ridge, he is sure to come down here, because he w ill see the green leaves.
On the other side of the ridge, even on the other side of Burden Hill, there are no leaves; everything is dead.
There are some things I need to explain.
One is why I am afraid.
Another is why I am writing in this composition book.
I took the book and a supply of ballpoint pens back in February.
By then the last radio station had stopped broadcasting.
It had been dead for about three or four months.
I say about and that is the reason I got the book: because I discovered I was forgetting when things happened, and sometimes even whether things happened or not.
Another reason is that I thought writing in it might be like having someone to talk to, and if I read it back later it would be like someone talking to me.
Sometimes I would put in what the weather was like, if there was a storm or something unusual.
I put in when I planted the garden because I thought that would be useful to know the next year.
But most of the time I didn't write because one day was just like the day before, and sometimes I thought — what's the use of writing anyway, when nobody is ever going to read it?
I was pretty sure I was the only person left in the world.
But now I have something to write about…
I was wrong.
I am not the only person left in the world.
I am both excited and afraid.
At first, when all the others went away I hated being alone; and I watched the road all day and most of the night hoping that a car,anybody , would come over the hill from either direction.
When I slept I would dream that one came, and drove on past without knowing I was here; then I would wake up and run to the road looking for a tail light disappearing.
Then the weeks went by and the radio stations went off, one by one.
When the last one went off and stayed off it came to me, finally, that nobody, no car, was ever going to come.
The man on the radio had said that there wasn't any more power.
He said some other things, too, that I did not like to hear.
And that started me thinking.
Suppose a car came over the hill, and I ran out, and whoever was in it got out — suppose he was crazy?
Or suppose it was someone mean, or even cruel, and brutal?
A murderer?
What could I do?
The fact is, the man on the radio, towards the end, sounded crazy.
He was afraid; there were only a few people left where he was and not much food.
He said that men should act with dignity even in the face of death, that no one was better off than any other.
He pleaded on the radio and I knew something terrible was happening there.
Once he broke down and cried on the radio.
So I decided: if anyone does come, I want to see who it is before I show myself.
It is one thing to hope for someone to come when things are civilised, when there are other people around too.
But when there is nobody else, then the whole idea changes.
This is what I gradually realised.
There are worse things than being alone.
It was after I thought about that that I began moving my things to the cave.
Conclusion
Anna has seen the worst that people can do to each other.
An unnamed government has caused death and destruction to thousands.
People in her own country who have been injured, terrified and starving to death have behaved in a way that Anna can hardly bring herself to think about.
Knowing this, Anna has to decide whether or not to trust the stranger she sees approaching her farm.
Prayer
Hatred and violence are not just qualities that exist in other people.
We all contain the seeds within us of terrible violence and evil as well as the power to do tremendous good.
Let us remember that peace in the world starts and ends with ordinary people like ourselves.
May we seek to develop the powers of good that lie within us.
Amen 
Day 5 Z for Zachariah (2)
Introduction
Anna thinks the safest thing is to hide from the stranger that she's seen approaching her farm.
But, whilst she's hiding, Anna sees the stranger bathe in a stream which she knows is contaminated with radio-active fallout.
She still, however, does not make herself known to him.
May 25th 
I suppose it seems wrong to be so afraid.
It is just that I don't know what the man will do.
I liked most people.
I had a lot of friends at school, and a boy friend too.
But that was a matter of choice; there were some people I didn't like, and many more that I didn't even know.
This man may be the only man left on the earth.
I don't know him.
Suppose I don't like him?
Or worse, suppose he doesn't like me?
For nearly a year I have been here alone.
I have hoped and prayed for someone to come, someone to talk to, to work with, and plan for the future of the valley.
I dreamed that it would be a man, for then, some time in the future — it is a dream, I know — there might be children in the valley.
Yet, now that a man has actually come, I realise that my hopes were too simple.
All men are different, but the man on the radio station, fighting to survive, saw people that were desperate and selfish.
This man is a stranger, and bigger and stronger than I am.
If he is kind, then I am all right.
But if he is not — what then?
He can do whatever he likes, and I will be a slave the rest of my life.
That is why I want to find out, at least as well as I can by watching him, what he is like….
May 26th 
I followed the man, staying on my high woods path.
I had to work a bit to keep up with him — the path is not as straight as the road; also I had to be careful not to make a noise.
He walked on down the road, heading south towards the far end of the valley.
He looked around him as he went; but he did not slow down much until he reached the culvert.
At that point the small stream, having flowed into the pond and out again, bears right and is joined by Burden Creek.
He stopped there.
I think it dawned on him then for the first time that there were two streams, and that the pond was not formed by Burden Creek.
And here, if you look at them closely where they join, the difference between them becomes plain.
Even in the last few feet, the small stream has life in it — minnows, tadpoles, water bugs and green moss on the rocks.
Burden Creek has none at all, and after they merge, downstream all the way to the gap and out, the water is clear and dead.
I cannot be sure that he noticed all that, but he stared at it for a long time, getting down on his hands.
If he did see it he must have begun worrying, and maybe it was then that he started feeling sick.
In a short time he was going to get very sick.
About half way back it happened: he stopped, sat down quickly in the middle of the road, and was very sick.
He stayed there, retching, leaning to his side on one arm, for several minutes.
Then he got up and walked on.
He did that again three times on the way, and after the third time he was barely stumbling along, dragging the rifle.
When he reached the tent he crawled in; he has not come out again.
He did not make a fire tonight, nor eat any supper.
But it may be that in the morning he will be better.
May 27th 
The man has not moved.
I know he is sick, but I do not know how sick, and therefore I do not know what to do.
It may be that he just doesn't feel very well, and decided to stay in bed.
Or he may be so sick he can't get up.
He may even be dying.
Last night I would not have thought that would worry me so much, but this morning it does.
It began with a dream I had just before I got up.
It was one of those dreams that are more like daydreams; I have them when I am half awake and half asleep…
I dreamed (or daydreamed) that it was my father in the tent, sick, and then that my whole family were there again, in the house.
I felt so joyful it took my breath away, and I woke up.
I lay there realising that it was not true, but also realising something else.
I thought I had become used to being alone, and to the idea that I would always be alone, but I was wrong.
Now that there was somebody else here, the thought of going back, the thought of the house and the valley being empty again — this time forever, I was sure of that — seemed so terrible I could not bear it.
So, even though the man was a stranger and I was afraid of him, I began worrying about his being sick, and the idea that he might die made me feel quite desperate.
I am writing this partly to get it clear in my head and to help me make up my mind.
I think what I w ill do is wait and watch until late afternoon.
Then if he still has not come out of the tent I will go down there while it is still light, very quietly, and see if I can see, without getting too close, how he is.
I w ill take my gun with me.
Conclusion
Anna has enough knowledge and skill in farming to be self-sufficient and yet she still needs other people.
She wants companionship but, in order to achieve that, she has to take the risk of trusting someone else and take the risk of getting hurt.
Prayer
We know it is foolish to be too trusting of other people, but may we be prepared to take risks sometimes and give other people a chance to get close to us.
May we be helpful and reliable so that other people can trust in us and find our friendship valuable.
Amen 
Gowie Corby Plays Chicken Gene Kemp (abridged extracts)
Day 1 Gowie Starts School
Introduction
Our readings this week are extracts taken from a book by Gene Kemp called Gowie Corby Plays Chicken .
‘Corby.
Gowie Corby,’ shouts a voice.
‘Pick up that litter.’
I pick it up, hate, hate.
They've started already.
Picking on me.
Bossing me about.
Telling me off.
Gowie Corby, Gowie Corby, the theme tune for all that's wrong in this school.
All this is ahead of me, lying in store for me, week after week after week, being tidy, trying hard, working, reading, writing, doing Maths….
Coats and shoebags are to go in the cloakroom.
I haven't got mine.
I can't remember where they are, and I haven't got any plimsolls anyway.
I can't be bothered with gym or PE.
We're told to get a tray to put our gear into.
Gear I have not got, but I grab a tray next to that belonging to Jonathan Johns — call me JJ, he says — glistening and gleaming in full school uniform, brief-case crammed with equipment, pens, pencils, felt tips, rulers, set square, compasses, clip board and bulldog clips, sellotape and paper clips.
He bristles with school gear like a hedgehog.
Just what is he aiming at?
Mastermind, maybe?
Not that I care, but it's handy to be near him, 'cos he's always got something you can knock off and it's useful to be able to pinch something of his when the teacher finds you haven't got a pen for the third day running.
So there I am popping my tray next to his in the unit, when he says, right out of the blue, completely unprovoked, I haven't said anything —
‘Push off, Corby.
Find some place else.’
A new silver papermate is lying on top of the books in his tray, I notice.
‘Well, that's nice,’ I say gently.
‘What's got into you, Jonathan?
Rotten holiday?’
He doesn't respond to my friendly greeting.
‘Keep your rotten maulers off my things,’ he says.
‘What unkind words.
Don't be like that, Jonathan.
When have I ever touched anything of yours?’
‘All the time.
All the time.’
‘You callin' me a thief?’
‘Yeh.
Yeh.
Somethin' like that.
Somethin' like that.’
Jonathan always thinks that what he says is so fantastic that he's got to say it twice in case you missed it the first time round.
And what he's standin' there sayin' is a bit much, I feel.
So —
‘You askin' for a knuckle sandwich?’
I show him my power-packed bony fist and wave my eight-inch thick-soled boots at him.
He's encountered the weight of my right boot before.
‘Don't lose your cool, Gowie,’ he says, quickly.
‘I was only joking.
I was only joking.’
With eyes fixed on me as if I was hypnotisin' him, he takes the papermate out of the tray and moves away as if I might bite.
(And I might.)
‘What I want to know is who's in the team?’ asks a gruff voice.
That's Stewart Pitt and he means the football team, of course.
He's crazy about football and hopes to be the captain this year.
He and I don't get along too well.
Most people think he's great.
He's known as Stewpot and is a sort of hero to the little kids.
I call him Stewpid.
I move to sit by Darren Parker, but Simon Singh gets there first and most of the other seats are taken by now.
‘What's the matter?
Not found a niche, yet?’ asks Sir.
It's always the same.
No place for me.
Other people have friends.
I have enemies.
Not that I care.
But there is one empty place.
The face next to it smiles at me, nervously.
I look away fast.
No one wants to be smiled at by Heather.
‘Hurry up,’ says Sir.
‘Just sit by Heather.
She won't bite, you know.’
Heather pats the chair and smiles again, a truly horrible sight.
She must have forgotten a few things in the holidays, like the time I pushed her in the school goldfish pond.
I lower myself into the chair, keeping as far away as possible.
Given a straight choice, I'd rather sit by a slug.
Why on earth should I end up sitting by Heather?
Bloomin' unfair.
In a gloom at being at school in the first place and being next to Heather in the second, I push my hands into my jeans pocket — we aren't supposed to wear jeans at school — and discover some chewing gum, antique but welcome.
‘Put that gum in the bin,’ says Sir, without looking up from the register.
He must have eyes in the top of his head, under his hair.
Life is going to be very tedious this year, I can see.
Conclusion
Most of the children who read this book find themselves quite liking Gowie Corby.
They think it might be fun to have a boy like Gowie in their class.
One thing you might have noticed, though, is that there is only Heather who actually wants to sit next to Gowie.
The other children don't trust him — they don't mind watching him being horrible to other people but they're afraid of Gowie being horrible to them.
He's not the kind of person any of them want to have as a friend.
Prayer
May we learn to value friendship.
May we be open and honest and trustworthy so that other people are never afraid of getting close to us and need never be afraid of us hurting them.
Amen 
Day 2 The Chase
In the afternoon the weather is really hot, the way it always is when you go back to school, after it's rained non-stop for the summer holidays.
We play football and I score a goal, mainly because everyone except Stewpid is playing so badly that it's difficult to miss….
As I change, a beam of sunshine, full of surprise at finding itself in our cloakroom, picks out something silver, the papermate in JJ's pocket, gleaming amid the immaculate school uniform.
I give a fearful deadly hiss.
‘Jonathan Johns, the hour of your doom is upon you, and you shall DIE…
DIE…
DIE…
AAARRRRHHHHHH!’
He leaps in the air as if ants have just bitten his bum, and I reach out, grab the papermate, and shoot out through the door.
Jonathan's still in his football boots, laces trailing, so I have a head start as I rush across the playground to where the crossing lady stands with her lollipop .
Behind me ring out beautiful howls of rage and anger and fury.
My heart sings.
I find time to turn and wave at him, purple, struggling.
‘Give it back you thief,’ he bawls after me, but I spurt ahead, knocking over a coupla kids who start bawling and bellyaching as well, but I don't stop to investigate, because after all, I'm doing them a favour, the sooner they learn that life is full of hard knocks the better.
Above the angry shouts of the mums I hear another voice and take a quick shufti behind.
‘I'll get him for you,’ Stewpid is shouting….
I barge through the crowd of 'orrible mums, snotty kids and prams that always litter up the gate, and rush across the road, Mrs Moggs, the crossing lady, trying hard to keep up with me on her fat little legs.
‘Don't be in that much of a hurry,’ she pants.
‘You've got all your life ahead of you.
I think.’
Down the street opposite, Spring Avenue, and towards the car park, where I head for a silver Ford Granada, so that I can pause and hide a mo, to see how the pursuit is going.
And Simon Singh has joined in as well, which means I've got the two best sprinters in the school chasing me.
But I can have a lot of fun before they catch up with me, if they ever do.
Out of the car park…then round the corner and into the High Street, full of fat old housewives and layabouts, past Woolworth's and into Tesco's — perhaps I can lose them among the counters.
I peer round a stack of Hovis loaves and see Stewpid just entering the doors with Simon right behind him, no Jonathan though, slow-footed halfwit.
I mean to move on silently escaping, but I crash straight into a trolley, pushed by a bloke looking like one of the heavyweights in a James Bond film, so I leap away at speed as he snarls after  me and knock over a pile of bean tins.
Beanz meanz Bangs and Smashes, deafeningly loud, just missing two old geezers who squawk and screech, and the whole store breaks out in —
‘Kids, these days…’
‘…ought to be locked up…’
‘Out of my way, you stupid old bags!’
I yell, and run through the doors, going the wrong way to the multi-storey car park behind.
I am starting to puff a bit now so I stop behind a Ford Capri and try to get my breath back.
And a cry goes up.
‘Boy!
You, there!
What are you doing?
You're not supposed to be here!’
I run on faster, stitch stabbing in my side, now.
I feel like packing it in and going home.
I'm out of the multi-storey now and still running, though slower.
I hope the others have been copped by the attendants.
This thought cheers me up, gives me fresh power, so I surge on again past Boots, towards the Library, ready to turn on to the New North Road that takes me back home.
But I'm exhausted now, half-dead and looking back, see that Stewpid is gaining on me, has halved the distance between us…my breath comes in jags, my chest is going to explode.
I keep running.
The feet of Stewpid are right behind me now, pounding louder than my heart beats.
Somehow I must get up the Library steps, for if I can get in there before they reach me, they won't be able to duff me in.
I don't want to be duffed in.
The sun is dazzling, shining through the leaves of the trees all around…it shines in my eyes, dazzling…burning me up….
A hand grasps my shoulder from behind.
‘Got you, Corby!’ gasps Stewpid.
‘Oh, no, you ain't,’ I mutter, turning and twisting and thrusting with my right boot.
Stewart falls clumsily down the steps.
And lands splat! on his right elbow.
Conclusion
Running off with Jonathan's pen might sound like a good joke but, as you probably noticed, it isn't Gowie that the others come and help, but Jonathan.
What seems like a fairly harmless joke can have unfortunate consequences — as you can see in tomorrow's reading when we find out what happens to Stewart after his fall.
Prayer
May we learn to get on with other people.
May we be caring and considerate so that other people trust us and feel proud to have us for friends.
Amen 
Day 3 Hospital Visit
I am sitting by the side of a hospital bed watching Stewart trying to open a box of chocolates that Sir has brought him from me, if you get it.
Stewpid is up on traction, which means his arm is up in the air, so that he can't lie down at all, even to sleep.
If he moves it at all— the elbow, that is — it won't set properly, and he'll be no good at football, ever.
I haven't seen him since they took him away, screaming his head off, with Jonathan Johns telling everybody gathered round that it was all my fault, bloomin' unfair because I can't help it if Pitt has the kind of bones that break easily, can I?
Afterwards I have to go to the Headmaster and explain to him that running off with the papermate was all a joke and could I help it if people had no sense of humour…?
…
With Mr Merchant's assistance Stewart opens up the box of chocolates and offers me one with the hand that isn't attached to a pulley and the ceiling.
I look round uneasily.
For this place really gives me the creeps.
I can't stand the smell.
Really unhealthy.
And all those nurses look like zombies, not that I mind zombies, proper spooky ones that is.
I want to get out of here.
Dangerous places, hospitals.
You might be in here, harmless, visiting somebody, and before you could say Werewolves Unite they'd have you on the operating table, jacking both legs off.
I don't know what to say to Stewpid.
I know I'm not saying sorry, because I said that in those letters I wrote, and then I had to copy them out again, because they weren't neat enough, and that's enough sorries for anyone.
‘How are the practices going, Sir?’
Stewpid asks.
‘As well as can be expected without you there.
I've made Simon Singh captain and we play Central next week.’
‘Is 'e in it?’ he says, pointing the finger that's not on traction at me.
‘Well, no.
Gowie didn't turn up to any of the practices, did you?’
‘You play on Saturday mornings, and I ain't givin' up my Saturdays for anyone.’
‘Why not, Gowie?’
‘I've got better things to do.’
‘What better things?’
I shut my gob tight.
Why can't he leave me alone?
What I do on Saturday mornings is MY business, and he can poke his long conk in some place else.
Get knotted, Sir.
Let's change the subject.
‘How do you go to the bog, all strung up as you are?’
I ask the figure on the bed.
He goes a dirty red colour and wriggles about as much as he can considering his condition, and I wonder if he's shy, but then he explodes and I see that it's anger, not modesty.
‘I use a bottle and a bed pan, thank you very much, thank you very, very much, Mister Bloomin' Corby, for getting me stuck in here when the football season's started!’
I shrug my shoulders, for no matter how mad he gets, he can't duff me in, he's stuck in bed, which is his hard cheese.
‘You shouldn't have such rotten bones,’ I reply.
‘Come along, you two,’ Sir says, sharp as a needle.
‘Let's have reasonable behaviour.
Make an effort to get on with one another, at least .’
‘No way.’
‘Not likely.’
‘All right, all right .
Calm down or you'll drive me insane.
Now both say sorry.’
Long silence.
‘BOTH SAY SORRY.’
We both say sorry.
Huh.
Stewpid reaches for another choc, remembers me, and shoves the box towards me with his free hand.
I manage to knock it on the floor, where the unwrapped chocs go on a neighbourhood tour.
A nurse rushes forward tut-tut — tutting, and in the confusion, people bending over and so on, I somehow knock over Stewpid's orange juice, distributing it quite evenly over him, the nurse and the bed, to say nothing of the chocs, which I've never cared for much anyway.
Chewing gum's my favourite.
I look at my watch.
Nearly time to go.
I don't think Sir will bring me again somehow.
He'll leave me alone in the end.
I know he's got his reputation as a good teacher to keep  up, but that doesn't matter to me, I'm different, I'm not like this soft lot down here, my folks came from the North, descended from the Vikings, and I don't want to be liked, I don't want to be good, I don't want to be in the football team, or a useful member of anything, I don't want to know.
I don't care.
Conclusion
Gowie says that he doesn't want to be liked.
That probably isn't true because all of us want people to like us.
What Gowie means probably is that he doesn't expect anybody to like him and, because of that, he tends not to behave in a likable way.
Prayer
We have to learn to value ourselves before we can expect other people to like us.
May we learn to cherish the good that lies within us.
Let us try to recognise our faults and seek to overcome them so that we can learn to feel self-respect.
May we learn to value ourselves as well as other people.
Amen 
Day 4 The Gang
Conkers are everywhere at the moment, it's the season.
It's fairly boring, especially when JJ announces that he's the CHAMPION, showing off the most ginormous conker ever, polished and shining like his silly face.
The playground is covered with string and bits of nuts.
Stewpid is back at school with his arm in plaster, and he is the big HERO with kids queueing to write their names on his plasterised arm.
I say Hi to him and he hardly speaks back which I consider mean.
I don't care for that kind of meanness.
After all, I haven't done anything to him.
He began it all, chasing me.
He isn't allowed to play football and has to go back to the hospital for treatment.
The team is losing all its matches, Simon Singh is away with flu and Pete Gillett, the goalie, is ill as well.
So Sir has another go at getting me to play.
‘I won't say that it's for the school, Gowie,’ he says, ‘for I know that interests you not at all.’
‘No, Sir.’
‘No, Sir?
You mean no, it doesn't interest you, or no, you're not going to play?’
‘Both, Sir.’
‘I thought I might get you to play for your own sake, because you enjoy the game.’
‘I don't.’
‘You look as if you do when you're playing.’
‘Load of rubbish.
Sir,’ I add because he's looking a bit explosive.
He twitches a bit.
‘Go and sit down.
No matter how I try, sometimes you depress me.’
He looks so miserable that for once I don't kick Heather on the way back to my desk.
But it's his own fault.
Anyone who chooses to be a teacher deserves to have a rotten life.
At playtime Stewpid heaves over.
He looks about as friendly as an anaconda with belly-ache from too much goat-swallowing.
‘You listen to me, Corby,’ he says as if he was a hundred years old and me a little kid.
‘You gonna play for the team?’
JJ joins in unasked.
‘Don't ask him, Stew.
He'll ruin it.’
‘It's already ruined at the moment.
We're bottom of the league right now.
The team needs you, Gowie, and the team comes first with me.
Whatever you think JJ.’
His face shines with effort and love of the TEAM.
The TEAM comes above everything else.
Even though he can't stand the sight of me, he'll do anything to get me to play if he thinks it will help.
I don't give a bent penny for his pathetic TEAM.
‘Don't bother, either of you.
I wouldn't play for the team if they paid me.
I've got better things to do.’
And I walk off, leaving them standing there complaining.
But Stewpid still follows me.
He can't believe I really mean it.
‘Look here,’ he begins.
‘Where?’
I ask, peering round.
‘Oh, pack it in.
This is serious.’
‘What's serious?’
‘On Saturday we play Brent Hill.
We've only got half a side and we need you.
Look, you've got to play.’
‘No, you look.
Go and look for some of your friends, the  Stewpot fan club, and ask them to play for your precious team.
You're wasting your time with me.
I don't want to know.’
His face goes white, then red, and he raises his fist to me as if to hit me, thinks better of it, pushes his nose in the air and his voice down to his boots.
‘You are the rottenest, meanest, horriblest kid who ever came here.
You've never done nuthin' for nobody in the whole of your mean, miserable life!’
I push off into the bright sunshine, and across the playground.
No one follows.
The anger goes, no point in being mad, and I remember a tasty bit of gum I've got stashed in the classroom, and I fancy it.
By now it's empty and there, just in front of me, shining like a polished mirror, is JJ's brief-case, brass bits glowing like gold.
I open it.
Spotless books nestle in a spotless lining, pens, etc., in a separate partition.
I look at what he's reading.
Yuck.
‘That's Jonathan's,’ squawks Heather, putting in an unlovely appearance from nowhere.
I reach for the super glue on the shelf, the extra strong kind that sticks wood and so on.
I pull off the top — it's almost full, lots of gooey, gorgeous glue.
I tilt it over the case.
‘You mustn't do that,’ blethers Heather, like an old sheep.
Typecasting.
At the bottom of the case is Super Conk, the Champion.
I pick it out with loving care.
‘Wanna bet?’
I ask, stamping on the conker with maximum power as I empty, glug, glug, glug, the glue into JJ's pride and joy, and the slurping noise is music, music, music to my ears.
The glue covers the books, the pens, everything and I spread it generously around the fastening before I close it up.
For ever, maybe?
The conker lies shattered in bits on the floor, string st ill attached.
I whistle into the bright morning, feeling at one with the world.
Conclusion
Gowie is given every opportunity by his teacher and his classmates to join in with the others and make a useful contribution to the school; but every gesture of friendship he rejects.
Jokes and laughter can be a wonderful way of bringing  people together but Gowie's so-called jokes are the sort that cause only anger and unhappiness and make everyone despise him.
As you will see in the final reading from Gowie Corby Plays Chicken nobody w ill put up with Gowie's cruel jokes for ever and it's not long before people's patience with him runs out.
Prayer
Let us give thanks for the gift of laughter.
May we never misuse this gift by torments, sarcasm and cruel jokes but use laughter to entertain and bring happiness to others.
Amen 
Day 5 Attack
On Friday when I breeze in, fairly cheery 'cos it's nearly Saturday, I find a note waiting for me.
It says:
LOOK OUT CORBY YOUR GOING TOO GET WOTS COMING TO YOU.’
Then when we come out of Assembly there's another.
‘DEATH TO YOU SCUM.’
I don't find that nice at all, and spend most of the morning watching them all, wondering who sent it.
The last one of the day of the day reads:
‘WE'VE GOT A GANG ONTO YOU ROTTEN SWINE AND WE ‘RE GOING TO DUFF YOU UP SO YOU WISH YOU'D NEVER BEEN BORN, SO LOOK OUT YOU BEAST.’
Pathetic.
Some time later, near home-time, I don't find it so pathetic.
At the end of a long, draggy, boring Friday afternoon, it's at last time to clear up.
Soon, very soon, the classroom empties, only Heather and a coupla girls left, and Darren, who's reading and has forgotten he's supposed to be going home.
‘Where is everybody?
They disappeared fast,’ I say.
The girls' faces go tight and close up.
I know that look.
It means that someone is being kept out of the know, and it's often been me in the past, and it's me now.
‘Somethin's goin' on,’ I say to them.
The girls move away, but I stop Heather near the door, seize her right ear and twist it.
She squeals.
The other two depart as if there are bombs in the classroom.
‘Now talk.
What's goin' on?’
‘Nuthin'.’
She whimpers as I twist a little harder and drag her to the cloakroom, to keep out of Merchant's way.
‘Talk.’
‘They're gonna duff you in.’
‘Where?’
‘Outside school…’
‘Who?’
‘They'll hurt me if I tell you…’
‘I'll hurt you worse…tell me who's in it.’
‘The team mostly.’
‘Why?’
‘They're fed up with you 'cos you're so horrible.
Oh, stop, stop.
I'll tell Sir.’
‘Where are they now?’
‘You usually go to the shop on the corner after school, for some chewing gum…’
‘Go on…’
‘They're waiting for you in the alley way at the back of the shop.
That's all I know, honest.
Let me go, now.’
‘Get out.’
I push her through the door.
She makes me feel sick.
I feel sick anyway.
Some of the kids in the team are a horrible size.
Stewpid is bigger than Mr Merchant.
Not that he'll be doin' much with his elbow.
I walk slowly into the playground.
Most of the kids have gone home by now.
What am I to do?
Fancy that lot ganging up on me.
I must go very carefully.
Think…think.
I'd better go another way home, the long way round.
And Miss Plum walks through the playground carrying two heavy bags, and in a flash I am beside her, smiling a face full of teeth like Tom in a Tom and Jerry cartoon.
‘Miss Plum, please let me carry your bags.
You look so laden.’
She looks surprised as well.
My nice smile is almost splitting my face.
She hands over the bags and we walk along side by side.
I start to talk to her.
‘I expect that you are looking forward to the week-end, Miss Plum.
It must be a relief to get away from an awful mob like us.’
‘Oh, you're not that bad, really.
But you are right in a way.
I do enjoy the week-ends.’
‘Have you a hobby, Miss?
I like to go bird watching when I get the time.’
‘Do you indeed, Gowie?
Now, that's very interesting.’
On we walk, discussing hobbies, like two old geezers, and  she tells e how nice it is to talk to me like this as sometimes she feels she hasn't got to know me as well as she would have liked.
The corner shop comes into view, with JJ's ugly mug peering round it, and jerking back at the sight of me, and I am killing myself with laughter inside as Miss Plum and I walk right past, together.
I bet they're mad.
I bet they're astonished.
I smile at Miss Plum with all my available teeth.
She does a cherry.
We go right past and down the road and I'm safe.
I've mucked up their dirty little plan.
Load of morons.
On we go, well away from the scene of danger.
‘I catch a bus here,’ she says.
‘Thank you for your company, Gowie.’
She smiles at me as if she really likes me.
I could fancy her if she wasn't so old and a teacher.
‘'Ave a good weekend, Miss.’
I run on till I come to the cul-de-sac where I live…
I run along, happy with the Friday freedom feel, all the weekend stretching ahead, just for me, nobody saying do this, do that, go here, go there, Gowie Corby.
And it's even better because I've outwitted the TEAM, and there should be something good on tele tonight, and I wonder what there is to eat.
I get out my key and open the door, and suddenly…
Conclusion
You will have to read Gowie Corby Plays Chicken for yourselves if you want to know what happens next.
Gowie makes enemies.
He can't complain about people not liking him when he's so horrible to them.
Towards the end of the story, Gowie does start to become much nicer — not because of people threatening him, but because he meets somebody with a stronger personality who wants to be his friend.
Prayer
May we try to avoid being cruel and unkind even with those people we find it really hard to like.
May we be generous with our friendship and learn to be forgiving.
Amen 