

INTRODUCTION
Many people have heard the name of Richard Baxter, but know little about him.
I am unaware of any biography in print, and it was for this reason that I wrote this brief account of the life of a truly great man of God.
Almost a hundred years before Richard Baxter was born, Tyndale's Bible was being smuggled into England.
The re-discovery of the Bible, following many centuries of neglect, was the means of bringing the light of the Gospel of Christ into the darkness of England.
That same light revealed the corruption of the established Church.
This awakened, in many, a burning desire to cleanse the Church from all the superstitious beliefs and ceremonies accumulated during the centuries of Papal domination.
They were known as the Reformers, and later as the Puritans.
The power struggle that followed, between Reformation and counter-Reformation, reached its climax during Baxter's lifetime.
Featuring prominently in the centre of this maelstrom was the towering figure of Richard Baxter.
He preached before both Charles II and Cromwell and courageously reproved them for their sins.
He witnessed the horrors of the Civil War, the Plague and the Great Fire of London.
He bore with dignity the malicious insults of the notorious Judge Jeffries.
Baxter was a man who could not be bought with a bribe or silenced by threats or prison.
During his lifetime he brushed with death so frequently he called it his ‘friend’.
However, by the grace of God, he lived to see, in the ‘Glorious Revolution’ of 1688, the downfall of his persecutors.
During an era which Milton described as one of ‘sects and schisms’, Baxter promoted the cause of unity between true believers.
Even though Richard Baxter was born in Shropshire and spent most of his life elsewhere, his name has always been closely associated with the town of Kidderminster.
The reason for this is the extraordinary measure of blessing that attended his ministry in that place.
Both the Bible and history demonstrate that such a measure of blessing is almost invariably related to the means employed.
There are particular truths and certain methods that God is pleased to bless far above all others.
Richard Baxter's beliefs did include anomalies.
However, he was accepted as being a Puritan leader within the mainstream of Reformed tradition.
Moreover, he learned from his own experience that the most profitable truths were not the finer details of theology but the great essential teachings of Christianity.
He said, ‘My Religion is meerly Christian’.
His basic theology, his belief in the verbal inspiration and authority of the Bible, the nature of Christ as perfect God and man, His death on the cross to pay the penalty for sin, God's gracious gift of faith to His elect, man's responsibility to repent and believe the Gospel, and so on, are all considered as ‘outmoded’ by many leaders in the modern church.
However, I believe it would be foolish to allow such an assertion to remain unchallenged.
After all, if modern theology really is so vastly superior, then why do those who preach it so often succeed in emptying their churches?
On the other hand, those who, like Baxter, preach with a burning inner conviction, the good old truths of the Gospel, nearly always manage to fill their churches.
This was the case not only three hundred years ago, but also in Britain in the 1990s.
Surely the real value of any religion depends firstly on its truth and secondly, its effectiveness in bringing people back to God.
Like Baxter, we believe that nothing even remotely approaches Biblical Christianity in its power to transform a life crippled by sin and guilt into one of real holiness and joy.
Baxter's tender conscience and his continual living near to death gave him a lively  awareness of the awful danger of spiritual delusion.
He was only able to overcome doubts about the genuineness of his own faith after much inner struggle.
This deep concern for spiritual realism spilled over into his own ministry and explains why he preached and laboured with such tremendous zeal and fervour, as ‘a dying man to dying men’.
Over a hundred years ago, one of Baxter's biographers wrote, ‘It is impossible to doubt that Puritanism produced the freedom, strength and activity of modern British and American life.
We owe our liberty, our power of social organisation, our ideas of the propriety and dignity of public virtue and of private purity, to the resistance our forefathers made to the tyranny and immorality of the Stuart dynasty’.
In 1925 a new biography of Richard Baxter appeared which attracted the attention of Dr. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, from which time he dated his ‘true and living interest in the Puritans and their works.’
This eventually led to the initiation of the annual ‘Puritan’ Conference in 1950 (since re-named the ‘Westminster’Conference) and which continues to this day.
It is my desire that many others, in our own day, will catch something of Baxter's vision, zeal for God and love for the souls of men.
May God help us to learn from these great men of the past the lessons they themselves so painfully learned.
‘Nothing so little as grace at first, and nothing more glorious afterward: things of greatest perfection are longest in coming to their growth…
A new creature [in Christ]is the most excellent frame in all the world, therefore it groweth up by degrees; we see in nature, that a mighty oak riseth of an acorn.’
(From ‘The Bruised Reed’ by Richard Sibbes)
THE FORMATIVE YEARS
Richard Baxter was born in Rowton, Shropshire, on Sunday, 12th November 1615 at the time of morning worship.
His parents, Richard and Beatrice Baxter, were freehold farmers in the village of Eaton Constantine, between the Wrekin Hill and the River Severn.
At the time of their son's birth they were impoverished due to gambling debts incurred by Richard senior during his youth.
As a result, Richard Baxter had to spent much of his boyhood living with his maternal grandfather in Rowton, near High Ercall, about 10 miles away, until he was nearly ten years old.
In those days there was little opportunity to hear Gospel preaching in Shropshire.
However, about the time of his son's birth, Richard senior was converted through reading the Bible.
One of the results of this was that he later sought to influence his son with the truths of Scripture.
‘When I was very young’ says Baxter, ‘his serious speeches of God and the life to come possessed me with a fear of sinning’.
His father encouraged him to read the historical books of the Bible.
He enjoyed these very much, and eventually he began to appreciate the more doctrinal portions of the Bible as well.
On Sundays, the family would spend some time together around the Bible.
However, their devotions were often disturbed by the sounds of revelry and dancing as the villagers gathered around the nearby maypole.
Young Richard was often tempted to join them, and sometimes he did.
However, when he heard his father being ‘derided…under the odious name of Puritan’, he joined them no more.
This incident brought home to him the great contrast between his father's uprightness and the godlessness of those who sneered at him.
His godly upbringing gave young Baxter a troubled conscience whenever he indulged in the usual boyish sins.
Of these he lists the following: lying to escape punishment; eating too many apples and pears; stealing fruit from orchards; playing too much; gambling; being over fond of reading romances and old fables; imitating other boys in their foolish talking and behaviour; being over fond of his teacher's praises; and being cheeky and disrespectful towards his parents.
These, he says, were not overcome without a long struggle.
Richard excelled in school.
He was very bright and was never satisfied until he had mastered any subject he studied.
He acknowledged the great help and encouragement he received from Mr. John Owen, schoolmaster of Wroxeter free school (not the famous Puritan of the same name).
Whilst in Wroxeter, Richard stayed in the home of Sir Richard (later Lord) Newport, and attended school with his sons.
Another of his fellow pupils was Richard Allestree, later to become Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford, and later Provost of Eton College.
Naturally, these two Richards were keen academic rivals.
It was customary in those days for the ablest students to be given some responsibility for teaching the younger pupils.
This had been Baxter's privilege until, one day, Mr. Owen gave this position to his rival.
Baxter was so upset by this that he felt like leaving the school altogether.
However, he says that Mr. Owen, thereupon, ‘gravely, but very tenderly rebuked my pride, and gave me for my theme: ‘Ne sutor ultra crepidam’’(‘Let the cobbler stick to his last ’).
In other words, ‘Don't think more highly of yourself than you should!’
About the same time as this incident, when he was fifteen, Richard Baxter experienced a spiritual awakening.
His conscience was stirred even more than usual, especially about his habit of raiding orchards, and he came under conviction of sin.
He found much help and comfort through reading devotional books.
In particular he mentions one which his father had bought from a poor pedlar who had come to their door.
This was ‘Dr. Sibbes Bruised Reed ’, which he said was, ‘Suited to my state and seasonably sent me….
He opened up more the love of God to me and gave me a livelier apprehension of the Mystery of Redemption and how much I am beholden to Jesus Christ’.
Richard Baxter's ambition of going to university was never fulfilled.
He was persuaded instead to become assistant to Mr. Wickstead, Chaplain to the Council at Ludlow, and a friend of Mr. Owen, Richard's teacher.
He was led to believe that he would receive better than a university education with Mr. Wickstead as his personal tutor.
As it turned out, Mr. Wickstead, although very fond of Richard, never taught him at all!
However, he did allow Richard all the books and the time he wanted to teach himself.
In those days, Ludlow was an important regional administrative centre for much of Wales and the arches.
Richard found it to be a ‘town…full of temptations’.
However, he records with thankfulness that it ‘pleased God not only to keep me from them’, but also to give him a friend whose example of zeal and practical godliness was of great spiritual help to him.
Together they would often walk and talk, read and pray.
This friend was the first person he heard pray spontaneously (without reading out of a prayer book) and Richard soon learned to follow his example.
However, it came as a great shock to Richard when, some time later, this friend fell into profanity and drunkenness.
Baxter later wrote,
‘For such a friend I had, though after all
Himself became my warning by his fall.’
After spending about 18 months in Ludlow, Richard Baxter returned to Eaton Constantine.
He was dismayed to find his old teacher, Mr. Owen, suffering with tuberculosis, from which he later died.
Lord Newport asked Richard to teach in his place, which he did for a few months.
However, he too began to show symptoms of the same terrible disease, which was incurable in those days.
For quite some time he lived with the expectation that he was going to die.
Doubts about the genuineness of his own faith troubled him for many years.
He gives three main reasons for his doubts:—
Firstly , he could not reconcile his own experience with the descriptions of conversion given in books on the subject, such as Repentance by William Perkins.
Secondly , he was disturbed by the fact that spiritual truths didn't stir his emotions or grip his imagination as much as he felt they should.
Thirdly , he was concerned about the possibility that his faith was merely an intellectual understanding coupled with a fear of God, and that he was not truly regenerate.
However, he gradually came to see that his fear of God was beneficial because it kept him from falling into sin.
Although his love was faint, it was, nevertheless, genuine and he really did love God, His word and His people.
He also learned not to place too much reliance on his senses and feelings.
The Holy Spirit works firstly through the understanding and the emotions must follow.
Also, God deals with different people in different ways as He sees fit.
In later years, when he was in the position of having to counsel others he found that these doubts were quite common, and in answering their doubts he answered his own as well!
In the meantime, both his doubts and his fear of death caused him to become even more serious and resolute in seeking ‘first…
God's Kingdom and His righteousness’.
His main purpose in all his studies became, as he says, that of ‘informing and reforming my own Soul’.
All other studies he made subservient to that end.
Therefore, his main studies were amongst the great wealth of practical and devotional literature written by the earlier Puritan authors.
He also delighted in studying the writings of scholastics such as Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus.
By adopting this method of study he wasted less time and it also enabled him to learn more efficiently.
The only disadvantage of this method of study he found was that he was never able to master the Biblical languages of Greek and Hebrew.
This was a handicap which he never found time to remedy later on in life.
Although Richard Baxter didn't die of tuberculosis, it nevertheless left him with much bodily weakness and pain for the remainder of his life.
He was afflicted with a tubercular cough from time to time, and also nasal haemorrhaging.
He was especially troubled by pain in his kidneys, which he believed was due to kidney stones ‘occasioned by unsuitable diet in my youth’.
Nevertheless, he was thankful to God that in all his life he was never overcome by depression, and that, despite his almost continual pain, it never seriously hindered him in his work, his study or his preaching.
When he was about 18 years old, Richard Baxter was almost persuaded, by Mr. Wickstead of Ludlow, to abandon his ambition to enter the ministry.
He was advised that his best chances for advancement in life lay in spending some time at the royal court and seeking some government office.
Richard's parents were also in favour of this proposal as they were not very keen on their son entering the Christian Ministry.
However, Richard Baxter's experience of court was a none too happy one.
‘When I saw a stage-play instead of a sermon on the Lord's days…and heard little preaching but what was…against the Puritans, I was glad to be gone.’
When, after just a month in the Palace at Whitehall, Richard's mother fell ill and wanted to see him, he was glad of an excuse to leave the corrupt court of Charles I, and resolved never to return.
THE MINISTRY
The winter of 1633/34 was the worst in living memory.
The snow lasted from Christmas until Easter.
Kidderminster was completely cut off.
In desperation, some of the men tried to dig their way through to Stourbridge to get coal for heating.
Whilst on their way a blizzard struck and some were trapped and froze to death.
Richard Baxter, on his way home to Shropshire from London, also narrowly missed death.
His horse slipped and threw him under the wheels of a cart.
For some unaccountable reason the horses drawing the cart stopped just inches short of crushing him to death.
On the 10th. of May, Richard Baxter's mother died in great pain.
When he was in his early 20s Richard Baxter felt so ill that he was expecting to die fairly soon.
The recurring bouts of illness made him feel he was continually living on the brink of eternity.
This made him see the great urgency of persuading ‘such ignorant, presumptuous and careless sinners as the world aboundeth with’ to repent and believe in Christ.
It was at this time that he first came across some Nonconformist pastors from Shrewsbury and was deeply impressed and helped by the ‘fervent prayers, godly conversation and holiness’ of their lives.
This contact made him study the issue of conformity to the established church.
He concluded that, although there were some practices of the Anglican Church with which he disagreed, he nevertheless felt the weight of argument was in favour of conformity.
Thus, when Richard Baxter was offered the position of schoolmaster at Dudley, he accepted and was ordained by the Bishop of Worcester on Advent Sunday 1638.
Dudley also presented Richard Baxter with opportunities for public preaching.
He describes the people as poor and ‘famous for drunkenness’ but also teachable and ready to receive God's Word.
Richard Baxter had only spent nine months in Dudley when he accepted an invitation to Bridgnorth as Curate to the Vicar, Mr.Madstart, whom he describes as a ‘good preacher and a most excellent minister’.
However, Baxter found the people, apart from a few notable exceptions, to be rather apathetic and unresponsive to the message of the Gospel.
It was about this time that the power struggle between King Charles I and parliament began to escalate.
Two issues produced a great deal of agitation in the country.
One was the ‘ship money’ controversy, which was the question of whether or not the King had the authority to raise taxes without the permission of parliament.
The other was the ‘Etcetera Oath’ in which all clergy were required to swear not to seek the overthrow of the bishops.
Richard Baxter believed the debate produced by this controversial oath alienated more people from the bishops than if the question had never been raised.
Upon examining the issue for himself, Richard Baxter came to see that the episcopal system, as then constituted, was ‘guilty of corrupting both churches and clergy’.
In 1640, parliament, with the agreement of Charles I, appointed a committee to investigate complaints against clergy.
The aim was to remove persons who were unfit to be ministers of religion either because of incompetence or scandalous behaviour.
Amongst the many petitions immediately received was one from the people of Kidderminster.
The Vicar was so incompetent that he had become an object of common ridicule.
He also frequented ale-houses and was sometimes drunk.
His Curate was also incompetent, a drunkard, and moreover, made some extra income during the week by conducting illicit marriages.
However, Mr. Danse, the Vicar, was pretty shrewd and was able to strike a deal with Sir Henry Herbert of Bewdley, the presenter of the petition.
According to the deal, the Vicar would retain his position, but the Curate could be replaced by a preacher to be chosen by the town's fourteen trustees.
The  first candidate was a well known preacher by the name of Mr. Lapthorn.
However, they were put off by his rambling and disorganised sermon.
The next candidate, Richard Baxter, was unanimously chosen the first time they heard him preach.
Richard Baxter was drawn to the people of Kidderminster as much as they were drawn to him.
He says, ‘My mind was much to the place as soon as it was described to me, because it was a full congregation…an ignorant, rude and revelling people for the greater part, who had need of preaching, and yet had among them a small company of converts, who were humble, godly and of good conversations, and not much hated by the rest, and therefore fitter to assist their teacher; but above all, because they hardly ever had any lively, serious preaching among them.
For Bridgnorth had made me resolve that I would never more go among a people that had been hardened in unprofitableness under an awakening ministry…
And thus I was brought, by the gracious providence of God, to that place which had the chiefest of my labours and yielded me the greatest fruits of comfort.’
CIVIL WAR
When Richard Baxter first came to Kidderminster he by no means had any easy time of it.
He continued to suffer a great deal with poor health, which, he says, stirred him up to‘speak to sinners with some compassion as a dying man to dying men’.
He also experienced an intense spiritual struggle.
He was assailed by doubts about the fundamental principles of Christianity.
However, this made him re-examine the foundations of his faith and as a result he became more convinced of their truth than ever.
He reckoned that Biblical Christianity not only made more sense than any other religion or philosophy, but also it was the only one that had the power to produce real holiness of life in genuine believers.
Had he not experienced this for himself, that God's word and Spirit had worked powerfully in his own life?
Richard Baxter also experienced opposition from some of the people of Kidderminster.
On the annual ‘Show’(Carnival) Day, they would have a parade of painted ‘giants’ and similar displays passing through the streets.
On those days some of the more vicious sort would come and ‘vent their spleen’ against him as part of their amusement.
At another time, one of the local drunks saw Richard Baxter sheltering under a tree during a thunderstorm whilst a well known woman of ill-repute sheltered on the other side.
He decided he would make this into an interesting tale to tell amongst his fellow drunks.
The slander spread like wildfire and was only checked when the drunk who invented it confessed in a magistrates court.
Another incident followed Richard Baxter's preaching of a sermon on original sin.
Some misunderstood him to have said that God hates infants and when this was passed around, it produced much ill feeling towards Baxter.
However, he was able to clear away this misconception in his sermon on the following Sunday.
A more serious incident occurred when the churchwarden was in the process of removing a crucifix in the churchyard following a directive from parliament for the removal of images from church property.
A gang of local ruffians was passing by and, when they saw what was happening, became infuriated against Richard Baxter.
Thankfully, he had gone out for about an hour.
However, they came across two of his friends and beat them so badly that they later died.
Richard Baxter was deeply shocked by this tragedy and also by the general prejudice aroused against him by this incident.
During his next sermon he said he would leave Kidderminster rather than cause them to be guilty of his murder.
The people, by this time, had also come to regret the whole incident and they beseeched him to stay.
During 1642 the quarrel between King Charles I and parliament rapidly deteriorated into the Civil War.
Most godly men, who were known as ‘Puritans’ were drawn to support parliament, whilst the more profane were drawn to the King's side.
Worcestershire was a staunchly Royalist county, and those who were suspected of siding with parliament were roughly dealt with.
It thus became unsafe for Richard Baxter to remain in Kidderminster.
Whilst the King's declarations were being read out in the market place, the reader, a local man, seeing Richard Baxter passing by, stopped and shouted, ‘There goeth a traitor’!
Following this incident Richard Baxter took his friends' advice and moved to Gloucester for his own safety.
After spending a month in that city, he was persuaded to return to Kidderminster for a while, but he found the ‘drunken rabble greatly stirred up by their royalist masters’.
In the meantime, the King gathered an army around himself at Shrewsbury and then headed for Oxford.
They passed close by Kidderminster and a scouting party was seen on nearby Kinver Edge.
Some parliamentarian troops in Kidderminster, believing the rest of the army was coming their way, fled so rapidly they left some carriages and supplies in the town square.
At the same time, the main parliament army, commanded by the Earl of Essex, marched towards Worcester.
Conflict was now inevitable.
Richard Baxter was preaching in Alcester one Sunday in September 1642 when the sound of distant canon fire was heard.
He was preaching on the text ‘The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and violent men take it by force’.
Reports from the battle-front were confusing, so Richard Baxter went to Edgehill  to see for himself.
He found the two opposing armies facing each other across a battlefield littered with corpses from the recent encounter.
However, there was no further fighting and the two armies drew off.
Richard Baxter now felt that Kidderminster was far too unsafe.
He went instead to Coventry which was a parliamentary stronghold.
Richard Baxter stayed in Coventry for two years in relative peace and security.
He was able to find time for study and he preached regularly to the soldiers and the local people.
In the meantime, the tide of the war was turning against the Royalists.
Oliver Cromwell was rising in prestige and influence with every victory won by his invincible regiment, nicknamed the ‘Ironsides’.
Following the battle of Naseby in 1645, Richard Baxter was concerned about the safety of some friends of his who were serving with the parliamentarian army.
So he went to their field headquarters near Leicester and was relieved to find his friends were all well.
However, he was alarmed to find the army was being infiltrated by those he regarded as religious extremists.
He was especially concerned about the prevalence of Antinomian teachings amongst the soldiers.
The aim of the war had also shifted emphasis from being against the threat of the Roman Catholicism and the excessive power of Charles I. It was now being directed more against the monarchy itself and the power of the bishops.
He felt that Cromwell was encouraging these changes.
He now regretted that he had declined an invitation from Cromwell to be his chaplain two years previously.
This would have given him the opportunity to be a restraining influence against the extremists.
Consequently, when he received another invitation to become a regimental chaplain, this time from Colonel Whalley, after consulting with his fellow ministers in Coventry, Richard Baxter accepted.
However, the soldiers in Coventry were very reluctant to let him go and threatened to bar the gates to prevent him leaving.
In order to persuade them, Richard Baxter felt he had to tell them of his concerns about the army and the reasons why he felt he must go.
Amongst the crowd was a friend of Cromwell's.
As a result, when Richard Baxter arrived at the camp, he was seen as a Royalist sympathiser.
He therefore received a rather cool reception from Oliver Cromwell and was never once invited to join the army council meetings.
Richard Baxter saw action with Colonel Whalley's regiment in the West Country including the sieges of Bridgwater and of Bristol.
During the siege of Bristol he was taken ill with the plague and again feared for his life.
However, he recovered, and following the siege of Worcester had the great joy of being able to go and see his friends at Kidderminster once again.
The war now being effectively over, they expected Richard Baxter to return to them.
However, he felt his moderating influence in the army was now needed more than ever.
But, early in 1647, illness struck again whilst he was with the army near Ashby-de-la-Zouch.
Having lost several pints of blood due to a nasal haemorrhage, he was much too weak to continue.
Lady Rous, of Rous Lench, Worcestershire, a godly woman and a supporter of Baxter, hearing of his illness, sent for him and nursed him back to health.
It was during this time, when he was again near to death, than he began writing his best known book The  Saint's Everlasting Rest .
After three months he had written most of this work and was well enough to return to his beloved Kidderminster.
RETURN TO KIDDERMINSTER
When Richard Baxter returned to Kidderminster in 1647 he found the Civil War had brought about some changes which were helpful to his ministry.
For one thing, many of those who had opposed him had joined the Royalist army and had been killed in the war.
Also, the government at this time actively encouraged Gospel preaching, in contrast to the government of Charles I. During these times, godliness of life was no longer despised, but generally regarded by most people as something honourable and praiseworthy.
In fact, in the gracious providence of Almighty God, the conditions were just right for the events which were about to take place.
Richard Baxter by this time was at the peak of his ability as a preacher.
In his preaching he sought to make the Bible relevant to the spiritual needs of the people.
His preaching was aimed primarily at the understanding and the conscience of his hearers.
His style of preaching is clearly seen in his books such as A Call to the Unconverted and The Saint's Everlasting Rest which were prepared from sermonic material.
His method was to use argument upon argument to reason with and to persuade the congregation of their need to repent and to believe in Christ.
A friend of Baxter said of his preaching, ‘In his sermons there was a rare union of arguments and motives to convince the mind and gain the heart; all the fountains of reason and persuasion were open to his discerning eye’.
For example, in an exposition of 2 Cor.v. 17, he divides his subject into five main points, each of which has several sub-divisions.
His fifth point consists of four main practical applications and he concludes by answering twenty arguments against conversion.
The main thrust of his sermons was evangelistic.
He said, ‘The work of conversion is the first thing we must drive at and labour with all our might to effect; then to build up those that are truly converted.’
He felt an almost overwhelming compassion for the souls of the lost, and he strongly resisted the temptation to provide a display of fine oratory for those who came in search of novelty or entertainment.
‘I hate that preaching which tendeth to make the hearers laugh or to move their mind with tickling laxity and affect them as a stage player used to do, instead of affecting them with a holy reverence of the name of God.’
He preached mainly on the great truths or the essential doctrines of the Christian faith.
However, he said he always included something above the understanding of his hearers in order to prevent them becoming either complacent or conceited and to stimulate their desire to learn more.
He was not the sort of evangelist who would have been content with a mere shallow ‘decision for Christ’.
Baxter was concerned that the work of conversion should be thorough .
As a result, the faith of those converted under his ministry withstood the tests of both severe persecution and time.
Almost a hundred years later, following his visit to Kidderminster, George Whitfield told a friend, ‘I was greatly refreshed to find what a sweet savour of good Mr. Baxter's doctrine, works and discipline remain to this day’.
His preaching not only appealed to the mind, but also moved the heart.
Richard Baxter preached with great urgency and seriousness as he pleaded with sinners to ‘embrace the Redeemer with a lively faith’.
Towards the close of A Call to the Unconverted you can well imagine tears rolling down his cheeks as he pleads with his hearers, ‘If I came hungry or naked to one of your doors, would you not part with more than a cup of water to relieve me?
I am confident you would: if it were to save my life I know you would, some of you, hazard your own.
And yet will not be entreated to part with your sensual pleasures for your own salvation?’
His style of preaching contrasted greatly with the average clergyman of the day who would discourse drowsily on the virtues of doing good.
Richard Baxter movingly brought  his people face to face with the great realities of heaven and of hell, with God and with eternity.
His praying likewise was full of life and feeling.
It was said that ‘When he prayed his soul took wing for heaven and wrapt up the souls of others with him.’
Yet despite all this he often reproached himself for not being fervent enough.
‘I seldom come out of my pulpit’, said Baxter, ‘but my conscience smiteth me that I have been no more serious and fervent…
‘How couldst thou speak of life and death with such a heart?
How couldst thou preach of heaven and hell in such a careless, sleepy manner?
Dost thou believe what thou sayest?
Art thou in earnest, or in jest?
How canst thou tell people that sin is such a thing, and that so much misery is upon them and before them and be no more affected with it?
Shouldst thou not weep over such a people, and shouldst not thy tears interrupt thy words?
Shouldst thou not cry aloud, and show them their transgressions; and entreat and beseech them as for life and death?'’
Such preaching, far from deterring the people, attracted them in such large numbers that the parish church of St.Mary and All Saints, which held about 1,000, was filled beyond its capacity so that five galleries had to be erected to accommodate the greatly enlarged congregation.
The main occupation of the people of Kidderminster in those days was weaving, so there were few rich people amongst them.
Richard Baxter observed the truth of our Lord's teaching that it is hard for the rich to enter the kingdom of heaven, but the poor received the Gospel gladly.
The most serious opposition to his work came from the wealthy and respectable Sir Ralph Clare.
Although he always treated Richard Baxter with the utmost politeness and civility, he nevertheless refused to embrace the Gospel himself and kept his family and servants away from the meetings.
Because he was well respected, many others followed his bad example.
However, there were some wealthy and influential people who were enthusiastic supporters of Baxter's amongst whom were many of the local J.P.s.
Another great spiritual advantage was that the people's occupation allowed them the opportunity to read good books or to engage in godly conversation whilst they were working away at their looms.
The people had never heard preaching like this before, and so they embraced the teaching before they had time to become used to it and ‘Gospel-hardened’ as had happened to the people of Bridgnorth.
The message of Richard Baxter's preaching was reinforced by his personal work amongst the people.
Every week, on Mondays and Tuesdays, he and his assistant would, between them, visit fourteen families to systematically instruct (catechise) them in the fundamental teachings of the Scriptures.
Their aim was to visit every one of the eight hundred or so families in the parish every year.
‘Another great help to my success’, he writes, ‘was the work of personal conference with every family apart, with catechising and instructing them.’
In his preface to The Reformed Pastor he wrote, ‘I am daily forced to admire how lamentably ignorant many of our people are, that have seemed diligent hearers of me these ten or twelve years, while I spoke as plainly as I was able to speak.
Some know not that each Person in the Trinity is God; nor that Christ is God and man; nor that he took his human nature with him into heaven; nor many the like necessary principles of our faith.
Yea, some that come constantly to our meetings are grossly ignorant; whereas in one hour's familiar instruction of them in private, they seem to understand more, and better entertain it than they did in all their lives before.’
He also provided a great deal of material assistance to the poor and needy.
His annual income was £80 to £90 a year.
He also earned between £60 and £80 a year from the sale of his books, which he gave away.
He payed for the education of children from the families who couldn't afford it, and the ablest of the children he sent to university.
Some of these were also converted through Baxter's ministry and became preachers themselves.
His charity was indiscriminate.
‘In giving the little I had’, says Baxter, ‘I did not enquire whether they were good or bad if they asked for relief; for the bad had souls and bodies that needed charity most.’
Having discovered for himself the great value of reading good books, he gave his  writings to his people.
Of the smaller works he gave a copy to every family, and if a family was too poor to afford a Bible he gave them one.
He visited the sick and comforted the dying.
For some years, the town was without a doctor, and often the people would come to Richard Baxter for medical help.
Through receiving so many treatments for his own various ailments he had gained some experience which was a help to others.
This help was always given free of charge.
However, he was mindful of his limitations and, after some time, he was able to arrange for a ‘godly, diligent physician’ to come and set up a practice in the town to relieve him of this burden.
Having done so much good among them, the people were all the more prepared to listen to his teaching.
Amongst his first converts were many young people.
When the parents saw for themselves the improvement in their children, their own prejudices were overcome.
The besetting sin of the time was drunkenness, and a couple of notorious drunks lived near Richard Baxter.
Regularly, up to three times a week, they would rant and rave in the streets.
One of them by day and the other by night.
They would often be put in the stocks until they sobered up, but they would invariably lapse again as soon as they were freed.
There was moreover, a young man in the congregation who lapsed into this sin.
He was repeatedly warned by Richard Baxter, and he would relent for a while, but lapsed into his old ways every time.
Finally, he was publicly warned and barred from communion, and the people advised to have nothing to do with him.
This was in order to ‘convince him of his misery and the necessity of true repentance and reformation’.
After this he would rail and curse at Richard Baxter's door and would ‘prophesy’ judgments against Kidderminster in the market place.
One time he tried to murder Richard Baxter in the churchyard.
However, when he grabbed Richard Baxter's cloak it came away, and before he could do any more harm a couple of by-standers restrained him and hauled him off to the magistrates.
‘And thus he continued’, writes Baxter, ‘raging against me about a year, and then died of a fever in horror of conscience.’
The examples of the behaviour of these men was so outrageous that it served as a warning to many people against this particular vice.
Richard Baxter's house in the High Street, Kidderminster, before alterations in 1848.
Notice the basket maker working in the cellar.
Richard Baxter rented the first and second floors of the house, the ground floor being occupied by a cobbler.
Two of his fellow ministers, Mr. Thomas Baldwin and Mr. Joseph Read lodged with him.
Mr. Read was one of the young men Baxter sent to Cambridge University, and was later ejected from Whitley in 1662.
Richard Baxter appointed Mr. Baldwin his successor as pastor of the believers in Kidderminster.
Later, Baxter's father and step-mother also came to live with him for a time.
Richard Baxter only preached once on a Sunday.
On Thursday evenings, he would hold a meeting in his own home during which the previous Sunday's sermon was reviewed by question and answer.
The people then had an opportunity to raise any doubts or difficulties they may have had about the sermon or other spiritual problem they faced, and Richard Baxter would try to answer their difficulties and resolve their doubts.
He would then ask two or three of them to pray and they would close the meeting with the singing of a psalm.
Those who were too shy or too inexperienced to pray on those occasions would meet together on a Saturday night to read, to pray and to prepare themselves for the following Sabbath day.
The younger believers learned how to pray by following the example of their elders.
Thus Richard Baxter laboured solidly for fourteen years in Kidderminster, and the Lord was pleased to bless the ministry of His servant to an extraordinary degree.
Apart from the meetings being packed out as already mentioned, he says that, ‘On the Lord's-days there was no disorder to be seen in the streets, but you might hear an hundred families singing psalms and repeating sermons as you passed through the streets.
In a word, when I came thither first there was about one family in a street that worshipped God and called on His name, and when I came away there was not passed one family in the side of a street that did not so, and that did not, by professing serious godliness, give us hopes of their sincerity.
And those families which were the worst, being inns and alehouses, usually some persons in each house did seem to be religious.’
Of the six hundred or so communicants, Baxter said he had good hopes for  the sincerity of the faith of all but twelve of them.
When news of the wonderful changes brought about in Kidderminster at this time spread, it won the approval of Anabaptists and Independents who hardly believed it possible that such a work of God could take place through the ministry of a parish church.
Indeed, one of the blessings Baxter thanks God for was the unity amongst his people.
They were not torn by the strife and dissension produced by sectarianism seen in so many other places at that time.
He says, ‘There was not a Separatist, Anabaptist, Antinomian, etc. in the town’!
However, during all that time he records that he was seldom free from pain.
Many times he was brought low and felt near to death.
At such times his friends would gather around and pray for him.
The Lord heard their prayers and restored him.
On one occasion he says he was ill for three weeks, until his friends prayed for him and he recovered that very day.
That was a Good Friday and following his recovery he felt able to resume his pastoral responsibilities.
Up until this time he had considered it wrong to administer the Lord's Supper to those whose profession of faith was somewhat dubious.
Now, in the conditions which prevailed in the church at Kidderminster he no doubt felt it was time to change.
So, after preaching, he administered the sacraments to the flock.
Having done so he says ‘I was much revived and eased of my infirmities’.
This experience, he says, was repeated on every subsequent occasion when he preached and administered Holy Communion.
Apart from the above, Richard Baxter records his thankfulness to God for preserving him in several accidents.
At one time, whilst working in his study, the top shelf broke and showered down some very weighty volumes landing either side of him.
It was during these years in Kidderminster that amongst all his other labours, Richard Baxter found time to write some sixty books.
Among them were some of his best known works,The Saints Everlasting Rest, A Call to the Unconverted, and The Reformed Pastor .
The Reformed Pastor was originally intended as a sermon to be preached on a fast day called by the Worcestershire Association of Ministers (who looked to Baxter as their leader) to seek God's blessing on their pastoral work.
However, Richard Baxter was laid low with illness and couldn't go, so he wrote this book for them instead.
In so doing he has provided a book which has been a tremendous help to pastors in every generation since, up to and including the present day.
In all his labours, Richard Baxter regarded preaching and sermon preparation as his recreational activities!!
He had no spare time for anything else, and laments the fact that he had so very little time for his studies.
It is little wonder that he considered being single as an advantage at this time.
Being free from family responsibilities, he came to regard his flock as his children and lavished his love and care upon them instead.
Although his work in Kidderminster took up so much of his time and energy, Richard Baxter's vision extended beyond the confines of his own parish.
He regularly preached in the surrounding area in places such as Cleobury, Shifnal and Dudley.
In Dudley, the place of his first ministry, his preaching was so popular that the people not only filled the church, but also hung on the windows and the ‘leads’ to hear him.
Moreover, it was his heart's desire that the cause of the Gospel would flourish throughout the whole country and even beyond.
any of his books were translated into foreign languages and were avidly read by Christians on the Continent.
Richard Baxter also had a great burden for foreign missionary work.
‘There is nothing in the world that lieth so heavily upon my heart’, he writes, ‘as the thought of the miserable nations of the earth.
It is the most astonishing part of all God's providence to me, that He so far forsaketh almost all the world, and confineth His special favour to so few; that so small a part of the world hath the profession of Christianity.’
It is therefore, hardly surprising to find that Richard Baxter was an active supporter of John Eliot, the ‘apostle’ to the American Indians.
Following his translation of the Bible into the Algonquian language, the next book Eliot translated was Baxter's A Call to the Unconverted .
Richard Baxter was  a leading figure in the establishment of the first missionary organisation, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.
Richard Baxter's house in the High Street, Kidderminster, before alterations in 1848.
Notice the basket maker working in the cellar.
Richard Baxter rented the first and second floors of the house, the ground floor being occupied by a cobbler.
Two of his fellow ministers, Mr. Thomas Baldwin and Mr. Joseph Read lodged with him.
Mr. Read was one of the young men Baxter sent to Cambridge University, and was later ejected from Whitley in 1662.
Richard Baxter appointed Mr. Baldwin his successor as pastor of the believers in Kidderminster.
Later, Baxter's father and step-mother also came to live with him for a time.
Richard Baxter's Statue which originally stood in the centre of the Bull Ring in Kidderminster.
Dean Stanley gave the address at the unveiling ceremony attended by local civil and ecclesiastical dignitaries in July 1875.
It was moved to its present position alongside the Ring Road next to St.Mary's Parish Church during redevelopment of the town centre in 1959.
The inscription reads:—
BETWEEN THE YEARS 1640 AND 1660 THIS TOWN WAS THE SCENE OF THE LABOURS OF RICHARD BAXTER RENOWNED EQUALLY FOR HIS CHRISTIAN LEARNING AND HIS PASTORAL FIDELITY IN A STORMY AND DIVIDED AGE HE ADVOCATED UNITY AND COMPREHENSION POINTING THE WAY TO ‘THE EVERLASTING REST’ CHURCHMEN AND NONCONFORMISTS UNITED TO RAISE THIS MEMORIAL AD 1875
THE RESTORATION
The anti-Royalist sentiments Richard Baxter had witnessed amongst Oliver Cromwell's supporters in the army, culminated in the trial and execution of Charles I on January 30th. 1649.
His son and heir, Charles II, managed to win the support of the Scots by convincing them that he was a true Protestant and that he favoured their presbyterian form of church government.
During this ‘Commonwealth’ period great liberty was allowed to all religious groups as long as they were basically Protestant.
The Scots struck a deal with Charles II.
They would provide him with an army to set him on the throne in return for his establishment of a presbyterian form of church government throughout the realm.
However, this plan came to grief following the Battle of Worcester, on September 3rd. 1651, in which the Scottish army was thoroughly defeated by Cromwell's troops.
The defeated Scots fled north and many went through Kidderminster.
A detachment of Cromwell's troops guarding the bridge at nearby Bewdley came to Kidderminster to cut off their retreat and took up position in the square.
In the ensuing skirmish, bullets struck Richard Baxter's door and windows until midnight when the fighting stopped.
Charles himself escaped, passing through the outskirts of Kidderminster, and spent that night hiding in an oak tree in Boscobel on the border of Shropshire and Staffordshire.
From thence he fled to France, escaping detection by dressing up as a servant.
As we have witnessed recently in some Eastern European countries, the overthrow of a ruthless, totalitarian regime doesn't necessarily result in peace and harmony.
Those who had fought together for the overthrow of Charles I, now bickered amongst themselves.
They had won the war, but they lost the peace.
The political turbulence that followed the Civil War was only brought under control by Cromwell's benevolent dictatorship.
There were controversies about various forms of Church Government and many sects flourished at this time of religious toleration.
Many people were by this time weary of the various attempts to find a satisfactory form of government and they believed the return of the monarchy was the best solution.
Indeed, many Englishmen, even those who had been on the side of parliament during the Civil War, like Richard Baxter, had never wanted to abolish the monarchy altogether.
They had only wanted to reduce the political power of Charles I and prevent him being manipulated by those who sought to return England to the Roman Catholicism.
Richard Baxter, during the one time he was asked to preach before Oliver Cromwell, had criticised him for weakening the Church by encouraging divisions.
The Protector wasn't too pleased by this and later summoned Richard Baxter to a private audience during which he lectured Baxter for an hour.
Richard Baxter replied by asking Cromwell why he had abolished the monarchy.
Richard Baxter says that when Cromwell heard this question he was ‘awakened into some passion’!
Cromwell summoned Richard Baxter again a few days later to discuss the subject of liberty of conscience in the presence of most of the Privy Council.
He says that Cromwell once more lectured him ‘tediously’ and seemed to pay little attention to Baxter's views.
When Oliver Cromwell died in September 1658, his son, Richard succeeded him as Protector.
However, Richard did not have the ability to rule the land as his father had done and he resigned in April 1659.
The Royalists and the Presbyterians formed an alliance and there followed a power struggle with the ‘Republicans’ who were against the restoration of the King.
The issue was settled in favour of the Restorationists when General Monk decided to intervene and brought the Northern Army, under his command, to take control of the situation  in London during February 1660.
On April 4th., Charles II issued a Declaration containing promises designed to make his restoration seem an almost irresistibly attractive proposition to parliament.
One of his promises was that he would ensure liberty of conscience to various religious groups.
With the situation now rapidly approaching a critical point, on April 13th., Richard Baxter decided it was his duty to go to London and throw the weight of his own influence behind moves for the restoration of Charles II to the throne of England.
parliament called for a day of prayer and fasting and requested Dr.Calamy, Dr.Gauden and Richard Baxter to preach and to pray with them.
This was the day before they voted in favour of formally calling for the return of Charles II to the throne of England.
At about the same time, the Lord Mayor and aldermen of the City of London decided to hold a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving to God for General Monk's success, and they requested Richard Baxter to preach in St. Paul's.
Charles II returned to England on May 25th. 1660 amidst the general rejoicing of the people.
As a favour to the Presbyterians and other religious leaders who had helped bring about the restoration, some were made king's chaplains, including Dr. Calamy, Dr. Manton, Richard Baxter and nine others.
A short while afterwards, Dr. [Hanton, Richard Baxter and some others had an audience with Charles.
They requested that the advantages for the Gospel gained during the previous years should not be lost and that the King should support moves for unity amongst God's people.
Charles received their requests with much apparent grace and favour.
He expressed his hearty agreement and desire for a compromise between the various church factions, and pledged his active support.
One of the elderly ministers in the delegation was so overwhelmed by the King's kind promises that he burst into tears of joy and thanked His Majesty.
After this meeting, Charles requested that the Presbyterian ministers draw up a list of their proposals for church unity.
The king wouldn't allow them time for a full consultation.
They would have to act on their own initiative and consult with those ministers who were in London itself.
They met in Sion College, and, following some lengthy discussions drew up their list of proposals for church government and church discipline.
During the ensuing negotiations, these proposals were firmly rejected by the Episcopalians who submitted no proposals of their own and remained inflexible in their position.
The bishops were intent on restoring the prestige, the wealth and the power they enjoyed before the Civil War.
They saw Richard Baxter, who was the chief spokesman, and his fellow Puritans as a potential  threat, especially when they were completely unable to match his skill in debate and argument.
In the midst of the negotiations, Richard Baxter was offered the bishopric of Hereford by Charles, the offer being communicated via the Lord Chancellor.
He refused to give a definite reply until the contents of the Declaration, which the King was due to make, were known.
However, Richard Baxter was hesitant to accept this offer for other reasons also.
He felt it would leave him little time for his writing for one thing.
He was also suspicious of King Charles' motives in this matter.
He could foresee, that even at best, many godly ministers would not agree with their proposals, and part of a bishop's work would then be to ensure these men were silenced.
He did not relish the thought of joining the opposition one bit.
Furthermore, he had become convinced that the diocesan system of church government was unbiblical.
Two of Richard Baxter's fellow negotiators, Edmund Calamy and Dr. Reynolds were also offered bishoprics.
The aim was, no doubt, to win them over and thereby weaken the Puritan opposition.
Dr. Reynolds accepted the offer and became Bishop of Norwich, whereas Baxter and Calamy refused.
When the King's Declarations were finally published, Richard Baxter was pleasantly surprised to find that some important concessions had been made to his position.
However, he refused to attach too much importance to these since they could be withdrawn at any time unless they were passed into law.
Despite many pleas, this was something that never happened.
During one of the meetings for negotiation, King Charles introduced a proposal which had been submitted by the Independents and Anabaptists calling for freedom of worship.
Charles, no doubt, hoped that if such a proposal were adopted, it would also allow freedom for Roman Catholicism to be re-introduced into England.
No-one, neither from the Presbyterian side nor the Episcopalian, dared answer this proposal until Richard Baxter broke the silence by suggesting that Roman Catholics and Socinians be exempted from this liberty.
The King was greatly displeased by this suggestion and promptly adjourned the meeting.
At this time, Richard Baxter requested the favour of being restored to his flock in Kidderminster.
He had officially lost his pastorate as part of the restoration agreement with King Charles in which positions and property sequestered during the Commonwealth were restored.
The Vicar of Kidderminster was under the influence of Sir Ralph Clare and refused to allow Richard Baxter to return under any circumstances, even though he offered to preach for nothing.
After preaching on two or three occasions to the people of Kidderminster, the Vicar banned him from preaching any more.
Richard Baxter requested the opportunity to preach a farewell sermon and administer communion to his former flock, but this too was denied.
Finally, he left a godly man, r.
Baldwin, to minister in his stead.
Whilst Richard Baxter was visiting his sick father in Shropshire, Mr. Baldwin came to him with the news that he too had been forbidden to preach.
As a last resort, Richard Baxter decided to try the Bishop of Worcester to seek his permission to return to Kidderminster, even though he knew the Bishop was no friend of the Gospel, and even though many of his friends entreated  him not to go fearing his arrest.
However, Richard Baxter did see the Bishop, and, even though he wasn't arrested, the Bishop forbade him to preach in his diocese.
Richard Baxter was deeply saddened by this failure to return to his beloved people of Kidderminster.
‘Having parted with my dear flock’, he says, ‘I need not say without mutual sense and tears, I left Mr. Baldwin to live privately among them and oversee them in my stead, and visit them from home to home; advising them, notwithstanding all the injuries they had received and all the failings of the ministers that preached to them and the defects of the present way of worship, that yet they should keep to the public assemblies and make use of such helps as might be had in public, together with this private help…‘(i.e. r.Baldwin).
Following this unsuccessful attempt to return to Kidderminster, Richard Baxter spent the rest of his life in and around London.
He preached in various churches in the city for a year.
He then joined Dr. Bates in St.Dunstans-in-the-West in Fleet Street where he preached once a week to crowded congregations.
Whilst preaching there on one occasion, there occurred an incident that demonstrates something of Baxter's courage and composure.
In the middle of the sermon some bricks and plaster fell from the roof of the steeple.
Nobody was hurt, but the congregation panicked and stampeded for the exit.
The noise of running feet of the many people in the galleries also resembled the sound of falling masonry, which added to the panic.
Richard Baxter stayed in the pulpit, and when he could be heard, he calmed the crowd and continued preaching.
Only a few moments later, a pew gave way under the weight of so many people sitting on it.
The sound of breaking timber made people think the roof was collapsing, and an even worse panic ensued.
Richard Baxter again pacified the crowd and eventually finished his sermon without further interruption.
During the extensive repair works on the building following this incident, Richard Baxter preached in St.Bride's at the other end of Fleet Street.
He also preached at Blackfriars on Sundays and a mid-week lecture in Milk Street.
Richard Baxter continued preaching in these churches for about a year until 1662, when he was forbidden by law from any further public ministry.
At this time, Richard Baxter rapidly fell from the favour he had recently enjoyed and he was slandered in ‘court, city and country’.
During 1661, a new parliament had been called, which was distinctly cavalier in character.
With the bishops also back in the House of Lords, the political tide had now turned very markedly against the Puritans.
Both parliament and the bishops were intent on ensuring they would never again suffer humiliation at the hands of the Puritans as they had during the Civil War and its aftermath.
If the Puritans refused to compromise they would have to be ruthlessly suppressed.
There followed a number of very unjust laws passed against them.
One of these was the Corporation Act, which restricted the holding of any public office to Anglicans.
The other was the notorious Act of Uniformity, which required clergy to subscribe, amongst other things to a new prayer book which the bishops had deliberately made offensive to the Puritans.
The deadline for their acceptance of this Act was Bartholomew's Day, August 24th 1662, when 2,000 of the most godly pastors in the land refused to subscribe and were consequently ejected from their ministries.
This event reminded many of the Bartholomew's Day ninety years previously when three thousand French Protestants were massacred in Paris.
Richard Baxter had already made his position clear when he stopped preaching the previous May soon after the Act had received royal  assent.
He did so partly in order that those who looked to him for a lead would have no doubts about where he stood.
Many of these ejected ministers faced serious hardships from poverty and persecution.
Some continued to preach in the open air, in streets or in the fields.
Some were imprisoned or banished when they refused to be silenced.
Many of them fled overseas, some to the American colonies, and Richard Baxter was tempted to join them.
However, he was persuaded to stay in England when he considered that his poor state of health probably would not have allowed him to survive the hardship of a long sea voyage in those days.
MARRIAGE
It was during these very difficult times for Richard Baxter that the Lord graciously provided a ‘help meet’ for him.
Margaret Charlton was the daughter of Francis and Mary Charlton of Apley Castle, near Wellington, Shropshire, just over three miles from Richard Baxter's own place of birth.
Her father died when she was a young girl, and her mother re-married a Mr. Hanmer who was a staunch Royalist.
When she was a girl of eight, she witnessed the horrors of war when Apley Castle was stormed and partially burned down by parliamentarian troops.
Her mother was a true believer in Christ, and after she was widowed for the second time, she came to live in Kidderminster in 1658.
Margaret, who had been living with her married sister in Oxford, soon came to join her mother.
At first she showed a marked aversion to the godliness and simplicity of life in Kidderminster.
She loved to dress in expensive, eye-catching clothes and enjoyed reading romantic novels.
However, it was not long before the Gospel preached by Richard Baxter began to change her life.
His teaching was ‘received on her heart as the seal on the wax’, and she surrendered her life to the claims of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Margaret's conversion was both sudden and dramatic, and was a cause for great joy and encouragement to the christians of Kidderminster.
The change in her life was clear for all to see.
Instead of reading novels she could often be overheard praying fervently in her private room.
However, in the winter of 1659 she became desperately ill and on the point of death.
Richard Baxter arranged a day of special prayer and fasting for her deliverance on New Year's Eve 1659.
There was an almost miraculous answer to their prayers, and Margaret was well enough to attend a special service of thanksgiving on April 10th. 1660.
There are some indications that it was about this time that she began to fall in love with Richard Baxter.
She struggled against her feelings and tried unsuccessfully to overcome them.
Richard Baxter's view that it was advantageous for a pastor to be celibate in order to give himself fully to the work of the ministry was well known.
It is possible that he suspected Margaret's love for him was more than just admiration or affection.
In one of his letters he counsels her against excessive ‘creature love’.
Anyway, there is no hint that he gave her any encouragement at all.
On the contrary, he seems to have discouraged any notions of romance whatsoever.
Richard Baxter left Kidderminster for London three days after the thanksgiving service for her deliverance, as we have already noted.
In one of his letters, he told Margaret and her mother not to follow him to London.
However, they ignored his advice and came anyway.
Margaret's mother died in 1661, leaving her alone and in need of a protector.
As we have already noted, Richard Baxter's preaching ministry came to an end on May 25th. 1662.
There was then no longer any reason why he should not marry.
It is not clear when Richard Baxter began to love Margaret.
Late in 1661, a rumour had been spread about, by Bishop Morley, ‘with all the odium he could put upon it’ that Richard Baxter was already married.
This rumour may have been based on someone having witnessed some signs of a growing affection between Richard and Margaret, but we cannot be sure.
However, we do know they were married on September 10th. 1662 by Mr. Samuel Clark.
Baxter later referred to ‘many strange occurrences’, no doubt recognising the hand of Providence in bringing about their union.
Richard Baxter recorded no details because he goes on to say, ‘wise friends, by whom I am advised, think it better to omit such personal particularities, at least at this time’.
His friends no doubt didn't want to provide ‘fuel’ for rumour-mongers.
However, we do know that whilst Margaret was lodging in Aldersgate, Richard was staying not very far away, with a friend, in Little Britain.
Richard Baxter was twenty four years older than Margaret, and although they had no children, they were very happily married for nineteen years.
Soon after their marriage, Margaret's  depression, which she had suffered for some time, immediately lifted.
He says this was partly due to counsel and partly because she was happy busying herself with her domestic duties.
Baxter stipulated certain conditions to their marriage.
One of these was that he would not benefit from anything that belonged to his wife before their marriage.
Margaret came from a wealthy family, and Richard was anxious to allay any suspicion that he had married for money.
Another condition was that Margaret would allow her husband to give priority to his ministerial work.
Margaret proved to be an excellent wife and companion for Richard.
She was very practical, and a woman of great wit and wisdom.
She had inherited a substantial sum of money from her parents' estates and devoted herself to works of charity.
She was especially concerned for those who were imprisoned for debt, particularly those who were the ‘most worthy’.
Margaret denied herself, dressing in modest clothes and eating plain food, in order to be able to give more help to others.
A Portrait of Margaret Charlton before her conversion
Margaret Baxter was also very well educated and was more conversant with Latin, Greek and Hebrew than her husband.
Richard Baxter often consulted her in cases of pastoral concern.
‘Except in cases that require learning and skill’, says Baxter, ‘she was better at resolving a case of conscience than most divines that I ever knew in all my life.’
Richard Baxter's tender devotion to his wife gives the lie to the caricature of the Puritans as being cold, unemotional and joyless.
‘It is my judgment and constant practice’, writes Baxter, ‘to make those that I teach understand that the Gospel is glad tidings of great joy, and that holiness lies especially in delighting in God, his word, and works and in his joyful praise, and hopes of glory.’
Margaret Baxter was a godly woman who was completely at one with her husband in the concerns of the Gospel.
She strongly encouraged her husband and other preachers of the Gospel in their soul-winning endeavours.
She was also deeply concerned for the spiritual needs of her relatives and household servants.
It troubled her if any servants left her employment unconverted.
She treated those servants who were converted like her own children.
She shared her husband's estimation of the value of good books and gave hundreds away.
Margaret was in complete agreement with her husband's refusal to accept the bribe of a bishopric.
Later on, when Richard Baxter was sent to prison for his faith in 1669, Margaret went with him, bringing her ‘best bed’ with her.
‘I think’, wrote Baxter, ‘that she had scarce a pleasanter time in her life than while she was with me there.’
However, she had little patience with those non-conforming ministers who continually moaned and complained about their losses and dangers, and, ‘would have no man be a minister that had not so much self denial as to lay down all at the feet of Christ, and count no cost of suffering too dear to serve Him.’
THE DARKNESS GATHERS
Following the ejection of Richard Baxter along with 2,000 or so of his fellow pastors in 1662, these Nonconforming ministers were persecuted ruthlessly by the authorities.
They were forbidden to preach or even to meet together for prayer.
Their enemies called every gathering a ‘dangerous meeting for sedition’.
Richard Baxter and his friend, Dr. William Bates narrowly escaped arrest when they were due to meet to pray for the recovery of a woman who was ill and on the point of death.
For various reasons they were unable to attend this meeting, and so all the arresting officers could do was to take the names of those who were present.
However, many godly ministers were fined and imprisoned at this time.
The Quakers were also persecuted.
Indeed they seemed to invite persecution by preaching openly in public places.
For a while they made so much work for the bailiffs that they had little time to harass the Nonconformists.
During this time, Richard Baxter preached and prayed with those Presbyterians or Independents who invited him.
In July 1663, Richard Baxter left London for reasons of health and went to live in Acton, which was then a village six miles west of the capital.
In Acton he would hold meetings in his home for the local people.
On one occasion, during a Sunday gathering in 1665, a bullet came through their window and narrowly missed both Richard Baxter and his sister-in-law.
At this time a series of calamities fell on England.
Richard Baxter saw these as God's judgments on the nation because of its terrible persecution of God's people.
The first calamity was a disastrous trade war with Holland.
Then there was a long drought which produced a very poor harvest.
This was followed by the Plague during which 100,000 people died in London alone.
Richard Baxter thanked God that his family were preserved safely in Acton even though he said the local churchyard resembled a ploughed field because of the large numbers of newly dug graves.
During the plague, the rich people and most of the ministers who had remained in the established church fled from London.
The Nonconforming preachers took pity on the poor people left behind and ministered to them in their distress.
Even whilst the plague was raging, the King and parliament, who had fled to Oxford to escape, were drawing up new legislation to persecute the Nonconformists.
This was the Act of Confinement which forbade Dissenters from coming within five miles of a city or corporation or the place where they had formerly ministered.
Some dissenting ministers left for the country, some had to leave their families, some went into hiding, but others were emboldened to preach more openly, until they were arrested and put into prison.
Just after midnight, September 2nd. 1666, the Great Fire of London started.
The weather had been dry for some time and, fanned by an easterly wind, the fire spread rapidly until, within three days, it had engulfed most of the city.
From his home in Acton, Richard Baxter saw the flames and the huge pall of smoke which turned the sun red.
Richard Baxter saw this as an illustration of the vanity of this life as both rich and poor alike had to stand by helplessly as their houses and all their  worldly goods went up in flames before their eyes.
Richard Baxter was further saddened by the loss of thousands of precious books in the fire, which he believed was a great loss to ‘piety and learning’.
The charred remains of many books fell near his home and even as far away as Windsor.
as if all this wasn't enough, in June 1667, England suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of the Dutch.
Encountering little resistance, they sailed up the Thames and destroyed some  of the most powerful fighting ships of the Royal Navy moored at Chatham docks and towed away some others.
It could have been much worse because London itself lay defenceless before them, and they could have wreaked havoc in the capital.
Following this calamity, there was a widespread feeling of discontent in the country.
People murmured that this would never have happened in Cromwell's day, albeit secretly for fear of the authorities.
Also, following the poor harvests, the plague and the great fire, there was a general recession of trade and widespread economic hardship.
The ministers whom the bishops had placed instead of those ejected were very poor in both their spiritual quality and ministerial ability.
This also produced popular discontent directed against the bishops.
However, this was a time when there was some easing of the restrictions against the Nonconformists.
Apart from a few fanatics, there was a general disinclination to apply the laws directed against them.
Persecution had also brought many of the dissenting groups together in a greater unity than they had experienced before the troubles began.
The Nonconformists were therefore greatly encouraged and enjoyed much popular support at this time.
One of Richard Baxter's wealthy neighbours complained to the King about the large numbers of people who came to the meetings held in his home in Acton.
The King did nothing about it.
However, another influential neighbour of Richard Baxter's was Sir Matthew Hale, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer and a man of great ability, godliness and learning.
He and Baxter became good friends and he encouraged Baxter's practice of holding meetings for worship in his home.
This, however, only proved to be a brief respite in the persecutions.
In 1669, Richard Baxter was arrested for the ‘illegal’ worship meetings held in his home.
Because he refused to promise not to preach the following Sunday, he was sent to Clerkenwell Prison.
This unpleasant experience was alleviated by the company of his wife, who also brought with her so many domestic items that he says it was almost as comfortable as being at home!
But his persecutors were frustrated when they had to release him a week later, partly due to a technical fault in the warrant for his arrest and partly due to the influence of his friend, Sir Matthew Hale.
Nevertheless, Richard Baxter had to move away from Acton, otherwise his persecutors would merely have to correct the warrant and re-arrest him.
So, the Baxters moved to Totteridge near Barnet to a house with ‘small and rather smoky rooms’, which didn't agree with his health.
In 1670, Richard Baxter's book, ‘The Cure of Church Divisions’ was published in which he argued that it was good for Christians to continue to worship in parish churches despite the bitter hostility against Nonconformists.
Understandably, many of his old flock in Kidderminster severely criticised him for this.
Following his ejection from Kidderminster, the Bishop, the deans and many of the curates had preached long and bitter sermons against Richard Baxter to alienate the people from him.
However, instead of becoming alienated against Richard Baxter, the people had become alienated against the bishops and clergy instead.
They began to meet in private houses where they read sermons and prayed together.
For this ‘crime’, many of them were fined or had their goods confiscated, and others were imprisoned.
Yet, despite all this, Baxter wrote, ‘not one that I hear of are fallen off or forsake their uprightness’.
Yet now, the Kidderminster Christians felt somewhat betrayed by their former pastor.
The book just mentioned also gave rise to a rumour that Richard Baxter was about to conform.
As a result of this, the Earl of Lauderdale, a friend and admirer of Baxter's, with the King's permission, offered him any position he cared for in Scotland, either a church, a bishopric or a university position.
Richard Baxter, for reasons of conscience, declined the offer.
If anything, the persecution in Scotland was even worse than in England.
In Scotland  at that time hundreds of Covenanters were brutally martyred for their faith in Christ.
One wonders why Richard Baxter felt so attached to the established church after all that he, as well as the majority of true believers in the land, had suffered at its hands.
The explanation may be that Richard Baxter still clung on to his vision for a united national church.
He lamented the fact that, following the restoration of Charles II, a great opportunity had been lost to turn England into a ‘land of saints’ through the preaching of the Gospel.
He hoped the wonderful change in Kidderminster would be repeated in every parish in the land.
He blamed the extremists, the sects on the one hand and the bishops on the other for the failure of his vision to be realised.
In 1672, King Charles II issued a ‘Declaration of Indulgence’ granting religious freedom.
His real purpose was to further the cause of Roman Catholicism.
However, this also gave some ‘breathing space’ to the Nonconformists.
Richard Baxter along with many other dissenting preachers, was now able to obtain a licence to preach legally once more.
In January 1673, he began a regular Friday lecture in a church near Fetter Lane, and at Easter time, the Baxters moved to a house in Bloomsbury.
This liberty was short-lived however.
parliament, deeply suspicious of the King's intentions, proclaimed his Declaration illegal in February.
Some justices renewed their persecution of the Nonconformists, but most were reluctant to do so.
In July 1674, Richard Baxter was preaching in St. James's Market House when the main beam, supporting the floor, creaked several times with the weight of the people who had crowded in to hear him.
Remembering the earlier incident in St. Dunstan's, Richard Baxter, with a calm authority, pacified the people and continued preaching.
However, the following day, when the floorboards were removed to examine the beam, it was found to be so deeply cracked in two places that they ascribed the fact that it had not given way to a ‘wonder of [God's]providence’.
These meetings were attended with great blessing.
Richard Baxter had preached to large congregations who listened to him very attentively.
Many of them showed, by their marked change of life, that they had been truly converted.
Many, including former Roman Catholics, gave public thanks to God for their conversion.
SPIES and INFORMERS
Following parliament's announcement that the King's Declaration of Indulgence was illegal, persecution was renewed when the  Nonconformists' licences to preach were recalled.
The bishops hired spies and informers to track down dissenting preachers and bring them to trial.
Richard Baxter was among the first to be arrested.
The Bailiff of Westminster, a Mr. Barwell, went around all the city judges for a warrant for Baxter's arrest.
However, they all refused to grant him one.
Nevertheless, he was able to obtain a warrant from a county judge, Sir John Medlicot, and promptly sent his informer, a Mr. Keting, with the warrant to arrest Richard Baxter.
Whilst they were waiting to see the magistrate, Richard Baxter spoke kindly to Mr. Keting regarding the needs of his soul, which, ‘his conscience did not well digest’.
On this occasion, Richard Baxter was again released on a technicality because his ‘offence’ was committed in the city, and only a city judge had the authority to sign the warrant.
A few days later, Mr. Barwell, the bailiff, died tragically in a riding accident, and soon afterwards, Sir John Medlicot, the judge also died suddenly.
Mr. Keting, the informer, had suffered with his conscience ever since Richard Baxter had spoken to him, and was now terrified by the death of his master.
He came to Baxter and earnestly beseeched his forgiveness.
However, spies continued to attend Richard Baxter's preaching services to try and gain evidence against him.
During one of these services, Richard Baxter preached so powerfully on ‘Making light of Christ and His salvation’, that the two spies in the congregation fled in terror from the church.
Due to the large crowds coming to hear Baxter's preaching, some of his friends built a large meeting house for him in Oxenden Street, which was completed on April 16th 1676.
Because of the great spiritual needs of the people, Mrs. Baxter urged the building of another meeting house in Bloomsbury.
However, Richard Baxter had only preached in his new meeting house once, when the authorities moved to arrest him once more.
At the same time, he suffered another severe bout of his recurring illness, and his friends persuaded him to move to the country for a while for the sake of his health as well as his liberty.
At this time he decided to dispose of all but his essential possessions, and hid his library of books (his most treasured possession) with a view to selling them also.
Richard Baxter said he was glad to part with all so that he had nothing left to be confiscated and that he could carry on preaching.
After a week in the country, Baxter's health greatly improved and so he took the opportunity to preach in some of the needy country churches in Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire.
Crowds of people, including many who hadn't been to a church for years, came to hear him.
He sometimes preached to congregations of some two to three thousand who listened to him with ‘much attention and willingness’.
The Quakers had a large following in Hertfordshire, and whilst in Rickmansworth, Richard Baxter met their leader, William Penn for a public debate.
Baxter believed this was a very profitable exercise.
Whilst Richard Baxter was away in the country, the services in his meeting house were conducted by a Mr. Seddon.
During one service, whilst he was preaching, three J.P.s and several soldiers burst into the chapel with the purpose of arresting Richard Baxter.
However, seeing their intended victim was not present, they changed the name on their warrant and arrested Mr. Seddon instead!
The poor man spent three months in jail before being released.
Until now, most judges had been reluctant to enforce the harsh and unjust laws directed against the Nonconformists.
However, in March 1676, the King commanded them to execute these laws with renewed vigour.
As a leading Nonconformist, Richard Baxter was especially  targeted for their persecutions.
Being denied the use of his own chapel (the former warrant against him still being in force), he preached at another chapel nearby.
However, on November 26th 1676, six constables, four beadles and several others were set at the chapel doors in order to arrest Baxter.
Life for Richard Baxter continued to be a series of narrow escapes from the hands of his persecutors.
When Margaret Baxter died after a short period of illness on the 14th. of June 1681, Richard felt her loss very deeply.
‘Under the power of melting grief’, immediately after her death he wrote, ‘my dear wife did look for good in me, and more help in me than she found, especially lately in my weakness and decay.
We are all like pictures that must not be looked at too near.’
John Howe preached her funeral sermon as she was buried alongside her mother in Christ Church, London on 17th.
June.
‘I am waiting to be next’, wrote Baxter, ‘the door is open.
Death will quickly draw the veil and make us see how near we were to God and one another, and did not sufficiently know it.
Farewell vain world! and welcome true everlasting life.’
On Sunday, August 14th. 1682, Richard Baxter was in great pain and weakness, and was only just able to preach twice.
He thought he would never be able to preach again.
However, he reflected that it was now twenty years since he had been ejected from the church on ‘Black Bartholomew's Day’, and during all that time, by God's mercy, he, and many others had been kept in relative ‘peace’ and freedom to serve the Lord, despite all the efforts of the Church and State to silence them.
The Puritans never sought persecution, but neither did they flinch from suffering when they were called to endure it.
‘It much more concerned us,’ writes Baxter, ‘to be sure that we deserved not suffering, than that we be delivered from it.’
‘ALMOST WELL’
Late in 1682, at the age of 67, Richard Baxter was arrested once again.
He had only just recovered from another bout of serious illness and was still extremely weak.
He was charged with breaking the ‘Five Mile Act’ and was due to pay a fine of £190.
On their way to the magistrates they were stopped by Richard Baxter's doctor who immediately ordered him home to bed.
The doctor then went to the magistrate and swore on oath that he would probably die if sent to prison.
The magistrate consulted the King who told him to allow Richard Baxter to die at home.
However, they confiscated everything they could lay their hands on, even the bed he was lying on, to sell them in order to pay the fine.
However, Baxter's friends bought most of these confiscated goods and ‘lent’ them back to him.
In February 1685, Charles II, the ‘Merry Monarch’, died after receiving the last rites and absolution from a Roman Catholic priest.
He was succeeded by his brother, James II.
He was even more of a Catholic fanatic than Charles had been, and under his rule, the persecutions against the Nonconformists were continued with greater vigour than ever.
In the same year, Richard Baxter published a paraphrase of the New Testament.
Because some of its passages seemed to be critical of the religious establishment, the authorities castigated it as being ‘scandalous and seditious’.
On February 28th 1685, Baxter was arrested and imprisoned yet again, this time under a warrant signed by the infamous Judge Jeffries.
He was released temporarily under a writ of  habeas corpus  , pending his forthcoming trial.
The trial took place in Westminster Hall in May that year.
Richard Baxter, now almost seventy years of age, and very feeble, pleaded ‘not guilty’ to the charges laid against him.
Baxter's influential friends had secured for him four of the ablest barristers in the land, but it was obvious from the beginning of the trial that Jeffries had already decided what the verdict would be.
When the defence requested more time to prepare their case, Jeffries raged, ‘I will not give him a minute's time more to save his life’.
During the trial, Jeffries seemed more like the prosecutor than the judge.
Typical of his remarks about Richard Baxter is: ‘This is an old rogue, and hath poisoned the world with his Kidderminster doctrine…he deserves to be whipped through the city.’
Later on, when Baxter was about to say something in his defence, Jeffries interrupted him.
‘Richard, Richard’, he roared ‘Dost thou think we'll hear thee poison the court?
Richard, thou art an old fellow, an old knave; thou hast written books enough to load a cart, every one as full of sedition, I might say treason, as an egg is full of meat.
Hadst thou been whipped out of thy writing trade forty years ago, it had been happy.
Thou pretendest to be a preacher of the Gospel of Peace…but…
I'll look after thee.’
It was a foregone conclusion that the jury, carefully selected beforehand, would return their immediate and unanimous verdict of ‘Guilty’.
They didn't even bother with the formality of retiring to consider the case.
An appeal to the Bishop of London proved futile.
When Richard Baxter returned to the court in June for the sentence, he was fined five hundred Marks and ordered to remain in prison until he paid.
Jeffries had wanted to see Baxter flogged through the streets of London, but his fellow justices wouldn't allow so harsh a sentence.
So, Richard Baxter was imprisoned once more, in Southwark, for his faith, from  June 1685 until November 1686.
He received a steady stream of visitors during this time, including the young Matthew Henry, the famous commentator, who was studying law in London.
Because he was so old and feeble, Baxter's imprisonment attracted a great deal of sympathy from many people, and was becoming an embarrassment to the authorities.
James II was also at this time seeking to win some support from the Nonconformists.
Therefore, when it became obvious that Baxter had no intention of paying the fine, Lord Powis interceded with the King and secured both his release and immunity from the ‘Five Mile Act’.
In February 1687, Richard Baxter went to live in Charterhouse Yard in Clerkenwell where he assisted in the ministry of Matthew Sylvester as much as his health allowed.
By December that year, James II had lost almost all his support so that he was forced to flee the country when William of Orange landed with his forces at Torbay.
Thus ended the terrible tyranny of the Stuart dynasty, and a Protestant succession to the throne was subsequently established by law.
Richard Baxter continued to write and to preach for as long as he could.
After August 1691, he was no longer able to leave his house.
However, every day, morning and evening, he would open his home to all that would join him in family worship.
This he continued to do until his illness confined him first to his room and finally to his bed.
On Sunday, 6th.
December 1691, Richard Baxter was expecting to leave this world.
Lifting up his eyes to heaven, he prayed, ‘Lord, pity, pity, pity the ignorance of this poor city’.
When his pain became very severe, he prayed to God for his release, but then checked himself: ‘It is not fit for me to prescribe when thou wilt, what thou wilt, when thou wilt.’
The day before he died, he was visited by Dr. Bates and Mr. Increase Mather (of New England).
‘I have pain’ he said, ‘there is no arguing against sense, but I have peace, I have peace.’
When asked how he was, he replied ‘Almost well’ meaning that he would soon be leaving his feeble body for an eternity of glory with Christ.
During his last hours in this world, he found unspeakable comfort in thinking about some verses from Hebrews Ch.12, ‘But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God, the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant ’.
This passage, he said, ‘deserved a thousand thoughts’.
Richard Baxter summed up his life in these words, ‘Weakness and pain helped me to study how to die; that set me on studying how to live; beginning with necessities, I proceeded by degrees, and now I am going to see that for which I have lived and studied.’
Richard Baxter had lived with ‘one foot in the grave’ for most of his life.
His final words, spoken to his friend, Matthew Sylvester, were, ‘the Lord teach you to die’.
Finally, at 4 a.m. on Tuesday, 8th.
December 1691, in his 76th. year, Richard Baxter entered into his everlasting rest.
He had ‘fought the good fight, he had finished his course, he had kept the faith’.
His earthly remains were laid to rest alongside those of his dear wife in Christ Church.
His funeral, according to Calamy, ‘was attended by a most numerous company of all ranks and qualities, and especially of ministers, some of whom were Conformists, who thought fit to pay him that last office of respect.’
‘The heavenly hosts, world without end,
Shall be my company above;
And Thou, my best and surest Friend,
Who shall divide me from Thy love?’
(A verse from one of Richard Baxter's hymns)
RICHARD BAXTER'S INFLUENCE
Richard Baxter occupied a very influential position amongst Nonconformists during the latter half of the 17th.
Century.
His influence was mainly due to his exemplary life, powerful preaching, pastoral ministry and devotional books.
Dr.Thomas Manton thought so highly of Baxter that he did not even consider himself worthy to carry his books behind him, and that ‘Mr. Baxter came nearer the apostolic writings than any man in the age’.
Bishop Wilkins thought that had Baxter ‘lived in the primitive times, he would have been one of the fathers of the church; and that it was enough for one age to produce such a person as Mr. Baxter.’
However, we must admit that Richard Baxter was not without his faults.
Although his practical works have been an enormous blessing to the Church of God, he actually wrote far more books on Christian doctrine.
These were never nearly as popular.
The reason for this was that he followed the methods of the scholastics (medieval theologians) whom he admired very much.
Consequently, subjects were dealt with so intricately and thoroughly few ever read them.
His style of writing caused some to accuse him of rationalism.
Even when he was relatively young he very much enjoyed exercising his keen intellect in analysing the controversies of his day.
‘In my youth’, says Baxter, ‘I was quickly past my fundamentals and was running up into a multitude of controversies, and greatly delighted with metaphysical and scholastic writings.’
One of the main controversies raging within the Church during Baxter's youth, particularly in New England, was the difficult issue of Antinomianism.
Antinomianism concerned the nature of the relationship between the law and the Gospel.
Antinomians taught that since Christ died for the actual sins of His people, they are justified even before they are born.
They said law and grace were two contrary doctrines.
There was no grace in the law and no law in the Gospel.
According to this teaching, the moral law (The Ten Commandments) was not binding on believers.
They were to be guided by ‘Christ within'.
This teaching appealed to many ordinary people because it was simple to understand and made Christian obedience appear much easier than it really was.
Cromwell allowed Antinomian preachers like Tobias Crisp and John Saltmarsh freedom to preach to the troops with whom this teaching was, naturally, very popular.
Baxter believed the Antinomian controversy went to the very roots of the Christian faith and this was one of the main reasons he accepted the offer of an army chaplaincy in order to counter this error.
However, instead of using the Bible alone to oppose Antinomianism, Richard Baxter made the mistake of using mainly reason and logic instead.
Firstly , Baxter could not see how it was possible to avoid Antinomianism if it was accepted that Christ died for the actual sins of His people.
He therefore maintained that Christ died to pay an equivalent rather than the actual penalty for their sins.
Secondly , Baxter rejected the doctrine of double pre-destination.
He believed the decrees of God applied to salvation but not to damnation.
He maintained that the death of Christ was for the sins of all men against the first covenant.
He accepted only four of the five points of Calvinism.
He could not accept that Christ's Atonement was not in some sense, applicable to the entire human race.
Again, it was reason rather than faith that led him to believe that this was the only adequate ground for the proclamation of the universal offer of the Gospel.
Thirdly , Baxter believed the covenant of grace to be a ‘new law’.
The first book he published was ‘Aphorisms on Justification’(1649) written specifically to counter Antinomianism.
Baxter expressed his views as follows: ‘Justification is received by those who obey the law of the new covenant.
The covenant of grace is a new law; obedience means repentance and faith in Christ and evangelical obedience produces the justification before God which finally saves.
The old law kills, but God gives the new law for the conditions whereof should be more easy to the sinner.’
Following its publication, ‘Aphorisms on Justification’ attracted so much adverse criticism that Baxter never republished this work.
He was charged with teaching justification by works and with Arminianism.
He rejected these criticisms but never changed his position.
He believed that his views alone provided a safeguard against Antinomianism.
However, Baxter's influence was a major factor contributing to a split between the Presbyterians and Independents towards the end of the 17th.
Century.
Partly due to the influence of Baxter's theology, English Presbyterians succumbed to rationalism and legalism.
There occurred a doctrinal slide in the Presbyterian seminaries in the direction of Arminianism and low views of the inspiration and authority of Scripture.
All the major doctrines came to be questioned, culminating eventually in the denial of Christ's deity.
Baxter's old congregation in Kidderminster was typical of many former Puritan congregations in that it became the scene of a Unitarian split during the 18th.
Century.
Also, many Christians, especially in Scotland, were influenced by Baxter's view of the Gospel as a new law, or ‘Neonomianism’ as it became known.
The danger with this was that it caused believers to look to their own faith rather than to Christ alone for the assurance of their salvation.
The late 17th. and early 18th.
Centuries was a sad phase in the history of the English Church.
However, even though Richard Baxter may have been poor as a theologian and controversialist, he was undoubtedly one of the most outstanding pastors of all time.
Thankfully, by and large, Baxter kept controversy out of his pulpit ministry.
He always considered himself to be Reformed and praised the Westminster Assembly, that there was ‘never a synod of more excellent divines than this and the Synod of Dort’.
He held John Calvin in very great esteem.
‘I know no man since the apostles’ days,’wrote Baxter, ‘whom I honour more than Calvin, and whose judgment in all things, one with another, I more esteem and come nearer to.’
His practical works have been deeply appreciated by Christians from the 17th.
Century to the present day.
His Call to the Unconverted is considered by many to be the greatest work on conversion ever written.
Over 30,000 copies were printed during Baxter's own lifetime, and thousands of people have, by the grace of God, been converted by reading it.
Baxter heard of whole households being converted through reading this book in his own day.
But the message of the book continued to speak long after Baxter died, and many more have been helped along the ‘path that leads to life’, by this book, including great soul winners such as George Whitfield and Charles Spurgeon.
The Saint's Everlasting Rest was the most popular book Baxter wrote.
Its vivid descriptions of the joys and glories of heaven have encouraged many weary servants of God, whilst its warnings of hell and exhortations to repent have been the means of bringing others to faith in Christ.
Thousands of preachers of the Gospel have been stirred to renewed zeal by reading the Reformed Pastor .
Philip Dodderidge described it as a ‘most extraordinary book’.
John Wesley earnestly commended it to his preachers.
C.H. Spurgeon, the ‘Prince of Preachers’ would turn to the Reformed Pastor , on a Sunday evening.
Feeling worn out after preaching to the thousands who flocked to hear him, he found renewed stimulation and encouragement for his ministerial labours.
We have  already noted how a biography of Richard Baxter was the spark that ignited Dr.Martyn Lloyd-Jones' interest in the Puritans in 1925.
As minister of Westminster Chapel, Dr.Lloyd-Jones was to become a champion of the Reformed Faith in this Century.
Thus the teachings of the Puritans, and their successors, Bible-believing Christians, continue to be an influence of incalculable benefit to people today.
The Church of Christ has great cause to be thankful to her Lord for the life and work of His servant, Richard Baxter.