

Welcome to Cotswold Wildlife Park
Cotswold Wildlife Park aspires to show animals to people — so that they can come to understand and respect all forms of wildlife; to understand what is special about each species, and how the various species have evolved and adapted over very long periods of time, adjusting and changing to survive in habitats from many parts of the earth.
Cotswold Wildlife Park offers a fascinating mixed collection of animals.
Some are designated as threatened or endangered in the I.U.C.N.'s (International Union for the Conservation of Nature) Red Data Books; others, are still relatively numerous in the wild, but offer an educational encounter of value.
Like most enlightened zoological gardens, Cotswold Wildlife Park is a member of The Federation of Zoological Gardens of Great Britain and Ireland.
We co-operate, share and exchange animals with other members to further breeding programmes of conservation importance.
Your visit helps to support these.
Thank you.
The Manor House
The Gothic style Manor House is set in the midst of 120 acres (50 hectares) of gardens and parkland; it was built in 1804 to replace a previous Jacobean residence, and is at the centre of the 3,300 acres (1,335 hectares) Bradwell Grove Estate, where for many centuries farming and forestry have been practised in a way typical of life in the Cotswolds.
The owner, John Heyworth, inherited the estate from his grandfather, Colonel Heyworth Savage, in 1949 and twenty years later decided to open the Wildlife Park to the public.
Parts of the house are in use and are open to visitors.
The old dining-room is now a brass rubbing centre and the drawing-room is used for meetings and lectures.
The old library and conservatory, conveniently linked to the drawing-room, now provide a most attractive setting for a bar and dining area.
The stables and outbuildings have been converted into the Aquarium, the Reptile House, and the Bat Belfry; plus various support services including quarantine facilities for incoming animals.
The Animal Collection, Gardens and Parkland
The park is home to a fascinating and varied collection of mammals, birds, reptiles, fish and invertebrates from all over the world.
The enclosures have been carefully sited and designed, and each supplies the essential features to answer the needs of particular types of animals.
The science and art of maintaining, breeding and displaying wild animals successfully in captivity may be thought of as something akin to gardeners with green fingers.
Indeed, horticulture is of equal importance to the maintaining of the animal collection.
The development of the gardens has been given high priority and there is a large variety of named trees and shrubs.
Plants within the enclosures have to be carefully chosen.
Some animals treat choice plants with little respect!
Planting outside and around enclosures can offer protection from variable weather and give the animals a feeling of security.
Many enclosures are particularly spacious and carefully landscaped — with full advantage being taken of the beautiful rural setting of the Bradwell Grove Estate as a backdrop.
Walled Garden
Situated across from the main car park, the Walled Garden was originally a kitchen garden supplying vegetables for the Manor House.
The high walls now give protection from cold winds to animals from warmer climates as well as to those from temperate ones.
Within the garden, particular attention is given to both plant and animal displays.
These are of interest to horticulturalists and gardeners, as much as to those who come to see the animals.
The flower beds are replanted each year and many of the shrubs and trees, including old  varities of apple, remain from the original kitchen garden.
Some Birds in the Garden
Toucan and Hornbill
These are tropical, mainly fruit eating birds.
They may look alike in shape and have some forms of behaviour in common, but they come from different parts of the world.
Toucans live in the forests of South and Central America and are more closely related to woodpeckers than to hornbills.
The length of the bill makes it easier for the birds to reach fruit and the bill colour may help them to recognise their own species, of which there are about forty.
Notice the toes — two point forward, two point backwards.
This is known as being zygodactyl, a feature that is found in many climbing birds, not least your pet budgerigar and other parrots, and indeed woodpeckers.
Hornbills also have large bills and many have casques on the top.
These are hollow and therefore light.
Hornbills, too, live in forests, but also in woodland savannahs in Asia and Africa.
Cotswold Wildlife Park has had particular success in breeding hornbills.
The Great Indian Hornbill comes from India and South-East Asia.
Like nearly all the other forty-five species, they nest in hollow trees.
Just before the first egg is  layed , the male seals the female in with a wall of clay and mud, helped by the female herself from within.
A small aperture is left, through which the male passes food.
The nesting trunk in the aviary is carefully screened to avoid disturbance.
Red-billed and Yellow-billed Hornbills from Africa also breed here in the gardens.
Stork and Ibis
There are a number of birds which have long legs, long necks, and possibly long or specially shaped bills.
Herons, flamingos, spoonbills and cranes are examples, some of which can be seen elsewhere in the park.
They are not necessarily closely related; but have come to look alike because they forage for food in places such as wetlands and grasslands where these physical features have an advantage.
Storks and ibises, however, are closely related.
In the aviary, you can watch breeding groups or colonies of Sacred Ibis and Scarlet Ibis.
The former had a religious significance for the Ancient Egyptians, but sadly they are no longer found in Egypt, though they are still widely distributed in other parts of Africa and Asia.
The Scarlet Ibis comes from forested wetlands of Central America, where it feeds on invertebrate animals containing the pigment carotene, which gives the birds their gorgeous plumage colour.
The pigment has to be given as an additive in their food here.
Both species use their curved bills to probe for small animals, build colonial nests off the ground and have young which hatch naked and blind.
Humboldt Penguin
These delightful birds, one species out of the eighteen to be found in the Southern Hemisphere, come from the relatively temperate latitudes along the western coast of South America as far north as Peru.
Though penguins cannot fly in the air, their bodies and wings are designed for ‘flying’ under water.
Their wings are formed like the flippers on aquatic mammals such as seals.
Humboldt Penguin chicks are reared regularly at the park, and in the breeding season some may be seen in the specially designed rearing unit alongside their enclosure.
Black Stork
The pair of Black Storks, housed in the same aviary as the Ibises, is another ‘special’ for the Park.
The rarest of the two European storks, we have been successful in breeding this species.
A shy bird of forested temperate wetlands in Europe, it feeds on similar items as its better known relative, the White Stork — frogs, fish and invertebrates.
These storks are usually solitary nesters whose young, like those of Ibis, are dependent on their parents for food.
Some Mammals in the Garden
Meerkat
Meerkats are a kind of Mongoose and are related to the civets and genets.
Notice the narrow snout extending beyond the mouth which helps it to seek out small rodents, reptiles and invertebrates.
Meerkats, also called Suricates, live in colonies in burrows on the dry sandy velds of southern Africa.
They have the charming habit of sitting up on their haunches and basking in the early morning sun.
You may be able to watch this habit here.
A heat lamp has been installed and the Meerkats use it, especially on dull overcast days.
Small-clawed Otter
Eighteen species of otter are known, all of similar shape, but variable in size.
Long bodies and short legs are reminders of their close relationship to weasels and polecats.
The head is flattened, with strong vibrissae or whiskers; the ears are small and can be closed when swimming; and all four feet have five webbed toes.
In the Asian Small-clawed Otter, one of the smaller species, the claws are reduced in size — this possibly helps the toes to be more sensitive when being used to feel around boulders under water, for molluscs and crustaceans.
This species is less aquatic than most of the others.
Coati
Coatis come from Central and South America.
Their long mobile noses are used for rooting around in search of small animals.
Coatis are extremely agile and climb well.
Note how they sometimes walk with their tails up in the air, probably using them as a flag for signalling to others in the group when on the move through undergrowth.
This is known in other mammals including Ring-tailed Lemurs — also to be seen in the Walled Garden.
Other species to be seen in the Walled Garden include Ruffed Lemurs, Squirrel Monkeys, and Tamarins; in aviaries and enclosures are Kookaburras, Superb Spreo Starlings, Mountain Witch Doves, Roul Roul Partridges, Laughing Thrushes, Nutmeg Imperial Pigeons, Peacock Pheasants, Pink-backed Pelicans, Pileated Jays, Black Swans, Mandarin Ducks and parrots.
Giant Hornbill male feeding female in nest log.
Blue-fronted Amazon Parrot.
Giant Hornbills and fledgling.
Humboldt Penguins ‘flying’ under water
Meerkats basking under the specially provided sunlamp
Meerkats and young.
Lemurs using their tails to signal.
Tropical House
This building was completed in 1982 and occupies the same site in the walled garden as the original estate conservatory, where peaches and carnations were once grown in one of the Oxfordshire's oldest greenhouses.
The Tropical House was designed to exhibit a pair of American Alligators and a large collection of plants from the warmer regions of the world.
The American Alligator is found in south-eastern USA, including the Florida Everglades.
Prior to 1982, the park's alligators were kept in the reptile house, where, on several occasions, the female constructed a nest of dead plant material and laid eggs.
For a number of reasons, however, the eggs failed to hatch.
It is hoped that the greater environmental control available in the new Tropical House will contribute eventually to the successful breeding of these reptiles.
It should perhaps be mentioned that the breeding of American Alligators under fully captive conditions is a rare event.
On warm days in the summer the alligators have access to a separate grassed enclosure where they spend long periods basking directly in the sun.
The plant collection includes flowering plants now cultivated in gardens in many tropical areas of the world.
The visitor will find hibiscus, bougainvillea, angel's trumpet, thunbergia, abutilon, plumbago and datura, to name but a few.
Also on exhibit are a number of interesting crop plants such as sugar cane and banana.
Living among the foliage are small tropical birds such as Tanagers from the Americas, White Eyes from Africa and Asia and other insect, fruit and nectar-feeding species.
These birds may be seen taking their specially prepared foods from raised feeding trays and nectar tubes arranged near the visitors' viewing path.
The bird species have been chosen with care in order to minimise damage to the plants.
Animals for children
Around the park you will see a variety of animals which will have particular appeal to children.
Very few exotic animals make good pets.
Few mammals and almost no birds enjoy being handled, no matter how tame.
To answer the understandable need to touch and be involved with animals, the park has a Children's Farmyard.
All the animals here, including some birds, may be approached and in some cases will allow themselves to be petted and stroked.
Depending on the time of year, there will be pigs, lambs, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, geese, ducks and poultry.
It is a good idea to tell children that all these have been domesticated for many hundreds of years in the service of man, for meat, milk, hide, skins, wool and eggs.
The ‘wild’ characteristics have been bred out of them for many generations and few would survive long if released into the wild.
In aviaries around the outside of the Walled Garden, you will see a range of familiar domesticated cage birds — which, given informed care, can make very good garden aviary subjects.
These include Cockatiels, Budgerigars, Zebra Finches, Java Sparrows, Bengalese Finches and Chinese Painted Quail.
‘Snake Experience’ day.
caption 2 omitted
Sandy and black pig and piglets
Pheasants
About the Children's Farm you will see peacocks.
Peafowl have been domesticated and valued as a special food dish for the rich since Roman times!
Like guinea fowl from Africa, apart from one or two colour varieties they resemble their wild ancestors.
Red Jungle Fowl are the progenitors of the bewildering variety of domestic fowl.
From the modern egg-laying hybrid hen to the more ornate fancy fowl, all are pheasants!
Pheasants are birds of Asian origin, including the covert pheasants seen in the English countryside and bred for shooting.
Many species are threatened in the wild due to habitat destruction by man and probably over-hunting.
The plumage of most male and female pheasants is strikingly different.
The cocks are brightly coloured to attract many duller coloured and camouflaged females as potential mates.
Species on display in the World Pheasant Association aviaries include Satyr Tragopan, Himalayan Monal, Grey Peacock Pheasants, and Reeve's and Siamese Fireback's Pheasants.
The cock Satyr Tragopan.
An ‘eye’ feather from a Peacock's tail.
Caption 3 omitted
Birds of Prey
Birds of prey are animal hunters and most catch their prey alive, killing it quickly with their specially strong feet or talons, and if necessary tearing it into smaller pieces to swallow.
Eagles, falcons, hawks, buzzards, kites and caracaras also find dead animals, known as carrion, to eat.
Vultures rarely kill their own food, but are known for tidying up after the kills of bigger mammal predators such as of lions.
Birds of prey, or raptors to give them an alternative group name, come in many sizes.
Some are specialist killers, like the Peregrine Falcon where individuals tend to take only one kind of bird.
More versatile hunters such as the Kestrel will take any small mammals, birds, reptiles or even beetles as they are available.
Bateleur Eagle
Although not a large eagle, the Bateleur is provided with powerful, heavily scaled legs and feet.
The relatively short toes indicate a concentration on prey which includes snakes and other reptiles, as well as mammals up to the size of small antelopes.
It is known to pick up tortoises, birds eggs and carrion, which may be stolen from other predators.
This is known as piracy and the Bateleur will attack Tawny Eagles, Lammergeyers and vultures — forcing them to drop or disgorge their food.
Bateleur Eagles are unusual in having dimorphic plumage, the female displays grey secondary feathers whilst males have entirely black wings.
Griffon and Lappet-faced Vultures
Vultures are known for their extremely keen eyesight, and their ability to take advantage of thermals with their extensive wings and soar for hours at high altitudes.
Both features enable them to seek out food.
Not only do they look down, they also watch the movements of other vultures.
One vulture sighting carrion below unintentionally informs all others of its availability by swooping downwards, and thus dozens of vultures arrive at the scene of an animal kill in a very short space of time.
Both Griffon and Lappet-faced Vultures are strong, heavy-billed birds, capable of tearing open the hides of dead animals with ease.
Bare heads with few feathers enable them to reach into carcases of dead animals without becoming matted with blood.
In the wild, smaller billed species of vultures and kites tidy up the smaller remains and clean the bones after the Griffons and Lappet-faced Vultures have had their fill.
Griffon Vultures are found in southern Europe, Africa, the Middle East and south-western Asia.
Lappet-faced Vultures come from southern and eastern Africa.
Caracara
Caracaras are smaller scavenging raptors from Central and South America.
In feeding habits they occupy a similar role to the kites in Europe, Africa and Asia.
Owls are another group known under the title of birds of prey.
Owls tend to take most of their prey from the ground and therefore feed mostly on mammals, but smaller owl species will take roosting small birds and invertebrates.
Most owls are nocturnal, hunting at night for similar prey to the diurnal or day-hunting hawks.
Because of their different activity time clock, the owls are not competing with the hawks for the same food animals at the same time and can therefore co-exist.
Eurasian Eagle Owl
One of the rarest birds in Europe, a number of sub species are found from northern Europe to south-eastern Asia.
The larger forms are found in the north, the smaller and lighter coloured ones come from drier steppe and desert areas further south.
They are both nocturnal and diurnal hunters, capable of taking prey up to the size of squirrels and hares.
As in other raptors, females are larger than males.
This enables the female to hunt a wider range of prey in the wild, particularly helpful when rearing large families of hungry owlets.
Snowy Owl
This large owl is found right around the Arctic tundras of the Northern Hemisphere.
The larger female is more heavily marked, this helps to make her better camouflaged on the ground nest she builds in the Arctic spring, immediately after the snow begins to melt.
Their main prey is the Lemming (rather like a large field-vole).
In years of Lemming plenty, female Snowy Owls respond by laying larger clutches of eggs.
Other owls in the park include the Spotted Little Owl from Asia, largely an invertebrate hunter.
Boobok Owls from Australasia, the Great Horned Owl from the Americas which is the counterpart to the Eagle Owls of Eurasia, and the well known, but sadly now scarce in Britain, Barn Owl.
Strangely, despite its comparative rarity in England, the latter is a bird with one of the widest distributions world-wide.
Park-bred Barn Owls have been released in the area.
Well feather-insulated talons of a snowy owl's feet.
Eurasian Eagle Owl with rabbit.
Reptile House & Aquarium
Stable buildings at the rear of the Manor House have been converted for the display of reptiles, amphibians and fishes.
These animals are sometimes termed ‘cold-blooded’.
They do not generate their own body heat like mammals and birds, but are largely dependent on the temperatures in their immediate environment.
The only way they can control their body temperature is by moving themselves — for example, in and out of shade.
The buildings are heated and temperatures in individual vivaria and aquaria are adjusted as necessary.
Tortoises, Terrapins and Turtles
In this country, tortoises are usually thought of as land animals, terrapins as freshwater and turtles as sea-living, or marine, reptiles.
In America, all tend to be referred to as Turtles.
The largest tortoises you will see in the park are descended from specimens from Aldabra Island in the Indian Ocean.
They are kept outside, but have their own heated house, from which they emerge to graze even on cool days.
Giant Tortoises have suffered in the past from being conveyable fresh meat parcels for sailors.
Many tropical islands once had their own species, but most of these are now extinct.
Reptiles and Amphibians
Some reptiles and amphibians are superficially very alike.
Newts and lizards are confused by many people.
Amphibians may have warty or smooth, but usually moist, skins.
All reptiles have scales covering the skin, which is usually dry, and have nails on their toes.
Even aquatic terrapins need to be able to dry out by sun basking.
Reptiles reproduce by laying eggs on land or by giving birth to live young.
The young in both cases are perfect miniatures of the adults, and breath air by means of lungs.
Amphibians usually lay their eggs in water and go through an aquatic larval stage as tadpoles, when they breath by means of gills.
Typical reptiles include snakes, lizards, tortoises, turtles and crocodiles.
Typical amphibians include frogs, toads, newts and salamanders.
In the courtyard between the Reptile House and the Aquarium, you will see groups of Mediterranean species of tortoise.
In the recent past, many thousands of these animals were exported for the pet trade.
Indeed some of these are unwanted pets, but we are proud to show batches of young animals bred from these unfortunate exiles.
Sadly their wild habitat is now suffering destruction for the hotel and tourist industries.
Red-eared Terrapins
On warm sunny days you may see Red-eared Terrapins basking around the edge of the lake.
These were pets bought as hatchlings which quickly outgrew their owner's facilities, and have been donated to the park.
They are native to the southern U.S.A. 
In the aquarium, you will see a number of aquatic tortoises, including Malayan Box, Reeve's from Asia, Helmeted from Africa, Caspian and Pond Terrapins from Europe and Three-toed Box from North America.
The box terrapins are so called because of their ability to close the undershell or plastron at both front and back.
This is a defensive mechanism which helps them to survive attempts on their lives by predators.
As young animals most are carnivorous, but as they mature they consumer more vegetable matter in their diet.
Warmth and lighting with a minimum ultraviolet content are essential to the well-being of Chelonians in captivity.
Lizards
Like tortoises, many lizards are worshippers of the sun.
They maintain an optimum body temperature by alternatively moving from a hot spot to a cooler one and back again throughout the day.
Thus their vivaria must offer a temperature gradient from which to choose basking positions.
Some, such as the Green Iguana from Central and northern South America, are largely vegetarian and diurnal, basking on branches over waterways from which they will dive if predators threaten.
Other lizards, like the Tokay Gecko from tropical Asia, are nocturnal, largely insectivorous and able to walk upside down, even on glass, by means of feet with special pads on the toe tips.
Chameleons from Africa and India occur in many sizes.
All are noted for their ability, in some degree, to change colour according to their background.
Notice how the eyes work independently of one another, searching for likely insect prey upon which to unfurl their long, sticky, lobe-ended tongue.
Note too, the prehensile tail, which allows them to lift the forefront of their bodies on to their back legs to reach even further.
Snakes
The Reptile House contains one of the most interesting collections of snakes in the country, including both venomous and constrictive types.
Pythons and boas include the largest species known — the Reticulated Python from South-East Asia is probably the longest (up to 10 metres) and the Anaconda from South America follows it a close second and is certainly heavier.
Both are constricting snakes, wrapping the length of their bodies around a helpless mammal, and killing it by suffocation before swallowing it whole.
It is often possible to see the vestigial remains of rear limbs on these large snakes.
They look like large spurs, really claws, on either side of the cloaca or vent.
The Gaboon Viper is one of three large vipers found in Africa.
They have heavy bodies, and sit and wait for prey to come to them, striking with unerring accuracy and speed at any small mammal as it passes.
The venom is injected by means of long, hollow teeth called fangs.
Other colourful snakes on display include King Snakes which will prey on other snakes, mambas and cobras from Africa, Rainbow and Haitian Boas from Central and South America, Garter Snakes from North America, Carpet and Children's Pythons from Australia, and Mangrove Snakes from Asia.
Frogs and Salamanders
Amphibians in the wild are food for so many other animals that it is not surprising that they do not always show themselves well even in confinement.
Some such as tree frogs have well developed finger and toe pads, rather like Geckos and can climb up plants to reach insect prey that other ground-living frogs cannot reach.
Like chameleons, some are able to vary the colour of their sensitive skins, to remain camouflaged.
White's Tree Frog and the Yellow Tree Frog from Australia and Asia can be seen here.
One amphibian which might not be too concerned about showing itself is the Fire or European Salamander.
Its colouring of black and yellow, as in wasps and some other animals, is a warning!
The glands on the skin contain a powerful irritant which will make any would-be predator think before attempting to eat the salamander.
The park breeds the Fire Salamander regularly.
Fish
A minute representation of the world's 30,000 or so species of fish is to be seen in the aquarium.
Both freshwater and marine fish are on display and most of them are ‘tropical’, that is, their water temperature has to be maintained at around 75° F (25° C).
The aquarium has a fine specimen of the African Lungfish.
As well as having gills, Lungfish have primitive lungs with which they can obtain oxygen from the air.
They can survive long periods of drought encased in mud, until the next rainy season.
The tropical marine aquaria contain a variety of invertebrates including sea anemones, shrimps and sea slugs.
Fish, such as the ornate Porcupine Fish and Lion Fish and the colourful Domino Damsels, Koran Angels, Tomato Clownfish, Red-tailed Blenny and Striped Sweetlips — colourful names to describe colourful creatures from fragile marine habitats gravely threatened by pollution in many parts of the world.
Note the large-surfaced toes which enable the animal to walk up very smooth surfaces — even the glass of its vivarium
Burmese Python incubating her eggs
Invertebrate House
This house has recently been refurbished to show a broad spectrum of animals without backbones, correctly called invertebrates.
Invertebrates are usually comparatively small; many are minute.
They include an incredible diversity of well known groups such as jellyfish, worms, sea-urchins and snails.
However, most of the examples in this house are called arthropods — meaning many-jointed limbs.
These include arachnids (scorpions and spiders), ants, butterflies, moths, bees and stick insects — all true insects with six jointed legs.
Arthropods make up three-quarters of all known present day animal species.
Scorpions are nocturnal predators inhabiting warmer parts of the world.
They spend the day concealed under stones, preying at night on smaller invertebrates, which they seize with their pincer-like claws and may paralyse with their tail sting.
They crush their victim in their pincers, but feed by injecting digestive juices and sucking the prey dry.
Scorpions are viviparous, that is they bring forth living young.
Many thousands of species of spider are known.
The largest are sometimes misleadingly called bird-eating spiders.
In fact, most hunt on the ground and are unlikely to come across birds.
The largest of these attains a leg span of 25 centimetres.
The Red-legged Tarantula from Mexico and the Zebra Tarantula from Costa Rica are examples to be seen here.
Females are larger than males.
Ostriches, Emus & Rheas
The largest birds in the world live in grasslands.
They include Ostriches, Emus and Rheas.
These large, flightless birds are known collectively as ratites, a grouping which also includes the  Cassowarys from New Guinea and Australia, and the Kiwi from New Zealand.
Both the latter are forest and woodland birds.
The Ostrich is found in open savannah country over much of Africa.
It is the largest living bird — a fully grown male weighing 140 kilograms and reaching 2.5 metres in height.
Long necks and long legs enable the birds to both keep a wary eye over the landscape and to make a speedy departure should they be threatened.
Adult males are dark and the females are grey/brown.
They are polygamous, each male possessing any number of females.
The females lay their huge eggs in the same nest scrape (up to sixty have been found in one nest).
Incubation is shared by the cock and the dominant hen.
The group of Ostriches in the park do breed.
Ostriches are farmed in South Africa and Australia, for their meat as much as for their feathers and hides.
The nests of Ostriches, Emus and Rheas are simple scrapes on the ground.
Male Ostriches often look after the young, forming ‘herds’ of the young from several nests.
The Emus usually nest alone.
Incubation is by the male birds only in the cases of Emus and Rheas.
Emus come from the bushlands of Australia and the Common Rhea comes from the open pampas grasslands of the Argentine, South America.
All these birds have lost the power of flight over millions of years.
Until man became a considerable predator, they did not need to fly; instead they have long, strong legs for running.
A reduction in the number of toes on each foot parallels that seen in fleet-of-foot mammals.
See if you can get a good view of these birds and count the number of toes.
(They do not all have the same!)
Right foot of an Ostrich.
Lemurs, Monkeys & Apes
These animals are known as primates, a group that includes the galagoes or bush babies of Africa, the tamarins and marmosets of South America, and man himself.
Some of the characteristics of primates are flexible fingers with nails rather than claws, and forward facing eyes that give binocular vision and are vital for judging distance.
They can move their eyes in the sockets and most see colours as we do.
Cotswold Wildlife Park has examples of each of the main groups of primate.
Lar Gibbon
Gibbons are small apes, the most obvious characteristic being the absence of a tail.
Thus Orang-Utans, Chimpanzees, Gorillas and people are also apes.
There are about a dozen kinds of gibbon, all from South-East Asia.
Their long arms are particularly well adapted to life in trees.
They swing with considerable grace from branch to branch using their hook-like hands alternately, a mode of locomotion known as brachiation.
Gibbons communicate and hold territories by means of loud hooting voices that carry through and over the forest canopy.
They live in small family groups.
Monkeys
Monkeys can be divided into two groups: the ‘Old World’ from Asia and Africa and the ‘New World’from Central and South America.
They have evolved separately and thus we discover that monkeys with prehensile tails serving them as an extra hand only come from the New World.
They also have broad noses and sideways facing nostrils, and tend to sit in a hunched position when at rest.
Old World monkeys have narrow noses with downward pointing nostrils — like man's — and can rotate their thumbs, which allows them more manipulative skills than their New World relations.
The Old World monkeys tend to sit upright when at rest and many have special thick-skinned sometimes brightly coloured pads on their rear ends.
De Brazza Monkey
The De Brazza is one of the Old World's largest monkeys, and the most richly coloured of the African forest monkeys known as guenons.
The African rain forests are inhabited by several closely related guenons.
Because each species has a tendency to stay in a particular strata in the tall forest, they seldom compete for the same food.
De Brazza Monkeys occupy the middle layers.
Diana and Spot Nosed Guenons occupy the upper layers, and Red-tailed and Green Guenons occupy the lower layers.
The De Brazza group here breed regularly.
Spider Monkey
These are typical New World Monkeys.
They use their tails to grip branches whilst reaching for food, mostly ripened fruit.
Notice how the Spider Monkey has a tail that is thicker and longer than its legs.
The end has a naked patch on the underside like the palm of a hand, which can be used to pick up small objects.
You will notice from looking at our animals that Spider Monkeys have four long fingers, but only a rudimentary thumb.
Lemurs
Lemurs are considered to be amongst the more primitive of the primates.
Isolated for millions of years on the island of Madagascar, they have changed less than primates on, for example, the African continent.
Different species of lemur occupy different living spaces just as we have seen with the guenons of the African forests.
Ring-tailed Lemurs tend to spend more time on the ground.
The Ruffed Lemur is an extremely vocal animal living in what is left of Madagascan forests.
There are Ring-tailed and Black and White Ruffed species of Lemur.
All are threatened by habitat degradation by people.
Other primates in the park include Cotton-top Tamarin, Red-bellied Tamarin, Red-handed Tamarin and Squirrel Monkey, all from South America.
They can be seen at the end of the Walled Garden.
The Spider Monkey's prehensile tail, used as a fifth limb.
Note the loss of the thumb on the hand of this kind of monkey and how it uses its first or index finger to grip items of food.
Cats
The big carnivores are represented in the park by two species of cat.
In fact they come under the grouping of ‘Big Cats’, not only because they are large as cats go, but they roar and do not purr!
All cats, big and small, are animals in danger in the wild, particularly those that have spotted or striped coats.
Despite protection in most countries, there is still an illegal trade in cat skins, which is compounded by continuous encroachment of their habitat by an ever-increasing human and domestic animal population.
This puts in doubt the future survival of cat species as truly wild animals.
Like domestic cats, well fed big cats are contented cats, and spend a large part of their day just resting.
They do not demand huge enclosures for exercise.
This behaviour is typical of many predatory mammals — and indeed birds.
Persian Leopard
Of all the big cats the leopard is the most adaptable.
Its adaptability means that it can survive at high altitudes, in semi-arid areas, and in rocky areas as well as in forests.
It is willing and able to feed on a variety of prey species, up to the size of antelopes.
Leopards are found over much of Africa, from South-West Asia to China, Korea and Java.
Several races are recognised throughout this wide range.
The sub-species kept at the park is the very rare Persian Leopard from Iraq and Iran.
The park is participating in an international breeding programme with several other zoological collections, to help save the race from extinction.
Bengal Tiger
Tigers are more specialised and demanding of habitat and prey requirements than leopards.
Nevertheless, tigers once roamed over most of Asia, some trekked over the frozen north, others up into the mountains of Central Asia and more through the hot humid rain forests of the south.
The tigers that lived in these different places gradually developed into a number of different races.
Although tigers have been able to adapt to different climates and landscapes, they have not been able to live alongside people.
In fact people have killed so many tigers that two races are probably extinct.
The Bengal Tiger is the most numerous of the races that survive today.
Tigers are most active at night and feed on larger mammals such as deer, antelope and wild pigs.
They enjoy water and do not hesitate to enter it on warm days.
You will see the park's tigers on hot days splashing around in their pool.
White spots on the reverse side of a tiger's ears.
These markings are found on many of the cat family and are used for signalling their intentions and mood to others.
Hoofed Mammals
The hoofed mammals or ungulates can be divided into two.
The first group, the odd-toed ungulates, a much bigger group in the distant past, now consists of the tapirs, rhinoceroses, zebras, and wild and of course domestic horses.
The second group consists of the even-toed ungulates such as the hippopotamuses, giraffes, antelopes, and camels, goats and sheep, wild and domestic.
Sometimes this latter group is called cloven-hoofed animals.
Ungulates are of great importance to man.
As well as those mentioned, there are others too that have been domesticated over the centuries providing food, clothing and transportation.
Grasses occupy a quarter of all the vegetated land on earth.
Resistant to flood, fire and drought they can provide a continuous supply of food for huge assemblies of animals that have become specially adapted to feeding on them.
Ungulates can be found in the grasslands of all the major continents except Australia.
Chapman's Zebra
There are three species of zebra.
One of these, the Common Zebra, is widely distributed over the grassland savannah in eastern and southern Africa in different forms, each with a slightly different stripe pattern.
The form we have in the park is known as Chapman's Zebra.
Zebras live in herds with a dominant stallion as the herd leader.
A single foal is born after a gestation period of a year.
Foals have to become part of the herd immediately after birth in order to gain the protection of the herd from lions and hyenas.
Being all legs at first, a foal can gallop alongside its mother within hours of birth.
The function of the stripes is not fully understood and the pattern is in fact different on each zebra.
The striping may make it difficult for a predator to select one animal out from the others in a tightly packed herd and equally difficult to judge distances between itself, its intended prey and the rest of the herd.
Brazilian Tapir
The tapir has the distinction of being one of the oldest forms of mammal.
It has remained virtually unchanged for hundreds of years.
Tapirs formerly inhabited Europe, Asia and North America; modern day tapirs are confined to Central and South America and Malaysia.
The Brazilian Tapir is the largest animal to be found over much of its forested wetland habitat.
Only man and occasionally Jaguars are predators.
The shape of a tapir makes it possible for it to push its way through the thick undergrowth at considerable speed.
The female gives birth in a secluded spot in the forest.
All newly born tapirs are covered with stripes and spots as camouflage.
Scimitar-horned Oryx
This semi-desert antelope was once widespread in North Africa.
Now it is found only in a narrow strip of land in Niger, Chad, Mali and Sudan.
Domestic animals have over-grazed the area creating total desert conditions which are unsuitable for oryx.
Many have been killed for sport by oil surveyors and troops using automatic weapons.
Oryx make better use of the available plant food than domestic animals, and if given adequate protection in the wild could become a valuable source of food for local people.
Scimitar-horned Oryx bred in British Zoos were reintroduced to Tunisia in 1987.
Latest reports are that they are breeding successfully.
White Rhinoceros
The name ‘White’ is misleading.
It is in fact derived from the Afrikaans wyd meaning wide, which refers to this species' square upper lip, contrasted with the triangular lip of the other African so-called ‘Black’ Rhinoceros.
The wide mouth might be thought of as a kind of lawn mower for taking up vast quantities of grass to support their huge bodies.
The White Rhino is the heaviest of the five rhino species still living today.
(The Indian can be taller.)
A fully grown White Rhino may stand 6 feet tall (183 centimetres) and it can weight almost 8,000 pounds (3,600 kilograms).
this means it can weight as much as fifty men!
Unfortunately for all rhinoceros species, their horns (made of thousands of tiny hair strands within, covered by a keratin layer) are dangerous, not only to would be predators, but now to the rhino themselves.
Some people in Asia, the Middle East and Africa believe that the powdered-down horn has some medicinal properties, which is untrue.
The horns have also been sought after as dagger handles by rich Arabs and this involves the killing of the animals.
Blackbuck
The Blackbuck used to be one of the most numerous of the grassland plains animals of the Indian sub-continent.
A grazer, it now lives in small herds of five to fifty individuals.
There is a noticeable difference in the coat colour of adult animals (dimorphism).
The adult males are dark, the females and young are sandy-brown.
Note too the spiral horn of the male.
As in all antelope, the horns are retained for life, unlike deer.
Examples of odd-toes and even-toed ungulates which can be seen in the park.
Chapman's Zebra and foal.
Jambia, ceremonial dagger used by Yemen tribesmen.
Wildfowl, Flamingos & Cranes
Ducks, Geese and Swans
There are 147 different species of waterfowl, found almost worldwide.
All have adaptions for feeding and living in wetland habitats and even at sea.
Most duck species are omnivorous, but geese are grazers on land, and swans with their longer necks can reach well below the water surface to graze on water plants.
Many duck species are polygamous, with the drakes having no role in rearing the families.
Ganders and cobs (male swans) have permanent pair bonds and with the females play equally important roles in raising their young.
Cotswold Wildlife Park has been successful in rearing Black Swans from Australia and, of particular note, the unusual Coscoroba Swans from South America, which have piebald cygnets.
The lake supports a wide variety of ducks, from the gorgeous Mandarins from China and Japan to the Eider Ducks, still ‘famed’ for their down on islands off the coast of Norway.
(The down is collected from the nests of wild birds after the eggs have hatched.)
Flamingos
There are six kinds of Flamingo.
The birds in this colony are Chilean Flamingos from South America.
Their pink plumage is particularly well seen in the wing-stretching courtship displays.
The colour, as with the Scarlet Ibis, originates from blue-green algae at the lower end of the food chain.
Small shrimps ingest the carotene pigment with the algae and are eaten in turn by thousands if not millions of flamingos in soda salt lakes.
No other birds can live in these hostile places, so the flamingos have no competition for this rich food supply.
The beaks of flamingos are usually inverted when feeding, the algae and shrimps are filtered from the water by hair-like lamellae on the rims of the bill openings.
Flamingos build nest mounds of mud and lay but one egg.
The chick hatches after a month's incubation and is dribble fed by the parents on a regurgitated milk-like secretion.
Like many animals which only produce one young at a time and may not breed every year, individuals are potentially very long lived, fifty or sixty years may not be unusual for some.
There are fifteen kinds of Crane.
All are threatened in the wild due to drainage and the so-called development of their wetland habitats.
Their long legs allow them to stride through tall vegetation and shallow water to forage for a variety of animal and plant items.
Many species are seasonally migratory and require safe intermediary staging places in which to rest and feed, on their long journeys.
Cranes nest on the ground, building a mound of vegetation usually in the middle of a swamp.
Most cranes lay two heavily marked eggs which hatch two days apart, though usually only one chick survives.
Out of the breeding season and particularly on migration, cranes are vegetarians.
The park has Sarus Cranes (the largest of all) from India, Common Cranes from Europe and Asia, and Grey-necked Crowned Cranes from East Africa.
Coscoroba Swans and cygnets.
This unusual swan breeds in the park.
Flamingos have webbed feet and, like wildfowl, are able to swim well in deeper water.
The flat surface of the upper mandible of the bill of a flamingo enables it to take in microscopic food from very shallow water only millimetres deep.
Some smaller mammals
Bennett's or Red-necked Wallaby
The name wallaby is given to many of the smaller kangaroos, all of which are unique to Australia.
Australia has been isolated from the rest of the world for a long time and its flora and fauna are unique having evolved on their own without competition from species elsewhere.
The mammals are known as Marsupials, or pouched animals.
The minute young are born in a relatively premature state and wriggle their way into the pouch of the mother where they fasten on to a teat for some weeks to complete their development.
Kangaroos occupy the roles that antelope and deer take in the rest of the world, with species adapted to grazing and browsing in grasslands and bush.
Bennett's Wallaby is found in the bushlands of south-eastern Australia and Tasmania.
It is a hardy animal and breeds well here.
There are at least two feral colonies living in Britain.
Red or Lesser Panda
These delightful animals are distantly related to the better known Giant Panda.
Each Red Panda has a different pattern, making it easy to identify individuals.
As an aid towards camouflage, most animals have a colour pattern which includes countershading, i.e. darker on the top, lighter beneath.
A very few mammals show the reverse.
The Red Panda is one with a rich red glossy fur on the back and dense dark fur beneath.
Though pandas' ancestors were carnivores, they eat a high proportion of vegetable matter including bamboo and various roots, shoots, fruits and fungi; and in the park they will sometimes be seen grazing grass.
In the wild they live in forests in the eastern Himalayas and western China at an altitude of 2,000 to 4,000 metres, living in pairs or small family groups, or more usually alone.
Capybara
The rodents or grazing mammals are the most successful and widespread of all groups.
The largest rodent is the Capybara.
It may be thought of as a giant aquatic Guinea Pig weighing up to 60 kilograms.
It lives in large groups alongside rivers over much of South America.
It is an excellent swimmer and feeds on grasses and waterside vegetation.
Like domestic Guinea Pigs, the young are born well developed after a long gestation period of four months — covered in fur and with eyes open, they run around the mother soon after birth.
This is an adaptation to survive predation from the many animals that hunt them — not least man for the cooking pot!
Polecat
Polecats are related to the more familiar Weasels, Stoats and Badgers.
They are excellent hunters of small ground-living animals including game birds.
When much of the country was maintained as a game preserve for shooting, all predators, including Polecats, were thought of as competition and ruthlessly trapped by game keepers.
Since the last war, with the decline of shooting for sport and a more enlightened attitude to predators on the part of a new generation of gamekeepers, Polecats are making a limited comeback, particularly in Wales.
It is suggested that this could be faster were it not for the introduced American Mink which may be occupying the position once held by Polecats in the habitat.
The domestic Ferret, used for catching rabbits, is closely related to the Polecat, which indeed may be its wild ancestor.
Fruit Bats
Bats are the only mammals to possess wings and to manage sustained flight.
Many of the larger species are fruit eating and, because of their bright eyes and pointed snouts, are often misleadingly referred to as ‘flying foxes’.
Fruit Bats are only able to live where fruit is available throughout the year, in tropical areas of the old world.
Two species can be viewed in our special facility for them at the park — the Indian Fruit Bat, which inhabits the rain forests and the smaller Egyptian Fruit Bat which prefers to roost in large colonies in open caves and buildings.
Fruit bats carry their single offspring continuously until it is able to fly itself.
Both species breed here regularly.
An underside view of the extended hand of a bat showing the webbed fingers which make flight possible.
Note the finger bones and the thumb with a large nail used for scrambling up walls and branches.
Trees & Shrubs
One of the principal delights for visitors to the Cotswold Wildlife Park is the many fine trees.
We must be grateful to past landowners who planted in the knowledge that they would not see the results of their endeavours, but that successive generations would.
Over 300,000 trees have been planted on the Bradwell Grove Estate since 1950 and many may be seen within the Wildlife Park.
Certain specimens are of particular interest.
For example the Oak at the corner of the restaurant is thought to be more than 600 years old.
Reminders of the past glories are the remains of Cedars of Lebanon in the Adventure Playground, now supporting the children's tree house and slide.
Lying near the car park is the trunk of a massive Elm killed by Dutch Elm Disease several years ago.
If you like a challenge, you could try counting the annual growth rings.
A specimen tree on the lawn beside the Manor House, a Wellingtonia, is 130 years old and 40 metres high.
We look forward in the knowledge that in its native western slopes of the Sierra Nevada in California, it can grow at least a foot a year.
It will have bark 2 inches thick and could weight in excess of 2,000 tons — the world's largest living organism!
Other things to do
The animals are not the only attraction at the Wildlife Park.
Should you wish to rest your legs a while, why not take a train ride on our narrow-gauge railway (April-October inclusive), or try your hand at brass rubbing in the centre situated in the old dining-room of the Manor House?
Perhaps a visit to the glass-animal maker in the Bat House would be of interest, and no visit to the park would be complete without a browse around the spacious gift shop where you can purchase a memento of your visit.
During the summer months, special events are held around the park.
These include birds of prey flying demonstrations, morris dancing, archery tournaments and car rallies, to name but a few.
You can picnic on the spacious lawns whilst the children play happily on the adventure play area, or you may wish to eat in the large cafeteria.
Park amenities & information
Location
The park is situated on the A361, 2 miles south of its junction with the A40.
It is around 22 miles east of Cheltenham, 20 miles west of Oxford and 18 miles north of Swindon.
Opening Times
The park is open from 10.00 a.m. every day except Christmas Day.
Last admissions are at 6.00 p.m. or dusk, whichever is the earlier.
General Office
The general office is situated on the ground floor of the Manor House.
Cafeteria
A large cafeteria seating over 300 people and offering full self-service facilities is situated at the rear of the Manor House.
Reduced meal prices for parties are available upon request and enquiries should be made from the catering manager, either in writing or by telephoning: Burford (0993) 822005.
Bar
There is a bar situated at the side of the Manor House, adjacent to the old conservatory.
Refreshments
Refreshment kiosks are to be found near the zebra house, opposite the bird of prey aviaries and near the adventure playground.
Shops
A gift shop and children's shop are situated just off the main car park.
Children's Playground
A large adventure playground is situated adjacent to the insect house, conveniently near the cafeteria and main picnic lawn.
Brass Rubbing
A brass rubbing centre is situated in the old dining-room of the Manor House, to the left of the main entrance.
Advance bookings for parties may be made by contacting the general office.
(Limited service November-March.)
Invalid Chairs
A limited number of invalid chairs is kept in the manor house and there is no charge for their use.
Enquiries should be made from the general office.
First Aid
A first aid post is situated near the general office in the Manor  Houae .
Public Telephone
Public telephones are available just inside the main entrance hall of the Manor House and in the cafeteria.
Lost Children and Lost Property
Enquiries about lost or found children or property should be made from the general office.
Dogs
Dogs may be brought into the park provided that they are kept on a lead at all times.
However, dogs may not be taken around the lake area, through the tropical house, into the children's farmyard, or into the Bat House.
Animal Feeding Times
With the exception of the penguins there are no specific feeding times.
The penguins are fed at 11.00 a.m. and 4.00 p.m. every day except on a Friday.
Animal Feeding by Visitors
Visitors are respectfully reminded that they are not permitted to feed any of the animals, this would spoil their carefully balanced diet.
Season Tickets
Season tickets provide reduced admission charges to the park for regular visitors.
Enquiries should be made from the pay kiosk or general office.
Party Rates
Reduced rates are available to school or other parties of twenty or more paying persons.
Animal Adoption
Visitors may adopt an animal and thus make a contribution towards the cost of that animal's upkeep.
An annual payment is made, the amount depending upon the animal concerned.
A plaque bearing the name of the adopter is displayed in the park and the adopter is given free entry to the park for a year.
Enquiries about this scheme should be made from the general office.
Facilities for Lectures and Meetings
The old drawing-room in the Manor House may be booked for lectures, meetings and social functions.
Up to sixty people can be seated and full catering facilities are available in the bar and cafeteria which are immediately adjacent.
Junior Friends of the Park
Children may become Junior Friends of the park on payment of a small annual membership fee.
This entitles them to four copies per year of the ‘Tracks’ Newsletter , one free entry to the park per year, a Junior Friends' badge and a park poster.
Education
An education service is provided by the park for use by the many thousands of school children who visit the park each year.
Children are able to study subjects such as habitats and homes, reptiles, animal husbandry, animal behaviour, camouflage and many other animal orientated subjects.
Talks are given by members of staff, often illustrated or using live subjects.
A small fee is charged for this service and advance notice of at least two weeks is required.
Also available is a discovery pack as well as teachers' packs and worksheets for children of various ages.
Prices, as well as further enquiries regarding the education scheme can be obtained by contacting the general office.
Scientific or Latin Names
The use of the scientific names of animals and plants has been avoided in this general guide book.
However, scientific names are to be found on the labels on individual animal enclosures and on some plants.
Credits
Photography by Colin Fountain.
Text and illustrations by Joe Blossom, Animal Arts.
The management reserves the right to remove animals and facilities without prior notice, however, every effort is made to provide our visitors with all facilities stated in this guide book.
Thank you for your support, do come again.
Back cover: Juvenile Egyptian Fruitbat.
Adventure play area.
Falconry display.
Dogs allowed on lead.
School visit.