

CHAPTER ONE
Until he was nine years old, Endill Swift lived in a large wooden house at the edge of Duntinnie village.
The house was called Gibbet Hall; not because this was the name the Swift family had chosen but because a long time ago enemy prisoners had been tied to the tree outside the front gate and threatened with hanging.
No-one was certain if any hanging had really taken place but on cold, windy nights the tree would creak and moan, startling those who happened to be passing by.
Endill spent most of his time running around the house, hunting for things to explore.
One of his favourite places was the hallway.
It was filled with hundreds of exotic ornaments his grandfather had collected on trips to the continent.
Vases of different shapes and sizes lay beside pebbles, weavings, ancient carvings and many other objects no-one knew the purpose of.
Most of the other rooms in the house were empty.
Each one had its own iron fireplace and every week Endill would help his mother clean them, making sure they were free of mould and little insects.
Then, if there was no more work to be done that day, he would hide behind the biggest chair in the sitting room and play with his toys.
He liked taking them apart and putting them together again in the wrong order to make new toys and would do this all day until he had forgotten what they looked like in the first place.
Once, on a more adventurous day, he began taking some of the furniture apart with a screwdriver he found beside the garden shed, but was caught by his mother and told to put it back the way he had found it before she chased him out of the house.
‘You're a terrible boy, Endill,’ she said laughing.
‘You'd take  yourself apart if you could.
But I'd watch it.
One day you might take out a screw too many and the world will fall apart.’
Although she shouted at him, Endill knew she was never being cruel.
When she chased him she laughed all the time and they would run around the garden before collapsing in a heap together on the grassy slopes beside the vegetable patch.
She was a big, soft, loving woman with endless energy, who smelt of cough medicine and laundry.
There was always a bottle of cough medicine in all the rooms, even outside in the shed and in a box buried in the vegetable patch.
Endill kept finding empty bottles around the house.
They were in cupboards, boxes, bags, under beds, in drawers, behind cushions, and even in the big soup pan where she made the marvellous soups.
When Endill was old enough to know what they were he asked her about them.
‘Are you ill, Mummy?’ he said.
‘Me?’ she said laughing.
‘Me ill?
Not likely.
I drink it because it's the tastiest stuff I know.
Put it in the soups too when you're not looking.’
She winked at him and laughed again.
‘And one thing's for sure,’ she continued in her big voice, ‘your mother will never have a cough.’
She did everything about the house.
The vegetable patch was hers and all the things in it had been grown by her loving hand without the help of a single gardener.
She had never read any books on the subject and just seemed to know what to do.
In the summertime, on bright warm days when the sun was high in the sky, Endill would help her weed and tend the vegetables.
He soon knew almost every vegetable that existed, from the carrot to the ochre, which his mother had specially imported all the way from India.
When she cooked them, Endill sat in the kitchen on a tall stool, watching them disappear into the big soup pan full of steaming, bubbling water.
‘There are no screws in these to undo,’ she would say, smiling.
Whenever she was not working in the house or on the vegetable patch, Endill would find her in the rickety old shed  beside the wall he sometimes climbed to hunt for nests in the trees above.
She made all sorts of things in there and Endill would hear bangs and thumps all day long when she was working on something special.
He never knew what these special things were and tried to find out by sneaking down there at night, but the shed door was always locked.
His mother told him she made things to sell and left it at that.
Endill was sure she made tools because they never bought any but always had the ones they needed for digging and planting.
Endill's father was very different.
He was a mysterious man who wandered about the house at all hours but was very rarely seen.
Not until he was five years old did Endill meet him for the first time.
Walking into the dining room he saw a huge man about seven or eight feet tall standing behind the desk at the other end of the room.
Frightened by the stranger he ran to the kitchen to find his mother.
She was not there and after running frantically around the garden he eventually found her beside the old hanging tree at the bottom of the path.
‘Mummy, Mummy,’ he cried.
‘Come quickly!
There's a giant in the dining room.’
They ran back to the house and Endill waited at the front door while his mother went to see who or what it was.
After a few minutes she returned.
‘That's no giant, Endill,’ she said laughing.
‘That's your father.
And he was standing on a chair.’
From then on Endill was never again scared by the strange footsteps he had heard for years in the middle of the night.
Sometimes when he was playing in the house, he would bump into his father by accident.
He was a tall man with dark hair that was always hidden under a hat.
He wore a thick woollen coat all the time, even on the hottest days of summer when he took to wandering around the garden in endless circles.
Wherever he went things seemed different.
Often the furniture looked lost after he had left a room and because of this Endill soon learnt to tell where his father had been in the house.
His father could never remember Endill's name.
He did not  say much when they met and it was always muffled by the lapels of his coat.
He had a low doddering voice and said the same thing every time.
‘Hello Edward.
What's that you've got in your hand there?’
‘I'm called Endill, Father.
You called me Endill.
Remember?
And I've nothing in my hand.’
‘Did I really?’ his father would reply in a deep thoughtful tone.
‘Don't remember that.
Long time ago.
Slip of the tongue.’
And he would walk away muttering the names Endill and Edward over and over to himself.
When Endill asked his mother about him she did not say much and never smiled as she normally did.
‘He's a little confused, I'm afraid,’ she said.
‘Confused by what?’ asked Endill.
‘Everything, I think.’
For eight years Endill roamed around the big house, helping make the soups, walking through the hills, digging up the vegetables, bumping into his father by mistake and unscrewing the furniture when his mother wasn't looking.
On his ninth birthday, even though he was very young, he could tell there was a funny silence in the house.
His mother, who had spent longer with him in the garden than usual that day, led him into the sitting room when they returned to the house.
She sat him in the biggest chair, the one he always hid behind, and looked deep into his eyes.
‘Endill, my dear,’ she said slowly.
‘I'm afraid the time has come for you to go to school.’
She smiled, but it was not her usual beaming smile.
‘I don't want you to go.
It won't be the same without you and I'll miss you very much but there's nothing I can do.’
Endill said nothing.
He did not know exactly what school was.
In the village he had noticed an old crumbling building with the word ‘SCHOOL’ outside it, and he had seen children a little younger than himself disappear inside it in the mornings then reappear sometime in the afternoon.
He often wondered  what they did in there that made them scream and shout as they ran out.
No-one had told him about schools or explained their purpose.
His mother had never mentioned it until now but he had heard from Mr Natchet, the postman, it was a place where they taught you things you didn't want to know.
‘Why do I have to learn things I don't want to know?’ asked Endill.
His mother laughed and shook her head.
‘Every school is like that, I'm afraid,’ she replied.
‘But I'll be able to come home in the evenings and you can teach me the things I need to know,’ said Endill.
‘Unfortunately it's not the village school you're going to,’ sighed his mother.
‘You're too old.
I kept you here for as long as I could but I can't do that anymore.’
‘Which school am I going to then?’ asked Endill.
‘It's up north in the mountains,’ his mother told him.
‘Every boy your age has to go there.
It's the only one in the country.’
‘What will it be like?’ asked Endill.
‘Big,’ replied his mother.
‘That I can remember your father saying.
He went there before you, as did your grandfather Cornelius Swift, who gave us the vases in the hallway and the stuffed baboon I had to throw out because of the fleas.
Armadail Swift, your great grandfather, went there too, before he took that trip in the giant balloon and was never seen again.
As I said, everyone has to go there and a list of Swifts as long as my arm have been to it and now it's your turn.’
‘How long's your arm, Mummy?’ asked Endill.
‘About a foot and a half long.’
‘That's a long list then,’ concluded Endill.
At that moment the door opened and to Endill's surprise in walked his father.
‘Ah Edward.
What's that you've got in your hand there?’ he said as usual.
‘I'm Endill, Father.
Remember?
And I've nothing in my hand.’
‘Is it really?
Don't remember that.
Long time ago.
Slip of the tongue.’
‘Endill's going to school soon,’ said his mother.
His father stood silent and looked distant.
For the first time since Endill began bumping into him he continued to speak.
‘Big place,’ he said thoughtfully.
‘Big place indeed.
As big as…’ his voice trailed off.
‘No,’ he said after a moment's consideration.
‘Much bigger than that.’
And with this he turned and left the room.
From then on great preparations were made.
Endill was given the same suitcase his father and grandfather had taken with them to school.
When he opened it moths flew out and he had to give it a good clean to get rid of the cobwebs and years of dust that had settled inside.
He began searching through the house gathering clothes and other things he wanted to take with him.
He packed the screwdriver he had used on his toys, stones from the path, a packet of seeds, an old saucepan from the kitchen, a torch and his favourite pair of walking shoes.
Soon the day came for him to leave for school.
It was a soft September morning.
The sun made Endill feel sad but excited at the journey ahead and he was unable to keep still before his departure.
His mother had spoken to Mr McDoodle, who owned one of the few horse and carts in the village, asking him if he could take Endill to the nearest train station which was over the hills in the town of Moorloch.
Endill ran to the cart as Mr McDoodle brought it to the house.
He put his case in the back then returned to the front door to shout the loudest goodbye he could manage, hoping his father would hear him.
His mother helped him up onto the seat beside Mr McDoodle.
‘I've a present for you, Endill,’ she said, and took from her pocket three bottles of different coloured cough medicine.
‘Just in case,’ she said smiling, but her voice was sad and Endill could see tears forming in her eyes.
‘Don't worry, Mummy,’ said Endill softly.
‘I'll be alright.’
Mr McDoodle pulled on the reins and they headed off down  the drive, past the old hanging tree and out onto the bumpy road.
Endill looked back at Gibbet Hall.
His mother was waving goodbye and crying.
As he turned the corner away from the house and towards the train station, Endill was sure he saw the shape of his father standing at one of the upstairs windows, watching him go.
CHAPTER TWO
Arriving at the station Endill was amazed at the sight of the train.
It was much bigger than he had imagined it to be.
He had only seen them in books and wondered how something as light and puffy as steam could pull such heavy carriages.
Climbing aboard, he sat beside a man with three pairs of spectacles around his neck.
As they travelled along he used one pair for reading, one pair for looking out the window and the other for glancing around the carriage.
The journey seemed to take forever, even though Endill wasn't sure how long forever really was.
The train passed over huge bridges that looked to be made of matchsticks.
It weaved around the lowland hills, round and round, up and down, until they grew into mountains and had a purple shine that reflected in the sky.
It chugged along the thin edge of slopes where, hundreds of feet below, Endill could see lochs with birds and boats on.
And once they climbed so high they entered the clouds and there was nothing but a great whiteness around them as if the world had been erased by a giant rubber.
After many hours of travelling they passed a sign that read ‘WE'LL SOON BE AT PRAIL’.
Endill remembered that this was the place where someone would be waiting to meet him.
When the train stopped he dragged his heavy suitcase onto the platform; if you could call it a platform because it was only some wooden planks resting on a pile of milkcrates.
There was a tin hut at the end of it and inside sat a ticket collector asleep over the counter.
Endill did not have to look far for whoever was to meet him as there was only one person on the platform.
He had a sign in his hands which read 
‘HERE I AM ENDILL’.
The man was stooped over the sign in a ragged butler's outfit with trousers that were too short, exposing his white ankles.
He had untidy grey hair and looked tired and impatient.
As Endill approached him he thought he could hear a loud ticking coming from his direction.
‘Hello.
I'm Endill Swift,’ said Endill.
‘Good,’ said the wobbly old man.
‘I was thinking you weren't coming.
The train was over five seconds late and I was getting cold.’
He pointed to the horse and cart behind the ticket hut and took out a large gold watch from one of his pockets.
That was where the ticking was coming from, thought Endill.
It was not a big watch but the noise it made was much bigger than you would have expected.
‘In the cart,’ said the man.
‘Or we'll be late.’
‘But I thought we had all day to get to the school,’ remarked Endill.
‘Late for getting in the cart,’ the man replied sternly.
‘I allowed sixty seconds for us to get in the cart from the train and if we don't leave now we'll be late.’
Endill thought this odd.
The cart was only a few feet away but he shrugged his shoulders and headed towards it.
‘And try not to make too much noise,’ said the man, treading softly on the planks.
‘We don't want to wake up the ticket collector.
He needs his rest.
By the way, the name's Tock.
Tock the butler and odd job man about the school.
It's not my real name but everyone seems to call me that.
Can't think why though, but it's stuck.’
Endill smiled and said nothing.
The cart moved off along the bumpy road towards the rocky mountains in the distance.
As they travelled the landscape became more and more barren, populated only by the occasional tree, house and flock of cold looking sheep.
The road was so bumpy Endill had to hold on tight in case he was thrown from his seat.
Every few miles his suitcase bounced out  the back of the cart and Tock became annoyed at having to stop and collect it all the time.
Eventually he tied it down and sat muttering about it being typical behaviour of suitcases and that they were not to be trusted.
In fact all through the journey Tock complained.
He complained about the cart, the reins, the horse, the road, the sky, his watch (which never told the right time) and his clothing.
And if he wasn't complaining he was muttering under his breath about them.
‘It's such a struggle,’ he grumbled, ‘trying to get everything to behave the way you want it to.
They just don't seem to care.
By the way, did you bring warm clothing?’
‘Yes,’ replied Endill.
‘Good,’ sighed Tock.
‘Some parts of the school can get very cold.
Did you bring some waterproofs too?
There are holes in the roof where you least expect them.’
‘Yes,’ replied Endill again.
‘A torch?’
‘Yes.’
‘A compass?’
‘Yes.’
Endill was getting confused by the strange list.
‘What about a magnet?’
‘No, I didn't bring a magnet.’
‘How about a loud hailer?
You'll be surprised when you could need it.
And I hope you didn't forget a rope.’
‘I didn't bring any of those things,’ said Endill, wondering why you would need a loud hailer for school.
Were all the teachers deaf?
Tock grumbled something about them being useful if you were lost, then fell silent.
They continued on their journey for nearly an hour without another word.
‘We'll soon be there,’ said Tock, sounding neither happy nor sad.
‘The Headmaster will meet you once you get over.’
‘Get over what?’ asked Endill.
‘The sea of course!
The school's on an island and you have to be taken over to it.
Not on a boat though.
Boats are too dangerous.
No-one quite knows what is in the water.’
Tock  muttered something about how irritating water could be if you didn't look after it.
For the first time Endill felt his stomach turn at the idea of going to school.
He thought about the vegetable patch at home and sitting by it on summer days.
Would the school have a vegetable patch?
Would it have any grass at all? he wondered, for over the past few miles the grass had become scarce, huddled together in tiny clumps or hiding behind rocks for shelter.
He was so involved in these thoughts that when the school finally loomed into view he failed to notice it and only when Tock poked him in the side did he look up and see the gigantic sight.
He held his breath in amazement.
The school sat on an island a little off the coast.
It was as big as the island itself, if not bigger, and the rocks below seemed to be wobbling under the strain of holding it up.
Gibbet Hall was the size of a matchbox compared to this.
Endill could make out towers, turrets, spires, and an endless amount of windows.
It looked like hundreds and hundreds of houses all piled dangerously on top of each other and Endill wondered if it was safe to live in such a place.
The cart stopped beside an old cottage near the edge of the mainland.
Endill climbed out, still shaking from the bumpy journey, and felt the wind blowing about him.
He had not noticed how dark it was getting.
The sun was falling from the sky, exhausted after its day's work, and the approaching twilight made the school seem even larger.
‘Wait here,’ said Tock, entering the cottage.
Endill noticed he was standing beside a thick wooden pole.
Looking up he saw at the top of it a bizarre collection of wheels and cogs.
A chain came down from them to another set of wheels and cogs nearer the bottom.
Attached to this was a handle.
A wire stretched from the contraption at the top out towards the school and hanging from it was a dangerous-looking wooden basket, big enough to hold a single person.
He examined it for a few moments, then realised Tock was standing beside him with a can of oil.
‘Needs a little oiling’ he said.
‘Not the oddest of jobs and being an odd job man I like the oddest jobs I can get but it has to be done.’
‘What is it?’ asked Endill.
‘Transport,’ replied Tock proudly, oiling various parts of the strange machinery.
‘Made it myself.
Primitive I grant you but transport nonetheless.’
Endill suddenly realised what was about to happen.
‘I'm not going in there, am I?!’ he asked pointing nervously to the basket.
‘As I said, boats are too dangerous,’ replied Tock.
‘And this was cheaper than an aeroplane.
Now in you get or you'll miss the last crossing.’
Endill hesitated and looked down at the sea crashing against the rocks.
It was a long way down.
He glanced at Tock then climbed slowly up the steps to the basket and sat down on the little seat provided.
Already the basket was swinging from side to side in the wind.
Tock passed up his suitcase and shut the door.
‘Don't move around too much,’ he said.
‘It wastes time and I'll have to turn the handle harder.
Besides you don't want to fall out, do you?’
‘Are you sure it's safe, Mr Tock?’
‘Never had an accident yet,’ replied Tock.
He grabbed the handle and began to turn it round.
‘Well apart from the time…’
Endill did not catch the rest of the sentence as the basket moved slowly away from the pole in fits and jumps.
It swung back and forth, creaking in the wind as it moved past the cliffs and over the sea.
In the twilight the water, gushing and frothing, looked a long way down but the sound it made felt only a few feet below.
At any moment, thought Endill, a huge wave would rise up and carry him away.
The wind grew worse.
He clung to the sides of the basket with all his strength and tried not to look down.
The roar of the sea became louder.
The excitement of the morning, the thoughts of home and all its comforts, seemed far  away.
He tried shutting his eyes but sickly feelings ran through his body and made his fingers tingle.
Despite his fear he couldn't help wanting to look over the edge of the basket but when he did was sure he saw, besides the surging of the sea, long black shadows just below the surface of the water.
There was something down there and it wasn't a friendly rock!
Suddenly, when he was only halfway across, the basket stopped moving.
He turned and saw Tock bent over the handle.
He shouted something at Endill but he couldn't hear because of the wind and didn't dare move or shout back, frightened he would upset the basket.
Tock disappeared into the cottage and returned with a huge shovel.
Endill watched in horror as he began hitting the handle, swinging against it with all his might.
The basket began rocking violently from side to side.
Tock was striking at the cogs at the top of the pole, banging the machinery and shouting at it like a crazy old man.
Throwing the shovel to the ground he tried the handle again.
It began to turn and Endill moved off.
From then on he sat cowering in the corner beside his case praying for the journey to end and did not dare move, look down or even breath.
The basket came to a stop.
Endill peered slowly over the edge of it.
In front of him, wearing a black robe, stood a huge man with a face like a ploughed field.
‘Out you get, laddie,’ the man said in a loud gusty voice.
‘Nothing like a bit of sea air to get the brain cells jumping.
Lucky for you it was a calm day for your trip.’
He opened the door of the basket and Endill climbed out shaking, but glad to be on solid ground.
The basket moved off back to the mainland.
‘Welcome to Epitaph School,’ said the man.
‘I'm its Headmaster.
What is your name?’
Endill, said Endill.
‘Endill what?
You have more than one name, little man.
Don't be shy.’
‘Endill Swift,’ said Endill.
‘Right then, Endill Swift.
Come with me and meet the other  teachers.
They are waiting for you.
And don't drag your feet.
I'll tell you now no pupil of mine drags their feet when they walk.’
Endill was still recovering from his journey in the basket lift and he followed behind the Headmaster without a word.
They walked towards the tall iron gates of the school.
Endill noticed there was no wall on either side of them and they stood alone in the middle of the grass.
The Headmaster fumbled with a huge set of keys and unlocked the gates.
As he pushed them open, they made a great scraping noise and Endill had to cover his ears because it was so loud.
Outside the front door of the school stood a line of teachers wearing the same robes as the Headmaster.
Endill was led to the start of the line and told to shake hands with the first teacher, then the second, then the third and all the way along the line until the last.
It took him fifteen minutes and by the end his hand was sore from all the shaking.
He was just about to pick up his suitcase when there was a shout from the other end of the line.
‘Headmaster,’ came the voice.
‘Headmaster!’
‘What's the matter?’ he yelled.
Headmaster!’ called the voice again.
‘Look over there.
It's Mould.
He's on springs!’
All heads turned to where the teacher was pointing.
From behind a wall a boy had appeared.
On his feet were huge settee springs and he bounced onto the grassy ground then high into the air and back over the wall again.
In a moment he reappeared and did exactly the same.
‘Mould!’ screamed the Headmaster.
‘Come here this instant!’
Mould disappeared over the wall for the fifth time.
It was obvious he was out of control and could not stop the springs.
He made loud wailing noises as he sailed back and forth over the wall, missing the top by inches.
‘Well, don't just stand there gaping,’ bellowed the Headmaster.
‘Go and get him!’
At once the teachers began running in Mould's direction.
They reached the wall and waited for him to reappear.
When  he did, shouting and screaming, they tried to grab hold of him but only succeeded in ripping off his jacket sleeve as he bounced back over the wall.
The next time Mould appeared the other jacket sleeve was ripped off and a leg of his trousers.
After both sleeves and both trouser legs were in tatters and several of the teachers lay unconscious on the ground, someone decided to run and find a net.
Throwing it over him, they finally managed to grab hold of his legs and stop the uncontrollable bouncing.
He was presented to the Headmaster in his sleeveless jacket, ragged trousers and covered from head to foot in dirt.
‘What did you think you were doing!!??’ cried the Headmaster, leering at him.
‘Bouncing,’ replied Mould out of breath.
‘BOUNCING!!’ repeated the Headmaster.
‘That wasn't bouncing that was being a fool, jumping over the wall like that on those springs.’
‘They were out of control,’ said Mould calmly.
‘I will be out of control in a minute, Mould!
No-one bounces around my school without my permission.
Understand?’
‘But…’ protested Mould.
‘NO BUTS, MAYBES, IFS OR BECAUSES,’ shouted the Headmaster.
‘Get inside and clean yourself up.
Return those springs to where you found them.
I hope it wasn't my favourite armchair either!
Take seven lengths of the corridor as punishment and have it done by tomorrow night or you'll have another seven.’
The teachers grabbed Mould and disappeared through an archway.
Endill watched the whole scene with wonder.
What did seven lengths of the corridor mean?
The questions were filling up his mind, making him even more tired than he already was from the train journey, the handshakes and the heavy suitcase he had carried everywhere.
It was turning out to be a day unlike any other he had spent at Gibbet Hall.
The Headmaster muttered to himself as he led Endill up the flight of steps to the front door of the school.
‘Imagine’ he said.
'Trying to get out of here on those things.
And if they're from my armchair…’
He took the largest key from his set and unlocked the door.
‘Make sure, Swift,’ said the Headmaster, ‘You never get caught up with that Mould boy.
Talking to him should be banned.’
There was a loud creak like the noise of the gates as the door opened.
‘Everything creaks in here,’ said the Headmaster.
‘Even the food.’
They went inside.
As the Headmaster shut the door with a bang that echoed and echoed, Endill had the strangest feeling he wasn't going to like living here one little bit.
CHAPTER THREE
The Headmaster locked the door behind him.
Endill tried to see where he was but it was too dark and he waited, not daring to move, for the Headmaster to put on the lights.
‘No point in putting on the lights if we're only passing through,’ said the Headmaster, switching on a torch.
Endill glanced around the room.
He was standing in a small hallway.
It was empty apart from a round wooden table, a large golden picture frame on one wall and a cupboard.
Endill walked up to the picture frame and noticed there was nothing in it but a blank piece of paper, yellow with age.
‘Where's the picture gone?’ he asked.
‘Picture?’ said the Headmaster rummaging through the contents of the cupboard.
‘Oh yes.
That's the school's founder.
Only nobody knows what he looked like.
There's a statue of him on the table too.’
Endill examined the table.
There was no statue on it, just a stand with a plaque underneath that read ‘THE TRUEST LIKENESS OF THE FOUNDER OF EPITAPH SCHOOL.
MAY HE ONE DAY BE FOUND.’
‘If you don't know who he is,’ asked Endill, ‘How do you know he was the one to build the school?’
The Headmaster glowered at him but said nothing.
Endill decided it was better to leave all his questions until later.
‘Found them!’ shouted the Headmaster.
‘Here, take these.
They're maps of the corridors.
Most of the more used ones are marked on it and given a number but there are thousands that aren't.
If you find one on your travels not on the map, play safe and leave it alone.
Wouldn't want to lose you so early on.’
Endill put the map in his pocket.
‘Now,’ continued the Headmaster, opening a thick book lying on the table.
‘Signing the register time.
Put your name under here and today's date.’
He pointed to a column marked ‘Date Entered School’.
Endill did as he was told.
Beside the ‘Date Entered School’ column he saw one marked ‘Date Left School’, and noticed it was completely empty.
The Headmaster opened a door at the other end of the hallway.
Endill followed him out into the biggest corridor he had ever seen.
A long line of gas lamps ran along each wall, giving it a dim smoky glow.
The floor was a mixture of stone slabs and floorboards.
Old tattered flags hung from the ceiling, their patterns long since faded into the air.
Surprisingly, it did not feel too cold and Endill stood for a moment trying to see the end of it but it disappeared into darkness.
He could hear the faint sounds of footsteps and, straining his eyes, saw a figure moving slowly in the distance.
‘There are many more like this throughout the school,’ the Headmaster told him, ‘but not as long.
Signposts are around to help you.
Never trust them.
Always getting switched around.’
Endill found out later that mixing up the signposts was a favourite pastime of the more mischievous pupils.
It was not uncommon for someone to take a wrong turning and be found wandering three weeks later, cold and hungry.
Endill learned that this was what had happened to his grandfather, Cornelius Swift.
He had disappeared at the age of eleven and was not found until he was thirty-six years old.
He hardly knew a thing about the world and had not seen the sun for twenty-five years.
When he saw it again he ran away and hid, much to the embarrassment of his family, who thought this silly behaviour for a man of his age.
The Headmaster turned towards a row of small carts sitting on a miniature railway track that stretched the length of the corridor.
Another track ran down the other side.
‘That one's for going,’ said the Headmaster pointing to a  sign which read ‘GOING’in large red letters.
‘And this one's for coming.’
He stepped into a cart.
Endill sat beside him and he started turning a handle at the front of it.
They began to move slowly forwards.
‘Tock had them made to save time,’ said the Headmaster.
‘He likes inventing things with handles.’
No matter how fast they travelled, the corridor never seemed to get any shorter and Endill thought he would be an old man by the time they reached the other end.
On their way they passed the entrances to other corridors, some with names painted on the walls.
These led to towers.
Each one had a spiral staircase the length of a lighthouse leading up to it and at the top lived a teacher.
Every teacher had his own tower and they were often dizzy from going round and round all the time.
Nobody was sure where the Headmaster stayed at night.
Some said he slept in his study while others believed he wandered about the corridors waiting to catch escaping pupils or those who had gone missing.
Eventually they approached the figure Endill had seen in the distance.
It was Mould.
On his fret were huge lead boots with metal straps and weights attached to them by rusty nuts and bolts.
A padlock was where the laces should have been to stop anyone taking them off when alone in the middle of the corridor.
Mould lifted them with great effort.
He looked tired and bored.
‘That's it,’ said the Headmaster as they passed by him.
‘We won't be in a hurry to get away the next time, will we?
Only six more to go.’
So that was what he had meant by seven lengths of the corridor!
By the look on Mould's face it was a nasty, tiring, time-consuming punishment.
One length was enough for Endill, but seven!
It was a terrible thought.
Soon Mould was far behind.
As they travelled along Endill thought he could hear the sound of an engine revving nearby.
He began to think it must have been his imagination when a  motorbike zoomed across their path, clouding the corridor with smoke.
A few minutes later Endill caught another glimpse of it in the distance.
‘I've told her again and again to toot her horn before crossing the main corridor,’ grumbled the Headmaster.
‘She'll be the cause of an accident one day.’
Reaching the end of the main corridor they climbed out of the cart and Endill was led down a shorter corridor where they turned left, then right, along another with squeaky floorboards.
There were not so many lights and Endill kept a close eye on the Headmaster in case he became lost in the darkness.
They turned right, left, right and right again, then left and climbed a flight of steps.
By now Endill did not know where he was.
All the corridors looked the same and he felt thoroughly confused by his new surroundings.
‘Here we are,’ said the Headmaster.
'Some schools call their dormitories after letters of the alphabet.
Others after names of countries, or people.
Here we do it after weeds and insects.’
Endill looked at the door.
The dirty chipped name plate was difficult to read but he could just make out the word Nettles on it.
The room felt cold, and was empty.
A row of four metal beds stood against each wall.
They sagged in the middle and Endill was sure they would all squeak.
‘Yours is at the end there,’ said the Headmaster.
‘I'll leave you now.
I like pupils to find their own way round.
Hardens them up.’
Endill did not know if he wanted to be hard but was too tired to argue.
He turned to ask the Headmaster something but he had disappeared.
He was alone.
He put his belongings into a musty old cupboard beside his bed.
Thinking of Gibbet Hall he began to feel sad and lonely.
No wonder, he thought, my father is so confused.
Anyone living in a place like this would be.
Before going to bed that evening he studied the map he had been given.
He worked out there were one hundred and  seventy-three different ways of getting to the library from the dining room and fifty-two different ways of getting from his dormitory to the nearest toilet, which was only a few yards from the dormitory itself.
He hoped he would not have to go during the night.
CHAPTER FOUR
The next morning Endill ate his breakfast in the dining room.
It was the tallest room he had ever seen and was so dark near the top it was impossible to see the ceiling — if there was one.
Nailed on the walls were rows and rows of stuffed animal heads.
Every animal Endill knew was there and others he did not recognise.
They stretched all the way up each wall and disappeared into the darkness at the top of the room.
Endill did not like them.
Years of dust and cobwebs had settled on their fur and skin and they all seemed to be snarling or growling.
As Endill ate his breakfast he felt a thousand eyes watch him put his cold piece of toast into his mouth and it sent shivers down his spine.
Endill noticed that in the sea of heads surrounding him, no-one else liked looking upwards while eating and some pupils even put up umbrellas to stop the animals from staring down at them.
One of the worst things that could happen to a pupil was to leave something in the dining room by mistake after dinner.
This meant having to walk through the room on your own with only a torch for comfort.
Many pupils who had left a schoolbook behind would rather risk punishment than walk through the dark room with the animals smiling as they watched you hunt for your things.
Endill was given a timetable of his lessons.
It was English first and Endill recognised a teacher from the night before.
His name was Mr Jotter who, as far as Endill could tell, spoke only in rhymes.
Welcome Endill and take a seat,
And please be kind enough not to eat.
English is the lesson here,
So open your book and lend an ear.
This was the first thing he said to Endill as he entered the room.
Endill found it funny but someone sitting next to him said it became very annoying year after year.
Even when angry Mr Jotter talked in rhymes.
The lesson lasted all morning and went very slowly.
They had to read out of books, then write out what they had read, then read aloud what they had written.
After that Mr Jotter gave them each a long word typed on a piece of card.
They had to write it out a hundred times to remember it.
Then the cards were swapped around and everyone started again.
Endill's hand felt sore after a while and he wanted to ask why he would need words like ‘pumpernickle’ and ‘ourang-outang’but thought on his first day too many questions might lead to trouble.
Maths was not much better.
All Mr Fractor did was write huge sums on his blackboards.
He had a blackboard on each wall with only tiny windows in between to let in the light.
If the sum didn't quite fit onto one blackboard he moved onto another and when they were all full up continued on the walls.
Endill could see the faint marks of past sums on the ceiling too, and Mr Fractor's gown was always covered in smudges from his chalky hands.
By the end of the day, after more lessons, a cold shower, a cold dinner and two hours of homework, Endill felt exhausted.
He went to bed and fell straight to sleep, dreaming of his mother's soup.
Over the next few months Endill began to hate his schoolwork more and more; not because it was difficult and boring but because he thought what the teachers taught him was of no use.
They seemed to be teaching him how to do things he didn't want to do more than anything else.
Mr Fractor's sums were getting longer and longer.
They kept everyone busy but Endill wondered why Maths wasn't more fun.
He liked numbers; they  were funny little squiggles and he liked the way everyone agreed when an answer was right although he did not understand why.
‘Why does 6+3 always equal 9?
Or 5+10 always equal 15?’ he asked Mr Fractor.
‘Have you done the sum I set you yet?’ replied Mr Fractor sternly.
‘Not yet,’ said Endill.
‘Well, I suggest you do it before interrupting again,’ he cried.
‘If there is anything to be asked 1'11 ask it, not you.’
And he slammed his fist on his desk in anger.
It was the same with the other teachers too.
He asked Mr Jotter who had picked the vowels and why they'd chosen the letter ‘u’ instead of‘s’which he thought was a nicer shape.
‘Get on with your work and stop being so nosey,’ shouted Mr Jotter.
‘If you talk once again lifewon't be so rosy.’
Soon Endill was getting into trouble because of all his questions.
‘Why do you ask so many questions, you irritating little brat?’ cried Mr Fractor one day when he had had enough.
It's the only thing I know how to ask,’ Endill replied.
‘Well, I've had enough of it,’ said Mr Fractor, writing an extra long sum that covered the length of one wall.
‘No more questions or you'll be punished.’
‘But why?’ asked Endill before realising what he had said.
‘Right.
That's it!’ shouted Mr Fractor, thumping both fists against his blackboard.
‘Two lengths of the corridor for you.
Now!’
Endill was taken to the main corridor and strapped into a pair of lead boots.
The punishment took him most of the afternoon and his legs felt weak and wobbly when he finished.
It didn't stop him from wanting to ask questions but from now on he would have to find out the answers himself.
Luckily other lessons were different.
In History Endill spent his time underneath the floorboards playing marbles.
Mr Rumback either read to them from books, which no-one heard because the words got caught in his big moustache, or slept.
Some lessons he did both.
He was old and forgot things.
Endill learnt he had been in the army but was told to leave after forgetting who he was fighting for.
If he lifted a piece of chalk or opened a book, it usually tired him out so much that he spent the rest of the lesson dozing.
He did not even notice when one of his class became stuck in the hole in the floorboards and was there all day until Endill had the idea of smearing him with butter to slide him out.
The only teacher Endill liked was Mr Litmus, who taught them Science.
He had a soft face and a long white beard with red, yellow and blue bits at the end where he had dipped it  in strange chemicals by mistake.
He was always muttering to himself about all the experiments he had to do that week.
In class he put out rows of brightly coloured chemicals on the desks.
Some were hard, some sticky, some wobbly or as runny as water.
Everyone had to add one to another to see what happened.
So far they had smashed sixteen windows, burnt nine desks, singed the hair of several pupils and set someone's jacket alight.
The walls were stained with all kinds of colours as the mixtures popped, exploded and flew about the room.
Half the class refused to go to the lessons, frightened of being set on fire or being thrown through a window, but Endill liked the suspense of waiting to see what each mixture did next.
Endill would ask Mr Litmus question after question and he was the only teacher who did not mind answering.
The only thing was Mr Litmus' answers contained long complicated words, names of strange substances and funny symbols that Endill did not understand.
‘Life is one big experiment,’ he would tell his class.
‘It's a question of adding one thing to another to see what will happen.’
He was always confusing the class with his exclamations.
‘Everything is really a chemical,’ he cried one day to a pupil who said they wanted to learn about something else.
‘Why even the whole class is nothing but a great big bunch of chemicals!’
Endill's habit of asking questions made him few friends.
Most of the other boys left him alone.
They thought him odd because he wanted to learn things.
They liked him even less when they discovered he hated playing rugby, especially on cold winter mornings when the ground was as hard as concrete and the snow lay two feet deep.
Since the school took up so much space on the island, the rugby pitches were the size of tennis courts.
They were on a slope too.
Every game Endill played the balls would bounce down the slope and into the sea.
Each game went through at least thirty rugby balls, and Endill was always the one sent back to get some more.
He hated fetching the balls as much as playing with them.
They were kept in a large room, hundreds and hundreds of them, and it was impossible to open the door without them all falling out.
Although about a hundred rugby balls went into the sea on game days none were ever seen floating on the water for long.
Endill asked Mcduff, the only person in Nettles who had made friends with him, why this was so as they were throwing stones into the water from the dormitory window.
‘The eel eats all the balls,’ Mcduff told him.
‘But eels are small,’ said Endill.
‘They couldn't eat whole rugby balls.’
‘This is a giant eel,’ said Mcduff.
‘Well, no-one's ever seen it apart from the Headmaster.
He says it's long and slimy and hides in the water waiting for anyone who might fall in.’
Endill looked down at the sea.
It was a calm day.
The water seemed peaceful and inviting and it was hard to believe there might be something lurking beneath its surface.
He remembered  the long black shadows he had seen when crossing over in the basket lift.
Had that been the giant eel?
‘The Headmaster says it's a man-eater,’ continued Mcduff.
‘I remember some scientists visited the school a year ago and tried to find it but their search failed.
One of them got lost in the corridors and another dropped some important equipment into the sea.
If the Headmaster's in one of his bad moods he threatens to throw people to it.’
‘One day we will find out what it looks like,’ said Endill.
‘How do you know?’ asked Mcduff.
‘Well, I'm sure with all that air inside it from the balls,’ explained Endill, ‘It will eat a ball too many and float up into the sky for all to see.’
‘I'd never thought of that,’ replied Mcduff.
‘And I wouldn't like to be around when it happens.’
Mcduff didn't like too much excitement.
He  prefered doing quiet things like throwing stones in the water or looking for his parents.
He had been sent to the school when a small child and had not heard from them since.
Now he could hardly remember what they looked like.
He spent most of his time searching through magazines, picture books and newspapers, hoping to find some clue as to what had happened to his mother and father.
He tried to read every scrap of newspaper in the school; even the loose pieces blowing through the corridors and those stuffed underneath mattresses.
And if he wasn't searching through magazines and papers he was looking into boxes, bags and bundles to find more magazines and newspapers to search through.
‘Have you ever thought of escaping to try and find them?’ asked Endill.
‘It's too dangerous,’ moaned Mcduff.
‘Everyone makes plans but Mould's the only one mad enough to try.
You can't escape by sea because of the giant eel.
The only other way over to the mainland is the basket lift and you know how horrible that is.
Besides, it squeaks so loudly the Headmaster would hear you before you were halfway across.’
‘There must be a way,’ said Endill hopefully.
‘I've heard of a tunnel built by the school's founder for emergencies,’ said Mcduff.
‘But I think it's only a rumour.’
Endill had already begun thinking of escape.
His punishments were getting more and more frequent.
Mr Fractor shouted at him each lesson and gave him two lengths of the corridor nearly every week.
He had almost sent for the Headmaster because of all his questions.
Endill couldn't understand what he was doing wrong.
All he did was ask Mr Fractor to explain things or tell him what he wanted to know.
There was no harm in that but it landed him in trouble every time.
Feeling depressed one day he decided to explore a few of the corridors in Nightside and plant his packet of seeds to remind him of home.
Nightside was the name he gave the side of the school with all the dormitories on because most people only went there at night.
The other end of the main corridor, with the classrooms, dining room and library, he called Hardside because lifewas hard at that end of the school.
Endill took his torch and screwdriver with him in case there was anything to unscrew.
He did not want to travel far on his first journey; he would leave the darker, more mysterious corridors until later when he had built up enough courage.
Then he would search for the tunnel Mcduff had talked about.
He wandered along the brighter corridors near Nettles looking for a good place to plant his seeds.
They were all very messy.
Piles of rubble and bits of rubbish were everywhere and Endill saw signs of where pupils had explored before him.
In the distance he could hear the sound of water dripping and he kept a look out for puddles, holes, fallen beams or any other dangers that might be around the next corner.
The few rooms he entered weren't any better.
But eventually he found one that was almost empty with tall arch windows and broken tiles about the floor.
Digging some of them up, he planted his seeds in the ground underneath.
There was a hole in the ceiling to let in the rain but just to be safe he returned every day for a week to water them and was walking back  one afternoon when, turning a corner, he felt a hand on his shoulder.
Endill jumped in fright.
He held his breath and turned slowly round, expecting the worst.
It was Mould.
‘That wasn't very nice,’ complained Endill.
‘I got quite a shock.’
‘Sorry,’ replied Mould.
‘Didn't mean to scare you.
I only wanted to talk.’
‘But why did you sneak into the corridors to talk to me?’ asked Endill.
‘It had to be in private,’ whispered Mould, looking round to check it was safe.
‘I've been watching you.
You like exploring and asking questions.
We could make a team and think of a plan.’
‘Think of a plan about what?’
‘Escaping of course!’ said Mould triumphantly.
‘What else?
I know you've thought about it.
I can tell.
The teachers are beginning to hate you as much as me.’
Endill was a little suspicious of Mould, not because of what the Headmaster had said, but because his eyes glowed with a life of their own, as if there was something burning inside his head.
He couldn't stay still for more than a few seconds and either paced the ground or fidgeted with his hair, clothes, hands, face and anything else within his reach.
‘I have thought about it once or twice but it seems impossible,’ said Endill.
‘Nonsense,’ cried Mould.
‘You've just got to find the right plan.
And if we work together it will be easier.’
Mould was right.
This was Endill's first chance to return home and he didn't need much persuasion.
If all went well he could be back happily planting seeds in the vegetable patch with his mother, instead of alone in the corridors.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘I'll help.’
‘Great!’ cried Mould.
His eyes shone brighter and he jumped into the air.
‘Let's go!’
They set off back to Nettles.
Endill discovered Mould slept  in Slugs, the coldest dorm in the school.
It was so cold that anything you said had frozen up before leaving your mouth.
Mould talked about some of his previous attempts to escape.
On one  occassion he had made a huge crossbow, hoping to throw himself to the mainland, but the elastic snapped, sending him backwards into the school and he had spent two weeks finding his way out.
‘Shall we search for the tunnel?’ said Endill.
‘If we find it leaving the island will be easy.’
‘But that could take years,’ said Mould.
‘I've been busy on another plan.
We're going to escape by catapult.’
‘By catapult?’ said Endill.
‘Yes.
A giant catapult will throw us to the mainland.’
For the rest of the day they discussed the idea.
It had to be worked out to the finest detail and Endill went to the library to find pictures of a catapult to help them on their way.
CHAPTER FIVE
Endill and Mould spent most of their time together working on their plan.
they found a room large enough in a dark part of Nightside and after clearing out the bugs, milkcrates, music stands and rusty oil drums, used it as a workshop.
The dusty furniture of other forgotten rooms was perfect for making the catapult.
Endill found plenty of use for his screwdriver, unscrewing various bits and pieces round the school.
Once he was almost caught taking the back off Mr Rumback's chair.
Mr Rumback had been asleep slumped over his desk and just as Endill removed the last screw he awoke with a start.
‘I've just had this awful dream,’ he announced to the class.
‘I jumped out of an aeroplane and discovered I'd forgotten my parachute.
Dreadful.’
He leant against the back of his chair, which wasn't there anymore, and crashed to the ground.
Luckily he had fallen asleep again before he could find out who was responsible.
Mr Fractor was not so forgiving.
When one of his blackboards fell onto his foot because Endill had taken the screws from it, he refused to let the class leave until he had discovered the culprit.
‘Who did this?’ he shouted.
‘Tell me now or you'll all have three lengths of the corridor.’
Everyone looked at each other, but no-one spoke.
‘Right then,’ said Mr Fractor, rubbing his foot.
‘If whoever it was owns up I promise I won't punish them.
I'll just ask you to put my blackboard back.’
After a few moments Endill slowly put up his hand.
‘Swift!’ cried Mr Fractor.
‘I might have known.
Four lengths of the corridor for you now!’
‘But you said…’ began Endill.
‘Never mind what I said Do it now or you'll get another four.’
It was the last time Endill would believe anything a teacher told him.
After collecting all kinds of material the catapult began to take shape.
Mould was a frenzied, energetic builder and did everything at a manic speed.
He was always eating.
As they worked he would disappear every fifteen minutes and return with some food, usually slices of bread, which he finished almost before he sat down again.
Endill wondered why he wasn't enormously fat and wobbly but no matter how much he ate, Mould stayed the same shape.
‘What are you going to do once we escape?’ asked Endill.
I don t know, it doesn't matter,’ said Mould.
‘That's not why I'm escaping.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I'm escaping because I like escaping,’ replied Mould.
‘I've done it ever since I was a baby.
I escaped from my cot, my house, friends’ houses, parties, schools, everything.
I like going to places I hate so I can escape from them.
I got my mother to take me to the dentist every week so I could run away from it.’
‘But don't you get into trouble from your parents for running away all the time?’ asked Endill.
‘Nah.
The rest of my family are just like me.
My mother tries to escape from my father.
My father tries to escape from my mother and my brother tries to escape from them both.
I came to the school to run away from it.
I haven't managed to yet but one day I'll get it right.
One day.’
When Endill wasn't building the catapult or doing his schoolwork, he explored further and further into the corridors.
He carried a piece of chalk with him, marking the walls with a secret sign so he would know the way back to his dormitory.
Soon he was exploring parts he felt no-one had ever been in  before.
Fortunately most of the corridors were bright enough and only in a few of the darker, damper ones did he need his torch to see where he was going.
Some had no floor tiles and their walls were crumbling.
Often he had to clear away piles of rubble and junk before carrying on his way.
Surprisingly, others looked brand new, as if he was the first person to walk along them.
Never did he find two that were exactly the same.
The rooms were just as mysterious.
They held the most unexpected collections of things Endill could imagine.
He wondered how many of the bits and pieces had got there; especially the room full of empty bird cages or the room lined with different coloured pencil sharpenings.
Not all the rooms he discovered were filled with strange objects.
In one at the edge of the school the floor had completely disappeared and looking down Endill could watch the sea crashing against the rocks.
Not knowing what lay ahead made him excited and nervous but he couldn't help wanting to discover what was behind a door or round the next corner.
He would hear eerie noises echoing through the corridors, the sounds of trapped seagulls or doors banging in the distance.
So far, he had not met any strange animals, terrifying monsters or lost pupils trying to find their way out, and after a few journeys began to feel quite safe as he wandered through the never-ending jungle of passageways.
There was one noise he kept hearing again and again on his travels that intrigued him.
The sound of a motorbike.
Sometimes it felt close by and at other times it was only a distant echo.
He presumed the noise came from the same motorbike he had seen on his first day at school and he asked Mould about it.
‘Oh, that's Matron,’ Mould told him.
‘She used to be a mechanic before coming here.
Unfortunately she's better at fixing sick engines than sick people and spends most of her time riding around the corridors on her collection of motorbikes.’
‘Is that why sick bay's usually empty?’ asked Endill.
‘Because no-one can catch up with her?’
Mould nodded.
‘She's kind and helpful,’ he explained.
‘But even if you do catch up with her there's nothing but spanners and wrenches  in her medicine chest.
She only learnt how to put on a bandage last month.’
Endill hoped they would stay healthy until they escaped.
He didn't fancy the idea of being treated with a spanner if falling ill.
While working on the catapult Endill started to keep a diary.
He would write in it underneath his sheets in bed before going to sleep.
Here are the first two pages.
(Courtesy of the Endill Swift Memorial Fund.)
The catapult was finished!
After the final touches, Endill and Mould stood back and admired their work.
It was the most impressive catapult they had ever seen and were proud of it.
‘Right,’ said Mould.
‘When shall we go?’
‘Let's not waste any more time,’ said Endill.
‘How about tonight?’
The plan was to wheel the catapult along the main corridor on top of the carts then put it near the basket lift.
They would aim it to the right of Tock's cottage.
The ground was soft there and if they were lucky they would land on the pile of hay he kept for his horse.
A sack of stones would be tested first.
This would show how well the catapult worked and if they had to make any adjustments in their aim.
Otherwise they might end up in the sea, which neither of them wanted.
They were nervous all day and couldn't concentrate on their schoolwork; not even when Mr Litmus spilt a chemical on the floor and it started to fizzle, turning an incredible glowing blue, then splattered against the wall.
The day dragged.
Eventually it was time for bed and they waited until the middle of the night before sneaking to the workshop on tip-toes.
On the way, Endill listened hard in case the Headmaster was wandering about.
Mould found it difficult to be so quiet.
He kept kicking things over and bumping into piles of rubble on the floor.
Endill was convinced he would wake everyone up.
Once or twice he thought he heard footsteps approaching in the distance and they hid in the shadows until deciding it was safe to continue.
At last they reached the workshop.
The catapult was waiting for them.
Pushing it towards the door they could hardly contain their excitement until Endill stopped in his tracks, realising they had made a terrible mistake.
‘Oh no,’ he cried.
‘Shhhhh,’ whispered Mould.
‘You'll wake everyone.’
‘Never mind that,’ replied Endill.
‘Stop pushing.’
‘What's the matter?
What's the matter?’
‘How are we going to get it through the door?!’ sighed Endill.
‘It's too big!’
Mould stopped pushing.
‘Oh no!’ he cried loudly jumping up and down in anger.
‘Shhhhh,’ whispered Endill.
‘You'll wake everyone.’
‘Oh no,’ said Mould again.
‘You should have said something.’
‘Why me?’ cried Endill.
‘You should have said something.’
‘You made the plans.’
‘And you read them.’
‘So did you!’
‘I know I did!’
‘Well so did I!’
They stopped shouting at each other, expecting the Headmaster to burst in on them at any moment.
Nothing stirred and they breathed a sigh of relief.
‘We both made the plans,’ said Endill.
‘We both read them and we both made a mistake.
We'll just have to make the catapult in two parts so it can be reassembled outside.’
Feeling depressed they worked away for the rest of the night.
Endill was tired the next day but slept underneath the floorboards in History class.
Unfortunately no-one bothered to wake him up and he was late for Maths.
‘Where have you been?’ asked Mr Fractor.
‘You've missed half the lesson.’
‘Sorry,’ said Endill.
‘I fell asleep.’
‘You fell asleep!’ replied Mr Fractor.
‘What are you doing that makes you fall asleep in the middle of the day?’
‘Nothing,’ said Endill.
‘I was just tired.’
‘You're up to something, no doubt,’ cried Mr Fractor, leering at him.
‘You've been behaving suspiciously these past few weeks.
Well, I'll warn you now.
I've got my eye on you.
Any nonsense and you're for it.’
That evening as they worked on the catapult, Endill told Mould about what Mr Fractor had said to him.
‘We will have to be careful,’ he said.
‘If he finds out, the Headmaster will be the first to know.’
Endill fitted special wheels so the catapult base could be  pushed through the door on its side.
He padded them out with a torn sheet from sick bay to stop them making any noise.
Mould dismantled the arm and they would carry it separately.
This time nothing was going to go wrong.
As Endill was walking back to his dormitory after lessons the next day he heard a faint ticking at the end of the main corridor.
Nearing the noise he was not surprised to find Tock bent over a bag of tools.
‘Hello Tock,’ he called.
‘It's Endill Swift, isn't it?’ said Tock.
‘Haven't seen you since your first trip in the basket lift.
Did you enjoy it?’
‘Not really,’ replied Endill.
‘Don't know why the machine stuck.
Something to do with the metals.
You've got to watch them.
Far too lazy.
Just like my tools.
I've not had one tool that's done what I tell it to do every time.
They're always sawing, hammering or drilling in the wrong place.
Spades are the worst.
What's the old saying?
‘A bad workman always trusts his tools'’.'
Endill wondered why Tock's tools were so disobedient.
His screwdriver had always done what he wanted.
‘What are you doing?’ he asked.
‘I'm moving a window,’ explained Tock.
‘The Headmaster wants it moved along a little.
He claims he keeps tripping over something on the ground.
Says if I move the window he'll be able to see what it is and avoid it.’
‘What an odd thing to do,’ remarked Endill.
‘Exactly.
That's why he called me.
Tock the odd job man, remember.’
Endill watched Tock make a hole in the wall, holding his hammer with both hands to stop it banging in the wrong place.
He then removed the window and put it in the new hole and started to fill in the gap at the sides with cement.
‘Stop!’ cried Endill.
‘What's the matter?’ grunted Tock.
‘You've put the window in upside down.’
‘Depends on your point of view, does it not?’ said Tock, standing back to examine his work.
‘But from where I'm standing I fear you're right.
I'll have to leave it.
I've to be in the library in two hundred and seven seconds.’
‘Why do you always count everything in seconds?’ asked Endill.
‘I've only got a second hand on my watch.
The other hands stopped dead when my shovel fell on it some years ago.’
He took a quick look at the window.
‘I'm sure no-one will notice.
I'll just hammer in this bit here.’
Tock swung his hammer towards the wall but it ended up going straight through the window instead, smashing the glass.
‘Now look what you've done!’ he shouted at his hammer.
‘What did I tell you?
‘A bad hammer always blames his workman'’.'
And he threw it in his bag.
‘Still,’ he muttered to himself.
‘Glass has always been inconsiderate.
Never easy keeping track of something you can't even see!’
He zipped up his tool bag and hobbled away before Endill had the chance to reply.
After two weeks' work the catapult was finally ready.
Endill and Mould sneaked to the workshop and without any problems pushed the catapult base through the corridors and onto the grass outside.
It was a bright clear evening.
The moon was almost full, casting long shadows on the ground and they saw Tock's cottage glimmering in the distance.
Mould was unusually silent.
The only sound was the sea against the rocks and the hollow call of hungry birds circling in the sky.
‘Where shall we put it?’ whispered Endill.
‘Beside that tree by the basket lift,’ replied Mould.
They put the catapult into position and placed wooden blocks in front of the wheels to stop it rolling into the sea.
Returning to the workshop they collected the bag of stones and the arm.
‘Are you scared?’ asked Endill.
‘Nah,’ replied Mould.
‘Yes you are.
I can tell.
What if it goes wrong?’
‘That's why we've got the bag of stones,’ said Mould.
‘If they fall into the sea we'll know it doesn't work and we won't go.’
‘Have you been in a catapult before?’
‘Not that I remember.
My brother made one back home.
He tricked our neighbours to sit on it and they were never seen again.
That's where I got the idea.
Are you ready?’
They aimed the catapult at the pile of hay to the right of Tock's cottage.
Endill wound the arm back and Mould put the bag of stones on the seat.
‘Shall we pull the handle together?’ said Endill.
They each put a hand on the handle, had a last look round to check it was safe, took a deep breath and pulled.
The bag of stones was thrown into the air.
They watched it fly up and up, gliding over the sea.
At one point the bag rose so high it seemed to disappear into the night.
When it came back into view it was falling towards the mainland at a ferocious speed.
The catapult had worked!
Endill was about to declare his joy when he suddenly realised what was about to happen.
‘It's going to land on Tock's cottage!’ he shouted, forgetting their secrecy.
‘Shhh,’ said Mould.
‘You'll wake everyone.
Anyway, it doesn't matter.
He'll be asleep.’
There was an enormous crash as the bag of stones plummeted through the roof of Tock's cottage.
Endill heard the noise of glass smashing, plaster crumbling and furniture being broken.
There was no way they could think of escaping now.
They had to get back to their dormitories before anyone awoke, but turning round, Endill saw lights had started coming on in the school.
He looked over to the mainland.
The dazed figure of Tock tumbled out the front door of his battered home, rubbing his eyes and brushing the dust from his hair and pyjamas.
‘Quick!’ shouted Endill.
‘Let's run.’
But Mould wasn't listening.
He was winding the arm back.
‘What are you doing?’ cried Endill.
‘It works!
It works!’ laughed Mould.
‘We're away.
If we just turn it slightly, change the aim then we're fine.’
‘But we can't escape now!
The teachers are coming.’
‘Yes we can.
We've still got time.’
The arm was wound back and Mould moved the catapult a little to the right, then climbed into the seat.
From the school Endill heard the sounds of bells, shouts and clumping footsteps.
He saw the Headmaster throw open the front door and start running towards them, followed by various teachers in their nightshirts.
The Headmaster still had on his gown and he flapped in the wind like a bat as he charged across the grass.
Endill could not make out what he was shouting but whatever it was it was not very friendly.
‘Quick!’ shouted Mould.
‘Jump in!’
‘But we'll never make it.’
‘We will, we will!
Come on.
We haven't the time to argue.’
‘STOP RIGHT THERE!’ boomed the Headmaster.
‘Stop what you are doing this minute.’
He was getting nearer and nearer and was almost upon them.
‘Hurry!’ shouted Mould.
‘Before it's too late.’
Endill moved towards the catapult.
But as he climbed onto it he slipped to the ground, catching his arm on the trigger handle.
‘WAAAAAAAAAH!’
Mould let out an almighty scream and flew into the air.
The Headmaster reached the catapult and stared with disbelief into the sky.
‘MOOOULD!’ he screamed.
Mould soared high over the sea, heading for the mainland.
For a moment it looked as if he was free and would land safely near Tock's cottage but coming down he fell with a thump into the basket lift at the other side.
‘Get that boy back here NOW!’ shouted the Headmaster.
Two teachers ran to the basket lift and began turning the  handle.
The basket, with Mould dazed and confused, came slowly towards them.
‘Don't you dare move, boy!’ the Headmaster shouted at Endill.
The last thing Endill felt like was moving and he stood frozen with fear.
‘What DID you think you were doing with that monstrous medieval machine?’
Endill said nothing.
Even if he had wanted to say something he was unable to move his mouth.
‘I'll tell you what you were doing,’ shouted the Headmaster.
‘Annoying me, that's what you were doing.
Escaping is bad enough but doing it in the middle of the night is inexcusable.
Look at all the havoc and destruction you've caused because of your nastiness.
This is unforgivable behaviour.’
‘I knew they were up to something,’ added Mr Fractor.
‘I just knew it.’
‘Then why didn't you tell me before, you fool?’
Mr Fractor turned red but did not have the time to answer because the basket was back beside them.
Mr Jotter opened the door and Mould fell out onto the grass.
He tried to stand but collapsed and he had to be dragged to the Headmaster.
‘Well, Mould?’ he said.
Endill could feel the heat from the Headmaster's face as it grew redder and redder and he was sure it was about to explode.
‘What have you got to say for yourself??!’
‘Asha washnay dododo anyfunk,’ muttered Mould.
The Headmaster gave him a cold stare.
‘You are a foul fiendish festering felon,’ he cried.
‘Two nights in the dining room for you.
Alone!’
Several of the teachers shuddered at the mention of this and Endill expected the worst as Mould was led away talking gibberish.
‘That will teach him.
Nobody throws themselves through the air without my permission,’ muttered the Headmaster turning to Endill.
‘And you!
I told you getting mixed up with that boy was trouble.’
‘But it was…’ started Endill.
‘Silence!’ shouted the Headmaster pacing the ground.
‘First you will break up your malicious machine and throw it into the sea.
Then it's eleven lengths of the corridor by the day after tomorrow.’
And with that he headed back to the school, she ground shaking as he strode across the grass.
Endill was stunned.
It had all happened so quickly.
He unscrewed the catapult piece by piece feeling depressed.
As he threw it into the sea, watching the water swallow up his past month's work, he thought of all the walking he was soon to do.
His fret began to ache just thinking about it.
CHAPTER SIX
For a week after his punishment Endill spent as much time as he could lying down.
He missed wandering about the corridors but the thought of walking made his feet throb and ache even more.
Mould returned to Slugs two days later.
His hair was a little white in places and he found it difficult talking to people.
Most of the time he spoke gibberish, changed the subject or just didn't finish his sentences, walking away to examine some dark stain on a wall.
He started shaking if you said ‘Hello’ too loudly and for several hours after his punishment felt very hungry because he couldn't hold a knife and fork long enough to get the food into his mouth.
Endill tried to cheer him up, tempting him with games of marbles underneath History class or journeys into the corridors.
He missed the fire behind his eyes; Mould wasn't Mould without it.
But after a few days he saw the sparks of it begin to reappear and within a week Mould was chattering away as usual and ran about the school thinking of a new plan.
‘I've had setbacks before,’ he told Endill.
‘But it doesn't matter because I've had another idea.
I may have been approaching it from the wrong angle.
This time I'll get it right.’
Tock repaired his roof with help from Matron.
She had also been a builder before coming to the school and ended up doing most of the work.
Tock was still a little stunned from the accident and would become confused as to where he was or what he was doing.
Somehow, everyone forgot to tell him what had happened.
He was completely dumbfounded by the whole incident and could not understand why the rocks had fallen on his cottage.
From that day on he did not trust the sky  again.
He spent some time afterwards making a special metal umbrella.
He carried it everywhere and if wandering outside put it up to protect him from what he called ‘The Mysterious Lumps of Space'’.
On finishing his lengths of the corridors, Endill's urge to escape was even stronger.
He decided, though, it would be best to do it alone and started searching for a new workshop where he could work in secret on a new plan.
Many of the rooms he found would not do.
On one journey he came across a room with sixteen doors leading off it, all locked.
When he managed to unscrew the hinges he found none of them went anywhere.
I only want one door to my place, he thought.
Too many doors and I might forget the way out.
In another he found old shoes piled high on rusty tables and there was one room he thought very odd but it made him smile.
All the furniture in it hung from the ceiling by long mouldy ropes and did not quite touch the ground.
When Endill opened the door they creaked in the draught and it reminded him of the old hanging tree beside the front gate back home at Gibbet Hall.
Once he thought he had found the perfect room but leaning against the wall it started to collapse and he narrowly escaped just seconds before the ceiling fell on top of him.
After a month of travelling through the corridors he still had not found a suitable place.
That evening he wrote in his diary.
Next morning Endill had Geography with Mr Morraine.
Mr Morraine spent most of his time dusting his collection of strange-looking rocks and stones he had sent to him from all over the world.
They had been piled high on his desk until the day it fell through the floor because of all the weight.
The class had taken a whole afternoon to find him buried beneath his precious collection and he had been more concerned about his stones than himself.
‘Don't throw them about,’ he shouted.
‘They wouldn't like that.
Treat them gently and make sure none of them are broken or there'll be trouble.’
Since then be had put them on shelves around the room.
Nobody was allowed to touch them and the place felt more like a cave than a classroom.
All Mr Morraine talked about  was his rocks and some said he even used them as pillows.
Every lesson he repeated the same thing over and over again.
‘There are three important types of rock in the world,, he told the class.
‘Hard, Harder and Hardest.
There are soft rocks too, but they're not as exciting.’
‘What type of rock is the school built on?’ asked Endill.
‘It's quite a soft rock, Swift,’ replied Mr Morraine.
‘I'm told the school was once part of the mainland.’
‘What made it into an island then?’
‘I'm not sure.
There are many stories but we haven't time for that today.
Ask the Headmaster or another teacher.’
And he continued reading out the names of all the hardest rocks in the world.
After Geography Endill bumped into Mcduff who asked him if he was going to try another escape.
‘Yes, but on my own this time,’ Endill replied.
‘I'm not sure of my plan yet but whatever it is you could help me if you want.’
‘If I can but I don't know too much about escaping.
Do you want to come and throw stones in the water before you start?’
‘Why not,’ agreed Endill.
‘We haven't done that in a long time.’
And they arranged to meet after lunch.
As Endill ate his plate of boiled potatoes he pondered on the afternoon ahead and was so involved in his thoughts he did not hear the boy sitting next to him speak.
‘Excuse me.
Could you pass the kangaroo?’
‘Pardon?’ replied Endill, startled.
‘Could you pass the…the…battleship please.’
Endill looked around.
There was no battleship to be seen and the only kangaroo in the place was the dead one mounted on the wall.
‘Do you want the kangaroo on the wall?’ he asked.
‘No, no,’ replied the boy.
‘The battleship over there beside the fishtank.’
He pointed to the salt and pepper.
‘You mean the salt and pepper,’ corrected Endill.
‘Yes, that's what I said.’
‘No, you said kangaroo then fishtank and battleship,’ replied Endill.
‘Did I?’
The boy seemed to be remembering something.
‘Oh yes.
I'm sorry.
I was getting mixed up.
I meant the salt and the…the…the other one.’
‘Why did you call it a kangaroo?’ asked Endill.
‘It doesn't look anything like a kangaroo.’
‘It does to me,’ said the boy.
‘I fell out of a tree when I was four years old.
I have a rare case of something with a big name I can't pronounce.
It's a bit like being colour-blind, only it's not colours I get mixed up, it's objects.
I've tried seventy-one different doctors all over the country but none of them know how to help.
That's why I see battleships instead of salt cellars.’
‘But you said kangaroo before,’ remarked Endill.
‘That's the strange thing,’ the boy explained.
‘A battleship is the salt cellar and the pepper a fishtank but if I see them both together they become a kangaroo.’
Endill looked at the salt and pepper trying his hardest to imagine a kangaroo, but it was hopeless.
‘You must live in a funny world,’ he said.
‘I would laugh if I saw pepper coming out of a fishtank.’
‘You just get used to it,’ laughed the boy.
‘If I ever saw pepper coming out of a pepper pot I would find that funny.
But it was strange when it first began.
It took me a long time to work out why I was eating my meals off a trampoline.’
‘What's your name?’ asked Endill.
‘Wednesday.
But only for today.
I can never remember my real name so I call myself after whatever day it is.’
‘So tomorrow I'll have to call you Thursday?’ said Endill.
Wednesday nodded.
‘Do you want to come and throw stones into the sea this afternoon?’ asked Endill.
‘Shoes,’ corrected Wednesday.
‘Not stones.
Shoes.’
‘Oh yes,’ nodded Endill.
‘Do you want to come and throw shoes into the water?’
They finished off their meal and headed to Nettles to meet Mcduff.
After throwing stones in the water for nearly half an hour, listening to the different sounds and seeing who could throw the farthest, Endill began to feel a little fed up.
‘Who wants to come and find something more exciting to throw in the water?’ he asked.
‘I know a room full of spare tyres.
We could get some of those.’
Wednesday wanted to but Mcduff decided to stay behind.
He had found a pile of papers in one of the dormitories and wanted to look through them.
Endill led the way through the corridors, talking about some of the rooms he had visited nearby and in other parts of the school.
He showed Wednesday a few of his favourites, including the old workshop, the small room with the cutlery stuck into the walls and the one he had discovered the week before with a huge oak tree growing through the floor.
Wednesday had never dared explore the corridors on his own.
He had a terrible sense of direction, always getting left, right, up, down, forwards and backwards mixed up.
It was bad enough trying to get to a classroom and he knew if he had explored the corridors he would have been lost for certain.
But now he was with Endill he felt safe and ran about opening doors to see what was beyond them.
‘And what's in this one?’ he called, charging into a room.
‘No!
Not that one.
Don't go in there!’ shouted Endill but it was too late.
It was the room without any floorboards.
Wednesday screamed and disappeared from view.
Endill ran to the door expecting to see him crashing into the sea but when he looked down, saw him clinging to a wooden beam sticking out of the rock.
Luckily his jacket had caught on it and saved him from falling.
‘Help me!
Help me!’ he screamed.
Endill bent down and tried to reach his hand but it was too far away.
‘I need a rope’ he shouted.
But where would he find a rope now?
He hadn't enough time to return to the dormitory to get help.
He had a quick look round the neighbouring rooms but there was nothing.
Then he remembered the room with the hanging furniture.
It was not too far away and he would definitely find a rope there.
The corridors seemed endless as he ran through them.
He jumped piles of stones and rubbish in his way and almost tripped over a mound of rusty saucepans lying in the darkness.
On reaching the room he found a chair lying in one corner.
A piece of rope was tied to it but the knot was difficult to undo and, after fiddling with it for what felt like hours, he still couldn't  pry it loose.
He would just have to take the rope and chair together.
He ran back to Wednesday, hoping he was in time.
‘Hurry,’ shouted Wednesday on his return.
‘I can't hold on much longer.’
Endill threw down the rope with the chair attached to it.
‘Ah!
A snake!
A snake!’ cried Wednesday.
‘What you doing?
Get it away from me!’
‘It's not a snake,’ shouted Endill.
‘It's a rope!
You must believe me.
We haven't got time to argue.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Of course I'm sure.
Trust me.
Try to grab the snake…
I mean the rope and sit on the chair.
Then I'll pull you up.’
Wednesday looked suspiciously at the rope then seized hold of it with one hand.
He had to rip his jacket free from the wooden beam and, sprawling himself over the chair, held onto the rope for all he was worth.
Endill started pulling him up.
He was much heavier than he looked and the chair kept banging against the rock.
At one point as Endill heaved him up, he slipped and slid towards the door.
He only managed to save himself from falling into the sea by putting one foot on either side of the  doorway.
Wednesday fell back a couple of feet and wailed in terror.
‘Oh no!
I'm going, I'm going!’ he kept screaming.
Endill needed all his strength to lift Wednesday into the corridor.
Eventually the two boys were lying exhausted on the floor, relieved to be alive.
‘That's the last time I charge into an unknown room,’ panted Wednesday.
‘And I've gone off the idea of throwing things in the water.
I know what it feels like now.’
They lay for a while catching their breath, then returned to Nettles.
Wednesday spent the rest of the afternoon asleep on Endill's bed.
Endill decided to visit the library.
He was a little shaken by the strain of the near accident but hoped concentrating on his new plan would help to calm him down.
CHAPTER SEVEN
The library was one of the most confusing places in the school.
It was filled with rows and rows of towering bookcases that seemed to sway back and forth as they disappeared into the darkness at the top of the room.
The shelves near the ground were usually well kept, but higher up they became more disorganised and larger in size, almost as tall as the pupils themselves.
Footholds had been made to get to books above head height but if you wanted one further up then you needed a rope, helmet and the special climbing boots to help you reach it.
Not many people had the nerve to climb higher than shelf fifty.
It was often very hazardous and Mr Crangle, the librarian, wanted to buy a safety net for when someone climbed beyond shelf thirty but the Headmaster was having none of it.
‘Can't have them getting too clever, can we?’ he said.
‘Wouldn't want them to be teaching us.
That would be a calamity.’
There was another reason why finding books was difficult.
They moved mysteriously from shelf to shelf.
Mr Crangle would spend hours rearranging them into their proper sections only to come back the next day and find them all mixed up again.
Books on whales sneaked their way into the ‘OPERA’ section.
Books on Scottish History were mixed up with those on Volcanoes, and a particular book on World Leaders was often found in the ‘SWAMPLIFE’ section, between ‘NEWTS’and ‘WEEDS’.
Some mornings Mr Crangle entered the library to discover the books piled in strange shapes about the room.
He didn't mind at first but when he kept bumping into sculptures of boats, animals or castles he became more and more frustrated.
The most popular shape was a ten foot long shark in the ‘AMERICAN HISTORY’ section.
Once all the books on the bottom shelf were used to make three gigantic pyramids that sent him into a fit of despair.
He ran about the library shouting and shaking his fists at the shelves and the Headmaster had to send for Matron to calm him down.
He had a theory about what moved his books.
‘There's something up there,’ he told Endill in confidence one day.
‘Are you sure?’ asked Endill.
‘What else could it be?
It isn't the wind or anyone in the school.
I've seen shadows moving around the top shelves.’
‘But where would such a thing live?’
‘It must have a den in one of the more remote parts of the library,’ replied Mr Crangle.
‘I bet it moves the books around just to torment me but I'll get it, don't you worry.
It can't hide forever.
One day I'll see what this creature looks like.’
Mr Crangle had attempted all kinds of schemes to catch the creature.
Often he spent the night underneath his desk, hoping to see or hear any trace of it.
This never worked because he was always so tired from running about the library all day he fell straight to sleep.
One morning he woke up to discover the entire ‘ARCHITECTURE’ section stacked so high around his desk he had to wait half the day before pupils managed to free him.
He had also tried setting traps around the shelves.
They were old animal cages and he disguised them with books, hoping the creature would be captured inside.
He hung his biggest cage above the library entrance but it kept falling down, capturing the Headmaster.
After it had trapped him for the third time, he ordered all the cages to be thrown into the sea.
Mr Crangle was almost thrown into the sea with them and the Headmaster had shouted at him so loudly he was deaf for a week.
At the same time as Endill and Mould were building their catapult an expedition had been organised to find the creature once and for all.
The best climbers in the school were picked for the hunt and they set out, one on each shelf.
Mr Crangle was  certain he would be successful.
Unfortunately, when one of the climbers became stuck in the ‘MOUNTAINEERING’ section the rest had to rescue him and the search was abandoned.
The Headmaster, who had helped direct the expedition from the ground, was reluctant to stop it just because one of his pupils was clinging helpless to some loose books and screaming his head off.
‘Do we want to find this menace or not?’ he shouted.
‘Yes we do,’ replied Mr Crangle.
‘But I think someone's in trouble.’
‘If they're in trouble then it's their own fault,’ said the Headmaster.
‘I'm not here to look after every child in the school!
Rescuing is their own business.
Besides, a little fear hardens them up.’
‘But if he falls, Headmaster?’ said Mr Crangle.
‘Finding the creature is important but I don't want anyone to get hurt in the process.’
‘Right!’ shouted the Headmaster.
‘If that's the way you want it well stop.
But don't come running to me when you find replicas of the Taj Mahal in here in the future.’
Since then Mr Crangle had been working in secret on another expedition.
He didn't want to make the same mistakes again and was taking great care over every detail, researching the best possible way to lure the creature into his grasp.
As Endill entered the library after Wednesday's narrow escape, he still had no idea what his new plan was going to be.
He began wandering around the shelves looking for inspiration when he met Mr Crangle who was busy dismantling one of the book sculptures.
‘It must be getting bored buildings things at the moment,, he told Endill.
‘This is only the sixteenth one this month.’
‘What was it?’ asked Endill.
‘A plane this time,’ sighed Mr Crangle.
‘You know sometimes I wish it would make one that worked so I could fly away from here altogether.’
That was it! realised Endill.
He could make a small one-man plane.
The library was bound to have books on how they were made.
‘What a coincidence,’ said Endill brightly, holding in his excitement.
‘I've got some homework on aeroplanes.
I was looking for a book on how people make them.’
‘You'll want ‘AERONAUTICS’ then,’replied Mr Crangle.
‘I can't remember offhand where the section is but if you follow me we'll find out.’
They returned to Mr Crangle's desk and he looked through his files.
‘Here it is,’ he said.
‘Not much demand for that sort of business.
But the books we've got should be, if they've not been moved, up on Row V, shelf sixty-nine.
You'll need boots, a rope and a helmet.’
He pushed an open book in Endill's direction.
‘Sign here for them,’ he pointed.
‘And return them when you're finished.’
Endill put on his climbing gear and at Row V began to climb.
He used the footholds at first until shelf twenty-seven then pulled himself up to sixty-nine with the rope.
When he reached the shelf he discovered most of the books had disappeared.
He searched through those remaining and found two that sounded useful.
One was called Useful Tips on Flying and the other Advanced Physical Dynamics and Introverted Equations for the 3-D Aeronautical Practice: Parts One and Two .
Sitting down between two piles of books Endill began to read Useful Tips on Flying , but it was more about what to do when you had a plane rather than how to make one.
He tried reading Advanced Physical Dynamics and Introverted Equations for the 3-D Aeronautical Practice.
Parts One and Two but couldn't get past the first page.
Many of the words were almost a line long and all looked the same.
Exhausted by the long words and the morning's adventure in the corridors he had soon drifted off to sleep.
He did not know how long he lay there but was woken by the sound of  turning pages.
At the other end of the shelf sat a dark figure.
He could not make out its face but saw it was looking through the book he had just found with the complicated title.
Endill held his breath as he watched it laugh and nod its head at what it was reading.
Endill tried to sit up to get a better look but as he did so, knocked over a book and it thumped onto the shelf.
The figure lifted its head.
‘Are you?…’ began Endill sitting up.
But as he spoke the figure jumped to its feet and ran to the edge of the shelf.
‘Wait!’ cried Endill.
‘Don't go.’
But the figure leapt through the air onto the next shelf and Endill watched helpless as it disappeared into the darkness.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Endill could not get the strange figure from the library out of his head and had soon forgotten all about his plan to escape.
From memory he drew a picture of what he had seen and asked Mr Litmus if he knew what it was.
‘The drawing's a bit vague,’ he said.
‘Could be anything from an Aborigine to an Atoguin.
With a beard like that we can tell it's quite old.
But I would say it's some kind of tribesman.’
‘Are there any in this country?’ asked Endill.
‘I doubt it.
Ancient tribes usually get killed off and their lands taken or destroyed.’
He looked closely at Endill.
‘Why are you asking me this?’
No reason, shrugged Endill, and left before Mr Litmus could ask him any more questions.
Endill spent every spare moment he had in the library.
He climbed a different shelf each day and hid for as long as he could behind piles of books, hoping to catch sight of what he called ‘the Bookman'’.
In the ‘FURNITURE’ section he made a little hut out of cardboard and used it as a base for his search.
Sitting there he would often hear strange sounds echoing around him; the shifting of books or the faint creaking of shelves.
At times the sounds seemed so close he could have reached out and touched them but if he moved from his spot everything fell silent.
He tried everything he could think of to tempt the Bookman into showing himself.
He wrote notes, asking if they could meet but to no avail.
He left biscuits, cake, pies, fruit and bowls of custard littered around the shelves, but it remained untouched.
He even tried sneaking back to the library at night, thinking  the Bookman might appear after dark, but had to stop this when he backed into Mr Crangle, who was up to the same thing.
Luckily he managed to escape into the darkness before being caught.
‘I almost had the creature last night,’ Mr Crangle told him the next day.
‘It was so close.
Now I know what I'm looking for.
It's a little thing, like a boy, about the same size as you in fact.’
Endill nodded his head but said nothing.
After a while he was sure Mr Crangle was becoming suspicious of his persistent visits to the library.
‘You're in early again this morning,’ he said as Endill collected his climbing equipment for the fifteenth time that week.
‘I've got an important project on the Romans,’ replied Endill.
‘Then why did you ask me for a book on Reptiles?’
‘Did I?’ said Endill swallowing hard.
‘Well…that's because…because I don't want to leave anything out.’
Mr Crangle looked at him carefully then turned away.
As Endill made his way to a shelf he had the strongest feeling of being followed.
Without looking back he ran to the end of the passageway and climbed up to hide in the shelves.
He waited a few moments until the footsteps were directly below him and peeked over the edge.
He had expected to see Mr Crangle lurking about but to his relief saw instead that it was Mcduff.
‘I'm up here,’ called Endill.
‘Why are you running away from me?’ moaned Mcduff looking hurt.
‘I thought you were someone else,’ explained Endill as he climbed down to the ground.
He leant closer and lowered his voice.
‘I think I've seen the creature that moves the books around.’
‘The one Mr Crangle's always going on about?’ cried Mcduff excited.
‘Shhhh,’ whispered Endill.
‘I don't want everyone to know.’
‘What's it like?’
‘I didn't see it for long,’ said Endill.
‘But it's hairy in places and laughs.
Mr Litmus says it might be some kind of tribesman.’
‘Are you going to catch it?’
No, no.
I want to warn it about Mr Crangle s expedition.
Mcduff came with him to sit in the shelves and they took it in turns to keep watch.
But after a few days Mcduff lost interest.
He began to think he could be doing more important things like writing to everyone in the country, asking if he was their son.
Although he had been writing letters for months he was still only a quarter of the way through the names beginning with ‘A,.
‘Why aren't you just writing to those called Mcduff?’
Endill asked him.
‘It's not my real name,’ Mcduff replied.
‘I was only called that because all I had when I came here was my  duffle coat.’
Unfortunately Wednesday, who was now Monday, couldn't help either.
He wanted to but was afraid he would only cause trouble.
‘I'll probably lose my sense of direction and fall and hurt myself,’ he sighed.
Endill continued to search on his own but was becoming more and more tired.
He kept falling asleep in lessons.
Mr Fractor threatened him with a sum stretching right round the classroom if he didn't stay awake and had already punished him for not finishing his work on time.
Mr Morraine shouted at him and Mr Jotter said any more slacking and he would be sent to the Headmaster.
You sleep all lesson and do not care,
Your homework too is beyond repair.
Now come on Swift, stop being so lazy,
And make an effort, or I'll go crazy.
Mr Rumback was the only teacher not to notice any difference.
Gradually, because of all the trouble he was getting into, and with Mr Crangle eyeing him suspiciously every time he  the Bookman.
Feeling depressed, he was on his way into the corridors of Nightside to cheer himself up when Mould came running to meet him.
‘Endill,’ he cried.
‘I've been looking for you everywhere.
I need your help.’
‘What for?’
‘My new plan.
I think I've cracked it this time.’
‘I'm sorry.
I can't,’ replied Endill, not wanting to get into trouble.
‘I'm busy with something in the corridors.’
‘It's the giant eel,’ whispered Mould proudly.
‘I should have thought of it before.
It's so obvious.
If we catch it leaving the island will be easy.’
‘Catch the giant eel!’ laughed Endill.
‘That's a ridiculous idea.
How can you catch something when you don't even know what it looks like?’
‘But no-one has ever tried,’ argued Mould.
‘It's far too dangerous.
Any creature that could eat hundreds of rugby balls could swallow us in one go.’
‘I promise you won't get into trouble,’ Mould pleaded.
‘I know the last time we did but I got over-excited.
It won't happen again.
We'll do it from one of the rooms in the corridors to be safe.
Nobody will know about it.
All we need is a rope, a bucket, a net, a hook, a rugby ball and this machine I've made.
It's not dangerous.
I've got it all worked out.’
Endill thought it over for a few moments.
It sounded risky but it might help take his mind off not being able to meet the Bookman.
And if it did work he wouldn't have to build his plane.
‘I'll help a little,’ he said.
‘But I'm not going anywhere near the sea.’
‘Great!’ beamed Mould.
‘Follow me.
Everything's ready.
The only thing I haven't found yet though is a room with a good access to the sea below.’
‘I know of one,’ replied Endill, remembering his adventure with Wednesday.
He took Mould to the room without any floorboards, and helped him piece together a bizarre contraption containing metal beams, weights and cogs.
A chain wound its way round various wheels and cogs and at the end of it hung a large bucket.
‘I got the idea off the basket lift,’ explained Mould, showing Endill a messy pile of notes and drawings.
‘It works in exactly the same way only I'll be going down instead of across.
All you have to do is lower me down in this bucket to just above the sea.
From there I'll throw out this hook with the rugby ball as bait.’
He pointed out everything as he went along.
‘When I think the giant eel is biting on the ball, I'll quickly tie the rope around this other hook inside the bucket.
Then you must start pulling me up.
Hopefully we can pull the giant eel right out the water and if not, I might be able to throw a net over it.’
He repeated the plan several times to make sure Endill understood what he had to do.
‘Sounds even more dangerous than the catapult,’ said Endill.
‘What happens if the giant eel just leaps out the water and gobbles you up?’
Mould had obviously overlooked this simple suggestion.
He glanced down at the sea, then back at Endill.
‘Maybe you best just lower me halfway down then,’ he said quietly.
He climbed into the bucket and Endill started to turn the handle.
Mould descended towards the sea, swaying gently in the breeze.
‘That's enough,’ he cried when halfway down.
Mould slid the rugby ball onto the hook, and threw it into the water.
It disappeared under the surface and they waited.
After five minutes nothing had happened.
Endill was secretly relieved when Mould pulled the hook from out the water.
Unfortunately he threw it back in again, this time in a different direction.
Once more they waited.
Endill watched the waves  slip into one another beneath him.
Everything was quiet.
Not even the sound of gulls could be heard.
He began to doubt the giant eel would bite.
It could be on the other side of the island or asleep or waiting to leap out the water and swallow them whole.
Looking down, he saw Mould pulling the hook out the water for the second time.
Endill thought he had given up when suddenly the rope became taught.
Endill's heart missed a beat.
In a frenzied motion Mould tied the rope to the hook in the bucket.
‘Oh my goodness.
We've got it.
We've got it!’ he shouted jumping up and down.
‘Start turning!
Quickly!’
Endill could hardly believe it.
The handle was difficult to turn and the rope strained under the weight.
Whatever was down there was very heavy and Endill shuddered to think what the giant eel would look like when it loomed into view.
‘Turn!, shouted Mould.
‘Come on.
We've got it!’
‘I'm going as fast as I can,’ cried Endill.
There was a great bubbling and frothing on the surface of the water.
‘Here it comes!’ cried Mould, getting more and more excited.
He grabbed hold of the net and prepared himself for when the giant eel came thrashing into sight.
From out of the water rose a ferocious piece of metal covered in seaweed, barnacles and winkles.
Mould looked down in disbelief and was about to declare his disgust at their catch when the rope snapped, returning the lump of metal to the sea.
At the same time, because of the sudden loss of weight, the bucket sprung upwards, propelling Mould back towards the school.
It was so quick he didn't even have time to scream.
Flying past Endill he hurtled through a door, crashing into the room beyond.
Endill was thrown to the ground and it took him a few minutes to realise what had happened.
He got to his fret and dusting himself down saw a large hole in the door behind him.
Peering through he found Mould lying stunned amongst a mass of bedsprings, cardboard boxes and broken armchairs.
‘It was only some stupid piece of metal,’ he moaned when he remembered where he was.
‘Not the giant eel at all.’
Endill went to check he was alright.
‘It might have been part of the equipment those scientists dropped into the sea when they were here,’ he suggested.
‘It's not fair,’ muttered Mould.
‘We'll just have to give it another go.’
‘I don't think this is going to work,’ said Endill, knowing his nerves couldn't stand much more.
‘The giant eel is too clever.
It won't be fooled easily.
Besides, your machine is broken.’
Mould sighed and rubbed his head.
‘Maybe you're right,’ he said reluctantly.
‘I suppose I'll just have to think of something else.’
Endill could tell he was disappointed at his lack of success.
‘There has to be a way,’ he said as Endill helped him to his feet.
‘I must never give up.
I'll get it right yet.’
For the next week or so Endill concentrated on finding his new workshop, despite being no further forward with his plan.
Wednesday, who was now Saturday, helped in the search but most of the time they ended up playing in the corridors.
Often they built things out of the junk in the rooms and Endill became an expert at making submarines out of old bath tubs and washing machines.
For a while their favourite game was wheeling along in a cart Endill had made until Wednesday crashed into a mound of rusty bicycles and hurt his arm.
Luckily, as they returned to Cockroach, Wednesday's dormitory, they bumped into Matron who was fixing her motorbike.
She was getting better at knowing what to do when people were sick and asked them how it had happened.
‘A rock from Mr Morraine's classroom fell onto it,’ lied Endill.
Matron didn't believe him.
‘You were playing in the corridors, weren't you,’ she said.
‘Don't worry, I'll not tell anyone.
I'm on your side.
Just be  careful next time.
If the Headmaster finds you out, you'll be in trouble.’
Soon Endill had found a room that he thought would do for his workshop.
He and Wednesday were clearing it out when Endill accidentally knocked out a cork from a pipe running down the wall.
There was a gurgling noise and water started pouring onto the floor.
‘Quick!’ shouted Endill.
‘Help me get this cork back in.’
They tried pushing it back into the hole but the force of the water was too great.
The room was filling up.
They ran out and, shutting the door behind them, blocked the gaps around it with a torn sheet to stop the water leaking out into the corridor.
A few days later Tock was wandering past the door.
Seeing a sheet had been stuffed round the edges of it he suspected something suspicious was going on inside and forced the door open to have a look.
Much to his horror he was swept off his fret and sent flying through the corridors by a roomful of water.
He had been carrying his umbrella but it did little to protect him.
He was found later on one of the rugby pitches soaking wet and scrambling around for his bag of tools.
Several of the dormitories were flooded because of the water, including Endill's, and he had to spend some nights sleeping in Mr Rumback's room.
Afterwards Tock became suspicious of the world around him and refused to enter a room first until someone had checked it was safe.
Also, he would not wander through the corridors on his own unless it was absolutely necessary.
‘Why me?’ he asked Endill one day.
‘I think there is something up.
First pieces of the sky fall on my house, then I get attacked by bits of the sea.
Why only yesterday I was cutting a piece of wood when my saw went straight through my shoes.
Luckily I had taken them off.’
‘Why weren't you wearing them?’ asked Endill.
‘I don't trust the ground after my accidents.
I think it's best to treat it gently.
I wouldn't want to upset it by walking on it too hard with my heavy boots.’
‘I don't think the world's out to get you,’ said Endill.
‘I think you've just been unlucky.’
He thought it better not to mention it was he who had been responsible for both his accidents.
Eventually, after looking at several different rooms, Endill chose the one he wanted.
He and Wednesday were very careful removing all the broken ladders, teapots and lampshades, expecting anything to happen.
This time they managed to empty the room without any mishaps and prepared it for Endill's work.
That night Endill wrote in his diary.
Since the failure of his last plan, Mould had been very quiet.
‘Things aren't going well,’ he mourned.
‘I'm usually away by the second try.
I'll have to think of something extra special.’
Luckily his depression passed before he started offering to clean the blackboard or standing up when a teacher entered a room.
He began on a new plan and Endill tried to ask him what he was up to but every time he approached, Mould shouted,
‘Can't stop.
Got measurements to take, calculations to work out’, and sped off into the distance.
‘Have you thought of anything extra special?’ asked Endill when he managed to catch up with him on his way to the library.
‘I'm taking no chances,’ replied Mould.
‘If this one doesn't work then I don't know what will.’
‘What is it?’
‘I can't tell you all the details yet,’ Mould explained.
‘But I was thinking the best time to escape is when all the teachers aren't around to stop you.’
‘And?’ said Endill eagerly.
‘Go on.’
‘That's all I can tell you at the moment,’ Mould smiled secretively and ran off in the direction of Mr Fractor's classroom.
In the library Endill found Mr Crangle in an unusually good mood.
‘I think I've got the creature,’ he grinned, rubbing his hands together.
‘It won't be long before I set out on my expedition and I don't think he'll be fit to run away from me.’
‘What do you mean?’ worried Endill.
‘Haven't you noticed?’
Mr Crangle said gleefully.
‘It started this morning.
Come with me and I'll let you hear.’
He led the way to a shaded part of the library.
‘This is the best place for it,’ he said.
‘Now just stand here for a minute and listen.’
Endill did not hear anything at first but after a minute or two heard what he thought was a cough in the distance.
A few seconds later it was followed by a sneeze.
Mr Crangle was grinning from ear to ear.
‘Oh joy,’ he chirped.
‘Can you believe it?
I do declare the creature has a cold.
With that cough he will be easy to track down and probably won't feel much like running away.’
Endill said nothing.
‘Would you like to join our climbing team to catch the creature?’ asked Mr Crangle.
‘Sorry I'm busy that day’ lied Endill trying to hide his sadness.
‘Not to worry’ smiled Mr Crangle.
‘You'll get to see him soon enough.’
He turned and skipped away, singing happily to himself.
Now Endill felt really depressed.
He couldn't start on his plane because there weren't any helpful books and now Mr Crangle was probably going to catch the Bookman before he could make friends with him.
He decided to write home asking his mother how everything was back at Gibbet Hall and if she could come to visit him, or even better take him away.
Hunting for some writing paper he emptied the drawer in his wardrobe out onto the floor.
He could not see any but noticed a little bottle lying amongst his bits and pieces.
He picked it up and read the label.
Cough Mixture.
Just in case, lots of love, Mum .
He had forgotten all about his mother's present and seeing it made him think even more of home.
Suddenly he had an idea.
He put the bottle in his pocket and rushed back to the library.
‘A rope, a hat and some boots,’ he gasped to Mr Crangle.
And without another word he ran off, making sure Mr Crangle wasn't following him.
He climbed up to where he had last seen the Bookman and left the bottle of cough medicine with a note saying
Take a little three times a day.
I hope you get better soon.
Love Endill (the person who left you the food ).
A few days later he returned to find Mr Crangle not looking so happy.
‘I've not heard a cough since yesterday,’ he moaned.
‘Perhaps the creature has recovered?’ suggested Endill.
‘But how could it?’
‘Will you still be having your expedition now?’ asked Endill.
‘Of course,’ cried Mr Crangle.
‘A cold can't just disappear.
I expect he's resting in another part of the library.
Either that or I've got wax in my ears.
I'll go and clean them out right this minute.’
Endill climbed to the shelf where he had left the cough mixture and saw that it had gone.
He looked around hoping to find any sign of the Bookman but, as he thought, there was nothing.
He turned to leave and was frozen to the spot.
His mouth fell open and he could not believe his eyes.
There in front of him, holding the empty medicine bottle, stood the Bookman!
CHAPTER NINE
Endill did not move for what seemed like a long time.
He blinked to make sure he wasn't dreaming, but the Bookman was still standing there when he opened his eyes.
‘I thought I'd return your bottle,’ the Bookman said calmly.
‘I'd like to thank you.
The strange pink stuff seemed to work wonders.
Could I get another bottle?
Just in case.’
Endill tried to speak.
‘I…
I…
I never thought…
I never thought I'd meet you,’ he finally managed to say.
‘You understand I have to be careful,’ replied the Bookman.
‘I thought at first the food was a trap, but after you left the pink mixture I knew I could trust you.’
‘I shall have to write to my mother,’ said Endill.
‘Does she want to meet me too?’ asked the Bookman.
‘No, no, well yes, she would like to meet you, but it's for the medicine,’ said Endill.
‘She drinks it all the time.’
‘She must have a strong mouth,’ said the Bookman.
‘I would find it difficult drinking so much pink.
Orange is my favourite, when I can get it.’
Endill sat down.
He felt tired and was finding it difficult to think straight.
His head was whirling with excitement and he didn't quite know what to say.
I had so many questions to ask you,’ he sighed.
‘But I can't remember any of them now.’
‘What a lot of pity,’ said the Bookman.
‘But don't worry, I can wait.
I like questions.
I have a box full of them at home.
Everyone has their own and it's a great shame if they never get a chance to ask them.’
Endill noticed the Bookman was standing beside him and looking deep into his eyes.
‘Every part of the body likes to ask its own questions too, I believe,’ he continued.
‘The eyes have the most.
There is one in there at the moment.
If I'm looking at them rightly, they're saying, ‘Where can I lie down? ''’
The Bookman turned around.
‘Put your arms around my neck, your legs around my waist and hold tight.’
Endill hesitated before doing what he was told.
The Bookman didn't look very strong.
His skin was dirty in places and wrinkled and Endill thought he must be at least fifty years old.
‘Are you on?’ asked the Bookman.
And without waiting for an answer he jumped off the shelf and onto the next one.
Endill kept his eyes shut and held on with all his strength.
He could feel his heart thumping against his chest as the Bookman leapt gracefully through the air from shelf to shelf, across the library.
‘You can open your eyes now,’ the Bookman told him when they had come to a stop.
Endill opened his eyes slowly and found he was standing in a little room made entirely of books.
In one corner was a bed made from books and shreds of paper from old magazines.
In another corner was a small box.
Endill presumed it was the box of questions the Bookman had told him about.
Against one wall stood a grand armchair made with books and tied together with string.
‘You can lie here,’ said the Bookman.
‘The hours are yours to sleep with.
I am off food hunting.’
He disappeared from the room and Endill, too dazed to do anything else, curled up in the shreds of paper.
It was surprisingly warm and within seconds he had fallen into an exhausted sleep.
The Bookman woke him up on his return.
‘I have the fruit which grows on the apple tree and an old sandwich.’
‘Where did you find the food?’ asked Endill.
‘I have ways of getting myself to the kitchens,’ said the Bookman.
‘Through the air ventilators, but it is dangerous.
I don't go too often and usually eat what is forgotten or left in the library.’
Endill wasn't hungry so the Bookman ate the lot, licking his lips.
After he had finished, he picked out the crumbs that had stuck in his beard.
‘I'm sure I searched this part of the library before,’ said Endill poking his head outside.
‘Why didn't I find your house?’
‘Because it wasn't here,’ replied the Bookman.
‘It is safer for me to move around from place to place.
I can make a home in about an hour.
The materials are all around me.’
‘How long have you been here?’ asked Endill.
‘Unknown,’ replied the Bookman shrugging his shoulders.
‘For as long as I've had memories and before that too.
All I know is I am the last.’
Endill returned as often as he could to talk and play with the Bookman.
He held onto his back as they leapt from shelf to shelf and soon he no longer had to shut his eyes as they flew through the air.
The Bookman showed Endill his favourite parts of the library.
In some places the books had not been touched for hundreds of years and could hardly be seen for dust.
In another part the sun shone through a high window and the Bookman could tell what month it was just by where the light fell.
If it was in the ‘MEDIEVAL HISTORY’ section it was near the end of March, but if it fell in the ‘TRAVEL’section, then it was probably September.
‘I like to sit and sun myself in these spots,’ said the Bookman.
‘I just make me a chair and spend lazy afternoons watching the clouds.’
On one of their travels the Bookman stopped beside a shelf in an older part of the library.
‘Here's a curious shelf,’ he said, and handed Endill a book from it.
Inside all the pages were blank.
‘It's the ‘BOOKS NOT WRITTEN’ section,’declared the Bookman.
‘You can't read them if they've not yet been written!’
Endill glanced at the title of the one he was holding.
It was called,Lakes that can't swim: How to teach them in thirty-six easy lessons .
No-one could ever write a book about that, he thought.
He pulled out another:The sky is really green and I can prove it .
‘Over there is the ‘BOOKS HALF WRITTEN’ section.
And just below that is a shelf of books with only one page.’
‘They wouldn't take long to read,’ said Endill.
‘Oh but they do,’ replied the Bookman.
‘They are some of the longest books in the world.
The words are so small, you need special glasses to see them.
There are over 500 words on each line.
I could read them in my days of youngness, but not now.
There are many other forgotten sections in the library.
One of my favourites is the ‘MEANINGLESS’ section, where none of the books make any sense.
And of course, there is the ‘ENDINGS’ section, for all the people who don't like reading books but want to know what happens in the end.’
He walked to the edge of the shelf.
‘Come,’ he said.
‘I will show you the only book no-one has ever read a word of.’
He led Endill down to a darkened bottom shelf.
‘There,’ he said pointing to a large leather bound volume.
It looked very ordinary.
‘Why can't anyone read it?’ asked Endill.
‘It is too heavy,’ replied the Bookman.
‘Even for me.
It is rumoured to contain many answers but no-one can open it.’
Endill gave it a try.
No matter how hard he pulled, from every angle, he could not lift the front cover.
‘Even if you did open it,’ said the Bookman, ‘I'm sure the pages are weighed down with so many words it would be impossible to turn them over.’
Soon Endill got to know more of the library.
Some afternoons he would hide with the Bookman above Mr Crangle's desk and  watch him working.
The Bookman showed Endill one of his favourite tricks.
When a pupil came in asking for a special book, he would rush and find it before Mr Crangle.
‘We don't seem to have it,’ Mr Crangle would say to the boy as they returned to his desk to find the book lying there, waiting for them.
‘You know he's having an expedition to try and catch you?’ said Endill.
‘I know,’ replied the Bookman.
‘I've overheard the Headmaster saying he would like to teach me a thing or two.’
‘You wouldn't like that,’ said Endill.
‘He teaches us funny things like how to be frightened and stand in corners or how to walk around without your hands in your pockets.’
‘Perhaps I could teach him some of the things I know instead?’ suggested the Bookman.
‘He would just get annoyed,’ explained Endill.
‘He thinks you are a savage.
All he wants to do is put you in a cage.’
‘I was afraid of this,’ sighed the Bookman, rubbing his chin.
‘What a lot of pity that is.’
Endill was sad at this because the Bookman was very clever and probably knew more than all the teachers put together.
He had read many of the books in the library, and knew exactly where every one was, much better than Mr Crangle.
He had read books on Medicine, Art, History, Mathematics, Science, Sport, Road Surfaces, Philosophy, Weaving, Woodwork, Envelopes, Religions, Pond Life, Tea-making, Politics, and all the novels the library possessed.
But there was one kind of book he had a particular passion for; Encyclopaedias.
He loved Encyclopaedias; especially the ones with the old pictures in, and he knew the names of every single one in the library.
Endill didn't notice until later, but each house the Bookman built was made entirely with Encyclopaedias, and he would use nothing else.
‘My houses have to be about the right thing,’ he told Endill.
‘If Encyclopaedias have everything in them, then so have my houses.’
But because he read them so often the Bookman had a little problem.
Sometimes when talking he would forget to call  something by its name, and describe it instead, remembering what he had read in one of his books.
‘Look,’ he said one day.
‘The body about which the planets rotate, ninety-three million miles from the earth and eight hundred and forty-four thousand miles in diameter, is bright today.’
Endill had to think before working out that all the Bookman was talking about was the sun.
Also, he had learnt English from a book and sometimes put the words in the wrong order, but it didn't matter for most of the time Endill knew what he was trying to say.
‘I'm glad I met you,’ said the Bookman.
‘Until now I had no-one to tell things to and that's almost as much fun as learning them.’
Every time Endill entered the library it was difficult not to let slip to Mr Crangle he had found the Bookman.
He wanted everyone to know about him; Wednesday, Mould, Mcduff and even Mr Litmus and Matron.
But to be safe he had promised not to talk of their meetings.
When Mr Crangle asked him how he was getting on, all he could do was smile.
‘Changed your mind about helping us find the creature?’ asked Mr Crangle.
‘What creature?’ shrugged Endill innocently.
‘The Book creature of course,’ said Mr Crangle.
‘Oh that creature,’ replied Endill.
‘No, no.
Forgot all about it.
I've too much work to do.’
And he would run off before he said any more.
Endill and the Bookman became great friends.
He would spend hours listening to the Bookman's tales of far-off lands, strange facts and the adventures of exciting people.
‘Why don't you come with me and we can explore the corridors of the school together?’ asked Endill.
‘I could show you all the rooms I've discovered.’
‘I couldn't,’ said the Bookman.
‘This is my home.
There are too many dangers outside.’
‘But I would look after you,’ said Endill.
‘That is kind.
But you could not save me from those who want to harm me.
I know inside Mr Crangle is curious only as to what I'm like and wishes me no real harm, but there are others who do.’
‘How do you know?’ asked Endill.
‘I've read many stories of people taken but not returned,’ the Bookman said slowly, as if thinking of a distant memory.
‘Many others like me in libraries around the world are quickly disappearing.’
‘I would never let that happen to you,’ said Endill.
He gave the Bookman a big hug and hoped they would be friends for a long, long time.
One of Endill's favourite pastimes with the Bookman was making things with him.
On free afternoons they would choose quieter parts of the library and make towers, animals, castles, chairs and ski-slopes, all out of books.
They teased teachers by dropping books near them, giving them a fright.
Only Mr Rumback walked on as if nothing had happened.
‘He's probably sleepwalking,’ explained Endill.
‘If Mr Rumback's asleep, nothing can wake him.
In class Mould burnt his desk to keep warm one winter and he never noticed.’
The Bookman was an expert builder.
He could make a wall twice as big as Endill and three times as wide in under a minute.
A tower over ten feet tall took only thirty seconds, and he would leave a trail of them around the passageways in his more creative moods.
His greatest wall had been built when Mr Fractor came to look for a book on logarithms.
‘Oh no,’ said Endill spotting him from above.
‘We've got Maths this afternoon.
He's started giving us logarithms as long as his arm in lessons.’
‘Would you like to miss your class?’ asked the Bookman, smiling.
He leapt down to the floor and made two gigantic walls of books, trapping Mr Fractor between them.
It wasn't until the next day someone heard him shouting and came to his  rescue.
The Headmaster was furious and demanded they start the expedition to catch the Bookman immediately.
He strode through the school and gathered up all the boys he could find, telling them there would be no food until the creature was caught.
‘They can do without the luxury of eating until we catch that monster,’ he told Matron.
‘Should only take a few days.
Anyway, a little malnutrition hardens them up.’
After several hours Matron managed to calm him down but he left her in a terrible mood.
As a result, there were even more people walking the corridors than usual.
‘What did you get punished for?’
Matron asked one of the boys trudging along with their lead boots on.
‘I went up some stairs the wrong way,’ he said slowly.
‘This is preposterous,’ sighed Matron.
‘One day he will go too far.’
And she took to giving pupils lifts on her motorbike when the Headmaster wasn't around.
Endill had been punished also.
He opened a book the wrong way and was given two lengths.
‘He's getting worse and worse,’ he told the Bookman afterwards.
‘I must start on my plan again.
I want to build a plane to escape but I can't find the books I need.
I've been searching for ages.’
‘Why didn't you say so before?’ exclaimed the Bookman.
He disappeared into the shelves and returned a few minutes later, holding a book.
‘A present,’ he said.
Endill took the book.
It was called,How to Make a One Man Plane out of Hardly Anything at all and Escape when Things are Getting Difficult .
CHAPTER TEN
Endill was relieved to be starting on his plane.
Since the Headmaster had been in a bad mood almost everything anyone did was at the risk of being punished.
He went through phases.
Some days everyone who wrote with their left hand automatically received two lengths of the corridor, and on other days it was people whose name began with the letter ‘S'’.
One morning he decided any pupil caught saying the word ‘shrubbery'’ was to be punished.
From that day onwards the word was never heard again.
Many of the teachers began acting the same way, believing the Headmaster might punish them too if they didn't follow his example.
Endill made drawings of his plane in his diary and on large pieces of paper.
He wrote out list upon list of all the things he needed, from cutlery to cucumber frames.
Soon the walls of his workshop were covered in diagrams, calculations and loose notes.
All he had to do now was collect everything and more besides, just in case.
He visited Mr Walpit, the Woodwork teacher, to see if he had any spare pieces of wood.
‘You'd better not be using any metal in what you're making,’ said Mr Walpit.
‘None,’ assured Endill.
‘Good,’ replied Mr Walpit.
‘Because it's the road to ruin for those who dabble in metal.
It rusts, doesn't look nice and you can't varnish it.’
He gave Endill the wood he wanted.
Next he went to Mr Welt, the Metalwork teacher, to see if he had any spare pieces of metal.
‘You'd better not be using any wood in what you're making,, said Mr Welt.
‘None,’ assured Endill.
‘Good,’ replied Mr Welt.
‘Because there's no hope for those who deal in wood.
It warps, doesn't look nice and you have to varnish it.’
He gave Endill the metal he wanted.
Endill was using both wood and metal in his plane but he didn't dare tell either Mr Welt or Mr Walpit.
They were always arguing with each other.
They argued while eating their meals, having baths and in their sleep too you could hear them shouting.
For weeks they would ignore their classes and have building matches, making carpets, shoes, curtains, beds and even hats and jackets to try and prove what was better; wood or metal.
So far neither of them had been defeated.
Their store rooms were crammed with piles of objects, from furniture to fencing, and some of the corridors were blocked with the mounds of things they had made over the years.
When they weren't making things they were fighting in other ways.
Mr Welt sneaked about at night and removed all the wooden furniture in the school and replaced it with metal furniture.
The next night Mr Walpit would change it all back again.
Eventually they were changing it around almost every hour until the Headmaster couldn't stand it any more.
‘I've had enough!’ he screamed as they fought over a table.
‘Two of everything from now on.’
They still argued, but at least the furniture stayed in one place.
From then on there were two grandfather clocks at either end of the main corridor, one wood and one metal.
Half the doors, tables, beds and chairs were wooden and the other half metal.
Each door had two handles on either side and on walls hung wooden and metal picture frames.
It was about this time that Endill began hearing footsteps echoing around the corridors of Nightside.
They always seemed to be beyond the next corner or in the next room.
At first he thought it might be the Headmaster but even if he ran to check, he never arrived in time to find out who, or what it was.
He would then hear the footsteps coming from the corridor he had  just left!
It was all very eerie and feeling a little frightened Endill would run back to his workshop for safety.
Several weeks later the mystery of the footsteps was revealed.
Endill had been dragging an ironing-board back from a room where everything was half buried in the floor when, turning a corner, he bumped into a tall thin man who had appeared from nowhere.
Endill dropped the ironing-board and began to run.
‘Wait!’ shouted the man.
‘It's alright.
Come back.’
The man was wearing a white coat and spectacles without any glass in them.
He looked tired, but his face was clean and he smelled of pencils.
‘Please don't run off,’ said the man calmly.
‘I'll not harm you.
I was wondering if you could help me?
I came to the school some time ago to investigate the giant eel and got lost.
Could you show me the way out?’
‘Are you one of the scientists?’ asked Endill, cautiously returning to where he had dropped his ironing-board.
‘I was the last time I checked,’ nodded the man.
‘Have you been here long?’ enquired Endill.
‘I think so,’ replied the scientist, taking out a piece of paper and pencil from his pocket.
He did a quick sum.
‘I can't say precisely how long but by this calculation it's time for a bath.
My colleagues will be wondering where I've got to.
I don't want to keep them waiting.’
‘My grandfather was lost in the corridors for twenty-five years,’ Endill said, trying to be friendly.
‘When he came out they said he'd lost his mind so he went off to look for it and hasn't been seen since.’
He gave the scientist instructions on how to return to the main part of the school.
He waved goodbye, saying thank you and disappeared around the corner.
A week later, in another part of Nightside, Endill met him again.
‘Excuse me,’ said the scientist politely.
‘I'm sorry to bother you, but what were those directions again?
I seem to have forgotten them.’
This time Endill drew him a map and pointed out the quickest route back to the main corridor.
The man thanked him and headed off once more into the darkness.
It was another few days before Endill met the scientist, whose name was Blunset, for the third time.
‘You must think me terribly rude,’ said Blunset.
‘Forgetting your directions for a second time.
I mustn't have been concentrating.
I'm so sorry.’
‘Do you want me to come with you and show you the way out?’ offered Endill.
‘No, no, not at all,’ replied Blunset.
‘You're working on something, I can see that.
I know how annoyed I get when people disturb me if I'm working.’
‘I'll show you the way out on the map then,’ said Endill.
‘What map?’
‘The map I gave you the last time.’
‘I don't have any map,’ muttered Blunset.
‘Are you sure you gave me a map?’
‘Yes, I'm sure,’ replied Endill.
‘But it doesn't matter if you've lost it.
I'll draw you another.’
‘I can't lose what I didn't have,’ complained Blunset, scribbling on his piece of paper.
Endill ignored his moans.
The long stay in the corridors must have made him forgetful, he thought.
He drew him another map and watched Blunset wander off into the darkness.
Endill expected to bump into him again soon, but after several weeks had seen nothing of him and concluded he had finally found a way out.
To make sure he asked Mr Litmus if he had seen or heard of a scientist being found coming out of the corridors.
Mr Litmus was quite certain he hadn't and knew none of the other teachers had either.
It seemed Blunset was still wandering through the corridors and Endill looked forward to their next meeting.
At last, after collecting enough materials, Endill was ready to start building the wings of his plane.
To give himself more time  he asked the Bookman if he would help him with his homework.
He also asked Wednesday, who was now Thursday, to come and assist in the workshop.
But neither made things any easier.
Endill often forgot Wednesday had trouble recognising objects.
If he asked him to pass the screwdriver he passed the hammer and if he asked for the hammer, he passed the nearest broomhandle, which was usually in another room altogether.
Once Endill asked for a box of nails and Wednesday returned ten minutes later with a tin of spaghetti.
‘Are these the right size?’ he asked innocently.
Also, because of his terrible sense of direction, he would get lost when hunting for the wrong things and Endill had to spend much of his time searching for him, almost getting lost himself.
Unfortunately, because the Bookman was so good at doing Endill's homework, some of the teachers began to get suspicious.
They asked if he was cheating and decided that if he was able to do his work so well, there was no harm in giving him some more.
‘Can't stand giving pupils work they find easy,’ said Mr Fractor, thumping a huge pile of papers on Endill's desk.
‘Have these done by next week,’ he said, and in class that day wrote a special sum for Endill involving long division, multiplication, logarithms, complicated geometry and fractions that stretched out the door and into the main corridor.
Mr Jotter did not like Endill's efficiency either.
You hand your essays in on time,
The writing's neat and on the line,
In fact your effort is too great,
So have more work to celebrate.
Eventually Endill had to sneak to his workshop during the night.
It was too dangerous wandering around the school during the day if the Headmaster was about.
He had decreed everyone should wear tartan shoes and since no-one had any, or could get any being stuck on the island, every pupil he met was  punished for breaking the law.
Also, the threat of the giant eel was getting worse and worse.
Once a boy was almost carted away but the Headmaster changed his mind at the last moment.
That night Endill wrote in his diary.
Over the next few months the school became more and more deserted.
The Headmaster entered a strange, brooding phase that worried everyone.
He would be oblivious to everything for weeks on end, then had short bursts of punishing anyone on sight for reasons like opening your eyes when waking up.
He refused birds the permission to fly or the winds to blow, and became annoyed when they didn't pay any attention to him.
Much of the time he stayed hidden in his study.
No-one knew quite what he did in there but there were rumours he drank tea with his furniture and wrote furiously on the walls in a language only he understood.
He was often heard muttering to himself, and got into the habit of wiping surfaces with his cloak.
‘This school's a dirty place,’ he would say to no-one in particular.
‘The last thing it needs is pupils walking around mucking it up.’
He started giving out new punishments.
He made pupils stand in orderly queues to receive nothing.
The worse your crime was, the nearer the back you stood.
‘You'll thank me one day,’ he told them.
‘When you grow up all this practice will come in useful.’
Matron again helped pupils when the Headmaster wasn't looking.
She kept giving lifts to boys in the corridors and provided chairs for those standing in the queues.
She was the only one to challenge the Headmaster's mysterious ways, believing the strain of being in charge of the school was getting to him and he needed a rest.
‘Rest!’ cried the Headmaster.
‘Me, rest.
Never!
Can you imagine what would happen if I had a rest.
The place would go crazy.’
As a result of the Headmaster's moods no-one ventured out of their dormitories or classrooms unless it was absolutely necessary.
The corridors took on an eerie silence.
Nothing was heard apart from the sound of lead boots walking up and down or the revving of a motorbike.
In places the wind whistled through the loose stones, insects became more adventurous and the gas lamps flickered quietly in the emptiness.
Endill was kept very busy.
In his spare time he sat with the Bookman in the spots of sun on the shelves or hunted for Mould to ask him if he could borrow some of his tools.
‘It's difficult making an aeroplane with only a screwdriver and a bent hammer,’ he explained to the Bookman.
He had searched the corridors but found only tools that were so old and rusted together they fell apart if he tried to use them.
He had come across rooms with hammers hammered into the walls, screwdrivers screwed into the floor and saws sawed in  half.
All were no use.
He began to think it would be years before he escaped until the day he bumped into Wednesday, who was now Sunday, as he tip-toed back to Nettles.
‘Endill!
Endill!’ cried Wednesday.
‘Come quickly, come quickly!
It's Tock.
He's been trapped by giant plants and can't get out!’
‘Giant plants?’ puzzled Endill.
‘But there aren't any giant plants in the corridors.’
Suddenly he remembered something that made him jump.
‘Oh no,’ he cried.
‘My seeds!
I'd forgotten all about them.
They will be enormous by now.’
‘They're more than enormous,’ said Wednesday.
‘They're giant .
And Tock's stuck right in the middle of them.’
Wednesday rushed off for help and Endill ran to where he remembered planting his seeds.
What a shock he got when he turned the corner to find the entire corridor overgrown by mountains and mountains of wild plants.
They had spread as far as he could see, grown up to the ceiling and broken through it.
Somewhere in the middle of all the leaves, stalks and flowers was Tock.
He was thrashing about in a circle, trying to escape and kept shouting, ‘Help me!
Help me!
Is there anybody there?
I've done nothing wrong.
I'm sorry for wearing shoes.’
‘It's alright, Tock,’ cried Endill.
‘People are coming to help you out.’
‘Oh hurry, hurry,’ moaned Tock.
‘This is it.
This is the end.’
Endill tried to hack his way through but there were too many plants blocking his way.
After a few minutes Wednesday arrived with about ten boys, Mr Morraine and Matron.
They had brought sticks with them to cut down the plants.
Everyone stood in a line and slowly began working their way forwards.
Matron kept calling on Tock, making sure he was alright.
It was one and a half hours later before they reached him, caught up in all the plants, still shouting ‘What have I done?
I'm sorry for wearing shoes.
I'll never do it again.’
Matron, who was getting used to talking with upset people, calmed him down.
With Endill's help, she led him back to the sick bay.
‘How did it happen?’ she asked him.
‘I was in the corridors,’ Tock began, still shaking from the shock.
‘I had on my shoes.
I don't usually wear them you know, hurts the ground, but my feet were cold.
I saw something growing through the tiles.
When I went up to investigate it the floor caved in beneath me and I fell into the middle of all those nasty plants.’
He took a deep breath, and drank a glass of water in one go.
‘First the sky,’ he continued.
‘Then the sea and now the plant world.
I should have taken more care.
There's definitely something up.’
Matron thought the shock was making him talk gibberish but Endill understood what he was trying to say.
‘He thinks the world's out to get him,’ he told Matron.
Matron was about to answer when Tock wagged a bony finger at them.
‘I don't think, I know!’ grunted Tock.
‘And I'm not hanging around here waiting to be attacked again.’
He hobbled out the sick bay and disappeared into his workshop, locking the door behind him.
A week later he re-emerged sitting inside a glass case.
It had wheels on the bottom and a handle inside, which he turned to get him from place to place.
The glass was bullet-proof, sky-proof, sea-proof, plant-proof, stone-proof, everything-proof and he refused to come out of it, not even when the Headmaster threatened to throw him to the giant eel for being so cowardly.
‘It's eel-proof too!, he claimed proudly.
He spent his days wandering around the rugby pitches doing nothing and refused to return to his cottage.
The only way into his protective case was through a little trap door he kept locked night and day.
The only time he opened it was to have food passed in and out.
‘The world is a dangerous place,’ he told Endill.
‘This is my  protection.
I'm safe in here.
No more misbehaving materials for me.’
‘But what about all the things you'll miss?’ asked Endill.
‘I'll not miss ferocious plants, bits of hard sky and angry seas.
Like I've always said, ‘A bad walker always trusts his feet'’.
‘I'm sure they were just accidents,’ insisted Endill.
‘There is no such thing as an accident,’ replied Tock.
‘It's some master plan, that I'm certain of.
In here they can't get me.
And I'm safe from those disobedient tools too.
They've had their day.’
‘Don't you want them any more?’ asked Endill.
‘Never again!’ cried Tock, shaking his fist in the air.
‘Not once did they finish a job properly.
Why, it took them three goes before they got this protective case right.’
‘Would you mind if eh…if…eh…
I had them?’ asked Endill, trying not to sound too eager.
‘Take them away,’ Tock muttered.
‘No use to me.
But you'll get nowhere with them I grant you.
A bad investment.’
Endill was overjoyed.
Now he could start on all the little jobs he had been unable to do.
He ran to his workshop, to examine the tools and try them out.
Perhaps Tock had been too hard on them and if he treated them gently their disobedience would stop.
After all, his tools were still doing what he asked.
He was so excited at his new find he did not look where he was going and ran straight into Blunset, who was busy scribbling out a calculation on a wall.
Endill fell to the ground, dropping his tools.
‘I'm so sorry about that,’ said Blunset, helping Endill to his feet.
‘I hope you're not hurt.
Please don't be frightened.
I was wondering, since you're here, if you would be kind enough to show me the way out?
I've been here for some time.
I've just worked out it's time for a change of clothing.’
‘But it's me,’ said Endill, wondering why Blunset hadn't recognised him.
‘I'm pleased to meet you Mr Me’ said Blunset.
‘Can't say I'd like to go through lifewith a name like that.
It would be a little confusing.’
‘But it's me, Blunset,’ repeated Endill, not knowing what else to say.
‘I know it's Me,’ said Blunset.
‘You just said so.’
He paused and looked suspiciously at Endill.
‘How do you know my name?
I've never told you.’
‘Yes you did,’ replied Endill.
‘When we met the last time.
And my name's Endill, not Me.’
‘You can't meet someone again if you've never met them before,’ said Blunset scratching his head.
‘This needs working out.’
And he began calculating in his notebook.
‘My goodness!’ he cried, his eyes widening in amazement.
‘You're right.
We have met before.
I'm so sorry.
I must have forgotten it.
I'm forgetting everything these days, or is it nights, you can never tell stuck in these corridors.’
‘I thought you'd managed to get out,’ said Endill.
‘I have tried,’ said Blunset.
‘Perhaps my legs just take the wrong turning on purpose.
I seem to vaguely remember you gave me some directions last time.
Would you be so kind as to repeat them again?’
Endill told him the quickest way out of the school.
Blunset listened carefully, jotting down the odd note in his notebook and headed off down the corridor.
‘If we do meet again,’ said Endill, ‘I'll lead you out of here myself.’
‘It wouldn't make any difference,’ called Blunset as he turned a corner.
‘I can't leave until the giant eel is found.’
Endill did not know what he meant by this and ran after him for an explanation.
But Blunset wasn't anywhere to be  seen.
Endill looked briefly around the neighbouring passages, calling for him, but he had disappeared.
That's strange, thought Endill.
He couldn't have gone far in such a short time.
He returned to his workshop, hoping to bump into him on the way, but arrived without hearing or seeing a single trace of the forgetful scientist.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
It was the day before the expedition to catch the Bookman.
Mr Crangle was rushing from place to place checking the details of his plan.
He had spent the past few months noting down all the sightings and rumours of the Bookman's movements.
He listed all the sculptures made and where they had been found.
Everything the Bookman did was recorded one way or another and now the piles of notes, drawings and maps were locked away in a safe.
Special climbing equipment, extra strong torches and loudspeakers had been bought.
The Headmaster had even let Mr Crangle buy a safety net so the expedition could continue if someone became stuck in the shelves.
Endill tried to find out what the plan was but Mr Crangle refused to say.
‘I have a theory,’ he said.
‘And soon I will discover if it's right.’
He would tell no-one of his plan until the big day.
He was very excited and arranged extra meetings with the boys he had chosen as climbers so they could practise their skills.
All the teachers were involved, apart from Mr Litmus and Matron who were against the expedition.
The Headmaster was helping prepare for the grand event and was so confident it would be a success, he had contacted a specialist to come to take the Bookman away when caught.
‘I don't want any harm to come to him,’ Mr Crangle told the Headmaster.
‘But what a find!’ cried the Headmaster, clapping his hands together.
‘The world must know!
Of course no harm will come  to him.
These people will just ask him a few questions, make a few tests.
Oh, what a day it will be.’
‘Nothing painful I hope?’ asked Mr Crangle.
The Headmaster didn't know any of the details but reassured him it would be alright.
The Headmaster's happy mood made everyone suspicious.
It was too good to be true.
No-one walked the corridors or stood in queues and the Headmaster almost seemed friendly, if this is possible to believe.
He even talked to people without shouting at them.
‘This will be my crowning glory,’ he told Endill.
‘In all the years I've been here, nothing will beat this.
I will enter the history books.’
‘How long have you been here?’ asked Endill.
‘You are an inquisitive little chap,’ said the Headmaster.
‘But since I feel so good I don't mind telling you.
I have been here a long time.
In fact I was born here.
My parents, who were born here also, called me Headmaster at birth because they knew that's what I would be.’
‘Don't you have another name?’ asked Endill.
‘Like Keith, Colin or Roderick?’
‘No need,’ replied the Headmaster proudly.
‘I was born to be a Headmaster so that's what I was called.
You are called Endill so that's what you are.
My parents were called Headmaster and Headmistress.
And the only clothes I've ever had are my cloaks.
No need for anything else.’
‘Have you ever been off the island?’ asked Endill.
‘Never.’
‘Have you ever explored the corridors?’
‘Never.
Some things are better left untouched.
Too many questions can be dangerous for the health.
Just remember that, Swift.’
‘But questions are good,’ said Endill.
‘Why, the…’
He was about to tell the Headmaster the Bookman had a whole box of questions in his home but stopped himself in time.
‘Why…why…there is so much to ask,’ he said instead.
‘Dangerous,’ replied the Headmaster sternly.
‘Upsets the balance.
Knowledge is not good in the wrong hands, and discovery can lead to trouble.’
‘Do you mind,’ said Endill, chancing his luck, ‘If I ask you why the school is an island?
Mr Morraine told us it used to be part of the mainland.’
The Headmaster squinted his eyes, giving Endill a close look.
‘There are many stories about that,’ he said, glancing at his watch.
‘My goodness.
is that the time?
I should be elsewhere.
There are hundreds of things to be done for tomorrow.’
And he marched off, for the Headmaster never walked anywhere, to his study.
Endill visited the library.
He had avoided it with all the fuss going on but wanted to see the Bookman once more before the expedition started.
‘I still don't know what they're planning,’ he told the Bookman.
‘It's all a big secret.’
‘I will be on my guard,’ said the Bookman.
‘I remember watching the last one from my house.
It didn't get very far.
I didn't even have to hide.’
Endill didn't want to show it but he was worried for the Bookman.
He knew he was clever but there was just a slim chance Mr Crangle had found a way to get him, and he didn't want him caught, not for anything in the world.
‘Your eyes are wondering if I'll be alright,’ said the Bookman smiling gently.
‘Don't worry, Endill.
Who knows, even if they do catch me, Mr Crangle and I might get on and become good friends.’
‘It's not Mr Crangle I'm worried about,’ said Endill.
‘It's the Headmaster.’
The sun was throwing its last handfuls of sunlight into the sky and the gulls were crying as they circled around the school.
The Bookman looked at Endill and Endill looked at the Bookman.
They said nothing.
Nothing could be said and they just sat in silence enjoying each other 's company.
‘It's getting on,’ said Endill after a while.
‘I should go in case I'm seen.
I better not visit you until after the expedition, just to be safe.’
‘What a lot of pity,’ said the Bookman slowly.
Endill hugged goodbye to the Bookman and climbed down the shelves, hoping no-one had spotted him.
But as he left the library he heard a shout behind him.
‘Swift!’ cried the Headmaster.
‘Stop there!’
Endill froze.
This was it.
He had been seen climbing down.
‘Got you at last,’ the Headmaster said putting his hand on Endill's shoulder.
Endill turned to face him, trying to hide his fear.
If the Headmaster had discovered he had been friends with the Bookman all along, he was in deep, deep trouble.
It felt like centuries before the Headmaster spoke.
‘I forgot to give this letter to you when we were talking.
Came last post.’
Endill's whole body breathed a sigh of relief as the Headmaster gave him the letter.
From the handwriting he knew it was from his mother, and he ran to his workshop to read it.
Dear Endill,
I am writing to you about your father.
I usually bump into him every so often on the stairs, in one of the upstairs rooms or in the garden, but I have not seen him in some time.
I have looked through the house, hoping to find him but all the rooms are empty.
I asked the villagers if they had seen him and Mr Natchet, the postman, said he had met him by the front gate when delivering letters about a month ago.
No one has seen him since.
I am worried about him.
As you know he is very confused and if he has wandered off by mistake who knows what will happen to him.
He wouldn't know what to do in the outside world.
Is there any way you can get a day off school to help  look for him?
I hope you are well and I think of you all the time.
Lots of love, Mum
P.S. Are you allowed to grow your own vegetables?
Let me know how the seeds you planted get on.
On reading the letter Endill began working frantically on his plane.
He knew the Headmaster would not allow him to leave the school, not even in his good mood.
No-one left the school unless the Headmaster was throwing them out and Endill couldn't remember that ever happening in the time he had been there.
The only thing to do now was finish the plane and get back to Gibbet Hall as quickly as he could.
He worked all through the night and into the next day.
He had several trips around the corridors looking for baths, bits of bicycles, trolleys, plates, curtains, and anything else he needed.
For the first time in all his journeys he found a room that was completely empty, but he hadn't the time to investigate it, or any of the others he entered.
After hours of banging, sawing and screwing things together he felt exhausted.
He could hardly keep his eyes open and tried jumping in cold baths to keep himself awake, but only felt cold as well as tired.
Finally he fell into a deep, deep sleep.
He did not know how long he had been sleeping but woke up hungry and decided to sneak into the kitchens for a tin of soup.
On the way he noticed how quiet the school seemed.
No-one was around.
The dormitories were empty and nothing stirred in the main corridor.
He passed deserted classrooms, their doors open and books left abandoned on the desks.
A half-finished sum was scribbled on Mr Fractor's blackboard.
As he headed for the kitchens, wondering what had happened, he saw Mould running towards him.
‘Endill!
Endill!’ he shouted.
‘Where've you been?
I've been looking for you everywhere.
They've caught the Book creature!’
CHAPTER TWELVE
When news of the Bookman's capture had spread, everyone dropped what they were doing and rushed to the library as fast as they could.
The place was in chaos.
Fights broke out between pupils trying to shove their way to the front.
A mass of bodies scrambled over the shelves, everybody was shouting at one another and books were being thrown in all directions.
The entire ‘BRIDGES’ section fell on top of a bunch of frantic pupils and Tock and his protective case were knocked over in the confusion.
Most of the teachers joined in the surge to see the Bookman.
Mr Fractor used a table to push everyone aside and Mr Jotter, shouting in rhymes, lashed furiously with his cane at everything that moved.
The Headmaster was having difficulty in controlling the mob.
He had a hammer and banged it against the walls to restore order but nobody took any notice of him.
He ended up running around in circles, shouting through a loud hailer and threatening everyone with all kinds of unimaginable punishments if they didn't listen.
Eventually he quietened everyone down.
‘You will all get your chance,’ he shouted.
‘So anyone pushing will be severely dealt with.’
He organised official viewing hours when anyone was allowed to see the Bookman.
He organised unofficial viewing hours too.
Anyone caught visiting the Bookman during these was automatically punished and he kept swapping them around to try and catch people out.
An orderly queue was formed, stretching throughout the corridors of Hardside and out onto the rugby pitches.
Everyone  had to wait their turn or be punished by filling in a long complicated questionnaire two hundred and sixteen times.
Mr Welt and Mr Walpit each built a special cage for the Bookman.
They argued about which one was to be used.
In the end the Headmaster decided to put the Bookman in a different cage each day to keep them happy.
Spotlights were erected around the shelves.
Soon the room became so hot with the heat of the lamps, pupils had to strip down to their shirt sleeves and wear shorts when entering the room.
After dinner it was ‘Question Time’.
Only the teachers were allowed into the library.
They crowded round the Bookman, apart from Mr Rumback who had fallen asleep in all the excitement, and asked him hundreds of questions all at once.
‘Why did you trap me in the library?’ asked Mr Fractor.
‘You look as if you cannot spell.
Answer me now, or won't you tell?’ said Mr Jotter.
‘Do you use a napkin when you eat?’ asked the Headmaster.
‘What malicious thoughts made you trap me in the library?’ asked Mr Fractor.
‘Why don't you wear more clothing?’ asked Mr Morraine.
‘Can you count?’ asked Mr Walpit.
‘Where do you go for your holidays?’ asked Mr Welt.
‘How long ago was it since you had a haircut?’ asked the Headmaster.
‘Can you do cartwheels?’ asked Mr Morraine.
‘Did you enjoy trapping me in the library?’ asked Mr Fractor.
Even if the Bookman had wanted to answer the questions, he couldn't have replied to them all so quickly.
He sat in silence, afraid whatever he said would be taken the wrong way, and wished they would leave him in peace.
The Headmaster was very pleased with himself and made sure the specialist was on his way.
He wanted his name in all the papers and history books and had his picture taken standing proudly beside the Bookman's cage.
Soon everyone wanted their picture taken with the Book creature.
The Headmaster decided  to charge for such a privilege, and said the money would go to the school fund, but a week later was seen showing off three new gowns with different coloured linings.
Mr Litmus and Matron were the only two not to visit the Bookman and they refused to have anything to do with the Headmaster's plans.
Matron tried to tell him he would need to feed the Bookman properly but the Headmaster didn't seem to care.
‘The specialist can take care of that when he comes,’ he shouted.
‘If the creature dies there will be no point in anyone coming — and no picture in the paper for you,’ replied Matron sternly.
The Headmaster reluctantly agreed with her, and Matron insisted she inspect the Bookman every morning before visiting hours, and in the evening before ‘Question Time’, to make sure he was fit and well.
‘I'm sorry for all this,’ she said, trying to comfort the Bookman.
‘I don't like what they're doing.
If there's anything you want just let me know and I'll do my best.
I won't tell them.’
The Bookman whispered just one word in her ear.
‘Endill.’
Mr Crangle was overjoyed with his success.
He tried to give talks on how he had prepared the plan, captured the Bookman and what he hoped to learn from him, but nobody paid any attention.
The pupils just wanted to stare at him all day.
Some of them poked him with sticks to see if he really was a savage and threw books shouting, ‘Build us a tower.
Build us a tower,, to torment him.
The Bookman was frightened and helpless.
He knew if he became angry at being poked at, everyone would call him a savage even more.
He tried talking but the teachers wouldn't listen and thought he was repeating words like a parrot or just being cheeky.
There was nothing he could do.
The bright lights hurt his eyes.
He was hungry and tired.
His cough had returned and he longed to rest away from the noise of questions.
He tried squeezing through the bars but it was impossible to escape.
Teachers stood guard every night and he was never alone.
All he could do was sit in the corner of his cage, hoping it would all end.
When Endill heard about the Bookman he ran to the library in a blind panic, forgetting all about his mother's letter.
He had to join the end of the queue and wait half a day before reaching him.
Seeing his friend cowering in the corner of his cage at the mercy of the teachers, he felt the tears swell up in his eyes.
The Bookman put on a brave face and smiled, but Endill knew there was nothing to smile about.
‘Bookman, Bookman,’ whispered Endill.
‘I've got to get you out.
I'll think of something.’
He tried to touch him, but Mr Fractor, who was in charge of the front of the queue, moved him on.
‘Come on, move along,’ he shouted.
‘No touching.
If you want to see him again join the end of the queue like everyone else.’
Endill left the library and wandered about in a daze.
He bumped into people without realising it, walked into walls and was almost run over by Tock in his protective case.
He met Wednesday, who was now Saturday, outside his dormitory.
Wednesday could tell Endill was upset and eventually persuaded him to explain why.
‘We must get the Bookman out,’ said Endill.
They arranged to separate and look for Mould and Mcduff to help them.
Endill was wandering about hunting for his friends when he heard Matron's voice behind him.
‘Endill,’ she said softly.
‘I want to talk to you.
Come to the sick bay with me.’
‘I…er…can't,’ said Endill, not wanting to waste any time.
‘I'm busy.’
‘It's about the Book creature,’ Matron whispered.
‘When I check up on him in the morning he asks for you.
Do you want to tell me about it?
Don't worry, you can trust me.’
Endill followed her to the sick bay.
He was a little hesitant at first but soon had told her everything; how he met the Bookman, his funny habits, his endless knowledge, their pranks, sitting in the sun on reclining chairs and leaping through the shelves.
‘We must help him,’ said Endill.
‘I know,’ said Matron.
‘Already he is looking weak.
He has a cough too but the school has no medicine.
All I get supplied are empty bottles and hundreds of boxes of bandages.’
‘I have some cough mixture from home,’ replied Endill.
‘You can give that to him.’
‘We must move quickly,’ fretted Matron.
‘If we don't set him free soon the specialist will take him away.’
‘I can't think what we can do,’ said Endill.
‘Speak to Mr Litmus,’ said Matron.
‘I know he will help.
Then we must all get together and think of a plan.’
Matron said she'd find the others and they arranged to meet in the sick bay.
Mr Litmus was busy working at his desk when Endill entered his classroom.
‘I suspect I know what you've come to talk about,’ said Mr Litmus, stroking his beard.
‘It's the Bookman,’ said Endill.
‘Matron said you'd help us.
We have to rescue him.’
‘Yes I know,’ nodded Mr Litmus.
‘But why didn't you tell me about him before?
I wouldn't have told anyone.’
‘I wanted to tell you,’ sighed Endill.
‘But the Bookman asked me to keep our meeting a secret.
How did you know I'd met him?’
‘The first day you came with your drawing.
I just knew.
I used to look for him too when I was younger but I can't climb the shelves anymore.
Endill told him the plan so far, and they headed off to the sick bay, Mr Litmus taking his pile of notes with him.
Matron had found Mcduff, Mould and Wednesday and everyone spent the evening thinking of a plan.
It wasn't very easy.
It would be hard sneaking in a saw or any other tool for the Bookman to cut his way free.
It would be too big and noisy and the teachers would hear him sawing during  the night.
This discounted explosives too.
Kidnapping the whole cage was impossible and knocking out the Headmaster and all the teachers would be difficult.
It seemed there was nothing that could be done.
Endill began to feel depressed and helpless, and it was late into the night before Mr Litmus had the answer.
‘Acid!’ he cried after consulting his notes for the one hundred and thirty-ninth time.
‘Of course.
Why didn't I think of it before!’
‘But how will it work?’ asked Matron, Endill, Mould, Mcduff and Wednesday.
‘If we can sneak in a small bottle of strong acid to the Bookman,’ Mr Litmus explained, ‘he can use it to burn through the bars at night.
It will make the smallest of sounds and be virtually undetectable until he has escaped.’
‘But won't it be dangerous?’ asked Wednesday.
‘Very,’ warned Mr Litmus.
‘But it's our only hope.’
‘Then we must try it,’ said Endill.
‘But how do we get it to him?’
‘I can slip it to him just before ‘Question Time’ when I do my check up,’said Matron.
‘But the teachers watch everything,’ said Mcduff.
‘They will see you.’
‘Decoy!’ cried Mould, jumping up excited.
‘We need a decoy to distract their attention.
That's for me and I've just the idea!’
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The next day the specialist arrived.
He wore a brand new shiny suit.
In fact everything about him was shiny; his hair, face, clothes, briefcase, shoes, fingernails, even his ears had a shine to them.
He greeted the Headmaster with a wide shiny smile.
‘I'm so glad to meet you,’ he said.
‘The pleasure is all mine.’
‘Good.
I'm glad you're glad,’ replied the Headmaster.
‘Come this way, there's much to discuss.’
On the way to the Headmaster's study the specialist shook hands with everyone he met.
When he finished talking he shook hands again.
If he wasn't shaking hands with people he was greeting everything around him.
He introduced himself to all the furniture, saying how nice it was to meet a particular table, or how nice the covering was on a chair.
He admired the stonework of the school, the windows and even pointed out how quaint it was having two handles on each side of the door.
He wanted to be friends with everyone and everything, reassure them that he was a nice person and that the Bookman would be alright.
‘My, that's a lovely head you've got there,’ he would tell every pupil.
His name was Mr Slipper and he slid everywhere he went.
When the Headmaster showed him around parts of Hardside he put little pieces of cloth down on the ground and stood on these to protect his shoes.
‘I don't mean to of fend,’ he said smiling.
‘It really is a lovely school, most appealing, but my shoes are very important.
You'd  be surprised how many specks of dust stick to them from underneath.
And a single speck can ruin the appearance, so I must be careful.’
‘I quite agree,’ said the Headmaster, not caring either way.
His obsession with wiping surfaces had passed and he now spent much of the time sticking little stones to the wall instead.
The library was closed for a while and Mr Slipper, the Headmaster and Mr Crangle had a private viewing of the Bookman.
Mr Slipper shook the Bookman's hand, then wiped it clean on his hanky.
He then wiped his hanky clean on another hanky.
‘You have a lovely cage,’ he told the Bookman.
‘The bars are so straight.
Nicest bars I've seen in a long time.’
He smiled at the Bookman.
‘No need to worry, my friend, everything will be alright.’
Somehow the Bookman did not believe him.
The Headmaster was getting impatient.
He wanted to know when his name would be in the papers and if he could meet anyone famous.
‘How about a Queen or a Princess?’ he said.
‘That could be worth something if I retire.’
He wanted the Bookman taken to the city as soon as possible.
He had caused enough turmoil over the years and it was about time he was taught the rights and wrongs of life.
‘Civilisation,’ he cried.
‘Get him civilised.
If you don't do it, I will.
Using the proper knife and fork, nice haircut, doing what he's told, all that kind of thing.’
The specialist reassured him plans were being worked out by his colleagues even as they spoke, and it had all been taken care of.
Nobody asked the Bookman what he wanted.
While the Headmaster and Mr Slipper were quite happy with all the arrangements, Mr Crangle was getting more and more upset.
Since the Bookman's capture, nobody had paid much attention to any of his ideas and the Headmaster had taken over all his plans.
He wasn't sure if he liked what the Headmaster  had in store for the Bookman and they had started arguing about it.
‘I don't like the specialist,’ said Mr Crangle.
‘I don't trust him.
I think taking the Bookman away isn't such a good idea.
It would be good to talk and learn things from him.’
‘Nonsense!’ cried the Headmaster.
‘There's nothing to learn from him.
Can't even talk properly.
Thing's a nuisance.
These people here can make him useful to society.’
‘But perhaps that's not for the best,’ replied Mr Crangle.
‘Who knows what will happen.
He's never left the library before.
We should treat him more gently, try and get to know him.’
‘Listen,’ said the Headmaster sternly.
‘Whose school is this?
It's mine.
I'll make the decisions.
Who let you buy the safety net and all the equipment in the first place?’
Mr Crangle tried time and time again to reason with the Headmaster, but their arguments just became louder and louder.
Eventually he was banned from having anything to do with the Bookman and all his plans were ignored.
‘I've made a big mistake,’ he told Mr Slipper.
‘If I'd known what you were going to do, I'd never have caught him.’
‘My, that's a lovely jacket you're wearing,’ replied Mr Slipper.
‘I wouldn't worry about the Bookman.
He won't feel a thing.’
In the sick bay the final details of the plan were being drawn up.
Mr Litmus had returned to his lab and prepared a small bottle of acid, hoping it was enough to burn through the metal bars.
Endill wrote a note in tiny handwriting and wrapped it around the bottle, explaining the plan and what the Bookman was to do.
Everyone wished each other good luck and Mould, Matron and Endill headed off to the library.
The last pupils of the day were being let in to view the Bookman.
He looked tired and thin.
Mr Fractor was in charge of the queue while the Headmaster discussed the final details with Mr Slipper.
He kept pupils moving so quickly they were running past the cage and had to join the queue again to get  a proper look.
Mould and Endill waited outside and Matron entered the library.
‘It's time for his check up,’ she said, going up to the Bookman's cage.
Matron began her examination, taking her time.
‘Can't you hurry it up?’ said Mr Fractor.
‘Don't rush me,’ she said.
‘I'm going as fast as I can.’
Suddenly, as the last few pupils left, there was an almighty scream and Mould came bounding into the room on two huge settee springs, just like the ones he had worn when Endill first met him.
He bounced uncontrollably around shelves, desks and over piles of books, screaming as he went.
‘Help, help!’ he cried.
‘They've gone berserk.
Help me.’
‘Not again, Mould!’ shouted Mr Fractor.
‘Stop that this minute!’
He called the other teachers in the room and they ran after Mould as he bounced higher and higher.
He leapt about the room shouting, ‘Catch me, catch me.'’
The teachers managed to corner him and grappled with his clothing.
Mr Morraine fetched a net and they began to throw it at him.
The moment their backs were turned Matron took the bottle of acid from her pocket and slipped it to the Bookman.
‘Quick,’ she said.
‘Take this.
Read the instructions.
It's your only hope.
You must do it tonight as they're taking you away tomorrow.’
By now Mould had been caught and was being dragged away to do seven lengths of the corridor.
He smiled and said ‘thank you’ as he disappeared around the door.
No-one slept that night, worried something might go wrong.
Mcduff passed the time writing letters.
Matron sneaked some soup to Mould, giving him a lift on her motorbike, and Endill paced up and down until he felt dizzy.
On the morning of his departure Mr Slipper wandered about the school shaking hands with everyone and everything in sight.
He told them he would never forget them or their lovely  school.
He gave each pupil a little card that said ‘MR SLIPPER.
SPECIALIST.’,
and said if they ever had any problems to get in touch.
Mr Crangle had tried to persuade him all night not to take the Bookman away but all Mr Slipper had done was smile and ask him not to be so unfriendly.
‘The tests won't be severe,’ he said, rubbing his hands together gleefully.
‘But they must be thorough.
After all it isn't every day a Book creature is caught.
Anyway it's out of your hands now.’
Endill and Wednesday ran to the library before breakfast to make sure they would be first in the queue.
They, and about fifty other pupils, were allowed in to have one last look at the Bookman before he left.
A blanket was put over the cage every night and, as the Headmaster removed it, Endill prayed there was no-one underneath.
His heart felt heavy and his legs wobbled when he saw the Bookman still sitting inside, looking very depressed.
The acid had not worked!
Endill had to move quickly past the cage but managed to whisper a faint goodbye to the Bookman.
The Bookman gave a helpless smile.
‘Right,’ said the Headmaster.
‘That's enough.
Next time you see him, he'll be using a knife and fork like the rest of us.
Everyone out.’
The teachers started ushering everyone to the door.
‘Headmaster,’ cried Endill.
‘Can we stay and watch him being moved onto the trolley?’
The Headmaster hesitated and looked suspiciously at him.
‘Why?’ he grumbled.
‘Because…because,’ Endill began.
‘Because it would be good for some of us to see the first moments of your great fame.’
‘Quite right, quite right,’ beamed the Headmaster.
‘I hadn't thought of that.
Yes, you can all stay.
In fact let more pupils in, as many as you can.
Let them all see it.
Is everything ready?’
A rope had been thrown over a low beam in the room and tied to the top of the Bookman's cage.
At the other end the  teachers were ready to hoist it onto a trolley for transportation to the basket lift.
The Headmaster stood on a stool to conduct the lifting and Mr Slipper waited eagerly, shinier than ever.
Mr Crangle stood by the door, not looking very happy.
‘After three!’ shouted the Headmaster.
‘One…
Two…
Three…
Pull!’
The rope grew tight and the teachers tried to lift the cage but it wouldn't budge.
‘Pull harder!’ shouted the Headmaster.
‘Heave!’
They all pulled harder.
But as the cage moved a millimetre off the ground a strange screeching noise filled the room.
The harder they pulled the louder it became.
The cage was now a few fe et off the ground and the noise, which sounded like metal being torn apart, was almost deafening.
Suddenly the top of the cage snapped clean off.
The rest of it crashed to the ground and the teachers collapsed in a heap on the floor.
Within seconds the Bookman had jumped out.
He leapt over Mr Slipper and was climbing the shelves before anyone had the time to realise what was happening.
There was a moment of stunned silence.
The shock of the cage breaking froze everyone to their spot.
Slowly the Headmaster started to shake and grew redder and redder and redder.
‘NO, NO, NO!’ he screamed jumping up and down.
The stool he was standing on broke and he fell to the ground.
‘After him, get him!
Do something!
Anything!’ he screamed, banging his fists on the floor.
‘Go, Creature, go!’ shouted Mr Crangle.
His disappointment had turned to joy and he leapt in the air, relieved the Bookman had escaped.
The pile of dazed teachers jumped to their feet and chased after the Bookman.
They clambered onto the shelves but kept falling over each other.
By the time one of them had climbed a little way up, the Bookman had long disappeared.
The library erupted into chaos.
The Headmaster was shaking, stamping, sweating and screaming at everything.
His eyes seemed to be popping out of his head in uncontrollable anger.
He started throwing the furniture around.
‘Get him back.
Get him back now!’ he shouted.
The teachers were shouting at each other and scrambling up the shelves but getting nowhere.
Mr Walpit was fighting with Mr Welt over the failure of his cage and Mr Crangle skipped happily around his desk.
Mr Slipper was still smiling but somehow he did not look very happy.
‘I don't mean to upset anyone,’ he said.
‘But this could be serious.’
No-one heard him above the shouts and screams.
The pupils standing outside burst in to see what was happening and crowded around the empty cage.
It was pure pandemonium.
Endill could hardly believe what had happened.
He had thought it was all over for the Bookman and that the acid had not worked.
It was difficult to contain his happiness.
All he could do was smile and wriggle his toes in delight.
He decided it was better to leave the library until the place had quietened down.
He skipped along the corridors and went to see Matron to tell her the good news.