

Preamble to an ethology of cognition
Darwin…showed that a natural history of mind might be written and that this method of study offered a wide and rich field for investigation.
Of course those who regarded the study of mind only as a branch of metaphysics smiled at the ineptitude of the mere man of science.
But the investigation, on natural history lines, has been prosecuted with a large measure of success.
Much indeed remains to be done; for special training is required, and the workers are still few.
C. Lloyd Morgan 1909
‘That's not it at all.’
In one of the novels of Albert Camus an unfortunate man is walking at night on the banks of the Seine when a suicide, having cast himself upon the waters, cries for help.
Unable to summon the courage to enter the cold dark of the river the man, a lawyer by profession, finds himself at odd moments thereafter, and even in the courtroom, increasingly assailed by a laugh at the back of his mind, a laugh that mocks his whole posture in the world, a laugh that progressively exposes in him what he chooses to see as a guilty pretence.
I suspect that a number of ethologists of my generation occasionally feel the same way about ethological generalizations to human beings.
Certainly ten years ago, in the flood-tide of my research interest in wild primates, I began wondering more critically than before about the applications of ethological theories to man, the species.
Increasingly as I examined the implications of primate studies for ourselves and tried to see some convincing link between baboons and men a voice began muttering in the back of my head ‘Hey — that's not it at all.’
Falteringly, I sought to express these misgivings in my conclusions to a number of papers, conclusions that certainly brought no joy to my more optimistic colleagues in an emerging human ethology rooted firmly in the objective analysis of behaviour sequences and components.
So, in a paper written to commemorate the life and work of Danny Lehrman, whose critical interest in ethology and psychiatry had been considerable, I argued pessimistically (Crook 1977 a ) that an understanding of the primate behaviour I had been reviewing ‘provides no more than a kind of educational backcloth — a reference literature for university courses on human evolution and that it cannot begin to touch upon the existential issues that are the central focus of living human relations.
Grabbing the nettle I went on:
Ethologists have not yet begun to grasp at the crucial characteristic of human beings that tends to invalidate all but the most cautious inferences from other animals to Man.
Surprisingly too, many psychologists have also…failed to recognize the point I am about to make.
As a species Man possesses the characteristic of self-reference.
This means that not only do we describe ourselves to ourselves and create identity constructs but we can also face the issue of whether we want to alter those constructs and become another kind of person.
I feel there can be only one conclusion.
If ethologists are truly interested in an ethology of human relating we have to drop the pretence that, given present knowledge, evolutionary arguments are any more than a game for the psychologically literate.
Instead we should look directly in the place where the answer lies…the proper study of Mankind.
Of course, since I first penned these stirring lines E. O. Wilson has brought forth his spectacular synthesis of ethology and population genetics and opened anew the vigorous debate concerning the roles of the biological and the socially acquired in the determination of human behaviour.
This is all very much to the good but my inner voice keeps muttering ‘That's not it at all’— because studies of this kind never attempt to cross the boundary-line between behaviour and inner experience, and thus tend to side-track the issue I am raising here.
The ghost of J. B. Watson, who cast ‘consciousness’ out of psychology because it was too difficult to handle, still walks and ethologists and psychologists alike often fail to see that such a borderline exists.
The continuing separation between those who are interested in what people say about their experiences (psychoanalysts, psychotherapists, counsellors, phenomenologists, novelists) and those who pay attention only to what they do (behaviourist psychologists, human ethologists) is based upon important choices in research orientation related to conceptions of the social role and implications of the studies themselves.
The study of what people say is ultimately to do with cognition.
At present an ethology of cognition is almost a contradiction in terms.
In this book I hope to show that behaviour scientists interested in what people say can talk to those observers who prefer the voyeurism of much contemporary human study.
The growth of ethology can continue only if we find a way of talking about human experience that opens the whole range of the activities of men and women to inspection.
The uniqueness of man
Most inferences from animals to the human species are based in anatomical, behavioural, or sociological comparisons.
They deal with patterns of observable structure and employ well-established methods of comparative analysis, often based upon the principles of taxonomy  established by earlier generations of zoologists faced with the enormous diversity of the animal kingdom.
There is a plausible consistency about a well-developed derivational argument (for examples see pp. 96–9) that cannot be gainsaid except by a more inclusive one, for most such theses are not open to a direct test.
The evolutionary theory fundamental to understanding the human emergence has recently acquired a firmer basis than ever before (see Chapter 3).
The line of thought initiated by William Hamilton in his interpretation of the evolution of altruism (see p. 42) and developed by Robert Trivers's theory of reciprocation (see p. 43) provides a tight biological model for social change that is to a considerable degree applicable to man.
Although there is actually little that is novel in ‘sociobiology’, for the key elements have been in the air since the writings of Sir Ronald Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane, the extensive if not exhaustive application of population genetics to social evolution means that the relevance of evolutionary biology in the social sciences can no longer be ignored.
The enthusiasm generated by this approach can, however, blind; the simplicism, the ‘nothing butism’ as Julian Huxley would have said, of reducing all functional explanations of complex behaviour to calculations concerning the relative fitnesses (see p. 42) of gene-bearers tends to miss the major significance of human beings to other human beings.
Jerome Barkov begins a recent paper (1978 a ):
Are you reading this article in order to maximize your inclusive fitness?
Is human behaviour reducible to ‘nothing but’ an endless struggle to maximize one's genetic representation in the next generation?
Are we really nice to others only to the extent that they carry the genes we do, or to the extent that our ‘niceness’ will definitely be reciprocated.
Extreme reductionism is usually a sign of restricted outlook and it seems safe to say that sociobiology will not remain long in so puritanical a stage.
In his definitive review ‘Functional ethology and the human sciences’ Niko Tinbergen (1972) showed that functional analysis of single behaviours in animals offered analogies for human studies in spite of the added complexities at this level.
Yet, it is the unique features of Homo sapiens that become crucial in any comparison of animals with men.
The unique feature of human adaptability, emphasized by Tinbergen, is the cultural transmission of information between generations.
It is this that has allowed the astonishingly rapid conquest of the terrestrial environment and the anthropogenic changes in habitat resulting from accelerating rates of population increase and extension of urban environments.
Tinbergen argues further that human adaptations to older agricultural and pre-agricultural ways of life may be  failing to cope with the societal artefacts of cultural success, and he gives evidence from several areas of mental health and education.
Certainly, after the extremely rapid evolution of brain and skull structure in the early hunting phase of human social development, the prime cause of behavioural change switched to rapid cultural evolution with strong feedback effects whereby one cultural shift produced another like a series of cascades; agricultural surpluses needing markets, cities being formed, kings and statesmen gaining dominance, states and statecraft managing economies, and so on.
The mechanism of change, the cultural ‘instruction’ as Cloak (1975) calls it, has much the same function in the historical process as genes have had in biological evolution, but the ‘instruction’in cultural change is usually an acquired behavioural injunction existing in a world of meanings: the cognitive, although not always conscious, appreciation of their social environment by a human community.
It is particularly when we turn from comparisons with animals to the more characteristically human manifestations of our species that we hit the problem.
There is little understanding about how animal behaviour evolved through time to produce the human ‘mind’.
Human beings relate to one another not as complex reflex machines but as persons for whom the focal point in behaviour is the mutual transaction between one individual's psychosocial experience and that of another.
Ethology has always been profoundly concerned with evolutionary development, with phylogeny.
Yet, curiously, there is almost no evolutionary ethology of the human ‘person’.
The word person or ‘persona’ refers to the face each one of us puts on the world.
For it is to this that another reacts and it is to the face of another that I speak.
The term implies that there is a something that lies behind the face.
Indeed the face may be a mask covering a very different existential reality from that which it portrays (de Levita 1965).
The idea of an ‘internal world’ is not however new in ethology; it was indeed a prime preoccupation of one of its key founding fathers, Jacob von Uexküll, who through studies of the perceptual apparatus of a variety of species deduced the nature of the experiential worlds to which they gave rise.
This experiential world he called an Umwelt .
So cogent and imaginative were his descriptions and inferences that his name remains well known today even though almost nothing in the same vein has followed from his work.
It was the questions he implied rather than their apparently subjectivist formulation that ensured his place in current history.
To von Uexküll (1909), the Umwelt of an animal comprised two parts, the world as sensed and the world of actions.
The latter was accessible to an observer but the nature of the former could only be inferred.
This dualism tended to reinforce a form of psychophysical  parallelism in ethology.
The subjective inner world of animals was not denied and an evolutionary development of sensed-worlds was assumed because of the complexity indicated by the increasing sophistication of perceptual and communicational mechanisms, but only the behaviour could be charted and recorded in the actual passage of time.
This two-sidedness in ethology harks back in fact to the seventeenth-century dualism of Descartes, the mind — body dichotomy into different ‘things’(see Chapter 2).
So long as philosophers and psychologists of the nineteenth century had to wrestle with an implicit mind — body problem, it was virtually impossible for evolutionists to tackle the evolution of higher mental processes of a distinctively human kind.
For the most part they contented themselves with the material evidence available in the form of bones and artefacts, yet even when they began to observe living animals good behavioural description did not expose the factors that transformed the infrahuman primate society into a human one.
The idea of the Umwelt has re-emerged in ethology in Griffin's book The question of animal awareness (1976), in which he argues that recent research in animal orientation, navigation, and social communication implies cognitive processes of a high order and even mental experiences of them.
Griffin, whose own contribution to the experimental investigation of bird navigation and bat orientation is immense, argues that the objectifying abstractions of both behaviourist learning theory and much contemporary ethology simply ignore these issues.
Griffin, however, writes with a glance over his shoulder.
He asserts cautiously that there is a ‘possibility that both genetic and environmental influences, and interactions between them, may be important in the causation of mental processes, including awareness’ and goes on to say that awareness probably has survival value because it enables animals to respond to the complexities of the world in which they behave.
William Mason (1976) comments
The interesting question is not whether such functions exist, for they are clearly implied in the phenomena we call behaviour.
The interesting questions relate to how they are expressed in different species.
What has been their probable evolutionary course?
How do they develop in the individual?
How do they work?
Finally one might hope that some useful distinctions could be drawn between ‘having a mental experience’ and ‘being aware of having such an experience’which seems much closer to our usual view of consciousness and must certainly be an emergent property in evolution.
Indeed, it is precisely from this ‘being aware of having experience’ and being able both to communicate its features to another and to distinguish between oneself as experiencing agent and another's reported experiences that the prime features of humanity arise.
Behaviourist learning theory, which so dominated psychology from around 1914 until the revival of cognitive studies in the 1950s, was particularly concerned with the ‘laws’ relating stimulus and response.
The intervening processes were not directly examined.
Most studies of animal cognition focused on the gaining of an experimental control of learning processes in order to examine their nature.
Stimulus — response theory leaves both ‘consciousness’ and the ‘organism’out of account and is purely operational in its establishment of the laws under which animals learn.
Even when, as in Hull's learning theory, the organism is introduced, its place is taken by a formal set of mediating processes in which neither mental life nor biological processes as such are revealed.
Yet, as Mary Ainsworth (1969) points out in relation to the concept of attachment between mother and child (monkeys included), a mental or physiological condition can be said to be present even when it is not visible in behaviour.
She argues that the attachment between individuals — the relationship — resides in an inner structure which has both cognitive and affective aspects and affects behaviour.
The existence of such an inner structure can, however, be inferred only from behaviour:
Studies of responses to both separation from the attachment object and subsequent reunion with it, yield unequivocal support to the proposition that attachments can and often do survive periods of absence, undiminished in strength, despite the fact that attachment behaviour may diminish in strength during the period of absence.
If this quotation were referring to attachments between adult human subjects, most such persons would probably say that they were aware of their state of attachment, even though in their daily lives this would not necessarily be detectable in their behaviour.
They may or may not choose to express their awareness of themselves to another person.
This capacity for choice, implicit rather than active in so many people, can in fact be taken as one criterion for human maturity.
And such behaviour must of course be the expression of a psychobiological apparatus that needs description.
Few human ethologists have been interested in the existential issues of human subjectivity implied by the recognition of inner structure.
Much of our work focuses on externals, using the methods of an observational animal ethology well versed in the quantitative analysis of frequencies of tail flicks in relation to their context and the construction of elegant models of the systemic relations between them.
For the most part this paradigm allows only a study of non-verbal social behaviour.
Some authors indeed have argued that topics such as self-image, leadership, and attitudes, all belong to ‘social psychology’ and are not appropriate problems for ethologists to examine.
Yet the evolutionary and developmental origins of behaviours that are contingent  on esteem, attitudes, leadership, and similar factors are of vital importance in any study of humanity.
Social psychologists, apart from those educated in ethology, have no evolutionary theory.
To gain one, syntheses of method and approach are essential.
In the early 1950s the anthropologist A. Irvin Hallowell reconsidered the whole issue in the light of what it meant to be a human person.
He was clearly influenced by a reading of Freudian psychoanalytic writings in attempts at historical reconstructions of cultural stages in anthropology.
He pointed out that the structural basis of human behaviour must be rooted in the gregarious nature of primates and the potentialities thereby offered for the socialization of individual experience.
The study of personality structure, he argued, the genesis of which lies in social interaction, offers the beginning of a conceptual resolution of the old mind — body dichotomy while at the same time relating the individual to his social setting.
Since personality arises out of social interaction its structure is not reducible to organic structure even though it remains dependent upon the whole psychoendocrine and neural system of a human being.
Both the ‘social matrix of conduct and the expansion of the cortex are among the necessary conditions for the emergence of a human mind.
Just as bodily evolution and mental evolution cannot be separated, neither can psychological structuralization and the social evolution of mankind.’
Hallowell (1950, 1956) went on to argue that the emergence of culture was due to a novel psychological structure rooted in the social behaviour of the gregarious primate that gave rise to Man.
Organic evolution, behavioural evolution, and the old problem of mental evolution come to a common focus in a study of this structure.
Hallowell was in effect establishing the whole field of inquiry with which this book is concerned.
His argument, although rarely quoted, is basic to an attempt at understanding the evolution of the complex psychodynamics that characterize our species (Barkov 1978 b ).
As I put the question again in 1974, ‘Why is Man so restless and so divided an animal?
What is the root of his ever-present seeking for something other than he has — happiness, nirvana or what you will?
An answer to this depends on a correct definition of human uniqueness rather than looking at those features Man shares with animals.’
Hallowell argued for a species-specific type of psychic structure in the human being that clearly differentiates the ‘person’ from the psychological make-up of primates and other animals.
‘This structure is the foundation of Man's specialized form of adaptation as a species as well as the basis of his personal adjustment as an individual.’
Self-consciousness in humans is a conceptually structured awareness of self-processes that are unique to man.
Relatively simple observation of the activities going on within one's head would produce such a  phenomenological definition.
Whereas we may postulate ‘awareness’ as a basic property of any behaviour, the ongoing ‘here-and-now, relating together of incoming sensations to provide a consciousness of ‘oneself as an object’requires a sustained act of attention utilizing a coded representation of reality in which the self as agent is included.
Although this psychobiological structure is unique, it makes use of functional processes that are well established in other higher animals.
It follows, then, that an evolutionary argument must attempt to establish exactly what the continuity may have been that led from the level of the higher animals to that of Man.
Behaviour and the environment of evolutionary adaptedness
In considering the evolution of the mental capacities of the human being we need to remind ourselves that evolution occurs through the differential selection of traits with survival value in the habitat adopted by the animals.
The word ‘habitat’ implies more than simply the physical environment of an animal.
It includes the presence of other animals that may be predators or competitors for food, animals of other species that may communicate with it in finding food or raising an alarm, and individuals of its own species that interact with it in many ways, competitively, nepotistically, and in co-operation.
The structure of the animal's behaviour will be adapted to all these features in ways that in past generations have been most successful in transmitting the gene complexes of individuals into the future.
The ‘design for living’ shown by a species is the outcome of this selective process and is related not at all to any eventuality that may arise but to the set of conditions, the ‘niche’, to which the evolutionary process has confined the species.
Robins live mostly on the floors of woods while titmice explore the twigs.
This restriction to particular ‘niches’ in the environment is the result of a partitioning out of competing species over a limited range of resources; each comes to live in the portion of a habitat it can exploit best for reproductive purposes.
Every living organism is thus constrained as a result of selection to live in what John Bowlby terms its ‘environment of evolutionary adaptedness’, using stable strategies of exploitation which are the best available to it.
Tinbergen argued that rapid cultural change may have pushed human systems into an environment which is no longer that to which the species has adapted through evolution.
If this is the case, it implies that some at least of the feedback systems maintaining human wellbeing may be in difficulties simply because they are being called upon to function near the limits of their capacity.
We can expect such systems to show varying degrees of ability to acclimatize.
The environmental  conditions with which the system is in equilibrium may shift, and only so long as the equilibrium can be set at new and workable positions can the species survive.
There are likely to be limits to the extent to which such acclimatization is possible.
To what then is the human psychobiological system adapted and what are the limits to which it can adjust without an excessive strain leading ultimately to reduced reproductive ability?
We simply do not know the answer to this question but brief mention of the complexity of a human individual's environment may suffice at this point to indicate how elaborate the considerations will have to be.
If we were asking this question of an amphibian or reptile, which lays its eggs and goes away to live solitarily except when the mating season comes around again, we would answer it purely in terms of the physical ecology of the species.
Human ecology includes a vast complexity of social elements, themselves functioning in relation to modes of economic exploitation in varying regional ecologies.
In a tribal village, in Africa say, a boy is born to a particular woman who, obeying the customs of her people, proceeds to rear him either under conditions of high sociability or relative isolation and according to a particular regime of toilet training and weaning.
The child then becomes relatively independent of his mother and enters a sequence of periods in which his identity is established by the role that custom decrees for his age-group.
Family structures, age stages, and the sharpness of the transition between stages, accompanied perhaps by initiation rites that may be both physically and psychologically painful, all vary between peoples, often in extreme ways.
Each of these stages is an element in a complex societal structure and cultural context.
The overarching cultural structure includes a system of rights and obligations, the family organization and the child-rearing practices, yet each of these levels is distinct in that, to a degree, it can shift independently of the others.
Culture or social structure may change and child-rearing may remain the same.
Conventions of weaning may alter while family structure does not.
Change from one state of a system to another may occur at different rates at contrasting levels.
Economic pressures producing changes in family structure may, for example, influence the higher-order structure of society only a generation or two later.
The original environment of human evolutionary adaptedness cannot be clearly defined because our evolution has been such an extraordinary progression of expansive diversifications in adapting to an immense range of environments.
Even so, the extreme length of the hunter — gatherer phase (Chapter 8) suggests that our main behavioural attributes were formed in that period.
These attributes clearly included immense potential for societal and cultural modification in relation to economic exploitation of the environment.
It is also possible that  cultural adaptations during this phase may have selected genetic bases for behaviour in ways that ensured the development of social strategies designed to ensure that individuals fitted well into the existing social structure.
Extrapolation theory as a background to understanding human action
In the past some psychologists have written as if there were a kind of biological, genetically determined ‘bang’ at the beginning of human life and that cultural learning took over immediately afterwards.
This form of body — mind dualism merits rejection.
Biological factors operate throughout an individual's life with differing degrees of importance at different stages.
Studies of the natural constraints on learning suggest that what is learnt, and when, is probably under a genetic surveillance so that learning does not normally occur outside the context of an evolutionary stable strategy.
This does not, however, mean that a biological reductionism is an appropriate mode of explanation for all types of human behaviour.
As we shall see inter-group behaviour in modern times is explicable primarily in terms of the social identities people adopt in relation to cultural and economic stresses, and the place for a biological factor in the discussion is here a very small one (p. 390).
Nonetheless an evolutionary approach to human social life permits a broad perspective in which the emergence of the social psychological domain from the biological can be traced.
The understanding of human action requires a temporal perspective which only a sufficiently broad evolutionary approach can supply.
This book is much concerned with what I shall call ‘extrapolation theory’; that is to say the drawing of inferences regarding the sequence of changes whereby one psychobiological state has shifted to another — from chimp-like language, say, to human speech.
Here no single-factor theory of language will do, for brain size and anatomy, symbolic coding linguistics, social system, and dietary distribution are all plausibly involved and operate in interaction during the evolution of language systems.
Clearly we must think in terms of changes in state of complex systems, of transitions involving various types of ‘catastrophe’(in the sense of Rene/ Thom).
An adequate extrapolation theory must have at least the following features:
(1)
A concern with change within systems.
(2)
A capacity to explain temporal shifts, i.e. a sequence of stages and the duration of different stages.
(3)
An explanation of the increasing complexity of systems with time.
(4)
A treatment that allows for a basic continuity underlying the emergence of novelty.
The appearance of later stages is usually a development from earlier ones using the same components, and not a radical replacement.
(5)
An account of how later stages often serve similar or identical biological strategies as lower stages but employing more complex mechanisms (e.g. compare hunting in wolves and man).
(6)
An account of where in the development of individuals evolved changes productive of shifts in adult behaviour are expressing themselves.
The sources of extrapolation theory, like those of evolutionary theory generally, are numerous.
They include current selection theory describing the mechanisms of biological change, accounts of animal studies that provide evidence concerning the psychobiological ‘platform’ from which human life ascended, inferences from infrahuman primates and other animals to man, and finally a treatment of the evolution of the component faculties that go to make up the human mind.
Evolutionary theory is by nature synthetic.
Most evolutionary propositions, especially those referring to historical derivations, are not directly testable, however precisely one may attempt to erect alternative hypotheses for testing.
This means that derivational arguments stand or fall by their plausibility according to the effective use of evidence; advance in theory.
is achieved primarily through the incorporation of new material.
Some of this evidence may be factual: the occurrence of certain fossils in certain strata, for example.
Some may consist of correlational studies of behaviour in relation to social systems and ecology, perhaps combined with observational or experimental tests of the causality of the correlations found.
Some evidence may consist of tightly controlled laboratory experiments on motivational systems or genetics.
Evolutionary theory, especially when applied to so complex a creature as man, has often advanced by what E. O. Wilson in his book Sociobiology: the new synthesis has slightingly termed the ‘advocacy’ method.
An author has a ‘hunch’ and infers an evolutionary scenario informed by the proposition he has created.
Robin Fox (1971, 1972) and Lional Tiger (1969) in influential books have perhaps pushed this approach to an extreme, but they have thereby generated an important renewal of interest in biology among anthropologists.
A good hunch is heuristic, productive of preliminary explanatory propositions and capable of analysis into a priori axioms that can be reformulated into hypotheses, some of which may be practically testable.
It is quite  pointless for critics of evolutionary thinking to waste time and space on a denigration of the hunches of earlier phases of an evolutionary inquiry when neither contemporary sources of information nor current developments in selection theory had arisen.
The context of hypothesis creation quite normally remains the realm of imaginative speculation.
Without an advocacy stage few general theories in biology would ever have arisen.
The sterility of Wilson's final chapter with its severely reductionistic interpretation of human nature reveals the effects of a puritanical fundamentalism.
The advocacy of a plausible explanation in science is open-ended and self-correcting.
Evidence bearing upon it will be finely sifted.
Some propositions can be subjected to experimental test and the results used in the creation of an extended thesis or alternatively an antithesis.
Other propositions may not be testable even in principle but may remain for the time as a necessary component of an overall paradigm.
A good theorist should be aware of the weaknesses in his theory, and his prime advocacy will be for more imagination in examining the issues involved and better experimentation wherever possible.
The chapters that follow do not present a tight theory.
They do, however, survey a wide range of material relating to cognitive evolution.
The result is a set of viewpoints on contemporary man down the long corridor of his evolutionary past.
To see ourselves in this way is to gain a perspective rather than to advocate a policy, yet the relation of these two activities will inevitably remain in the background of our work.
Summary
(1)
Ethologists concerned with the evolution of human behaviour have stopped short of attempting to explain the further reaches of the human mind; consciousness, self-reference, the construction of identity, and intersubjective relating.
Instead of defining clearly the uniqueness of man their efforts have focused on aspects of human life comparable to those of animals.
(2)
Man has a biologically unique history defined by an extreme development of complexity in his cognitive functions, perceiving remembering, analysing, states of awareness, and communicating.
These areas are the stock in trade of psychologists who busy themselves with mechanisms and models but never fully with origins or evolutionary history.
This indeed is a task for the ethological evolutionist concerned to understand humanity.
(3)
Recent developments of Darwinian theory provide us with a new and deeper understanding of the processes of natural selection.
There is little doubt that higher cognitive functions are associated with complex social life and elaborate means of communication.
The modern  sociobiological approach to evolution contains much of major importance for this inquiry.
(4)
In this book I develop the question of animal awareness into a quest for the evolutionary roots of self-consciousness and identity.
There are many considerations.
One is that we must admit verbal reports of inner experiences of human beings as valid evidence for studies of consciousness.
Contemporary psychology has come a long way from the time when J. B. Watson, the first behaviourist, forbade the consideration of non-observable entities.
Struggle as it might, psychology has not been able to remain behaviourist.
(5)
One of the consequences of advanced cognitive ability has been the emergence of cultural life.
Mind and culture go together in evolution, for culture depends on the emergence of capacities for learning and the retention of novel practices of environmental exploitation and social organization.
Culture in man depends on the development of psychological traits not found in other primates.
The capacity to form a concept of one's own identity and a process of comparison allowing an estimation of one's esteem among one's fellows that affects one's view of oneself are central features of humanity.
(6)
This book is to a large extent an exercise in extrapolation.
I attempt to clarify the roots of human cognition in their primordial states.
An ethology of man that accepts human uniqueness can thus begin.
Observation of behaviour is no longer enough, for the cognitive processes of transactions between people and within a person are also essential topics for an ethologist's exploration.
On the biological function of mind
Mental processes are the accompaniments or concomitants of the functional activity of specially differentiated parts of the organism.
They are in some way dependent on physiological and physical conditions.
But though they are not physical in their nature, and though it is difficult or impossible to conceive that they are physical in their origin, they are, for Darwin and his followers, factors in the evolutionary process in its physical or organic aspect.
By the physiologist within his special and well defined universe of discourse they may be properly regarded as epiphenomena; but by the naturalist in his more catholic survey of nature they cannot be so regarded.
C. Lloyd Morgan 1909
The concept of mind
We begin with an exploded concept, for ‘mind’ no longer signifies the entity it once did.
Even so, the tradition of several centuries does not die easily and for many people mind remains opposed to matter, remains the opposite of the body.
The origin of this very basic and particularly European way of thought lies in the experience that I appear to exist as a conscious entity within my body, and yet remain distinguishable from my body.
Within the European intellectual tradition, conscious awareness, the soul, became the seat of all that is angelic in Man, the part having the possibility of eternal life through resurrection after death.
The body, bound to the soil to which it is destined to return, remained the source of those evil behaviours that, judged by God, lead to hell.
In some Christian doctrine the flesh is the source of evil and the soul or mind is elevated as the moral agent with behavioural choice.
In the Hindu folk tradition, rebirth of the spiritual entity in a hell or a heaven is likewise dependent upon its moral behaviour while in the bodily container.
In secular philosophy this doctrine, in the form given to it by Descartes, has remained until very recently a basic element in European thought and science.
The relation between mind and body in this set of ideas is such that the two retain distinct properties and function as discrete entities.
Every human being has both a body and a mind.
Bodies are substantial, exist in space, obey mechanical laws.
In that bodies are observable, they can be inspected by others.
The behaviour  of bodies can be evaluated according to criteria, as beautiful or ugly, sane or mad.
Bodily life is a public matter.
With mind all is opposite; minds are not substantial, do not apparently obey physical laws, cannot be directly observed or inspected, unless it is my own mind that is in question.
Mind life is private.
Clearly there is a relation between the body and the mind that inhabits it.
Indeed the positing of such a relationship lies at the root of moral judgement.
Even though it is the body that offends, it is none the less the mind that is found accountable.
Descartes himself, using the little mechanical and physiological knowledge available to him, went to great lengths in trying to account for this relationship.
He did it by suggesting the nervous system as an intermediary.
You have a mind and I have a mind.
We can both observe our bodies but I can never observe your mind nor you mine.
In this respect, you and I remain unknowable to one another.
Yet since you ‘have’ your body and I ‘have’mine we can infer the general features of each other 's minds by observing each other 's bodily behaviour.
Behaviour carries the expression of the mind.
Yet, at best, this is unreliable, as when I am thinking of your beautiful wife while discussing with you the state of the nation.
The idea that minds exist as separate entities within bodies has been termed by Gilbert Ryle ‘the dogma of the Ghost in the Machine’.
In his important book The concept of mind (1949) Ryle exploded the dogma by successfully demonstrating that, as used in the Cartesian ‘myth’, the term represents the facts of mental life as if it belonged to one logical type or category, when it actually belongs to another.
Ryle uses a set of powerful illustrations to demonstrate his point.
A foreign visitor to Oxford is shown the colleges, libraries, playing fields, laboratories, and administrative offices.
He then asks ‘But where is the University?’
A child watches the march-past of an army division.
He has seen the battalions, squadrons, tanks, infantry, and so on.
He then asks ‘When is the Division going to appear?’.
In both these cases the confusion arises because a term is considered to belong to the same category as the ones that are being demonstrated.
In the case of Oxford University all the parts of the university comprise the University.
There is no extra entity, for the term ‘university’ assembles collectively all those visible objects that are known by the term.
Similarly, when a psychologist has observed numerous activities of the body, he may be inclined to ask ‘Ah — but now where is the mind?’.
Ryle's point is that, since the terms ‘mind’ and ‘body’are not of the same category, it is illegitimate to relate them logically in this way.
But 
…the argument will not show that either of the illegitimately conjoined propositions is absurd in itself.
I am not, for example, denying that there occur mental processes.
Doing long division is a mental process and so is making a joke.
But I am saying that the phrase ‘there occur mental processes’ does not mean the same sort of thing as ‘there occur physical processes’, and, therefore, that it makes no sense to conjoin or disjoin the two.
Ryle wishes not to dissipate the contrast between mind and matter by absorbing one by the other but by showing that the contrasting of the two is as illegitimate as contrasting ‘She came home in a flood of tears’ and ‘She came home in a sedan-chair’.
Thus, to argue that minds exist and that bodies exist is correct, so long as the ‘logical tones of voice, are maintained as distinct.
Here there are two different senses of ‘exist’, in the same way as ‘the tide is rising’ and ‘the cost of living is rising differ in the sense in which rising is used.
One might argue from this that ‘mind’ simply refers to the subjective aspect of a complex bodily process of cognition.
Ryle's examination of the relation between mind and body should not be confused with the behaviourist tenet that all ‘unobservables’, such as consciousness, should be eliminated from the programme of psychology.
J. B. Watson in 1914 and other behaviourist thinkers (Hull, Skinner) believed that an acquired behaviour element, the conditioned reflex for example, could be made to account for all behaviour, because such an element could be treated as a ‘building block in theory much in the same way that nineteenth-century physicists used ‘atoms’ to build up a theory of matter.
This extreme reductionism has failed simply because elements such as Pavlov's ‘conditioned reflexes’ cannot account for all aspects of behaviour.
By establishing a paradigm for psychological investigation that lasted for some forty years, behaviourists seriously delayed the understanding of human cognition.
Such is probably always the result of an excessive zeal in the application of Occam's Razor.
Ryle points out that the psychologist's dream of creating a behavioural science on a Newtonian basis must be abandoned.
Psychology is no more the name of an unique body of theory or inquiry and in physics Newton has given place to Einstein.
While, on the one hand, my stammering only in the presence of persons in particular roles, or talking excessively after giving a lecture, pose genuine psychological problems that find expression in certain types of theorizing, so too, on the other hand, do questions about the effects of adrenalin on sitters in an examination room, or family genetics on the choice of career.
Likewise, the neurology of the cerebral hemispheres is significant for the localization of cognitive attributes and the evolution of the nervous system is one way of describing the evolution of mental life.
Indeed, so interlinked have become questions of psychology with those  of biology that the two words are gradually eliding.
So we have psychobiology, sociobiology, biosocial anthropology, and so on, to indicate the common roots of the two sciences in the structuring of life.
Evolution of mind
When I reflect upon the nature of my experiential life, my ‘inner’ life if you will, I become aware of the presence of structure.
Some of this structure I hold in common with the structural elements of other people.
Their behaviour in resembling mine often allows me to make correct interpretations of their experience.
At least they may tell me so.
But some of my structure is unique to me, my history for example, and no one else can know much of this unless I choose to relate it to them.
I am aware too that, in spite of other similarities, no amount of relating will allow me to converse in more than a most elementary way with a chimpanzee.
Generalizing from these reflections that began in my own subjectivity I may ask ‘objective’ questions about the origin of my self-awareness, of my structure, and that of others.
I am led very rapidly into the field of evolution as applied to my behaviour, my experiencing, and that of others.
As early as 1901 L. T. Hobhouse wrote a book entitled Mind in evolution —a work singularly ignored by most modern scholars.
Hobhouse concerned himself directly with the evolution of mind at a time when the behaviourist dogma had not yet arrived to inhibit such a discussion.
He began by arguing that adaptive radiation in the animal kingdom produces diversity and specialization, but that such a process may as commonly entail a structural atrophy, as in the case of parasites or cave fish, as it does some directional increase in complexity.
Furthermore, stability rather than change is commonly a result of evolution.
Thus many primitive animals retain an ancient form and subsist to the present day.
Evolution multiplies and defines but ‘does not necessarily elevate’.
In posing the question as to whether there is some consistent direction from lower to higher states of biological organization, Hobhouse concluded that the one consistent change of this type lies in the growth of mind.
He largely avoided the Cartesian dilemma by saying
We shall not endeavour to trace the origin of Mind out of something that is not mind.
So far as its origin is concerned, we shall take it as a factor in organic evolution, and shall content ourselves with pointing out certain more primitive features of which it is the natural development.
In regards to its nature, we shall be principally occupied, not with what Mind is felt to be by its possessor, but rather with its operations as apparent to an onlooker.
Hobhouse went on to state:
Mind…is known by its functions.
The function which modern philosophy seized upon as expressing the vital essence of Mind was that of bringing things together so that they have a bearing upon one another.
Where there is Mind there is order and system, correlation and proportion, a harmonising of forces and an interconnection of parts.
The organisation which is gifted with intelligence shows it by arranging its actions on a certain plan….
Its scheme of action may include the good of its young or its mate…along with its own.
In proportion as its acts tend to promote the same end, its conduct may be termed organised and its several actions correlated.
Hobhouse goes on to point out that although instinct is a
basis for the adjustment and co-ordination of action unsurpassed in its own way…evolution consists in the gradual replacement of instinct by reason and, it is the final goal of reason…to bring all the experience of the race to bear in organising the whole life of the race.
He then went on, chapter by chapter, to provide an evolutionary ethology of behaviour as known in his time, treating reflexes, instincts, intelligence (with learning experiments), social behaviour, and finally conceptual thought and purposive self-conscious development.
Like the Victorian evolutionists before him, Hobhouse saw no error in seeking an element of progressive change in evolution.
Yet evolutionists of the next generation paid little attention to his views and others like them.
Early writers had not analysed clearly enough the elements that by changing constituted a directional advance.
Subjective anthropomorphism, undoubtedly present in these theories, led to the criticism that an evolutionary direction was purely relative to human evaluations.
This reaction attributed evolution to pure chance and held the opinion that complex animals could not be considered better adapted to their environments than more lowly forms: all represented degrees of specialization.
However, in 1942, Julian Huxley reintroduced both the notion of directional change and that of levels of adaptation.
The objective criteria for a hierarchy of types of adaptive organization have been variously discussed (see also Simpson 1944; Rensch 1950) but Huxley greatly advanced the analysis by suggesting two types of shift in levels: first, an increasing control by the organism over its environment; secondly, an increasing physiological and behavioural independence of the organism from its environment.
This idea may be expressed in terms of population dynamics.
An evolutionarily successful species is likely to populate its habitat fully and individuals are likely to be forced into peripheral regions where they face a greater environmental variance.
For many individuals, tolerance of the increased environmental stresses will be inadequate, reproduction will not be successful, and a high mortality may occur.
However, for those individuals which natural variation has endowed  with greater tolerance, survival and reproduction will be possible.
The progeny of such individuals, when compared with the parental populations, will have probably shown advance in both features listed by Huxley.
From this point on a number of contingencies are possible.
One is that descendants of the marginal stock enter into competition with the parental stock in a third area of colonization.
The individuals adapted through increased capacities to control environmental changes and to exist independently of them will then be the more successful.
Near the end of his book, Hobhouse introduced an interesting argument.
He stated that his purpose had been ‘to ascertain the character and function of Mind as the organising principle in Evolution.
In the absence of intelligence and in its lowest stages, Life is, as we expressed it, unorganised.’
He pointed out that the occurrence of conflict rather than co-operation and the fact that evolution ‘rests on a struggle for existence’ shows ‘a want of that organic unity in which the good of one part is necessarily the good of the rest’.
Evolution by natural selection is ‘the direct negation of organic growth.
It is in no way parallel to the regular unfolding of a germ.
It is more like a slow process of sifting, in which, by a long series of stages, and with many pauses, grains of one kind tend to come together in a heap’.
Evolution thus does not proceed in a particular direction but types emerge which deal most effectively with their particular environments.
Mind is that capacity of individuals to correlate past experience with ongoing reactions.
In this way a knowledge of the patterning of events makes possible ‘a mutual understanding of individuals and the impulses of aid to mate or young are thereby transformed into sympathetic actions’.
The extension of such knowledge produce a corpus of thought in which actions are adapted to ‘broad views of the purpose of life’.
And from this stems the origin of ethical systems governing behaviour.
Hobhouse saw the end-point of this direction in ‘a co-ordination of thought and conduct…in which the whole experience of the species would be used in furtherance of one end that can embrace all human action, the development of the human species towards whatever perfection it may be within its power to attain.
Hobhouse, in these paragraphs, was using the word ‘mind’ to refer particularly to a knowing capacity that functions in the construction of effective policies of behaviour with respect to individual and group survival and reproduction.
The shift from the ‘blind’ control of individual strategies by innate behaviour repertoires through the various stages of capacity in acquiring new behaviour through learning and intelligence is a marked feature of evolutionary direction seen clearly, for example, in the development of complex societies from simpler beginnings (Chapter 8).
Models of mind
In modern parlance, Hobhouse placed his emphasis on cognition and was discussing the evolution of cognitive capacity.
But cognition cannot exist independently of its data base and for data to be evaluated it must first be perceived.
The relation between percept and concept, between processes of perception and those of cognition, thus becomes a key focus of our attention.
Clearly it is no mere anthropomorphism to point out that the functional relation between these two and their capacity in man to render the species largely independent from and a controller of his natural environment has become a prime factor in the advance of man over other primate species.
If we are to comprehend how this has come about, we need to start with some simple modelling of the relations between mental functions.
Much as the University of Oxford is understood by reference to a model of its operational system so may we approach the operations of ‘mind’ from this point of view.
Through their effort in extreme simplification the early behaviourists treated the organism as a ‘black box’ with inputs (stimuli) and outputs (responses).
This black box model represented so: allows the study of animal behaviour through an analysis of the lawful relations between stimulus conditions and responses.
Surprisingly perhaps, the results were highly productive and the basic laws of learning under certain strictly controlled laboratory conditions were achieved through the monumental labours of B. F. Skinner and his colleagues using such amenable subjects as the white rat and the domesticated pigeon.
Another prodigious worker, Clark Hull, endeavoured to infer the processes within the black box that intervened between the stimulus and response.
Without actually opening it, which would have been to examine the beast physiologically, Hull inferred numerous relationships between levels of motivation (drive) and the extent of learning (habit strength) that rendered a response more or less probable.
Interestingly enough, as many writers have pointed out, this process led to the positing of numerous agencies with high-sounding names purporting to do exactly what the older and rejected vocabulary of pre-behaviourist mentalism had attempted to do.
These erudite analyses and subtle experiments thus led back to precisely the point at which they had started.
Clearly, if not the ghost, then the organism in the black box could not be ignored.
The model sketched below was inevitable:
The great physiologist Sir Charles Sherrington had approached the problem of the emergence of cognitive control in behaviour along a very different route.
Throughout a life spent in experimental anatomy he worked primarily with the spinal mammal and its reflexes.
He summarized his findings in his book The integrative action of the nervous system (1906).
Animals came in two kinds, radially and bilaterally symmetrical.
As the term indicates, radially symmetrical animals have a globular or circular plan such as do Volvox , sea anemones, starfishes, or jellyfishes.
The nervous systems of these creatures are loosely organized with many more-or-less interdependent parts.
An extensive nerve network receives stimulation on the surfaces, and when stimulation exceeds a threshold, responses are generated by activation of an equally diffuse system of motor neurons.
Many such creatures contain nervous organelles that operate independently of the other systems.
Such are the nematocysts of sea anemones: cells containing a coiled spring filament with a harpoon on the end.
When stimulated by contact the dart shoots out to impale a passing animalcule as prey.
Within the effector (motor) nervous system are neuronal circuits that cause periodic movements, so that the animal's basic needs are met.
Sea worms, living in tubes, aerate their burrows periodically by washing water through them and thereby both receive oxygen from the fresh flow of water and keep their tubes clean.
Some jellyfish beat the edges of the bell rhythmically and thereby rise in the water to remain near the surface.
At night they slowly sink.
This maintains them within the layer of plant plankton upon which they feed.
Such ‘wired-in’ behavioural programmes controlled by neuronal pacemakers are innate response repertoires activated endogenously or in relation to shifts in local conditions.
Similarly, reception of certain stimuli, usually by specialized neuronal receptors, sets off appropriate responses to the appearance of food, a predator, or a potential mate.
Such organisms have evolved their complex response repertoires as the means whereby they can relate to stimuli impinging from outside, either through direct tactile contact or at a short distance, by vibration or chemosensory means.
Behaviour here is a genetically programmed capacity for an adaptive response to environment.
These responses ensure the maintenance and survival of an individual and its reproduction.
These simple response systems, often only very loosely integrated, comprise elementary programmes with strategic designs.
Bilateral animals move in a constant direction in such a way that one end is the front and the other the back.
Many such creatures increase in size by segmentation, each segment containing a batch of similar organs, legs, excretory devices, and reproductive organs, so that each is partially independent of the remainder.
Even so the activity of the whole animal is co-ordinated by superordinate controls in the central  nervous system.
The earthworm (Lumbricus ) is an example.
Evolution in bilateral animals has usually consisted in a tendency towards more effective integration of segments.
In some cases, as in certain molluscs such as snails or octopods, the segments have become closely coalesced so that the original plan is largely hidden.
In vertebrates, the division of the spinal cord recalls the original segmentation, and the organization of the nervous system is still largely based on a segmental arrangement of both receptor and effector nerves.
The consequence of having a front end is that stimuli tend to make their impact there first.
It is thus that the ‘head’ as bearer of an impressive array of receptor organs (sight, sound, odour) has evolved.
And to integrate this bombardment of sense stimulations and to organize responses to them, the ganglion of this segment (often plus several additional ones) becomes greatly enlarged to form the brain.
In vertebrates the brain is the much expanded front end of the spinal cord.
Sir Charles Sherrington (1906) paid close attention to the evolutionary importance of the development of the ‘head’.
In each vertebrate segment the ‘reflex arc’ is based upon two neurons: the afferent sensory root and the efferent motor root.
‘And…on the junction between these two are superposed and functionally set, mediately or immediately, all the other neural arcs, even, those of the cortex of the cerebrum itself’.
In the head the segmental receptors are especially developed and differentiated into sense organs responding to environmental stimuli emanating often at a distance from the animal.
The main modalities of touch and smell, hearing and sight are all specializations to different modes of ‘distance reception’.
Sherrington underlines the statement that ‘the brain is always the part of the nervous system which is constructed upon and evolved upon the ‘’ distance receptor'’organs'.
Now distance receptors provide information about a possible event in the immediate future such that, through neural connections to innate movement controllers, an animal may make ‘precurrent’ reactions enabling it to adjust to the new information, for example , by approaching prey, or by preparatory behaviour for escape in relation to possible alarming stimuli.
These ‘anticipatory’ reactions are thus ‘precurrent’to final or ‘consummatory’reactions such as swallowing or escape.
A strong ‘affective tone’ accompanies these consummatory reactions so that once stimulated an animal may show a motivated persistence in completing the behavioural event that finalizes the sequence.
In a simple instance, such as hunger, the stimulus is particularly noticeable to a hungry animal, which then works hard to obtain the food.
Furthermore ‘the relative haste with which an animal when hungry approaches food offered to the visual field, suggests that conation attaches to the visual reaction by association through memory with affective tone’.
Here then  Sherrington perceives that learning and memory may intervene between stimulus and response and guide the animal with respect to the satisfaction of its metabolical or productive needs.
Along a different line of thought, Sherrington had thus reached similar conclusions to those of Pavlov in his famous conditioning experiments.
The ‘conditioned reflex’ is an element in the learning process.
To achieve this effect the complex sets of alternative motor patterns available to meet the contingencies presented by the distance receptors need to be managed.
This involves a substantial intercalation of neurons to form an association area between the sensory and motor parts of the elementary brain.
The consequence of course, is a major enlargement of the whole structure.
In addition, the neuronal representation and control of complex innate behavioural repertoires of strategic importance is based here.
Lorenz (1950, 1970) and Tinbergen (1951) have constructed influential models describing possible relations between such innate motor systems and the environment.
These ideas, together with their Sherringtonian anticipations, form the historical roots of much contemporary ethological theory and debate.
Animals rarely live in completely stable environments.
The successful colonization of the land from the original marine environment not only necessitated the production of entirely new means of acquiring oxygen and supporting the weight of the body, but also exposed animals to habitats of much greater variability in temperature, humidity, and other conditions.
Innate behaviour repertoires only change through natural selection over successive generations and, although their range of tolerance, their capacities, can be extended, their capability in responding to rapid day to day environmental shifts is clearly limited.
Increased ability to learn directly from the environment evolved to allow organisms to acquire new information and thus to build up simple programmes of response to such exigencies.
Expansion of neuronal material provided areas devoted to ‘association’ so that the necessary correlations between stimulus patterns and their effects in terms of comfort or discomfort (see below, p. 26) could be made.
Association areas were initially closely linked to innate programmes and extended their capacity.
As learning ability developed, however, whole response repertoires of acquired behaviour became possible and functioned largely independently of the innate bases.
In considering the maintenance and reproductive functions of an advanced organism, we find that there is an especially pronounced development of the capacity to correlate classes of information originating from the environment, not only with one another, but also with information arising from monitoring the interior metabolic condition.
This enhancement leads on to new stages in cognitive complexity:
(1)
An increased capacity to store past events in memory, together with the responses given to them and their results.
In fact whole past programmes and their effects are stored.
(2)
The capacity to recircuit neurophysiologically the ongoing experiencing of the senses in such a way that the subject becomes ‘aware’ of its situation through introspection of this analogue.
This process seems to occur in much the same way as a plan position indicator in a radar system monitors the movement of targets recorded on the radar sets by reference to the stable map of the background locality.
This  recyclying of the present is the root of consciousness and of the perception of time.
(3)
The capacity to re-represent in conscious awareness what was once a ‘presentational continuum’ of past events.
In this way elements of past experience can be ‘recalled’ from memory for comparison with the ongoing situation.
This is the basis for discriminatory planning and foresight.
It is the essential condition for higher forms of intellectual functioning.
We may now represent the mental capacities of the cerebral hemispheres of an advanced organism in a simple model that gets us far closer to the condition of our own species (Fig. 2. i).
There are four interacting systems within the organism's black box that enable it to function effectively.
First in the diagram is the perceptual system which monitors the environment by means of distance receptors: eyes, ears, nose, and tactile organs.
The internal state of the organism is monitored by means of receptors, mostly situated in the brain stem.
These record the ambient blood temperature, the levels of oxygen and CO2 in the blood, sugar and various nutrient levels, and the levels and presence of numerous endocrine substances related to symptoms of stress or reproductive physiology.
This input is fed to certain parts of the brain stem and filtered.
The filtering operation is crucial, because the total amount of environmental information could swamp virtually any receiver not adapted to selective perception.
In brief, filtering consists of a monitoring for novelty by a match — mismatch comparison with expected values based on physiological norms and established knowledge (see further in Chapter 9).
The selected novel information is then fed to the cognitive system .
In higher organisms one prime function of this system is the maintenance of consciousness as a kind of screen upon which both novel information and the background presentational continuum can be projected.
Fast scenarios may also be called up and reprojected in relation to the ongoing situation, so that the probable outcome of a current dilemma may be assessed.
Much of this assessment occurs in a kind of calculating room that is perhaps rather rarely available to conscious inspection and where information concerning bodily conditions, unconsciously held programmes highly prejudicial to the outcome, and the current motivational bias are consulted.
The outcome eventuates in a decision and instructions are passed to the motivational —behavioural system .
The motivational system of a higher organism is complex, comprising several distinct types of mechanism expressed through differing behavioural means.
Gone are the days when Hull among behaviourists or Lorenz among the classical ethologists could assume that all motivational mechanisms were of the similar type.
The activation of amotivational  system (say, fear, escape, aggression, sex) is expressed through behaviour provided by the neuromuscular systems of the body.
Social interactions entail the use of complex signal repertoires, many of which have been analysed in detail by ethologists (see Hinde 1960).
Many of the behavioural strategies initiated by an individual are concerned with approach or avoidance.
Approach may lead to aggression or sexual behaviour; avoidance leads to preservation.
But basic to all such schemata is the supplying of energy reserves above those required for maintenance metabolism.
The bio-energy system of the body is exceedingly elaborate.
In addition to maintaining levels of crude energy from sugars, it includes the maintenance of complex chemicals basic to neuronal functions as well as the efficiency of the endocrine system.
Basic behaviour must maintain the efficiency of this system, and the current wave of studies on foraging strategies and exploitation of the habitat signals a contemporary awareness of this fact.
The behavioural output affects the environment strategically.
John Maynard Smith (1976) used the term Evolutionary Stable Strategies (ESSs) to describe those regular performances of a species that have been selected in the past as a consequence of their contribution to success in differential reproduction and the structure of which is largely under genetic control.
The prime concerns of these strategies are (i) foraging and nutrient acquisition,(2) predator avoidance, and (3) mating, pair bonding (if present), and care of young (if present).
Each overall label will include a multiplicity of behavioural mechanisms of strategic design subordinate to the main functional system.
The effects of behavioural activity bring about changes in both the physical and the social environment and a shift in the information provided to the perceptual system.
The organism is thus constantly cycling information and maintaining an alertness to change.
Organisms commonly need to rest this apparatus and this is achieved by sleep and its attendant strategies, such as finding a safe place or, as with chimpanzees, constructing one.
One of the most crucial features of the model we are describing is the occurrence of feedback.
Information from the bio-energy and motivational — behavioural systems is returned in the form of an ‘output copy’ to the perceptual system.
On this basis the detection of discrepancy or ‘dissonance’ is possible.
Likewise, within the cognitive system the interplay between memory and ongoing circumstances involves repeated cycles of selective recall established according to highly complex sets of individualized criteria forming elaborate hierarchical systems.
Mind as information processing
The recognition that all parts of the psychobiological system governing the lives of individuals are interrelated is surprisingly recent.
The current emphasis on systems analysis tends to hide this fact, yet in both Konrad Lorenz's famous hydraulic model and Niko Tinbergen's attempt to relate this to the functioning nervous system no feedback loops at all were incorporated.
This omission, which now seems curious, was based upon the conventional notion of the organism as respondent.
Programmed by the genes or by the acquisition of conditioned operant behaviour, the organism emitted responses acquired through natural selection or learnt through reinforcement by rewards.
The insight, particularly in psycholinguistics, that the linear sequence was contrived through a hierarchical logic necessitating feedback, came as a revolution.
The consequence is a realization that it is precisely the hierarchical and cybernetic attributes of living organisms that enabled evolution to acquire the direction emphasized by Hobhouse at the start of the century.
Julian Huxley's directional component in evolution is made possible only by an increasing subtlety of internal integration of the body and a corresponding increase in the inter-individual integration in societal processes involved in reproduction.
Both of these depend on the capacity of organisms to integrate previously separated functions through the imposition of a superordinate system relating its subordinate parts; and this requires the open transfer of information between those parts.
Once a hierarchical order of open systems had come into being, natural selection, operating on the elaboration of new hierarchies and new cybernetics, became capable of generating states of greater heterogeneity with integrative systemic control.
Systems originally independent, become interdependent components of higher-order systems.
While retaining a measure of separate functioning, these systems may again become components of yet more highly complex ones.
Cells become elaborated into tissues, tissues into organs, colonies become individuals; organisms relate in societies that in many respects replicate the functions of individual organisms.
The cybernetic approach to biological systems is especially useful in an examination of the place of mind in bodily organization (Lazlo 1969).
The cognitive apparatus with its subjective aspect is above all concerned with the manipulation of information governing the conduct of the organism in relation to the environment through the flexible expression of evolved strategies.
Information processing is the prime function of ‘mind’; its organismic role.
As Sayre (1976) points out, a cybernetic approach also has philosophical advantages.
It allows a degree of reductionism without deserting a monism of mind for dualism .
The cybernetic approach is tailored to make sense of statements regarding body — mind interaction and to increase our understanding of both terms.
The interpretation of ‘mind’ as information processing with a self-monitoring facility called consciousness goes a long way towards resolving the problem of body — mind interaction which Popper and Eccles (1978) have recently revived.
It seems that these authors see mind as an entity distinct from the processes that support it.
While their criticism of reductionism is just and their emphasis on ‘downward’ causation (mind influencing matter) timely, it seems to me that the problem of ‘interactionism’largely disappears when the systemic position of information processing in the life of a subjectively aware organism is understood.
There is no doubt that information is held and manipulated in cytochemically encoded structures.
Information is physically represented.
The mind is thus materially present in the world.
The problem of dualism seems to arise from the way in which we experience ourselves.
Dualistic experiencing is a property of the way in which information is processed by action in the brain.
Consciousness, we may argue, comes into being when information is re-presented to a monitoring faculty under deliberative attention.
Attention is a holding in consciousness of an object that may be a thing, person, state of mind, a self-experience, another's opinion, or a mathematical abstraction.
Only as attending proceeds, however, does it become possible to describe the immediately antecedent experience of a conscious episode.
In fact mental experience can be consulted only retrospectively and such experience, as evidence for the existence of mind, can appear only as an introspective report of past events.
Inferences about mind are thus made from descriptions.
By contrast, if one seeks in the present continuum for ‘that which attends’, nothing is to be found.
Only observation itself exists; the ‘attender’ escapes observation (see also Sherrington 1940, p. 334).
It is because the attender is unobservable and can only be inferred from retrospective description that mental experiencing includes a strong tendency to dichotomize the ‘I’(attender) from the ‘me’(self-description); a dichotomy that parallels that between ‘I’ and my body.
Interactionism derives then from these two modes of experiencing (the monist present continuum and dualist self-description) which, on analysis, simply appear as inherent properties of the human cognitive process.
The philosophical splitting-off of mind from brain arises mistakenly from the necessity of retrospective insight in the affirmation of the mind's existence.
‘This is not to deny in any way that informational processing leads to decisions that have ‘downward’ psychosomatic effects.
Of course it does.
It is the function of the cognitive analyser to perform in exactly  this way and thereby to relate the organism more closely to environmental and social change.
There is no case beyond this for some mysterium , an agent of non-material origins, unless information processing itself is given that status.
Pursuing, perhaps riskily, a computer analogy we can argue that while the body resembles the hardware of a computer the mind comprises the software, the programmes that analyse and organize information to produce responses to inputs.
There is thus a valid distinction between body and mind.
Mind is synonymous with information in two categories; that governing instructions for operations and the raw information operated upon prior to decision-making.
Yet, in reality, we have much greater complexity.
The ‘biogrammar’ of evolutionary stable strategies and the acquired ‘sociogrammar’of social rules and roles are not so distinctly separated; they interlace functionally and epigenetically in ways that are not yet understood.
Consciousness
Many of the operations of mind, for example high-speed addition, skilled typing, or playing a musical instrument are not readily examined through introspection.
The roots of these activities remain unconscious to the performer whose attention illuminates the product more than the underlying process.
The selectivity and control of conscious attention remains poorly understood; very clearly it is not at all coextensive with information processing for much of this is never observed and cannot be summoned up for examination.
What then is consciousness?
It is as if the information processed by the senses becomes integrated to form an analogue of the energy patterns impinging upon them.
This interior analogue of the exterior world is actively ‘seen’; and this we may presume is no accidental metaphor, for the dominance of visual perception in human life extends into the inner world of experiencing as a dominant mode providing a basic ‘map’ of an ongoing continuum.
Auditory consciousness with its markedly linear character dependent upon the sequencing of events in time is a powerful vehicle for emotion, perhaps especially because the human voice is experienced in this mode, but it lacks the map-like quality of the inner visual panorama.
The tactile consciousness too, powerful as it may be in intimate contact, cannot represent our wide apprehension of the world to so marked a degree.
Vision, distance perception, maps our world and its analogue within is the experience of ‘seeing’.
Within consciousness one can experience a focal and a peripheral area.
It is as if within the wider panorama particular topics become a focus of especial attention.
And, curiously, this focus may utilize a  different mode from the more global picture.
Thus, while driving to work, an awareness of the road, other vehicles and the surrounding environment may become quite peripheral while the attention focuses upon a conversation, a recent argument at home, or a coming confrontation with a boss or client.
More curiously, since the complexities of threading one's vehicle through the traffic is successful, this peripheralization of awareness does not result in a reduction in efficiency.
The focusing of consciousness often appears to be concerned with the attempted resolution of unfinished business.
It is intentional.
In the moment of performing a task this recall of the past is precluded but when the ongoing continuum can be switched to ‘automatic’ the lines are cleared and old problems are worked over again.
In sleep, when the outer world is no longer dominant, the themes of such problems, often transposed into the curious symbolism of fantasy, again intrude associating with eye movements that emphasize their visual patterning.
The priorities that produce the recall of particular themes doubtless relate to the histories of the persons concerned.
Yet a consciousness can occur in which the focal attentiveness on a theme is absent; in a deeply relaxed mood one simply gazes upon the world.
Consciousness is both the stage and the action upon it.
Consciousness is not always a patterning in words.
While the inner metaphors of sensory experience are, as Jaynes (1976) affirms, verbal, consciousness is clearly not confined to linguistic themes.
The inner analogue is not just an interpretation of experience, it is a re-presentation of experience itself.
Indeed, subjectively, an individual is his experience, is his consciousness.
Consciousness is ‘being’.
Verbal thinking, by creating the object, is ‘having’(Fromm 1978).
About these polarities hang the varying states of consciousness that can and do arise (see Chapter ii).
Consciousness is intimately related to attending.
Attention is the focusing of conscious awareness.
This may involve a narrowing of consciousness, a division of awareness into a more- and a less-focal area, a widening of consciousness until it has no especial object, or a flickering of consciousness when steady attending is for some reason precluded.
Attention creates the foreground of consciousness, letting the rest slip into peripheral awareness.
Gaining control of attending is to control the mind and the states of experiencing.
It is one of the main disciplines of spiritual training (Chapters 12 and 13).
In learning a task, how to ride a bicycle, for example, one attends at first to every muscular movement.
As one gains in skill the performance of the task of riding is released to the periphery of awareness.
It becomes ‘automatic’ and an attempt to introspect the components of skilled movement often breaks up the quality of the performance.
Meanwhile conscious awareness is freed to survey the landscape, to  plan a route, to talk with fellow cyclists, or to dream on what might have been or what once was.
Consciousness is the forefront of the mind particularly concerned with the intentionality of the moment.
The consciousness we experience is most usually a structure derived from complex processing of information from the senses and elaborately categorized to make a consistent ‘picture’ against which fresh information can be sorted and ‘understood’.
Interaction with the environment is a complex transaction between biological structure and the energy flows of the world ‘out there’ mediated by the categories we impose upon raw experiencing.
In social life we build personal ‘constructs’(Kelly 1955) and use them to create consistent patterns of relating with others.
Some of the key properties of consciousness are spatialization, excerption, narratization, and conciliation (Jaynes 1976).
Spatialization is the invention of a spatial world as the map upon which we plot experience.
Inside the solid lumps of our brain lives the experience which appears to the subject as an ordered world, the room in which I write for example.
Yet not all is seen at once, we excerpt from possible scenarios those bits most relevant to the moment.
For example, in ‘conceiving’ of my car I literally create it in awareness by putting together an interior abstraction.
To remember an event, I first create an excerpt from the drama of the past and build from there.
Narratization is story telling.
The creation of linear sequences from the excerpts of our lives.
And a highly biasing and prejudicial process it can be.
Conciliation is the working through of ideas to produce an internally consistent view of the material.
For example, we create the space within which the action occurs and the social scenario of a given personal drama.
The ‘I’ and the ‘me’(p. 247) are likewise structures excerpted and narratized from experience.
These are not the immutable basis of our world but rather the constructs we create to produce a stable world of subject and object within which to act.
Inevitably this means that not only are individual consciousnesses unique but that the consciousnesses of one epoch may differ as greatly from those of another as do the construed worlds of a polar Eskimo and a city dweller in New York.
It also implies that the history of human consciousnesses is the history of human social life.
There is every reason to suppose that the conscious life of the Homeric heroes, for example, was most unlike that of modern man.
So unlike indeed that Jaynes (1976) does not refer to it as consciousness at all.
The Homeric heroes, the personalities of the early old Testament, individuals of the old empires of Babylon and Egypt have all come down to us as individuals driven by interior forces.
Gods speak to them from inside, hallucinating voices perhaps originally those of actual ancestors, later projected into statues but still ‘heard’ within.
It seems likely that as these  authoritarian empires arose the simple egalitarianism of hunter — gathering peoples gave place to the stress of hierarchy.
Early human consciousness would have been a world of certainties based upon simple social conventions and the fact of being born irrevocably into a clear cut role in life.
These empires, run by the internalized voices of deified ancestors, demanded a firm control of classes and sections of society.
Jaynes argues that at this stage in human history conscious examination of self was absent.
For this to arise an increase in social complexity with a need for analytical flexibility in contact with diverse persons of other cultures was necessary.
And this came about through a sequence of catastrophes, movements of people, and trade.
Jaynes in fact argues that the shift to self-critical awareness involved a major alteration in the use of the brain with a new emphasis on the analytical functions of the right hemisphere and the subordination of the more holistic left (see Chapter 11).
Whatever the paths that may have been taken, the relatively late arrival on the human stage of the self-preoccupied consciousness of Indian, Chinese, late Greek, Roman, and European civilizations seems certain.
The form of consciousness is a product of the myth generating socio-economic forces of its time.
To this we shall later return.
The symbol and the world
In The biology of ultimate concern Dobzhansky (1967) argued that the emergence of life from non-living matter, the development of air-breathing land-dwelling animals, and the appearance of other major shifts in structural organization that preceded great adaptive radiations are examples of ‘evolutionary transcendence’.
By ‘transcendence’ he simply meant surpassing or going beyond the limits of previous organization.
The emergence of the information-processing capacity of the human brain is clearly a major transcendence in this sense.
The model of mental functioning we have been elaborating here shows clearly that the evolutionary direction in higher organisms has been particularly focused in the development of cognition.
Jean Piaget, in his profound yet often obscure work Biologie et connaissance (1967), remarks that ‘cognitive mechanisms constitute the actual organs of regulation during exchanges with the environment’ and infers that some isomorphism between theories of biological and cognitive integration is inevitable.
Glancing at the animal kingdom as a whole it is apparent that biologically simple organisms regulate their transactions with the environment primarily through a genetic endowment of relatively inflexible action patterns.
The addition of learning skills and the intelligent  construction of knowledge through exploration gradually becomes a predominant feature of the transactional style.
This is particularly so in homoiotherms, whose constant body temperature ensures a steady level of functioning in the central nervous system and hence the possibility of extensive exploration in varied environments.
Cognitive mechanisms managing intelligence are extensions of self-regulating processes in living organization.
They necessarily become the specialized regulators of behavioural interactions with the environment.
We have seen that a prime cognitive function in higher animals is the re-presentation of organized information for cognitive, sometimes conscious, evaluation in relation to the current experiential continuum.
In Piaget's system the behavioural components are functional forms of organic structure.
These ‘schemata’, as he calls them, comprise the strategic elements of the organism's elementary transactions with the world.
With increased capacity for learning and intellectual functioning the concept replaces the percept as the controller of schematic behaviour.
These interiorized schemata are constantly shuffled together, remodelled, discarded, or replaced as the subject shows cognitive adaptation to the objects of its knowledge as an extension of the overall adaptation of the organism to its environment.
Piaget does not believe that concepts take their origin from linguistic structures.
Rather they derive from associated events in experience that antedate linguistic structure both phylogenetically and, in man, in individual development.
Thus, for Piaget, concepts derive from operational schemata: ‘logico-mathematical structures are extracted from the general conditions of actions long before they make use of language, either natural or artificial’— for example, a mother's non-verbal interactions with her baby (see Chapters 9 and 10).
Thought forms, at first perhaps pictorial and in modern man very largely linguistic, set up a re-presentational environment possessing a dynamic stability that is distinct but not separable from the biological organization that maintains it.
These thought-systems contain behavioural norms, expectations, ethics, and ideals as well as simpler components probably present in all higher mammals at a non-verbal level.
The extraordinary benefit that this environment of thought confers upon its inhabitant is the possibility of advanced cognitive anticipation.
The capacity of the mature human individual to run through whole sets of possible scenarios as imagined responses to a problem situation or as a means to achieve a goal so far existent only in thought, is the secret of human ascendancy.
Even so this attribute of mind has a biological basis, and intercalates with thought forms of a very different nature.
These belong to a paralogical world of symbol and fantasy deeply rooted in non-verbal experiences.
Head, heart, and body remain  indivisibly organic and he who would divide them does so at his peril.
In their treatment of this theme both Cassirer and Hallowell point out that the crucial link between the inner world of representation and the outer ‘reality’ lies in the human capacity to symbolize percepts; symbolization of events in the perceptual continuum provides the units for a pictorial logic from which the abstraction of grammar eventually emerged as a concomitant of sound production in the development of verbal communication.
Symbolization is involved not only in the psychic functions of reason but also in all forms of selective attention and perception, dreams and fantasy, and in imagination.
‘Representative processes,’ says Hallowell, ‘are at the root of Man's capacity to deal with the abstract qualities of objects and events, his ability to deal with the possible or conceivable, the ideal as well as the actual, the intangible along with the tangible, the absent as well as the present object or event, with fantasy and with reality.
Every culture as well as the personal adjustment of each individual gives evidence of this, both at the level of the unconscious as well as conscious processes.’
An animal capable of symbolization can carry away from a situation an inner trace that stands in for the response it may make when it next encounters the situation.
A central process comes to function as a substitute for actual sensory cues.
The operations of this central process cannot be conveyed to another without employing some convention which allows a communicational interchange, whether it be by gesture, facial expression, or language.
Extrinsic signals representing the inner symbols are what make it possible for groups of humans to share a meaningful world.
Externalized graphic, plastic, dramatic, or electronic representations make up the ‘media’ and provide that cultural environment that is so inextricably intercalated with the biology of the performers and the physicality of the environment.
This view of the mind as the prime organ of the body in its transactions with the environment is a profound one.
It totally replaces the archaic dualism of the Cartesian myth, and has the form of a modified holism based on the cybernetic analysis of living systems.
Mental activity becomes, not the movement of a disembodied sprite anxiously wandering the corridors of the brain, but rather a mode of relating by which the organism contacts, interprets, and acts on its world.
Experience is necessarily an act of relating in a relationship that can never be free of paradox.
For that of which we relate is our interpretation, our presentational continuum coloured not so much by the world as by our own senses.
Real, yet not real, the world we see remains in itself mysterious, ineffable, sometimes a world of suffering, sometimes of joy and wonder.
But to leave this chapter with such a peroration would close prematurely  the development of the very argument we need to pursue if a clarification of ‘biological mind’ is to follow.
The transactions of our perceptual, cognitive, and motivational systems occur primarily between ourselves and another.
The context of mental functioning is social.
The imagery of thought, the sequencing of behaviour, and our foci of attention are primarily concerned with the world of other people.
The mind ‘runs on’ social information, for our environment is a society.
The paradox is thus a social one and to clear the ground for an attempt at its resolution we must take an extensive detour of several chapters.
In these we shall attempt to say what it means to be social, for in that attempt lies a further definition of ‘mind’.
Summary
(1)
The word ‘mind’ connotes all those most complex features of human cognition.
It has been a focal point in philosophies attempting to relate subjective experience to the objectivity of the body.
(2)
The idea that mind and body were separate yet in some sense connected has dominated European thought.
Gilbert Ryle in 1947 showed, however, that this dualism was based in a mistake in the categorization of ideas relating to the two terms.
To contrast ‘mind’ and ‘body’strictly as opposites is logically illegitimate.
Interest lies in the investigation of the activities called ‘mental’ which occur concurrently with the activities of an entity we term ‘the body’.
(3)
Introspection of my inner life and behaviour reveals structure.
In 1901 Hobhouse made an early attempt at accounting for the evolution of mental structure.
He concluded that a consistent direction of evolutionary change has been-an elaboration of processes of perception and knowing towards an emergence of what we call the mind.
Sir Charles Sherrington argued that the evolution of neuronal integration of reflexes concerned with movement gave rise to large ganglia situated at the front end of mobile animals, for that is where the sense organs develop.
The head bears not only the senses but also the machinery for integrating information and organizing appropriate responses.
(4)
A model of the physiological processes concerned with cognition requires at least a four-part system with feedback loops between them.
The four parts are the perceptual apparatus, the input analysers, the motivational and behavioural controllers, and the energy regulator.
Cognitive activities are essentially involved in relating perception, analysis, and action.
A prime activity is the recognition of novelty, for it alerts the animal to the presence of danger, a food object, or a mate.
Consciousness of the world comprises a form of re-presentation of the current perceptual input on a mental screen so that a constant awareness of a monitoring process arises.
(5)
Awareness occurs in the context of stable strategies of behaviour  evolved in relation to the satisfaction of the key needs of an organism for food, for avoidance of predation, and for reproduction.
(6)
The idea that all parts of the psychobiological system are closely interwoven is relatively recent.
It is precisely the integration of cybernetic mechanisms in a hierarchical order that enables animals to develop the more complex cognitive functions.
Sir Julian Huxley argued that the directional component in cognitive evolution was made possible by an increasing stability of internal integration in the body together with increases in social integration that allow for stable social systems in which individuals can learn while young.
Successive levels of integration, each more fully developed and dependent on more complex mechanisms, have succeeded one another throughout the evolution of the animal kingdom.
Man is the latest creation of this process.
(7)
Many cognitive processes are carried through without conscious awareness.
Consciousness is the experiencing of an integrated analogue of the information received by the senses.
It is however highly selected by mechanisms of attention.
Within consciousness there are often focal and peripheral concerns — again the result of differential attention.
Conscious awareness is the forefront of the mind and is particularly concerned with the intentionality of the moment.
Consciousness is structured and there are reasons for supposing that this structure differs with the socio-economic situation of the experiencing subject.
(8)
Jean Piaget, in arguing that cognitive mechanisms constitute the actual organs of regulation during exchanges with the environment, emphasizes that the development of complexity arises through the assimilation of new functions on to older structures.
He points to an inevitable parallel here between biological evolution and cognitive development in the life of an individual.
(9)
The mind is the cognitive organ of the body — the perceiver, the knower, and the actor in its relations with the environment.
This notion entirely replaces the old body — mind dichotomy that once dominated Western thought.
Yet a paradox remains, for what we relate to in actual experience remains our interpretation of a presentational continuum coloured as much by our own senses as by the realities they perceive.
The social environment and its evolution
No man is an island
John Donne
Evolution, social selection, and altruism
It is impossible to understand the activities of the human person without considering what it means to be social.
Man, furthermore, shares sociality with a wide array of other living organisms and to treat the specifically human kind without a look at other species would be to assume too narrow a perspective.
Indeed, it is precisely on the difficulties posed by making inferences from social animals to social man that a great contemporary debate concerning the mechanisms of social evolution has had its focus.
The theory of natural selection first propounded by Charles Darwin (1858) is a cornerstone of biological thought and its appreciation is essential to anyone asking evolutionary questions in relation to human social behaviour.
There is an enormous body of data in support of the theory and it is as close to being a factual representation of the nature of evolutionary change as any theory can be.
None the less there remain a number of common misapprehensions that need constant clarification.
As we are about to see, Darwin's use of Herbert Spencer's resounding phrase ‘survival of the fittest’, does not actually represent the nature of the process adequately and over-emphasizes part of it.
Animals live in populations that are dispersed in characteristic ways in the environment, ways that can usually be interpreted as a function of the behaviour of individual members operating as strategies for survival and reproduction.
Some groups of animals found in nature are simple ‘associations’ assembled either through overwhelming influences of nature, such as tide-washed plankton on a sandy shore, or through responses to temperature or light held in common by all participants.
Most assemblies are, however, ‘consociations’ resulting from behaviours in which animals respond to each other 's presence in ways that establish their spacing in relation to one another and their occurrence in groups of certain age and sex composition.
Dispersion patterns in a population are thus usually a consequence of social responses producing a societal organization.
As examples of societal organization consider the herds of wildebeest on the Serengeti plains of East Africa, kittiwake gulls in cliff colonies, weaver birds in their dense colonies of thousands of nests in trees or marshes in Africa, elephant seals in vast assemblies on the Californian island of Anna Nuevo, or the troops of baboons wandering in the  African savannah.
Examples of equal interest, of course, are the ant or bee colonies.
But not all social responses result in sociable congregation.
A response that maintains wide spacing, as in territorial animals or solitary nomads, may be equally social in that it is an interaction between two or more individuals.
Its effect may produce dispersal rather than crowding according to the characteristic response repertoire of the species.
Solitariness is thus a result of social behaviour and may produce particular societal structures involving wide dispersion.
Within populations animals differ in their success in leaving offspring; they show differential reproductive ability.
This comes about in two ways.
Spencer's colourful phrase refers to differences between organisms in death-rates (i.e. differential mortality).
Obviously, individuals that either fail to find enough food for themselves or unwisely and fatally expose themselves to predators tend to die young and to leave few offspring.
Differential reproductive success also occurs in other ways, however.
The main process is competition.
Whenever one individual leaves more offspring than another and this capacity is inherited, in time its genes will come to dominate the population gene pool.
Eventually the rarer genes will disappear and the genetic types leaving fewer offspring will become extinct.
An exception arises only where there are concomitant changes that confer an advantage on the rarer types.
Evolution by selection is a balancing process.
Animals that are too aggressive, too daring, or too timid for their own good in terms of reproduction are gradually eliminated so that in a stable environment the median values tend to become the population norms.
In general, intermediates have more offspring in repeated generations than do extremes and, for this reason selection favouring intermediates is called ‘stabilizing’.
In biology, one says that where an intermediate type is leaving on average more progeny than others then it is the more ‘fit’.
In this sense fitness is measurable by the number of offspring surviving in succeeding generations.
In a changing environment things are different.
The average individuals may now not be the most fit.
Rather those, perhaps at first rare, types best equipped to deal with the changed conditions may have this characteristic.
In time then, as their potential representation is realized through actual selection, these types increase their proportional occurrence in the population as a whole.
If the environment then stabilizes it will be these types that will probably emerge as the intermediates.
The habitat of an animal population offers only finite resources for its use.
As individuals reproduce these resources are necessarily depleted and the relation between the speed of their renewal and the rate of population growth governs the numbers of individuals that can live  there.
The geese feeding on grassy maritime flats at Slimbridge in England or at Caelaverock in Scotland arrive in large numbers in autumn.
The grass is quickly cropped.
Unless it grows fast enough to sustain recropping the birds must move elsewhere.
In a population confined to a particular habitat competition for limited resources is an inevitable feature of life so long as reproduction occurs.
This indeed has been the case ever since self-replicating molecular assemblages evolved to exploit finite resources.
Competition and selection are logically inevitable features of ecology, and this must be true on any planet on which life-forms reproduce and depend on supplies that can run out.
Efficiency in competition is thus a prime source of selection and occurs in many aspects of social life.
It is indirect in the case of two flocks of geese quartering the same ground; direct in the case of two titmice fighting over a piece of fat on a bird table.
Both these processes in the long term are effective agents of selection, especially when applied to differential capacities to obtain mates and to care for and rear young.
These fundamental ideas in population dynamics emphasize the individual as the subject of selection.
In biological writing it has often been said that a character is advantageous or detrimental to a species .
Sir Ronald Fisher in the 1958 edition of his great book The genetical theory of natural selection (first published in 1930) cautioned against this fallacy and suggested that arguments about the benefit of a given trait to a species were misleading.
The term ‘species’ simply denotes a population of interbreeding organisms which have a ‘pool’of genes in common.
The pool is not, however, selected as such; rather its genetic constituents are constantly reshuffled into individual organisms which contain subsets of gene-pool elements.
These individuals are then subjected to differential survival through the operation of a range of mortality factors that eliminate them either before or after reproduction.
There has been much debate about this question of the unit of natural selection.
Some earlier writers have considered that the characteristic groups that make up populations could be selected as such.
While this is theoretically conceivable, every writer who has recently examined the problem has considered that in nature it must be a very rare event and certainly not a common factor in the evolution of animal traits.
Characteristics of groups, like the characteristics of species, are thus considered by most theorists today to be the result of the selection of genes as they manifest themselves in the individuals comprising populations (G. C. Williams 1966; Lewontin 1970; E. O. Wilson 1975).
Dawkins (1976, 1978) has argued strongly that considering the individual animal as the unit of selection is a form of shorthand for what is actually selected down the generations is the gene, or over short time spans, groups of associated genes.
Logically and philosophically Dawkins's argument is important.
Ultimately it is indeed the individual genes that are selected.
However genes do not act independently; often blocks of genes operate together in determining traits and sets of traits in individual organisms.
This inevitably means that in each generation the loss of individuals from the population through mortality prior to breeding or through failure to breed, eliminates not isolated genes but sets of associated genes from the pool of genes that represents the total population of that species.
Over short time spans then genes are not the separate units of selection Dawkins supposes.
And again, over a longer time span genes will have changed by mutation or altered their effects by chromosomal recombination so that the effect they exert on traits can never be considered in isolation.
It looks as if the concept of the isolated gene as a unit of selection is an idealized abstraction from reality.
Alexander and Borgia (1978) have re-examined the problem of the unit of selection at different levels of biological organization.
After considering a variety of cases their main conclusion is that, operationally, the genome (the genes of an individual animal) is a common unit of selection and that to refer to individuals as units of selection is not necessarily in error.
Individual organism and genic selection are two among several processes of selection that produce species populations.
A total reductionism to genic selection is a distortion of the complexities involved.
A classic case of the evolution of social features within a species is the process described by Charles Darwin (1871) as ‘sexual selection’.
Sexual selection depends on the success of certain individuals over others of the same sex in relation to the propagation of the species; whilst natural selection depends on the success of both sexes, at all ages, in relation to the general conditions of life.
The sexual struggle is of two kinds; in the one it is between individuals of the same sex, generally the male sex, in order to drive away or kill their rivals, the females remain passive; whilst in the other the struggle is likewise between the individuals of the same sex, in order to excite or charm those of the opposite sex, generally the females, which no longer remain passive, but select more agreeable partners.
Darwin used several criteria for distinguishing sexual characteristics selected in this way:(1) the features acquired by sexual selection are confined to one sex;(2) the features develop fully only at sexual maturity;(3) the features often appear only during the reproductive season; and (4) males are in most species the most active in courtship.
In the context of reproduction, males make use of weapons (teeth, horns, etc.) in competitive encounters with male rivals and also make use of their courtship display characteristics in the presence of females in order the attract them.
An example of sexual selection emphasizing male-to-male exclusion (intrasexual selection) is provided by the antlers of deer.
These enormous structures vary with age and are closely related to the dominance of their owners in the hierarchy.
While fights may occur in the context of displays of rivalry, the exhibition of the character in question is often sufficient.
Sexual selection emphasizing attraction of the opposite sex is commonly recorded in relation to the elaborate displays of polygamous birds.
The extraordinary plumages of the male suffice to attract several females, who then rear their young alone (see Selander 1972).
Darwin's argument emphasized that sexual selection depends on the ‘success of certain individuals over others of the same sex in relation to the propagation of the species’.
The word ‘propagation’ in most of the literature since then has been understood to mean fertilization leading to the birth of new individuals in the population.
Indeed, in most examples, the emphasis has been on social systems in which males sporting the elaborate character are polygamous and have little to do with other aspects of reproduction.
In 1972 I suggested a fresh categorization of the processes involved to take into account an additional meaning of ‘propagate’; namely to rear to sexual maturity.
Social selection results from (a) effects of competition between the subject and others of either sex with respect to commodities essential to survival in the situation that will allow attempt at reproduction,(b) competition for access to preferred members of the opposite sex for mating and (c) effects of competition between subjects for access to commodities in the environment essential for rearing of their young or those of relatives to reproductive age.
Of these (b) is the process most commonly referred to as sexual selection.
Social selection is undoubtedly one of the main evolutionary processes responsible for the emergence of…behavioural characteristics.
We can see easily enough that in a competitive world social selection for a selfish maximization of an individual's capacity to reproduce will result in the predominance of certain traits in a population.
The presence of these traits in an individual often means a very ‘fit’ animal.
However, when that same individual is observed spending some of its vital time and energy budget assisting others to survive or rear their young the logic of Darwin's theory would suppose it to be engaged in activities that would tend to lower its biological fitness.
For a long time the only way in which a truly selfless behaviour could arise seemed to be through a differential advantage accruing to groups of individuals that showed sacrifice in relation to their companions to a degree greater than in other groups.
We have already seen, however, that on present evidence, and on the basis of extensive efforts at modelling, such a process of group selection seems unlikely to be important in evolution.
None the less, observers of animal behaviour know that altruistic  acts with differing degrees of self-sacrifice are of common occurrence, ranging from parental care to group defence and rescue behaviour to complex forms of co-operation.
How such behaviours have evolved in the face of selection favouring the maximization of individual reproduction has been a great and tantalizing mystery to evolutionary theorists.
This puzzle was at last unravelled in a series of brilliant papers of a rather technical and mathematical nature by the English geneticist and entomologist William Hamilton (1964, 1971a,b , 1972).
The essence of his argument is simple enough.
An individual's genes are not unique to itself; they occur also in animals to which it is genetically related through genealogical descent.
The proportion of genes which an individual shares with a relation depends on how close the relationship is.
For example, I share a greater proportion of my genes with my sister than I do with my cousin.
The number of genes I share with my relations by marriage is again smaller, and those I share with people from other countries is yet smaller still.
Given sufficient information on the ‘family trees’ of individuals it is possible to calculate their relatedness.
Similar calculations, in the absence of information from pedigrees, can be made from studies on the similarities of blood types and other traits.
The sharing of genes means that it is possible to sacrifice myself for my sister in such a way that, even if I die in the process, a proportion of my genes will survive in the next generation.
My behaviour is thus far from unfit.
In fact since my sister is likely to share half my genes my behaviour is probably only one-half less fit than if I had behaved totally selfishly.
My cousin probably shares with me only one-sixteenth of my genes, so that to sacrifice myself for her would be an activity of less fitness than sacrificing for my sister.
There are exceptional circumstances, such as my total castration or my taking vows as a monk, where my only residual fitness is that which accrues to me through my assistances to relatives.
If, at times in an ordinary reproductive life, I am moved not only to look after my own progeny but those of my sister as well, then I clearly increase my fitness above that due solely to selfish interests.
Hamilton had the brilliance to see the simple point that had not been elaborated before; namely that overall fitness is the sum of fitness owing to selfish behaviour plus fitness owing to altruistic behaviour to relatives.
This overall value he named ‘inclusive fitness’.
Now, it is intuitively clear that an individual has the evolutionary option of operating strategies that either maximize individual fitness or provide varying degrees of assistance to relatives.
To what extent its reproductive strategies emphasize such altruism depends on the pay-off of such strategies in terms of inclusive fitness.
Different pay-offs are related to contrasting  social systems of reproduction, which are in turn correlated with features of the environment, as we shall see.
Hamilton's theory indicates that since altruism is only of survival value if it enhances fitness, it can evolve only where the recipients are relatives.
It will diminish rapidly with the distance in relatedness between individuals.
Some have therefore concluded that behaviour in this category cannot be termed altruism at all.
Alexander (1974) expresses the nature of the process most succinctly in the term ‘nepotism’.
Nepotism is selfish behaviour having the appearance of altruism since it benefits relatives as well as ones own concerns.
Strategies that maximize the individual fitness component may be termed selfish.
Those that increase inclusive fitness through behaviour facilitating reproduction by relatives are nepotistic.
The process by which such behaviour arises is often called kin selection.
Social selection has thus yielded two main strategic components in the behaviour responsible for societal organization.
Upon the balance between them depends the enormous variety of societies seen in the animal kingdom.
Both, however, exist to maximize the inclusive fitness of breeding in their exponents.
A biological case for ‘true’ altruism does not exist.
An extension of Hamilton's theory has been provided by Trivers's (1971) analysis of the evolution of reciprocal altruism.
Altruism is reciprocal when the assistance rendered to an individual by another is returned in an appropriate interaction, usually at a later date.
In reciprocal altruism individuals are not required to have any particular genetic relatedness with one another.
Indeed, reciprocation may develop in behaviour occurring between different species.
The phenomenon depends upon an exchange of benefits and not upon the fact that, as in Hamilton's theory, the gene in question benefits its duplicate in another organism.
The behaviour will spread in a population where the net benefits accruing to reciprocators exceeds that to non-altruists.
Trivers argues that the chances of selection favouring altruistic behaviour in which individuals dispense a benefit to another greater than the cost of the act will be improved when many potentially altruistic situations arise in the population, when there are repetitive interactions of the same kind within a small group of individuals, and where symmetrical situations favouring the return of benefits are common.
Generally, then, one would expect to find reciprocation in populations of highly social animals living in small intensely interactive groups.
Trivers's theory has in fact received a convincing demonstration in Packer's observations on the baboon Papio anubis living at Gombe in Tanzania (see p. 76) as well as in numerous less-quantified examples cited in Trivers's paper.
Finally, in man, reciprocal altruism is supported by an elaborate psychological system based in friendship, sympathy, and moral rules (see further p. 176).
A possible response to receiving a benefit is to cheat; to fail to return the favour.
Selection is likely to penalize a cheater if cheating has subsequent adverse effects on his life that are greater than the benefits of not reciprocating.
For example, altruists may learn to withdraw benefits from cheaters and their offspring.
In man discrimination against known cheaters is intense, going so far as imprisonment and other forms of punishment.
Short-term gains by cheating are likely to be offset by long-term losses that may affect one's offspring and those of relatives.
We shall see later (p. 244) that the monitoring of trustworthiness in companions probably played a major role in the evolution of self-awareness in higher primates.
Ecology and social organization
One of the main thrusts in the social ethology of the 1960s was the clarification of the adaptiveness of social organizations.
Why did some birds of the same taxonomic family move in flocks while others were solitary?
Why do some antelopes mate in lekking grounds much as ruffs do while others attempt to round up small harems in a moving herd?
Why do gelada and hamadryas baboons form bonded harems based on long-term relations between the sexes while olive baboons have short consortships in a patterned promiscuity?
Why do human beings form sexual bonds and show a tendency to monogamy?
These and other questions emerged from a classical ethology primarily concerned with the evolution, motivation, and function of social signals but which began to focus on ecology as the adaptiveness of social structure to habitat gradually became apparent (see Crook 1970b; Crook and Goss-Custard 1972).
Gross correlations between social organization and ecology sometimes yield valuable clues which lead to the formulation of hypotheses for testing in later studies.
One of the most productive themes has been the association between two major types of selection pressure (see below) and differing reproductive strategies of species under ecological constraint.
A mountain of research has shown that the population of a species is commonly limited by shortages of resources in a density-dependent manner; the larger the population the greater the shortage and the more marked the effects of starvation.
The research of the great ecologist David Lack (1954) showed for example that in many bird species of temperate zones, individuals were reproducing as fast as they were able and that the subsequent population was cut back every year by winter mortality.
The state of control depended on the relationship between the success of breeding in the preceding summer and the carrying capacity of a location under varying conditions of weather and vegetative production.
The pattern of food production varies in different ecologies.
In the tundra there is a massive growth of ground vegetation and insect life in a very short spring and summer.
Much the same situation, although both a more productive and prolonged one, obtains in temperate woodland, where a great table of riches is spread every summer, declining to a low level of diminishing resources in the autumn.
By contrast equatorial forests lack extreme seasonal variation; where productivity varies little during the year the resource fluctuations are never so great as in savannah or temperate regions.
These contrasted conditions pose different problems for individuals of a reproducing population.
In the first condition individuals that breed soonest produce young at the peak of a rich and often superabundant period of food production.
Competition and selection may be expected to yield traits that maximize rapid and early reproduction and the production of the largest possible brood or litter.
By contrast, where food resources are relatively constant the population will be close to the carrying capacity of the environment and successful reproduction will only balance mortality.
Beyond this the young and frail newcomers will starve.
Under these circumstances  bood sizes would be expected to be low and behavioural traits to emphasize careful and effective rearing and foraging under difficult circumstances.
Technically these two conditions are said to yield so-called r and k selective circumstances respectively:r being the ‘intrinsic rate of natural increase’ and K the ‘carrying capacity of an environment’.
Where seasonal conditions favour a high r , selection favours maximal reproduction in terms of both brood size and speed.
Where a steady K is maintained animals aim at optimizing their success with more limited numbers of carefully reared young.
r and K selection tend to produce widely contrasting strategies for individual success in reproduction, which are in turn given expression in the types of social organization in which individuals live and breed.
Their contrasted influences have been found again and again in widely differing animal groups.
r and K symbolize contrasted extremes of course; many conditions lie in intermediate positions so that the terms are used in a purely comparative sense to indicate the extent to which a set of r or K habitat conditions is reached for comparable situations.
My original concern with these problems was expressed in a series of papers on African and Asian weaver birds culminating in a monograph in 1964.
Over six years some 50 out of 105 species of weavers (Ploceinae) were observed in field studies in West and East Africa, the Seychelles Islands, and the Indian subcontinent.
The birds inhabit tropical forests, savannah, and arid semi-desert conditions.
Some specialize in grassland living.
In arid country (r conditions) the weaver birds, small passerines related to sparrows, tend to be seasonally and  sexually dimorphic, to breed polygynously (one male mated with several females), and to have short or capricious breeding seasons.
In humid forest (K conditions) by contrast, plumage colour does not change seasonally, monogamy is the rule, and colonies are occupied for long breeding seasons with individual pairs breeding in successive relays.
Why was this so?
I found that weaver species could be sorted into six different types of population dispersion, varying from the solitary to very sociable.
All forest weavers were relatively unsociable as well as being monogamous and eating insects.
Grain- and seed-eaters of grassland and savannah were gregarious and tended to breed in colonies.
The crowding of nests varied with the vegetation, being generally most dense in the more protected sites in tall grass, over water, or in trees infested with fierce ants.
Weavers also showed six types of pair formation.
In the forest insectivores with non-sociable behaviour, the male pursues the female, courts her, and leads her to the nest he has built.
In savannah trees, the male advertises the nest and pursues a female that approaches him, bringing her back to the nest after a chase.
In the most colonial species this chase is omitted and all courtship occurs at the nest.
The female is attracted there by a colourful advertisement display given on the nest itself.
These correlations suggested four grades of social organization in weaver birds in which features of population dispersion and pair formation correlated functionally with ecology (see Table 3.1).
My interpretation of the functional significance of these grades began by following Lack's (1954) view that the primary adaptations of birds, so far as their dispersion was concerned, were to ensure an adequate food supply.
The solitary feeding of insectivores in forests was therefore attributed to a foraging strategy involving the pursuit of cryptic and easily disturbed prey by singletons.
This would naturally associate with relatively solitary living in separate territories.
In the forest home of these birds the obscured vision in dense foliage necessitates a courtship strategy in which females are pursued and shown to their nest sites.
Monogamy is interpreted as a bonding strategy enhancing the co-operation of paired parents in rearing young.
The relatively unchanging conditions of forest life (i.e. K conditions) suggest that the adult population is near the food limit at all times and that adults have difficulty in rearing young; they therefore need to collaborate in pairs.
The unvarying conditions also promote long breeding seasons with breeding in relays.
In open savannah, gregarious species forage in flocks from colonies or roosts from which the daily dispersal occurs.
In open country, birds are easy targets for predators, and many authors have argued that    flocking increases the likelihood of an individual's survival in the event of an attack, if only because of the cover provided by its fellows (Vine 1971; Hamilton 1971a).
In addition flocking may assist individuals in finding food through enhancing their searching efficiency: several advantages may therefore result from such behaviour (Crook and Goss-Custard 1972; Thompson, Vertinsky and Krebs 1974).
The seeds on which weavers feed do not of course require spaced hunting, and flocking facilitates the location and congregation of birds on patchily distributed resources.
As J. Fisher (1954) and Ward and Zahavi (1973) have argued, dispersal systems based on roosts probably provide centres for information exchange whereby birds can detect contrasts in the foraging success of other individuals and follow the more successful back to good feeding patches.
In open country, trees becomes sites for breeding colonies which may also facilitate synchronization of breeding.
The sudden release of many young into the savannah at the same time may perhaps swamp the waiting predators and thus constitute in itself a survival strategy.
Colonies are easily detected by females at a distance, especially in species where advertisement displays on the many nests are given in synchrony to produce a vivid tree-sized orchestration of sound and movement.
Polygyny occurs in these environments because the short food-rich breeding season is a period of such abundance (r circumstances) that females can rear young by themselves.
Males thus tend to maximize their reproductive success by attracting and mating with several females and establishing them in nests in their territories.
Weavers are not totally promiscuous.
The number of a male's females is limited and males do assist them in rearing their broods.
In grassland colonies the nests are hidden in the greenery and the males have developed especially prominent aerial displays which attract females to the territories.
Males then show them where the nests are.
Away from the territories the birds remain gregarious.
The weaver birds in fact reveal a fascinating range of societal variation broadly correlated with points on an r — K continuum stretching from the arid near-desert conditions of sub-Saharan Sahel landscapes to the almost non-seasonal equatorial forests of the Congo basin.
Under the most northern conditions the Quelea of Mauritania breeds in exceptionally short rainy seasons.
The males establish the nest as in other weavers and attract females to it.
Living in extremely dense colonies, often covering several acres of thorn bush, they simply posture on their nests in display and do not pursue their prospective mates.
Males do not go on to construct further nests as polygynous weavers of more productive lands do.
Instead they assist females in rearing young, working extremely hard at collecting insect food.
Clearly in this arid region with its brief period of insect food availability for raising young  such assistance is vital if both sexes are to participate in a successful breeding (Crook and Butterfield 1970).
As we have seen, at the other end of the r — K continuum, in the rain forests, monogamy is again the rule.
But in this case the explanation lies in the relatively poor food resources due to the stabilized population — resource equilibrium under conditions of very limited seasonality.
I was able to study only a few of these birds but Brosset's (1978) research on the Malimbus weavers of the Gabon forests has usefully extended the story.
While the male of one of these species constructs the nest alone (as in other weavers), in others the female also involves herself in this activity and in two cases receives the active assistance of additional apparently adult birds.
In M. coronatus the nest is built by a mixed party of males and females (3–6 birds) all working together.
In M. racheliae and M. cassini the nest is built by a female and a multi-male party of two or three individuals.
In this case one male drives off the others when the nest is completed.
In all these advanced cases only a pair finally incubate, brood, and feed the young.
The social complexity correlates here with the complexity of nest construction and the difficulty of the siting (protectively slung from the ends of vines or tendrils).
In these birds with long breeding seasons the protective quality of the nest is important.
Collaboration is probably related to relay breeding under these K circumstances.
Some degree of collaboration in the Malimbus was predictable from comparative studies of other avian families where collaboration in incubation and rearing associate with K conditions.
In these weavers the importance and complexity of the nest seems to have focused co-operative behaviour in this area but it will be interesting to see whether further research shows an extension of the behaviour to incubation or rearing in any of them.
The weaver bird study suggested that the motivational systems of individual members of different species were producing contrasting strategies of dispersion and pair formation neatly graded to suit environmental conditions.
The social structure arising from the interactions between the birds was thus an expression of individual adaptedness and formed an important societal component of the environment in which individuals were seeking to survive and procreate descendants.
Following the weaver bird example, an array of studies appeared analysing the societal organizations of related species through correlating behaviour and ecology.
In 1968 Lack published a survey of birds from this viewpoint and the idea took root also among mammalogists.
In particular, surveys of African antelopes, carnivores, primates, and certain bats have been most instructive.
One of the most interesting bird examples, and one that reveals rather different principles from the weaver study, is Nelson's (1970, 1978) long series of investigations on the oceanic boobies and gannets.
In particular there are close associations between nesting density on islands or islets, foraging habits, breeding ecology, and behaviour.
Some of the principles illustrated follow.
Where nest sites on islands are plentiful and there are no special advantages arising from social stimulation the birds (all boobies of oceanic areas) space their nests on the ground or in trees.
Here there is little site competition, little aggression, and a development of displays based on locomotion.
Some of these species feed far offshore, necessitating very long foraging trips (up to 300 m).
In these species the clutch is very small (1–2), eggs are large, growth is slow, and starvation may occur.
The breeding cycles are very long.
In species that forage inshore, clutches are usually larger but brood reduction may occur under adverse circumstances.
Growth is quicker.
Many details of behaviour are associated with these contrasts.
Dense nesting arises either because the chosen sites are small or because high levels of social stimulation are advantageous in ensuring breeding synchronicity in short optimal breeding seasons.
In the gannet there is strong competition for sites with much aggression, little aerial display, and a great deal of mutual social stimulation.
Together with these traits go highly ritualized, short-range threat posturings, intense mutual preening, developed site ownership displays, and a meeting ceremony of mates functioning in reassurance.
Nelson's detailed account is well worth close scrutiny for it illustrates many aspects of socio-ecology most cogently.
Turning to the mammals, Jarman's (1974) study of antelopes describes five types of foraging strategy differing in their selectivity of plant species and parts and the utilization of food items dispersed in different ways.
Since these ungulates are primarily exploiters of vegetation, it is natural that the range of feeding strategies should be related to different types of browsing and grazing.
The 74 species of African antelope share certain basic features: all are exclusively vegetarian and bear one large and precocious calf each year.
Body size, mating systems, nomadism, and dietary composition as well as other minor features all vary and correlate with numerous details of display and behaviour.
Class-A antelopes are small and good at selecting plant parts to comprise a good diet.
Such animals remove the most important plant parts so that group foraging does not occur.
These selective feeders exploit their territories well throughout the year and correspondingly they defend them vigorously.
By contrast the larger class-D animals, living on grasslands where rainfall varies, are less selective and so long as they do not crop the grass too close many animals can cover the same foraging area in a short  time.
Herds are favoured (protection from predation) and nomadism develops.
The larger size of these nomads allows them to cover ground and move over longer distances than smaller animals.
The class-A animal on his small territory is likely to be monogamous, whereas the nomad males may attempt to round up harems on the move or establish temporary territories for mating purposes.
The mating systems of these animals are often dependent upon the dispersion patterns of the females and these in turn are related to patterns of optimum food exploitation.
The Uganda kob females, for example, tend to congregate over good foraging.
The males perforce come within such an area to mate and establish small ‘leks’ thereon.
Females are attracted by males' displays and go to them for mating.
Males are exhausted fairly soon and replace one another quickly as the prime maters on site (Buechner 1961).
The wildebeest of the Ngorongoro crater in Tanzania show an interesting ecological dependency in their patterning of dispersion and mating (Estes 1966).
Near the central lake there is rich grass where females assemble.
Males take territories here and attract temporary harems of females on to them.
Around the fringe of the crater grass growth is seasonal and the animals move in nomadic herds.
Here males attempt to acquire harems on the move rather than on topographically defended areas.
Among the mammalian carnivores there are likewise relationships between social organization and feeding ecology.
Carnivores are among the most socially complex mammals, although only a few of them form sociable groups.
Their importance is great, for they form the peak of the ecological pyramid and their prey comprises many of the antelopes already described.
Carnivores themselves are rarely preyed upon by other animals.
There are several distinguishable types of foraging behaviour and food preference, varying from tracking and pursuit of prey animals by running them down through stealth and pouncing methods to omnivory or insect eating.
There are four types of social organization: isolated animals with mother — litter families, monogamous pairs, groups or bands of associated litter — mates with their parents, and colonial animals living in burrow systems.
Some principles of association that emerge are that solitary hunters feed on prey they can subdue individually which they kill suddenly after a stealthy approach.
By contrast, hunters in packs are usually small relative to their prey and collaborate in diverse and very complex ways in hunting, in transport of food to dens, and in feeding and care of the young.
Some smaller carnivores such as mongooses are colonial, social, and highly altruistic, using group burrows for protection and as a refuge from which they then forage.
We can usually show that social organization correlates closely with  a species ecology yet we are often far from clear about the processes by which this association has come about.
Patterns of grouping and spatial dispersion are closely related to food resources and foraging strategy and come to constitute the demographic environment within which social selection determining behaviour responsible for mating and rearing strategies occurs.
These strategies are to a degree autonomous from the dispersion patterns within which they arise and may radiate in a number of directions.
Reproductive strategies
There are two distinguishable questions concerning social evolution.
The first is: why do groups form anyway?
The second concerns why groups have the size and membership composition that they do.
We have already seen that the first question has usually been answered by emphasizing either the primary value of the protection the group gives to individuals from predators or the value of gregariousness in relation to finding food.
I am inclined to back Alexander's argument that grouping would occur in most predated species if it were not for additional factors dispersing the individuals in relation to their food supply.
It seems likely that in most species these two selection pressures interact to produce a compromise weighted according to(a) the particular foraging requirements of a species in a given habitat and (b) alternative means of protection from whatever predators may be present.
The actual composition and size of groups seems to be largely a consequence of the formation of particular types of mating and rearing unit.
These types vary according to the investment in time and energy that the male and female place respectively in their mating and rearing roles.
Trivers (1972) points out that the sex that invests most time and energy in parental behaviour becomes a ‘limiting resource’ for the other sex.
For example, a male is rarely limited reproductively by his capacity to produce sperm but a female is restricted in her output of eggs.
Females are often limited further by the necessity to rear offspring by brooding or lactation.
It follows that in paired individuals the male's breeding capacity is limited by that of the female.
He can, however, improve his reproductive performance by mating with another female.
In general, then, males tend to compete with one another for females.
In more abstract terms, the sex that invests less will compete for the sex investing more in the production of young.
In effect males usually invest more in mating than in rearing but under certain circumstances must assist in rearing to ensure the survival of their offspring.
These circumstances play a major role in determining the variety of rearing systems found in nature.
In North America many marshland bird species show polygyny, a condition in which a male is mated to several females who occupy his territory.
Ornithologists, especially Orians and his colleagues, interpret this in terms of the effect of competition between the territorial males for the areas most productive in food for breeding.
Females tend to disperse themselves among the males but in cases where a male has an especially good territory a female may opt to breed with him even if he already has a mate, rather than go for one without.
Such a male has a territory so much better than that of neighbours that a ‘polygyny threshold’ is surpassed and he gains a second mate.
Among the weaver birds polygyny occurs in territories within a colony but these do not include a foraging area because the birds forage in flocks away from the breeding location.
The nests are intricate structures beautifully woven by the male birds, who then display on them to attract females to the nest.
Females inspect several nests before allowing courtship with a chosen male to proceed.
The females seem to be choosing between males of contrasting building skills.
A male that has a string of prime sites and well-made nests attracts the most females.
A male's vigour in display may also indicate to the female a mate with whose genes hers can mix with a high chance of being passed on through future generations.
Male vigour in display could also indicate vigour in caring for the young.
Male weavers assist females as the young hatch and the extent of their help to successive mates may greatly promote each female's reproductive success.
It is not always clear that polygyny is of such reproductive value to females as the views of Orians and his colleagues suggest.
In marmots, large ground-dwelling squirrels, for example, adult males are territorial and aggressive.
Each male's territory holds 1 — 4 breeding females.
Naturally the male's reproductive success rises with the number of females on his territory: but this is not the case for the females themselves.
The existing system seems to be a compromise between a female strategy that would favour monogamy and a male one favouring polygyny (Downhower and Armitage 1971).
However, it has also been suggested that since there is a dominance hierarchy among the females and only the subordinates do badly, it may be that it is only younger females that fare worse in big harems than they would if they were monogamous.
Since these females may breed more effectively when older the system is not necessarily disadvantageous to them (Elliot 1975).
Some male birds spend all their time mating and do not provide the female with any benefits other than indications of their vigour.
This condition, called polybrachygyny, means that males that show the most effective displays are most persuasive in attracting females.
These displays are given at localized courting places called leks.
Among many  dramatic examples the ruff has perhaps been studied the most thoroughly (Hogan-Warburg 1966).
The male ruff is a long-legged wading bird whose head and neck feathers are specially developed for use in a jumping display on a lek display ground.
The leks are placed within areas favoured by reeves (female ruffs) for breeding, probably because of a good food supply.
There are two types of ruff plumage and these are associated with two types of courtship behaviour.
‘Resident’ males display on their leks and are attended by ‘satellite’males.
In large leks the satellites have little chance of mating as they are driven away by the residents.
But in smaller leks the favourite residents are so busy mating that their satellites succeed in attracting waiting females and mate with them.
The interesting point about the satellites is that their behaviour includes many submissive components that trick the resident males into allowing them to remain near their sites.
Some 30 per cent of ruff matings are owing to satellites, and selection has yielded a stable dimorphism of the two forms of male structure and display.
A contrasting condition is found in a number of Arctic sandpipers studied by Pitelka and his ornithological group (Pitelka, Holmes, and Maclean 1974) based at Berkeley University, California.
Sandpipers show varying tendencies to breed polyandrously.
A female courts one or more males and then goes round laying eggs in nests prepared by them on the ground.
This odd reversal of polygyny has been attributed to a very high rate of ground predation whereby clutches are easily lost.
If a female, in a short breeding season, has to re-establish her clutch in relation to a single mate, clutch loss becomes a very serious matter which the male can do little about.
If, however, she keeps mating and not only gets several clutches going but is able to re-establish those that get lost, then she maximizes her chance of a successful breeding season.
In this case too, by maximizing their caring role, males ensure as far as possible that their young are ‘got off’ successfully.
In these birds male care is the limiting resource and females show the increased size and dominance which in polygynous species accrue to the males (see Jenni 1974).
The incidence of mating systems differs in mammals and birds.
Among birds the need to supply a nest and incubate the eggs externally to the body evidently produces conditions under which the female commonly requires male assistance.
Bringing up the fledglings necessitates a great deal of work in finding food, and polygyny, as we have seen, is possible only when food is exceptionally abundant under r conditions.
Among mammals by contrast, viviparity and lactation mean that the limiting resource is nearly always the female's rearing capacity.
Polyandry and monogamy are thus rather rare among mammals and polygyny the most common reproductive strategy (see Table 3.2).
Selective circumstance and the evolution of co-operation
Hamilton's theory of the evolution of nepotistic behaviour as a consequence of maximizing the inclusive fitness of individuals through kin selection (p. 42) has opened a passage from a nature red in tooth and claw to a no less rigorous nature in which the appearance of much gentler forms of interaction is comprehensible.
Among birds, the New World jays show a wide range of societies.
One line of development parallels the weaver-bird route culminating in the colonial breeding of paired individuals, each defending its own small territory but foraging as a group gregariously.
Another route has led to the formation of bands of close relatives in which only a small number of adults breed and these are assisted by helpers that live communally with them in a group territory.
These helpers are young of previous broods which defer breeding ‘altruistically’ to assist in the rearing of close relatives under ecological conditions which make this difficult.
In one study a comparison was made between pairs of Aphelocoma coerulescens unassisted by helpers and those that were.
Among the former the number of fledglings produced per pair on average was 1.1 and the average number of offspring still alive after three months after fledging was 0.5 (n = 47).
For pairs assisted by helpers the corresponding figures were 2.1 and 1.3 (n = 59).
Thus the presence of helpers increased the replacement rate of the jay family by a factor of 2 — 3.
This held true through a number of further evaluative studies of the data (Brown 1974).
One of the most remarkable accounts of collaboration in mammals comes from recent research by Olwyn Rasa (1977) on the dwarf mongoose (Helogale ), which lives in colonies in arid parts of Africa, often burrowing a refuge in the base of a termitarium.
The animals live in  matriarchal family groups of about a dozen to thirty individuals in which adult offspring remain as group members but do not breed under normal circumstances.
Instead they participate vigorously in the reproductive activities of their parents.
Dwarf mongooses are diurnal and feed mainly by hunting invertebrates such as insects, spiders, and  millepedes .
Eggs, lizards, smaller mammals, birds, and snakes are also eaten.
The family goes foraging as a group within a large home range and establishes a variety of bases for refuges which seem to be used at different times of the year.
In the captive group studied by Rasa the founding pair lived with several generations of offspring.
The family is led by the mother (designated ‘alpha’) with the founding father ranking immediately beneath her.
The older offspring tend to be lowest in the rank.
Only the alpha female breeds and it seems that the monogamous reproductive male suppresses sexual interactions between siblings.
The young are visited by the alpha female only for suckling.
Otherwise the babies are continuously attended by two or three baby-sitters.
These evidently clean and warm them and retrieve them if they wander.
In other collaborative activities individuals take turns in sitting vigilantly alert while others feed, thereby functioning as watchdogs or guards.
There is a regular changeover between individuals in the performance of this activity.
When the alarm is given the group assembles and may mob collectively a potential predator.
Males are usually most involved in attacking predators and may collaborate to kill snakes as dangerous prey.
They are also prominent in investigating potentially dangerous occurrences in the day's routine.
The group also collaborate in offering food to the young still in the nest.
Apparently, it is group care for the young that leads to the higher rank of younger rather than older non-reproductives in the group.
These features may be interpreted in terms of a high degree of social selection responsible for the care shown by the non-reproductives in the group.
Suppression of an individual's own breeding allows a slow rate of reproduction, which is probably of survival value in a harsh environment where over-exploitation of resources can easily develop.
Conversely, co-operative feeding and care increases the likelihood of rearing those young that are produced.
All individuals are closely related and the behaviour probably maintains a high degree of inclusive fitness for all parties.
Research on these animals is continuing.
Among primates, especially close collaboration between parents has developed in a few forest-dwelling animals as diverse as gibbons on the one hand and the tiny marmosets on the other.
The marmoset mother produces twins or occasionally, in the laboratory, triplets.
It seems that in times past marmosets were bigger but, perhaps in adaptation to an almost bird-like life in the high branches of South America forests, they  have shown an evolutionary trend of decreasing size.
This has meant that big single babies no longer easily pass through the birth canal.
Individuals having two small young have evidently been the more successful and twins have become the rule.
But two small marmosets need much attention, and insect hunting with two babies clinging to her fur may not be easy for the mother.
Whatever the reason, male marmosets have developed a rearing strategy whereby they greatly assist the mother by carrying, holding, and generally caring for infants while she is away eating elsewhere.
Furthermore, when the next young come along, their brothers and sisters of the preceding litters may assist the male in his carrying and caring tasks.
It is certain that to rear the twins successfully this kind of collaborative endeavour has become essential.
It is perhaps not surprising to find then, that here the female is the larger sex and is dominant over her male (Ingrams, personal communication).
One of the best-documented analyses of altruism and kin selection in group-dwelling mammals is Bertram's (1976) study of the lion pride.
These animals show evidence of considerable kin selection in that the females show communal suckling while the two males in the pride not only show no sexual competition for the females but are very tolerant towards all cubs.
From his field-study of the species Bertram has drawn up a list of features that in general characterize the lion pride.
These are:
(1)
A pride comprises two adult males and seven adult females.
(2)
Four females usually give birth and rear cubs together.
(3)
The litter size is three cubs.
(4)
The two males share the fathering of the cubs.
(5)
Three subadult female cubs remain in the pride.
(6)
Subadult females replace adult females that have died or left during the period.
Pride size thus remains constant.
(7)
All male cubs are expelled.
(8)
The adult males have grown up together in a similar pride, left before maturity, and stayed together.
They have taken over and breed in a pride which is not the one in which they were born.
(9)
Adult males retain a pride only long enough to father one batch of young females for the pride.
(10)
Prides are stable and are maintained in this way over generations.
Bertram's calculations of average relatedness among the pride's members show that the adult males are on average about as closely related as half siblings while the females are as related as full cousins.
Bertram explains the male's tolerance of cubs at kills by the fact that there is a high probability that it is his child or at least the child of the  other male, which is itself closely related to him.
They tolerate cubs more than the females possibly because their reproductive life in the pride is so short.
The absence of competition for the females is also associated with the very close genetic relationship of the males and their potential for harming one another should they fight.
The relationship between the females likewise favours a sharing in suckling young.
Closely knit groups of interacting and co-operating animals are common in some 6o bird species, in wolves, wild dogs, mongooses, elephants, and in many primates.
The fact that small groups tend of necessity to comprise a membership of close kin favours the occurrence of kin selection and hence a high probability that cooperative behaviour will evolve.
Group formation may arise as a result of factors favouring defence or resource acquisition and the sizes and compositions of groups express the effects of social selection within them.
The day of large inclusive socio-ecological theories is probably over.
So much detail is now accumulating on so wide a range of taxonomic groups that a mini-theory can be erected for virtually every one of them.
The general postulates of each theory have, however, much in common: the contrasts between them depend on the phylogenetic features brought to the varying ecological conditions of life in which the animals live.
Many mini-theories involve the r — K continuum.
Co-operative behaviour is often clearly associated with species which, when compared with their relatives, live under the more K selective circumstances.
We must recall, however, that the application of these ideas is necessarily comparative.
It does not follow that species reproducing under r conditions will always lack co-operative ability.
The need for theoretical analysis of many more cases such as the lion is clearly apparent and major studies of this kind are already on the way.
Social systems evolve in close relation to ecology.
The environment calls the tune and the strategic behaviour of individuals is a response to the circumstances affecting their lives.
The evolution of mating and rearing systems with attendant complexities of nepotistic behaviour occurs within and is part of this process.
Social evolution without ecological reference is ultimately a logical impossibility in a world of finite resources.
This we shall see to be as true of man as of any of his relatives in the animal kingdom.
Summary
(1)
Most animals show societal organizations that are the expression of the social responses of individuals one to another.
An understanding of human sociality demands a biological theory of animal social life and evolution.
(2)
The individuals of a species differ in reproductive ability.
Whenever one individual leaves more offspring than another and this capacity is inherited, its genes will in time come to dominate the gene pool.
(3)
Competition for limited resources is an inevitable feature of life so long as reproduction occurs in the context of finite supplies.
Selection of successful competitors is the prime mechanism in evolution.
(4)
The unit of selection is the individual phenotype: this, however, implies that the ultimate unit of selection is the gene that contributes successful traits.
Such genes increase their proportional representation in a gene pool.
(5)
Social selection, of which three types are distinguished, is a major process responsible for the evolution of behaviour.
(6)
Altruistic behaviour, for long a puzzle to evolutionists, may now be explained largely in terms of kin selection for the inclusive fitness of individuals.
Assistance to relatives enhances the fitness of individuals accruing solely from selfish behaviour.
We thus have a general sociobiological theory that accounts for both altruistic and selfish social behaviour.
(7)
Reciprocal altruism evolves where the net benefits received by individuals that show co-operative reciprocity exceeds that of non-altruists.
(8)
Elaborate social organization with co-operation tends to evolve in species attempting to reproduce under conditions where the carrying capacity of the environment is more or less filled.
These K circumstances play an important ecological role in influencing the evolution of advanced social behaviour.
(9)
Many studies have correlated features of social organizations with ecology and shown that the strategies of their members are adapted to habitat conditions, often in very elaborate ways.
Examples are described.
(10)
Reproductive strategies involve patterns such as polyandry, monogamy, polygyny, and promiscuity.
Sexual selection under environmental constraints from a species habitat accounts for the adaptive radiation apparent in taxonomic groups.
(11)
Some cases of elaborate co-operative behaviour are outlined and their evolutionary explanations discussed.
Monkeys, apes, and man
If no organic being excepting man had possessed any mental power, or if his powers had been of a wholly different nature from those of the lower animals then we should never have been able to convince ourselves that our high faculties had been gradually developed.
Charles Darwin
The primate scene
While the primates comprise only one of the several orders into which the class of mammals is divided, the group is of surpassing significance because man himself is classified within this order.
Of the mammalian orders, the insectivores, the ungulates, the Cetacea, the carnivores, and others, each comprises an array of forms of which every one is adapted to a particular habitat with a mode of life enabling it to live and reproduce there.
In each order an adaptive radiation has proceeded in the manner of an opening fan, eventually yielding the variety of forms extant today.
The earliest mammals (Eutheria), the insectivores, arose during the time that reptiles dominated the earth.
Together with some dinosaurs, perhaps, and with birds, which also emerged from a different reptilian stock at this time, they developed the capacity for regulating their own body temperature.
Homoiothermy allows the mammalian and avian body to maintain a constant high level of activity that does not depend upon the temperature of the environment; and it allows the colonization of environments that would be otherwise too severe to inhabit.
A great diversification of herbivorous and carnivorous forms developed from the insectivores.
The development of large herbivorous mammals was accompanied by a radiation of the carnivorous forms that preyed upon them.
The landscapes of the earth were thus ‘peopled’ with an interdependent range of forms comprising a natural system, itself dependent upon the grass and vegetation provided by soil, rain, and sun.
Today most of these assemblages are broken up by human activity but, for example, on the great plains of Serengeti in East Africa the relationships between seasonal vegetation, nomadic herbivores, and dependent beasts of prey can still be discerned and studied in detail.
Radiation and socio-ecology
The primate radiation took its own particular path.
The most primitive representatives are extremely similar to the insectivores.
Prosimians, such as the nocturnal mouse lemur of Madagascan forests, feed on invertebrates and are active at night.
Socially they live in loose communities comprising a set of juxtaposed home ranges utilized by females and their dependent young.
The adult males move in larger home ranges that are superimposed spatially upon those of the females.
Each male may meet and perhaps mate with several females in the course of moving through his range.
Males compete for females and thereby come to exclude one another from their ranges and, since male ranges are larger than those of females, there tend to be fewer males than females in any local community.
The excluded males range over large areas on the outskirts of the little community.
These important studies, made at night with great patience (Charles-Dominique and Martin 1972), show that at the very root of the primate evolution we have an extremely loose kind of relationship between the sexes.
Socially, the males are dependent on the whereabouts of the breeding females, themselves located in places well suited for the nourishment and protection of their young.
The female, with her heavy investment in producing and raising her babies, is both the spatial and the behavioural focus of the social system while the males compete for ranges that contain mateable females.
Only a proportion of them are successful and the rest must struggle as best they can to obtain mates.
With increasing age, strength, and experience, most of them probably inherit a vacated range, take one over, or succeed in establishing a new community where younger females are setting up new ranges.
The mouse lemur's pattern of life focuses especially on the female's feeding ecology, upon which the males dispersion is contingent.
Indeed, since the female has the prime investment in young, this is exactly what would be expected from Trivers's elaboration of Darwin's account of sexual selection (p. 52).
We shall see that explanations of social systems in terms of a male reproductive strategy contingent on a female rearing strategy make good sense in attempts at understanding the evolution of primate societies.
Early work on primate social systems yielded the first model of their social evolution in the mid-1960s.
In conjunction with Steve Gartlan, who like myself had conducted field research in Africa, I undertook a survey of existing studies (1966).
The outcome was a set of correlations much in the manner of my earlier weaver-bird work.
In brief, we argued that the primates could be classified into five grades of socio-ecological adaptation (see also Table 4.1);
(I)
The relatively solitary invertebrate-eating nocturnal forest animals such as the mouse lemur.
(II)
Forest fruit-eaters living diurnally in small family parties usually with a single reproductive male.
(III)
Diurnal forest vegetarians living in large multi-male parties.
(IV)
The terrestrial primates of savannah with a vegetarian omnivore diet living in multi-male troops.
(V)
This grade comprises the terrestrial ‘harem’ dwellers moving either as small parties in huge ranges or in large troops.
Our main inference was that as insectivorous primates radiated within the forest they took to fruit-eating and became diurnal.
The larger troops, plausibly, were developed as protection from diurnal predators.
Given sufficient food males were thus distributed with the females in large groups forming a hierarchically ordered collective collaborating in protection.
In a 1972 paper I suggested that during the evolution of terrestrial open-country monkeys, two main selection pressures operated on the individuals whose collective strategies lead to the interactions and relationships that are responsible for the social structure (see also Fig. 4.1).
On the one hand, the argument goes, predation pressure tended to select individuals which travelled in groups in which males often performed the role of protectors in collaboration.
Within such groups the males' competitiveness for females produced a strongly hierarchical   sequence of ranks.
In environments with seasonally poor supplies the large troop hoovering its way across the countryside would however soon clean up the food and many individuals would not get enough to eat.
Under these circumstances, as in the fringe areas of species ranges (Aldrich-Blake, Bunn, Dunbar, and Headley 1971), the troop splits into smaller parties so that when food patches are discovered all can feed adequately.
Competition for mates would tend to partition males among such parties and sexual selection would tend to favour males that retained a harem of females and assisted them in rearing young.
The relatively large size of males compared to females is probably due to sexual selection also, although the value of the male, unencumbered by a baby, in the protection of a harem against predators may also favour a large body size.
Predation risk would also maintain a tendency whereby harems would join others to form herds whenever feeding conditions allowed.
Much debate has centred round the relative significance of these interacting factors, and how they may apply to related baboons such as drills which range on the floors of rain forests.
Some problems faced by this approach are discussed later in the chapter.
These researches and others like them are based on innumerable hours of field study in remote places.
They formed the starting-point for contemporary sociobiological theory and the main data bank of facts.
In some respects, however, the theory was running ahead too fast.
Recent studies are attempting more quantified analyses of the exact relations between behaviour and ecology in day-to-day living.
This will eventually make it possible to manipulate ecology so as to test the dependence of social structure upon it.
Correlations between the broad characteristics of a taxonomic group and species ecologies yield suggestive associations that can then be expressed as evolutionary hypotheses that are in principle open to direct tests.
Not all social features of a species need be direct expressions of ecological adaptation, however.
As Struhsaker (1969) pointed out, uncertainties and irregularities in attempts to allocate primate species to socio-ecological grades may be attributed to phylogenetic heritage.
Indeed, a kind of inertia may be present whereby the genetic constitution of a species prevents it following the same adaptive route in relation to a common ecology as other species may show.
Furthermore, at refined levels of analysis, subtle differences at the species level may correlate with ecological adaptations that are obscured by grosser analyses of a whole taxonomic group.
Clutton-Brock (1974), for example, using finer instruments and methods than the earlier work, and applying it to species contrasts, was able to show that differences between two colobus species living in the same forest were functions of their feeding ecology.
Both the red colobus and the black and white colobus monkeys eat a mixture of leaves and fruit and have a  fully arboreal life.
The black and white feeds in a narrow range of tree species and when none is fruiting it eats leaves.
It lives in small troops in defended home ranges that supply its needs.
The red colobus, however, needs fruit all the year round and takes it from a greater variety of dispersed tree species; it thus requires a larger range which can support a correspondingly larger troop.
In these contrasts, the temporal and spatial patterning of food availability are important factors (see also Richard 1977).
As the number of species studied increases the simple classification into adaptive grades begins to break down as the variance within species and between species begins to exceed that between the categories described as grades.
None the less in a broad survey of recent studies a number of socio-ecological correlations are still sustained (Clutton-Brock and Harvey 1977).
Apes and man: the argument from descent
Man's place in the primate order is that of an ape derivative.
To understand the details of human social evolution the nearest point of interspecific comparison lies among the apes.
The apes, however, are all forest-dwelling specialists while man evolved primarily in open country as a savannah animal.
There are thus two possible lines of inquiry; the first, the argument from descent, is to look to relationships likely to connect the human species with ape-like ancestors; the second is to compare man with less closely related primates that have followed a similar evolutionary path in invading the savannah lands, an argument therefore by analogy.
Taken together these approaches provide a startlingly comprehensive picture for a plausible understanding of the socio-ecological origins of human life.
Beginning then with our closer relatives, we are faced with three rather similar forms, the orang-utan, the gorilla, and the chimpanzee, and a rather more distant set of relatives, the gibbon, and the siamang.
Gibbons and siamangs (the hylobatids) are restricted today to southeast Asia, as also is the orang-utan among the true great apes.
The chimpanzee lives in thick forest conditions of central Africa and in savannah woodland in western and eastern Africa.
It extensively overlaps the gorilla in its forest range but generally shows adaptations to lighter drier woodlands.
Many attempts have been made to compile a genealogical tree showing the relationships of these animals to one another and to man.
Authorities are in agreement that the hylobatids represent a branch sprouting early off the stem leading from the Old World monkeys towards the great apes.
They became highly specialized arboreal forest-dwellers feeding on fruit, moving by brachiating from tree to  tree, and living at high densities in food-rich forests where resources are generally constant and predictable.
The resulting competition probably causes the animals to occupy small but adequate territories which are vigorously defended by a monogamous pair.
The male assists the female in rearing the young.
The gibbon and siamang societies seem to be products of strong K selection.
The orang-utan, gorilla, and chimpanzee are usually depicted as arising from a stock separate from that leading to man.
More recently, however, Kortlandt (1972), in an extensive summary of palaeogeographical palaeoecological, and biochemical evidence, has argued that the orang-utan split off early from the stem leading to the root of the African radiation of ancestral apes into gorilla, chimpanzee, and man (Fig. 4.2).
It seems plausible that the Asian orang-utan represents an early forest specialization.
Dendrograms of this type are notoriously labile as new information appears and opinion changes.
The radiation of the African great apes and man represents a set of adaptations by a common stock, the Dryopithecine apes, to differing ecological conditions.
Kortlandt argues that the formation of the Great Rift Valley system in East Africa combined with the Nile and Zambezi drainage systems to constitute a geographical barrier to the east of which the Dryopithecine apes adapted to a progressive desiccation of the landscape caused by the rise of the Rift mountain ridges in combination with climatic trends.
This form developed bipedalism and other adaptations to the newly opening arid savannah landscape and eventually became the ancestor of man.
By contrast, to the West of the Rift the mosaic nature of the relatively dry forest woodlands north of the Niger–Benue river system constituted a cradle for the evolution of the adaptable, partly terrestrial, chimpanzee with its variable fruit food supply and capacity for mobility.
To the south of this, the gorilla  specialized as an evergreen-forest-dweller feeding on rich evenly dispersed vegetable food resources, mostly at ground level.
The earliest forms resembling man, the hominoids, were in fact widely distributed in Africa and Asia between 15 and 10 million years ago.
Pilbeam, in a continuing series of investigations in the sedimentary beds formed by rivers flowing from the Himalayas, themselves dating back only to about 20 million years ago, considers that of these forms Ramapithecus , because of its dental structure with large molars and smaller incisors and canines, is the most plausible ancestral form of the late Pliocene.
It was a small animal, probably about 1.2 m tall, living in woodland savannah.
This savannah covered huge areas as the great forests of 15 million years ago decreased following global changes in climate.
Ramapithecus was one of several primates, such as the baboons, which came down from the trees to develop terrestrial living.
Its dental adaptations to hard savannah fruits and seeds probably preceded the development of bipedalism, which may itself have been originally connected with foraging, reaching upward to browse on bushes for example.
Ramapithecus lasted for about 7 million years and may have then given rise to the first true hominid,Australopithecus , which has a similar dental structure.
Ramapithecus may not have been carnivorous, and the association between hunting, travel, and bipedalism probably emerged only with the true hominids.
The evolutionary story of early man remains a complexity of fossils and uncertain interpretations (Leakey and Lewin 1977).
It now seems clear that evolution in a hominid direction occurred over a widespread area.
A mosaic of characteristics developed, generally heading towards bipedalism in grass savannahs, the consequent freeing of the hands for foraging and later for weapon-making and hunting.
These changes coincided with the rapid development of the brain in response to the need for additional intelligence in social life and in the chase (Chapter 6).
Conceivably, different forms, changing at different rates and showing contrasting combinations of characteristics, were present in different areas.
In East Africa a gracile and a robust form of man–ape seem to have coincided and overlapped ecologically for a time — perhaps in a manner comparable to chimpanzees and gorillas in certain areas of their ranges today.
Eventually one form became pre-eminent, perhaps through warfare and forced intermating between the divergent stocks.
Recent field studies of the extant great apes by Wrangham, MacKinnon, and Dian Fossey allow us to formulate new models of the relations between social organization and ecology of these species and to present them in terms of the reproductive and social strategies of individuals.
The orang-utan studied by MacKinnon (1974) in Sabah, Borneo, and in Sumatra live in large home ranges in the trees of the rain forest.
They feed on large tough fruits and other vegetable matter, including bark which they can tear apart with their strong hands.
The fruit is irregularly spaced throughout the forest and the fruiting of trees is not easily predictable.
These large-bodied apes thus require a sizeable home range.
Unlike the gibbon, which tends to specialize in figs of a predictable and often continuous availability that allows it to live in small territories and at a large population density, the orang-utan is a great wanderer.
Group size is very small, rarely amounting to more than a singleton or a mother with a dependent infant.
The scattered nature of the food evidently makes dispersed foraging essential, since the animals are slow-moving and cover a small area each day.
Congregation at feeding sites would lead to a rapid exhaustion of local supplies.
The orang-utan shows no tendency to join up with others socially except for sex.
There is no greeting behaviour and a general lack of interest in other orang-utans, and tension between animals is rare.
The males wander over a wider area than females and make contact with those whose ranges they overlap.
Short mating consortships last a few days.
Females are evidently often afraid of the male's approach, for he may assault and rape her.
This seems unlikely to lead to fertilization, however, for the male's short penis makes female cooperation necessary for successful copulation.
Males give loud long calls which seem to function in spacing the males, and the dispersion of the females may well be related to this.
Long calls may also attract females or enable dispersed individuals to remain in contact with a dominant male.
In Sumatra, MacKinnon found that the orang-utans of an area moved into the near-by hills when the largest calling male did so.
MacKinnon believes that a robust medium-sized Dryopithecine ape fossil (D. sivalensis ), with the highly crenellated teeth that characterize the orang-utan, was the animal's probable ancestor.
The dental remains indicate little more than a dependence on a hard-fruit diet, and there may have been several species with this inclination.
The orangutan itself was not present in the well-known Siwalik fossil fauna of northern India and appears therefore to have evolved in Indo-China.
The South Chinese fauna suggests an open woodland environment but, by the early Pleistocene, humid forest conditions were established.
The orang-utan thus probably reached its definitive form by evolution from a rather more terrestrial animal but at a later date than that suggested by Kortlandt.
MacKinnon thinks that the orang-utans may once have been more sociable with a way of life suited to the more open woodland habitat of the suggested ancestor.
In addition, a decrease in size seems to have accompanied adaptation to an exclusively arboreal life.
But orang-utans were never as terrestrial as chimpanzees, for the species lacks the knuckle-walking adaptations of the African apes and its limb  proportions indicate a long arboreal history.
MacKinnon's further suggestion that the social life of the orang-utan could resemble that of early arboreal ape ancestors and to antedate the more terrestrial adaptations of the chimpanzee and gorilla seem borne out by the most recent studies.
Wrangham's (1975, 1977) research at the Gombe Stream reserve, a locality originally made famous by the pioneering efforts of Jane Goodall on the chimpanzee, has clarified many mysteries presented by contrasts between the Gombe findings and those of Japanese workers in the Mahali Mountains elsewhere in Tanzania.
Wrangham found that by following chimpanzees daily, he could establish the ranging relationships of the animals.
While ancestrous females are dispersed in overlapping home ranges, they may also congregate at food trees in areas where their ranges overlap.
The dispersion of adult reproductive males resembles that of females when food is poor, but they form large groups utilizing ranges in common at other times.
This group range is in effect a male-group territory and is defended as such against groups of other males.
Although the females' ranges are smaller than those of individual males they overlap those of several of them and may therefore turn up in more than one male community; females in oestrus range widely, consorting with a male for a few days.
Parties of chimpanzees congregate at fruiting trees irregularly spaced in both location and time and, since the animals eat small soft-bodied fruits in dense clumps, they can feed together and then move on or separate without producing an immediate over-exploitation of resources.
The chimpanzee is highly mobile and semi-terrestrial, showing great adaptability to a wide range of woodlands.
During periods of relative food shortage males tend to move less; dispersion evidently reduces competition for resources.
In good feeding conditions wider ranging groups occurs, evidently for reproductive reasons.
Chimpanzees often feed in groups and come together with loud demonstrations in the feeding trees.
Individuals then occupy particular feeding sites in the trees and there is competition for the best ones.
These parties are occasions for much social behaviour, including mating.
Wrangham's results show that party-size was largest when food was most abundant.
This means that information about food obtained by following others was most available to a given individual when it appears to be of least importance.
Eating may not then be the main reason for gathering in parties.
Such congregations seem more easily explained in terms of opportunities for relating and for sexual behaviour.
The congregation of animals at rich food sources necessarily  increases local party size.
We have noted that a male community defends a group territory and the outcome of aggressive interactions between different communities is known to be in part dependent upon party size.
The giving of ‘food calls’ by males assembles a large party, ostensibly for feeding purposes.
It can, however, have the additional effect of producing large parties that could then effectively win any encounter with males of an opposed community.
Furthermore, when such encounters happen the females do not necessarily retreat with the losers; the winners thereby gain more potential mates.
Wrangham argues that the formation of large feeding parties (in which individuals actually eat less than in smaller ones) may improve the reproductive success of a male community through increasing its probability of winning territorial encounters and hence females.
Indeed, the evolution of the communal behaviour of individual males may be due to strategies whereby co-operative action increases the chances of individuals mating with females.
The resulting group territoriality is possible in the chimpanzee since the locomotory costs in maintaining it are sufficiently low.
Ever since the pioneering field-work on chimpanzees of the Reynolds (1965) the species has been known to have a markedly ‘loose’ society when compared, for instance, with baboon troops.
Wrangham's work goes far to provide us with the essential spatial structuring that underlies this flexibility.
The chimpanzee social system turns out to be structurally rather primitive, offering temptations at a comparison with the social systems of nocturnal lemurs and even insectivores.
The separate spatial patternings of male and female reveal an absence of close intersexual bonding, and this impression is supported by the casual sexual arrangements and rather brief courtships of these animals.
These spatial arrangements are interpretable as (i) adaptations of individuals to the fluctuating availability of the dietary items,(ii) the fact that the size and local density of fruits encourage joint exploitation in parties, and (iii) to conditions of food abundance that periodically allow greater social activity, formation of male parties, and group territoriality.
It seems that male spatial arrangements are contingent upon those of females, who are themselves dispersed in relation to dietary ecology, and yet in this species it is females rather than males that move between social units.
If chimpanzee social structure is primitive, the actual behaviour whereby chimpanzees relate to one another is on a level far advanced beyond that of prosimians.
The animals show a sociable disposition that contrasts markedly with the isolationist features of the orang-utans, the ‘loner’ among apes.
It is in the features of this sociable disposition rather than in societal structure that the chimpanzee most resembles man.
Let us examine several of these features.
The chimpanzee's mode of life calls for an ability to adjust to rather sharp motivational changes associated with shifts in party size and composition during group gatherings.
In the fluctuating combination and recombination of groups, old friends and old antagonists come across one another in shifting social contexts.
Reassurance behaviour by touch, caress, mutual clasping, and other tactile means establishes a mutual support between animals known to one another that promotes, on the one hand, confidence in the face of potential antagonists and, on the other, a support that makes aggression unnecessary since simple assertion can maintain an individual's security.
Animals of high status commonly provide the reassurance that stabilizes interaction, and relations between close kin clearly underlie most of the contacts that take place.
An advanced system of emotional equilibration has thus developed which, on the one hand, resembles that of other sociable animals such as dogs and wolves among carnivores and, on the other, has a clear primate character.
A key to this combination is the unique association of emotionality with a social intelligence which has developed along somewhat different lines in man.
Emotional equilibration tends to reduce the possibility of social interactions of aggression or avoidance that would lower the maintenance of an individual's potential inclusive fitness.
The striking resemblance between this type of mutual support and that occurring in the human species accounts for much of the fascination of the chimpanzee for man.
A chimpanzee is an easy recipient for human projections since humans can easily identify with the emotional expressions of chimpanzees.
Chimpanzee males combine to capture prey which is then torn up and shared.
The imaginative may not unreasonably see in these actions the source of communal meal-taking in man and its importance to social life and ritual.
What do chimpanzees actually do?
Extensive descriptions of predation and meat sharing by chimps are now available (Teleki 1973; Wrangham 1975).
Chimpanzees eat many small animals.
Juvenile or infant monkeys, baby baboons, and piglets are the main dietary items providing meat, at least in the area of the Gombe Stream Reserve.
Adult males do most of the killing although adolescents and females also do so occasionally.
Killers are skilled at choosing the right moment, snatching a baby baboon when large baboon males are not looking, chasing monkeys out on to limbs of emergent trees from which there is no escape except a jump — into the hands of other co-operating chimps below.
Meat is nutritionally important and chimps are a serious source of predation for their prey.
Once an individual obtains meat he attempts to protect it and eat it privately.
This is rarely possible, for chimps join in an excited melée as soon as a killing occurs.
Wrangham opines that while attacks on a possessor are rarely successful, such harassment often prevents eating.
Food is shared to reduce risks of damage in fighting and to prevent interference with eating.
Meat is not the staple item in a chimp diet but a desirable extra.
Individuals vary in the success they have in getting meat from others, and old animals seem to do best.
Perhaps they risk less in terms of a damaged reproductive potential if they lose a challenge for possession, and hence persist more in harassment?
Conversely the cost of aggression in defence of meat against a female might be a reduced chance of mating.
Sharing food with females also seems linked to kinship.
Wrangham explains the higher success of older animals in terms of cost per effort decreasing with age.
Damage to an animal affects less of his reproductive potential as age increases.
In any case older animals may be socially more skilful.
Meat-sharing among chimpanzees should not therefore be ascribed totally to altruism.
It is, rather, the outcome of balancing costs and benefits in a competitive situation where clustering occurs around an obtained item of food.
Sharing in these circumstances clearly differs greatly from sharing in man, where the items shared go mainly to family members or other close kin.
Sharing is rare in primates and the chimpanzee behaviour may indicate the sources of human mealtime ceremonials.
The underlying functions and motivational causation are, however, different, for the chimpanzee's behaviour does not occur in the same setting of structured kinship and family relations as happens in man.
Chimpanzee communication is complex and extends into the formation and use of simple forms of language (p. 127).
Such language usage is, however, clearly described only from animals especially taught in laboratories.
We do not yet know to what extent chimps use their potential in the wild.
Menzel (1973) has shown that non-speaking chimpanzees can convey the location of food to one another in a large field enclosure; Wrangham notes that individual awareness of food resources in the natural environment is acute; but how much information transfer occurs in the wild remains unknown.
Chimpanzee society turns out to be a loosely organized system of overlapping male and female strategies.
It differs greatly from the family-based structuring of human life with its stress on the long-term bond between mates.
In this respect the gorilla resembles man more than the chimpanzee.
Gorillas move about in small parties usually containing one large adult ‘grey-back’ male.
These groups move in extensive and exclusive home ranges so that the freely forming parties so common in chimps do not occur.
Gorillas, as mentioned above, are terrestrial animals feeding on ample vegetation found at ground level whereas chimps congregate and move between fruiting trees irregularly dispersed through the forest in space and time.
The incorporation of the gorilla male into a more-or-less permanent  party is probably associated with certain benefits in relation to the terrestrial feeding niche.
The abandonment of trees makes the species, especially the young, prone to ground predation.
Against this the presence of the large male and his spectacular charging displays is an ample response.
The more even distribution of food is commonly associated with exclusive ranging in mammals and the presence of potentially aggressive males may enhance dispersion.
The cost of having a large male feeding together with females and young on the same resources is probably not great given the even distribution of food and its abundance.
Such a cost none the less needs setting against the advantages in any ecological study of gorilla social behaviour.
The apes provide us with much information concerning possible roots of sociable behaviour in man.
They are much less helpful, however, in a search for the source and significance of our social organization.
This is probably because they are all adapted to forest or woodland conditions and none of them has developed the close-knit social formations that are characteristic of open-country animals.
Man originated in arid lands, and for an understanding of his societal arrangements we may turn to look at those other terrestrial primates that adapted to a closely similar niche.
The baboon in the mirror: the argument by analogy
In the waters of the monsoon pools of East Africa it is as if man sees a baboon in the mirror, for the development of baboon societies in the very regions in which human social life must have also evolved seems to reflect in extraordinarily detailed ways the emergence of features otherwise unique to human life.
Even if the personal relations of baboons lack the human quality shown by chimpanzees, their societal organization is at once recognizably similar to hominid structures.
The following features are particularly striking:
(1)
These open-country terrestrial primates mostly move in large groups of both sexes which are often elaborately structured.
(2)
The membership of groups is socially organized in pronounced hierarchies of dominance, rank, or status.
(3)
In some species males and females consort socially in long-term relationships that may last many years.
Such relationships comprise uni-male reproductive groups or ‘harems’.
(4)
In ‘harem’ -forming societies the non-reproductive male population may form a ‘bachelor’section of the social unit which is organized rather differently in species of contrasting ecologies.
Young males leave harems to live in these sections of the community until ready for sexual reproduction.
(5)
Males compete for sexual access to the females.
This results in changes in their status leading to their participation in sexual life.
(6)
Extensive collaboration between males is common in defence of a group against predators and in certain social circumstances.
(7)
Males are generally the more mobile sex socially; females commonly remain part of the same social unit throughout their lives and their relationships often provide a basic stability to it.
Their organization into lineages descended from ancestral females has been demonstrated in some populations.
In some baboons, however, females move between social units more than males, for example the hamadryas (Abbeglen 1976).
Among the terrestrial open-country baboons there are two basic kinds of social unit: the multi-male and the uni-male reproductive unit.
The former, large troops of 40 or more animals, occur in the more wooded and fertile parts of the savannah with less seasonal aridity than the more arid ‘Sahel’ regions.
The several fully adult males of these groups are ranked in such a way that only top rankers usually mate with females in the mating season.
Such hierarchies tend to be stable with a powerful ‘alpha’ animal at the top.
Low rankers sometimes leave the troop.
In the case of the socially similar Japanese macaques such individuals may live as solitaries for a long time, growing in size and strength.
Eventually they may take over a small group when the large parent troop undergoes fission as increasing size produces social instability.
Among African baboons, males transfer between groups and a powerful male begins travelling with a stranger troop, gradually gaining acceptance as a member.
He may later fight his way to the very top of the hierarchy in a series of tactically staged combats.
The uni-male harem occurs in at least three kinds of population dispersion pattern.
Among patas monkeys each harem moves in a very large and exclusive home range.
In the hamadryas baboons the harems cohere in a band in which numerous non-breeding males also occur.
Gelada baboons often move in large herds; individual harems move separately and the ‘bachelor’ males are found in their own discrete and coherent social units.
Under conditions of poor food supply gelada harems tend to separate and travel independently.
Small parties seem to serve their members better when food patches are found for in larger units only a few of the animals present could then be fed (Dunbar 1977).
The basic function of both multi-male and uni-male groups concerns the provision of a safe social environment for rearing young.
These groups are rearing units and not merely mating consociations.
The animals within them are often closely related and both co-operative and competitive behaviours occur.
Hierarchies in baboons
The work of Robert Seyfarth (1976) has demonstrated that wild female baboons in a multi-male troop structure maintain a hierarchy just as males do.
Female and male hierarchies none the less differ in important ways that seem to be consequences of the contrasting strategies by which the two sexes seek to maximize their inclusive fitness.
Among the females of Seyfarth's study those of highest rank were most preferred as grooming partners.
This preference could not of course be satisfied for all members of the troop at once since baboons groom in couples.
Competition is thus established and the second-ranker comes effectively to prevent those of lower status from grooming the female above her.
Similarly number 3 can prevent number 4 from gaining access to either i or 2.
Females thus tend to groom those nearest to them and immediately above them in rank.
High-ranking females by and large receive more grooming than others.
The structure of the female group is thus based upon the relatively simple social dynamic principles of preference for high rank and the consequent competition, which in its turn maintains the hierarchy.
Fluctuations in this system occur when, for example, a female has a baby, for the mother — infant pair is a source of immediate attraction.
The more dominant females then tend to gain access more easily to the new mother irrespective of her rank.
As we have already mentioned, adult male baboons characteristically compete for sexual access to ovulating females.
This seems to be the main process ordering them into ranks.
Males will also compete for other resources, food for example, but the status hierarchies for access to different commodities are not necessarily always correlated (Rowell 1972).
It seems that the nature of the physiological factors involved in the motivation for competition play an important role in differentiating these rank orders.
Competition for a female or other sex object may not produce the same hierarchy as that for food, simply because a sexually aroused animal, say, is not necessarily a hungry one.
He will work hard at competition for a female but not so hard for food.
The establishment of the alpha male of a group seems, however, to be primarily a consequence of ranking in relation to sexual access to females.
The behaviour of young males and females in Seyfarth's study already foreshadowed the adult outcome.
Immature females interacted with adult females primarily when the latter were lactating; immature males did so when they were in oestrus.
Furthermore, immature females tended to spend proportionately more of their grooming time with females ranking higher than their mothers.
Immature males tended to groom more with adult females ranking lower than their mothers.
In addition, immature females already competed for opportunities to groom mothers of higher rank than their own.
Among  immature males this does not occur, but they are liable to be displaced by adult males if they attempt sexual interactions with high-ranking females.
The behaviour of males appears to be the expression of an underlying strategy that optimizes the probability of sexually effective mating while reducing agonistic competition.
Their rankings in relation to one another arise both through learning their relative strengths in play and because the strength of the tendency to compete for sexual partners is differentially distributed among them.
The advantages of female access to dominant females is less clear.
One of the functions of grooming lies in the causal relation between interactions and mutual support.
Thus grooming partners may form a coalition during agonistic encounters.
If one is threatened it can call upon the other's aid and give a ‘protected threat’ to its adversary.
The attractiveness of dominant females may derive from the advantage accruing to an individual from having a powerful ‘friend’.
In addition, high rankers tend to have access to scarce resources so that in competitive encounters the possession of a powerful ally will increase the subject's chance of obtaining some.
This will be important where the resources are vital for the well being of a subject's dependent young (see also Cheney 1978; Wrangham 1977).
Mothers and daughters tend to develop a close grooming association which tends to persist so that these close relatives have about the same rank, the daughter's being contingent upon that of the mother.
This tendency to a kin-based preference in the distribution of associations naturally biases the distribution of ranks among group members so that close kin tend to acquire similar rank as their genetic elders.
The attraction to mothers with neonates often leads to ‘aunt’ behaviour (‘baby-sitting’) providing valuable learning opportunities in the handling of infants that will be valuable when the subject's own baby is born.
Reciprocal collaboration in social conflict
The multi-male troops of Papio anubis baboons studied by Packer (1977) at Gombe illustrate two important principles governing the lives of these animals.
The first striking feature is the mobility of the male baboons.
At or soon after puberty they leave the troops in which they were born and work their way into new ones.
The breeding males of a particular unit are all animals that have transferred into it from elsewhere.
While sexually mature males may remain in their natal troops they have little access to females, unless they are of especially high dominance.
During conflict, baboons may seek assistance from others by soliciting their participation in an attack upon an opponent.
The solicited  animal is enlisted by the solicitor's repeated turning of the head from a direct look at the solicited animal towards the potential opponent.
Every enlisting event thus involves three animals, the enlister, the opponent, and the solicited.
A partner may be solicited to enable the enlister to achieve dominance in an altercation which does not necessarily involve any disputed object; such partners were not involved in the incident until they were solicited and thus had a ‘choice’ as to whether to collaborate or not.
One of the most significant occasions is when one male enlists the collaboration of another to separate an opponent from an oestrus female in consort with him.
When the solicited animal joins in the harassment, it may end with the enlister going off with the female and leaving the other two to fight it out.
The enlister thus creates for himself a very real opportunity for mating, while the collaborator faces a real risk of injury.
Packer believes that nepotism plays no role in the explanation of these events because the males of a troop, having transferred into it from elsewhere, must be only very distant relatives of one another.
The criteria for reciprocal altruism seem fulfilled as the interactions seem based upon expectations of reciprocation.
Of the 140 occasions observed by Packer, 97 solicitations succeeded in enlisting a partner.
On 2o of these occasions, the target was consorting with an oestrus female and, in general, partners were more likely to join in coalition when this was the case.
On six occasions the attack resulted in the initiator gaining the female.
Packer remarks that the greater willingness to join in collaboration against a consorting male may be related to the greater benefits that the altruism bestows on the recipient in these cases.
The most striking finding is that individuals which most frequently gave aid are those which most frequently receive it.
Favourite partners of an animal tended in turn to request aid most frequently from that animal.
Collaboration is thus a mutual matter between animals well known to one another who have established a reciprocating relationship.
Preferences for partners are probably based on the frequency of reciprocation.
Indeed, reciprocation is perhaps the operational basis for friendship.
Reciprocation is infrequent when females and young are the enlisters.
Here the expectation of effective aid and return will be small since males are so much bigger than non-males and most encounters of males are with other males.
Reciprocation seems to depend on the expectation of assistance from the beneficiary at a later time.
This must imply that the possibilities of gain are overall greater than the risks of injury.
Certainly the number of offspring that a male may sire as a result of reciprocating coalitions will be greater than if he did not participate, while his lifespan is probably only slightly affected by such activity.
Reciprocating coalitions are an important feature of these multi-male groups and particular friends at the top of the hierarchy can effectively ‘police’ the unit, reducing the frequency of quarrels and maintaining a low level of disturbance of pregnant and lactating females.
Indeed it is remarkable that transferring males have the persistence and strength to rise in rank and gain mates for themselves in the face of such opposition.
Much of their success lies in their skills in social manipulation whereby their rise is assisted by partners whose status and mating success likewise improves.
As existing dominant males age so doubtless can the collaborative attacks of younger animals prove increasingly effective.
On holding a harem
The prime difference between the multi-male and uni-male groups is that in the latter sexually maturing males quickly leave the reproductive unit.
This arises not only because fathers tend to reject young sons at puberty but also because young males show a preference for their own kind for company.
Young male and female geladas begin to differentiate their preferences in this way well before the male separates to join an all-male group.
The motivational system of the developing male makes a positive contribution to separation in these animals.
Young-females usually remain within the natal group, although transference to other groups through affiliation with young male reproductives reduces the probability of incest (see below) with the father.
The females within a harem form a team in which there is much mutual support for one another.
The strength of this support differs between species and effects the role the male plays in the social dynamics of the harem and the types of relationship that maintain the structure.
Among patas monkeys the male behaviour is adapted to the large territory through which the group ranges in open grassland (Hall 1965).
The male spends much time perched in trees on the lookout both for other Patas and for potential predators.
His alarm call causes the females to slink off undetected while he may produce a diversionary display to confuse a predator or male rivals.
He thus does little to ‘lead’ his group and he does not dominate the females.
The opposite condition is shown by the hamadryas baboon: the male enforces a direction of march through biting the necks of recalcitrant females until they follow him.
Male geladas are intermediate.
During the formation of harems they are assertive, dominant, directive.
As the harem matures, however, the females show a close collaboration that can oppose a male effectively; they determine the direction of movement and the male has little control.
His main preoccupation becomes the demonstration of prowess through chasing off other males that attempt to gain access to his females.
The study of interactions and relationships that constitute the social structure of these various rearing units has begun to provide a description of the rules whereby the structure is maintained from generation to generation.
These rules express the interactional dispositions of the individuals concerned which constrain their potential for acquiring novel behaviour randomly through learning.
Baboons are highly intelligent animals and learn to satisfy their biological needs in many often diverse ways.
The routes to satisfaction are patterned by internal or dispositional constraints so that the behaviours concerned tend to lead to an end that is characteristic of a species.
The behavioural routes to that end thus show an ‘equipotentiality’.
However far out an animal may seem to be going there is a tendency to swing back into a pre-ordained behaviour or orbit within which motivational satisfaction may be most probably attained.
Young baboons are reared in social units of complex structure.
They are born into a nexus of interactions and relationships that shape the expression of their own needs from the very beginning.
At each stage of life relationships are the outcome of relatively temporary associations between individuals in which the needs of the partners are balanced.
‘Reinforcement of the behaviours related to such needs cements the associations at least for a time.
While it may be strategic for a juvenile male to appease larger ones for a period and while he may learn elaborate social skills in the process, his ultimate strategy is to replace the dominant animal in terms of access to required commodities — especially mates.
Relationships are dynamic…the status system is a kind of social front, a temporary balance of forces, behind which individuals develop the social skills needed for the…resolution of intergenerational competition’(Crook 1975).
The study of the mechanisms responsible for group structure at any one time thus requires a through-time or ‘diachronic’ perspective if the functional role of these mechanisms in relation to the overall reproductive strategies of individuals is to be perceived.
A static model, such as that of Homans in sociology, emphasizing structural maintenance through a form of ‘social approval’, neglects the inherent dynamism of reproductive strategies that necessitate risk in competition and possibly conflict for their fulfilment.
The maximization of inclusive fitness requires a motivational assertion in the performance of strategies that necessarily conflict with the similar strategies of others, for animals (and humans) live in a world of finite supplies.
Young males in harem societies are faced with a problem of acquiring mates against a gradient of mate possession established by a ‘gerontocracy’ of their fathers.
Likewise young females have the problem of choosing mates that will provide them with vigorous young and possibly the assistance they need to rear them.
An ageing father is not  the best bet, yet very often his behaviour is coercive and restricts his daughter's access to potential suitors.
The mode of resolution of these conflicts is the key theme in any study of social dynamics.
The first exploration of this theme was made by Kummer (1968) in research on hamadryas in Ethiopia.
The male of the species is an unadulterated chauvinist who will not allow the females of his harem to move more than a few feet from him.
If they do so he grabs them by the neck and hauls them back to the fold.
These males are also sexually attracted to their daughters so that young suitors are vigorously rejected.
However, males from the bachelor section of the band harass owners until they are able to travel with the harem as a second male in what emerges as a two-male team.
The young male thereafter protects very young sexually immature females so that they are attracted to him and form a close relationship.
There thus emerges a harem of juvenile females in association with the secondary male, but this male is as yet unable to mate with them because they are too young.
As they mature he leads them out of the harem to an independent existence.
Recent research on the hamadryas shows that the males who join harem owners tend to be their sons.
This means that harem females are being passed down from father to son in a patrilineal fashion.
Bands of hamadryas evidently comprise several patrilineal lineages of this kind (Abbeglen 1976).
It also means that the males and females are not unrelated animals.
Kummer (1975) has also done much to clarify the rules that govern the formation of a gelada harem.
His work on this topic is experimental and consists of introducing a series of animals to one another and watching them as they ‘convene’ a group in a field enclosure.
The regularities he observed in this process suggest that the species behaves according to rules that limit the possible variety of behaviours that could occur as they meet one another.
Every time two geladas are introduced to one another they go through a series of steps in which, characteristically, a fight precedes presenting, which precedes a mounting, which in turn precedes mutual grooming.
These presentings and mountings, although sexual expressions, are not overt sexual acts but rather reflect the relative dominance and submission of the two.
All pairs go through this sequence irrespective of their sex and it ends with a clear dominance — subordination relationship in which grooming indicates compatibility and resolution of tension.
The establishment of compatibility is slower and it remains less stable when the two animals are both of high initial dominance; thus two males are less compatible than a male — female dyad.
The latter dyads are also more compatible than female — female pairs, although in the latter case there is little fighting in the convening sequence.
It seems that the initial agonism derives from a conflict over dominance and the  subsequent sexual posturing reduces both aggressive and escape tendencies as the conflict over dominance is resolved.
Grooming, says Kummer, is the behaviour typical of a mature and relatively stable couple.
If an established pair is subjected to the presence of a new animal their compatibility may become less and the interaction mode may regress to one of the earlier behavioural stages.
The less compatible a pair the greater the probability that their relationship will regress in the presence of another animal.
Three animals cannot establish two dyads of high compatibility, for the sight of an interacting pair in a threesome tends to reduce the capacity of the onlooker for developing his relationship with either of the other two.
Males, in particular, are quickly inhibited from approaching a female if she is already interacting with a male partner.
As more animals are introduced, males seek to maximize the number of compatible relations with females while the latter seek to make their relation with a particular male exclusive.
There is thus a strong tendency for individual males to intervene in every friendly dyadic interaction in which they do not have a part.
Intervention occurs when the intruder is dominant to at least one member of the couple approached.
When he is subordinate to both of them then a partnership with either animal may be established as an aid to intervention.
The outcome of these behaviours in a captive colony is the formation of one-male groups similar to those found in the wild.
All females become part of such groups but socially inhibited males may lack mates.
Robin and Patsy Dunbar (1975) have developed my pioneering studies of gelada baboons in Ethiopia (1966) through detailed analyses of interactions within harems in the natural habitat.
The number of females with whom the male frequently interacts decreases with the size of the group.
This means that in larger groups most of the interactions and mutual grooming go on between members of female pairs while the male only grooms with one or two of them.
The male can maintain a fairly equable distribution of grooming up to a harem size of five females.
Above this size he is unable to maintain this rate of involvement.
Whereas newly formed harems are small, with an active male who is both the dominant animal and the leader within it, older well-established and larger groups contain not only a strongly bonded group of females but a male who no longer leads and whose dominance can also be challenged by a consortium of females.
The male is now primarily involved in breaking up quarrels between females and in repelling approaches by other males either bidding for access to the harem through the formation of a two-male team or, more dangerously, seeking a fight for total replacement.
Large gelada harems develop instability from a variety of causes.
First, the male — female bonding is weakened owing to the low frequency of male interactions with most of his female companions.
Secondly, the male shows little sexual interest in his sexually mature daughters.
Thirdly, since dominant females have most young it follows that the more subordinate females there are in the harem the lower the potential reproductive success of any one of them.
The implication is clear.
Young, subordinate females will do better if they mate with a new male.
Opportunities may be expected to exist for a young male to join the harem.
Members of all-male groups maintain a regular monitoring of harems through a system of challenges I called the ‘yelping chase’.
By approaching the harems the male owners are stimulated to come out and chase the interlopers.
The approach of a body of unmated males to a group of harems is always the signal for a whole series of challenges and chases of this kind often initiated by the harem owners themselves.
The presence of a weakening harem owner must be easily detected.
Young males that regularly harass a particular harem owner finally get accepted as a member of the harem.
Sexual relations between the newcomer and the old man's daughters are not resented, and after a period of mutual co-existence the young male leads the daughters into a separate existence as a new harem.
The process is slowed down by the young females' strong attachments to their mothers some of whom may occasionally defect and move off with the young males too.
Males without harems sometimes opt for a frontal attack.
Fighting may go on intermittently for days and the original owner does not tire easily.
If the newcomer is persistent, however, some of the females may transfer their attention to him.
If this happens it seems the old male is doomed.
Soon he is defeated and becomes peripheral to the social unit now dominated by the sexually active newcomer.
The Dunbars have observed only a few such fights to completion but the outcome is quite remarkable.
In other harem-forming species the takeover by another male or males is commonly followed by either the killing or complete ejection of the old owner and by the slaughter of babies and infants (Hrdy 1974).
Such incidents have now been reported sufficiently often in langurs and in lions, for example, to invalidate an early explanation attributing them to a high population density.
In terms of selection theory it makes sense for an incoming male to kill the young, for the females then come into oestrus quickly and he can get his genes into the assembly line at the earliest opportunity.
Otherwise he would not only have to wait till the young of a non-related male were reared but would probably have to protect them as well in order to prevent other males from supplanting him.
The old gelada male, by contrast, is not driven forth, his young are not killed, and he may assist the newcomer in preventing a further takeover of the group.
Robin Dunbar (personal communication) is of the opinion that the reason why this happens in gelada is that the two males strike a bargain, as it were.
The newcomer trades his forbearance of the existing young against the collaboration of the old male in retaining the harem.
There is a real possibility that the newcomer is not only exhausted but possibly wounded by the time he has won the harem.
Other gelada males without harems have been seen to sit watching such a fight.
As soon as it is over and both males are exhausted they have a brief opportunity during which they can launch an attack and win the harem from both of them, and this has been seen to happen.
The collaboration of the two males tends to prevent this.
The old male remains loosely attached to the harem and spends a great deal of time caring for his infants.
No longer active sexually, he now invests his time and energy in caring for his last offspring.
The newcomer mates as soon as females are in oestrus.
Male geladas may thus obtain a harem in several ways that seem to depend on age.
Most seem able to enter a harem by harassment and then acquire the group's daughters.
A harem owner may have several sets of daughters creamed off in this way.
He is not interested in them sexually, so there is no direct confrontation between him and the newcomer.
A simple incest taboo is in operation here.
Males that are not successful at this manoeuvre are losing reproductive time; they are older and bigger.
On theoretical grounds, they must needs stake a venture to gain a maximum prize; so they risk a battle for the harem.
While this gets them both young and older females there is a price to pay, since big harems are the least stable and most easily taken over by other males.
The Dunbars have shown that whereas harems taken over in combat only last an average of three and a half years, those established by way of two-male team formation last eight and a half.
Over a lifetime these two strategies yield almost the same number of offspring but an older male clearly needs the quicker success and he takes the greater risk.
Who the cunning ones may be who calculatingly steal a harem from exhausted combatants after a battle is a question yet to be answered.
Homosexual behaviours between male gelada baboons
Young male geladas acquire the skills essential for obtaining a harem within the context of life in an ‘all-male’ group.
Whereas the young hamadryas baboon males move in the periphery of the bands of harems the geladas establish groups of consistent membership, close bonding between individuals, and reciprocal collaborations in several aspects of life.
When Wrangham joined our Bristol team after his chimpanzee research at the Gombe National Park (p. 69) he concentrated his  rainy season observations on a unit of gelada males.
Unfortunately, owing to changes in Ethiopian political life, the studies he began, together with those of the Dunbars, had to be terminated early, thus leaving many questions inconclusively answered.
One especially interesting question concerns homosexuality in these animals.
Wrangham (1976) made some striking observations.
He describes overt sexual behaviour of two kinds occurring between bachelors.
Neither of these behaviours comprised pseudosexual behaviour of the sort aimed at reducing tension and regulating dominance interactions which is quite common in mammals.
In such behaviour a submissive individual presents his bottom to a dominant male and is briefly mounted, but without penile erection or ejaculation by either animal.
Wrangham writes that in his observations the mounter could be either older or younger than the partner and that approaches were made in situations commonly lacking in social tension.
The behaviour was clearly sexual.
In addition he once observed self-masturbation to ejaculation and the manual masturbation of companions.
Wrangham, theorizing tentatively from some physiological evidence from human subjects, suggests that masturbation may stimulate the secretion of testosterone and may occur when the latter falls below some threshold.
He argues that young gelada males, living in all-male groups, suffer from sexual deprivation.
Plausibly sexual behaviour between these males not only relieves this deprivation but might maintain higher testosterone levels in the participants than would otherwise be the case.
Since aggressive animals often have higher testosterone levels than normal this might aid a male in persisting in attacks on harem males and thereby in gaining a harem.
Such mutual sexual activity in creating relationships between males could also amount to a form of collaborative support in obtaining of harems.
Wrangham comments: ‘We may thus find the first evidence that so-called abnormal sexual behaviour may have a biological function’; but he points out that a number of issues need to be resolved.
These bachelor males may not be more deprived of sexual outlets than are the harem owners themselves.
This is because the oestrous periods of harem females tend to occur bunched together in time.
At other seasons the male may entirely lack sexually active female companions.
Dunbar (personal communication) has then observed males masturbating.
Again, the frequency of masturbation is perhaps highest among older males recently defeated by a newcomer male who has taken over the sexual role in his harem.
In other words, we are still uncertain about the extent of self- or mutual masturbation and the circumstances under which its occurrence is high.
Certainly much touching of the penises, penile erection, and display occur between young male geladas and the behaviour is commonly used in greeting behaviour.
Wrangham concludes  that an understanding of these relationships awaits renewed field study.
Sexual ‘predators’ and herd cycles in geladas
The function of herd formation in open-country primates has been a topic of considerable debate.
A prime theme has been the argument that group formation is often of survival value to individuals in gaining a social cover from predation (p. 52).
Someone else is more likely to be eaten if I keep near to other people.
Certainly the troops of Papio baboons are important as a means of deterring predators, and solitary animals take considerable risks.
In the montane life of the gelada baboon today predation from village dogs occurs, especially on young animals, and the geladas are clearly fearful of them.
Predation by humans and dogs together may be heavy in certain areas.
Yet herd size is not constant; it fluctuates in relation to environmental and social conditions.
The parties in which gelada herds move vary seasonally in size (Crook 1966; Dunbar 1977).
In the arid part of the year the parties are smaller, they travel faster, and they congregate primarily at patches where food is locally abundant.
My observations were made mostly in areas dominated by agriculture where the effects of seasonality could have been especially pronounced.
In the gelada's natural habitat the Dunbars did not find an extreme seasonality in food availability, especially since geladas could switch from grass to rhizomes and bulbs as the key dry-season diet.
Furthermore, while party size varies, the local density of animals does not.
This might mean that while direct competition for resources is reduced by the decrease in group size, the indirect competition remains unaffected.
Wrangham, after a short period of ecological work, remarked that ‘herd formation clearly involves costs even at the beginning of the wet season, when a grazing animal should have the best food supply of the year’.
He found that harem males in herds had to walk farther per day to nourish themselves than did members of a lone all-male group.
Much of this extra travel is due to social interactions between harems.
Solitary feeding also has its cost, since the animal cannot then locate food by congregating at food sites discovered by others.
In the early dry season, gelada resources are especially patchily distributed; gregariousness probably enables the baboons to gain rapid access to patches rich in food.
Herd formation may then come about in response to the distribution patterns of rich food in patches.
But patches are rapidly exhausted by large herds, so that a smaller party size would reduce competition when patches were least rich (Dunbar 1977).
This takes us back to explanations similar to those suggested for the variation in group size early in these studies (Crook and Gartlan 1966) but these do  not account for the massive gregariousness of the species under optimum conditions when a more even dispersion of the population would reduce the costs of foraging.
Wrangham suggests an interesting and novel solution to this problem.
If a harem is travelling alone and encounters an all-male group, the male then faces the risk that adult males from the group will attack him and usurp his reproductive role.
A harem travelling with others is not only less likely to be the one attacked but, at least at the onset of the bachelors' approach, the male can count on the participation of other harem males in ‘yelping chases’ that deter the attackers.
In addition the loud cries of harem males probably alert others to the presence of non-reproductive males and this may result in collaborative defence in driving them away.
In sum, the association with other harems function in sexual defence in a way that is closely analogous to defence against predators.
Herd formation provides three advantages: information about the presence of potential rivals, the assistance of fellow male reproductives in collective harem defence, and a reduced probability of any particular harem being chosen as a target for an attack or harassment.
On the other side of course the line-up of young males is equally formidable.
The patterning of relationships between individuals in these groups needs much further study.
How do the male reproductives of the ‘gerontocracy’ withstand the co-operative attacks of the young males?
How often are harems formed by gradual means and how often by frontal attack?
When does it pay a young male to remain with his companions operating a preferred strategy of delayed takeover?
When is the pay-off to the young male greater in a gradual formation of a two-male team and a co-operative defence of a mating — rearing unit?
How closely related are young males to the harem owners they join or defeat?
A whole variety of subtle strategies are available.
They concern fine judgements about the time spent in the non-reproductive phase versus time spent in collaborative reproduction and they also concern subtle choices of companion at all times.
The topic is an attractive one for the application of games theory and mathematical modelling but, more important, we need more field data.
The demographic contexts for these events also influence their patterning.
The Dunbars found that the structure of their study population in Ethiopia differed in 1974 — 5 from that of 1971 — 2.
Although the age — sex composition and total number of animals present were similar in the two periods the number of reproductive units had decreased between the studies with a corresponding increase in mean unit size.
As fewer males ‘owned’ harems, the all-male groups had increased in size and contained older males.
This coincided with a greater frequency of direct attacks in harem takeovers.
Such shifts could be based upon periodic differences in population composition.
Because there is a two-year birth interval and because females are in reproductive synchrony, the birth-rate is not constant from year to year.
More individuals therefore enter the population in some years than in others.
Furthermore, since males become sexually mature later than females, a smaller male proportion may be entering the reproductive population in some years than in others.
Females tend to remain in their natal units, which thereby increase gradually in size.
At the same time more and more males are accumulating in all-male groups.
Once an imbalance occurs between the number of males waiting to acquire units and the number of units that can be taken over or entered, the system could go into a series of oscillations which would be self-perpetuating, at least for some time.
The excess males must wait until large enough units have been generated through the maturation of female offspring.
Once this point has been reached there will be a rapid reduction in the number of non-reproductive males, and the large units will be broken up into a number of smaller ones, in part through takeovers and in part through fission of units containing followers.
The result of this stage of the process is a large number of small units which the remaining young bachelors will be unable to enter.
The cycle will then gradually repeat itself.
All-male groups subject to a resistant collection of small stable harems led by assertive young adults may become relatively nomadic and move to areas where the population cycle is in a different phase and contains larger and less stable harems.
(For additional ecological studies on gelada see Kawai 1978.)
Kinship in monkeys and apes
Recent research is demonstrating that kin relations are important determinants of relationship patterns in monkey groups.
This is especially apparent from studies of troops of Japanese and rhesus macaques.
Troops are composed of both sexes, but, whereas young males normally emigrate, females remain to comprise the core of the unit.
These females interact with one another in ways that accord with their matrilineal descent.
Descendants of sisters interact positively with descendants of mother or grandmother more than they do with those of aunts or great-aunts.
Furthermore, when these groups split the division occurs between the lineages descended from particular females that began the matrilines.
Lineages of descent from a female ancestor are thus prime substructures composing a macaque troop.
Some primates live in patrilineal rather than matrilineal descent groups.
Here males stay with their male kin as adults and females move into new groups at adolescence.
Examples are fewer, it seems, than for matrilines but include spider monkeys, the red colobus, chimpanzees, and also the hamadryas baboon when movements between clans rather than in and out of harems is considered.
Wrangham (personal communication) has recently sought to explain the basis for these two types of lineage system by focusing on the consequences of intrasexual competition.
One might expect females to compete for rich food sources, for these are important to them in gaining nutrition for child-bearing and lactation.
He argues that matrilineal troops of primates arise where the preferred primary foods such as ripe fruits occur in clumps, necessitating competition, and that coalitions of female kin increase the feeding possibilities for related individuals (cf.
Seyfarth 1976 and above p. 75).
Matriline coalitions also utilize secondary food sources such as leaves and unripe fruits and the species have digestive mechanisms for detoxifying the latter.
These secondary resources are so abundant, however, that competition rarely arises for them and they thus constitute a reserve when primary resources are few.
Wrangham thinks that where there are no secondary resources, competition for the main resource may get so high that solitary feeding becomes essential.
This appears to be true of chimpanzees (under poor food conditions), orang-utans, and spider monkeys which show neither coalition formation nor matrilines.
In other species where patrilinearity has been suggested, food resources may again show important contrasts from those of matrilines.
Nagel (1973) has shown that in the area exploited by  hamadrayas baboons in the Awash valley there are no fruiting trees such as figs or tamarinds which by comparison constitute primary sources in the near-by P. anubis baboon area.
Competition for clumped items seems less in  hamadrayas , and there is plenty of low-quality food available.
Group formation may be due here to the collaboration of males in defence against rivals, so that male relationships become the main factor influencing the dispersion of females.
Wrangham's theory remains tentative but if it stands up to further investigation it suggests that humans were primordially  partrilineal .
No apes are matrilineal and humans and apes share physiological characteristics restricting diets to high quality foods.
The parallelism between man and gelada may perhaps also be supported by this developing line of thought.
Matrilineal descent systems seem to develop only occasionally in human cultures and to be associated with female ownership of primary resources such as land (see p. 205).
Summary
(1)
The mammals are classified into a number of orders: carnivores, insectivores, and Cetacea, for example.
Man belongs to the primates, which also includes monkeys of various kinds and the apes.
All these mammalian orders stem from small insectivorous animals that inhabited  the forests while the dinosaurs were still living.
A special innovation in both mammals and birds was homoiothermy, warm-bloodedness, which allows a constantly high level of activity that is not dependent upon the temperature of the environment.
It also allows the colonization of environments that would otherwise be too severe.
Clearly mammals and birds were equipped to radiate evolutionarily in places where cold-blooded creatures could not flourish.
(2)
Primitive primates are quite like the early insectivores.
The little mouse lemur of Madagascar lives in small groups in which each female owns a territory and lives in a tree cavity or hole somewhere within it.
Overlapping the largely contiguous female territories are those of males which mate with the females in their area.
Males and females thus live in largely separate systems only integrated through the overlap in range.
Since many males are excluded from the area where the females are, there is competition between young upstarts and older territory-owners for access to the areas of females.
Young animals usually do not get territories containing females for some time.
This type of social system is very like that of many insectivores and seems to be a starting-point from which other primate societies probably developed.
(3)
Survey of primate societies shows that the several grades correlate with certain ecological circumstances.
Forest fruit-eaters live diurnally in small family parties usually with a single reproductive male.
In both forest and savannah large parties with many males develop, especially among ground-dwellers subject to terrestrial predation.
In certain open-country baboons and some other animals ‘harems’ appear in herds or moving in separate ranges.
A great deal of discussion has focused on the adaptive significance of these societal structures.
Earlier views were based largely on correlations between social structure and ecological factors.
Modern studies of this kind can take into account many fine-grained features of both the physical and the social environment.
Studies where ecological variation or other contrasts within the range of a study population occurs can also be cited as evidence for the influence of one ecological factor or another.
Coupled with this approach is an argument from the axioms of sociobiological theory that attempt to explain the evolution of social structure in terms of the fitness that accrues to an individual living in it.
These arguments can then be tested by studies in the field of either an observational or an experimental nature.
(4)
Man is derived from an ancestor that he holds in common with the existing great apes.
The likely lines of descent are under continuous debate as new information from fossils or new inferences from other data or fresh theoretical axioms arise.
The fossil finds at present available are too few to settle debates.
I present here some recent views on the subject.
(5)
It is now clear that hominoids emerged in East Africa, presumably showing behaviour similar to but diverging from that of other ape-like creatures.
Similarities to chimpanzees must have included many expressions of emotionality and emotional control, complex communication, and vegetarianism combined with some hunting for meat organized among young males.
The strongly structured social organization of man with close bonds between particular males and females is not, however, a chimpanzee characteristic.
It is found to a degree in gorillas but a closer similarity occurs in baboons.
Their parallel evolution to man in a comparable habitat is thus of special interest.
(6)
The parallels between man and baboons include the following: a complex and structured group life, status hierarchies, the formation in some species of long-term polygamous bonds between males and females, the division of societies into reproductive groups and non-reproductive ‘surplus males’, competition between males for access to females, collaboration between males in their various competitions, and in some cases intergenerational male collaboration in the maintenance of breeding units.
Recent work has demonstrated the existence of both matrilineal and patrilineal kinship associations.
(7)
The hierarchical structures of baboons seem to be evolutionary beneficial to their members in terms of the maximization of their inclusive fitnesses.
The same appears to apply to the strategies of individuals involved in reciprocal collaboration.
Different types of societal structure containing ‘harems’ are related to contrasting ecological conditions and social pressures arising from competition.
Gelada and hamadryas baboons are shown to have especially complex social systems analysable in terms of their ecological context and interior social stresses.
The replacement by a newcomer of the male harem owner in the gelada is not accompanied by his expulsion.
He remains to look after his own infants and strikes a ‘bargain’ with the newcomer so that, while he remains sexually inactive, he assists his victorious opponent in preventing yet further take-overs of the unit.
(8)
The males in the bachelor groups of gelada may show homosexual behaviour.
This sexual activity does not prevent competition for females and the eventual acquisition of a harem.
Indeed the homosexual activity might plausibly have an endocrinal effect in priming males for heterosexual activity.
(9)
Competition between old males with harems and younger ones without them involves co-operation between males on both sides.
The mutual assistance of harem owners in driving off non-reproductive males may be the basis of herd formation in the gelada baboon.
A complex relationship between a co-operative reproductive gerontocracy and an equally complex group of co-operating bachelors results in oscillations in group size and composition.
Male geladas seem to have different strategies for obtaining reproductive females depending on the state of the population.
This socio-demographic complexity seems to foreshadow that of man.
(10)
Recent research reveals the importance of kinship and lineage in non-human primates.
Matrilines and patrilines appear to be associated with differing feeding ecologies and foraging strategies.
Man appears to be descended from patrilineal ancestors.