

HCI CLUB HOLIDAYS Hotels, Villages & Apartments in the Mediterranean & Canaries SPECIAL OFFERS SEE CLUB PAGES FOR DETAILS HOLIDAYS THAT THINK ABOUT EVERYBODY The Club Holiday Division of HORIZON
HCI Club Holidays…
HCI is an exciting idea in holidays — friendly, informal villages, hotels and apartments in some of the most beautiful sun-drenched locations in the Mediterranean and Canary Islands with virtually everything you could want right on your doorstep.
Exclusive Locations
HCI Clubs are set in spacious grounds and many have their own private beaches.
The perfect setting for relaxing and soaking up the sun.
Club Days
HCI Clubs offer activities to suit every age and every taste, from tennis to volleyball, pedalos to windsurfing, or simply lazing on the beach!
Club Nights
After a delicious meal with free wine, the choice is yours: a quiet drink in the bar, the late-night disco, cabaret style entertainment or a stroll along the beach beneath a starry sky.
For The Children
HCI holidays are very special for youngsters too.
For teenagers there's Club 16 whilst the children will have the time of their lives under careful supervision at their own ‘Pirates Club’.
Great Value for Money
Most of the activities described above are available FREE at HCI Clubs — from FREE wine with meals to a full programme of sports and entertainments making HCI holidays superb value for money.
Everything under the Sun…
Whatever you want from your holiday, you'll find it in HCI's friendly relaxed atmosphere.
Each HCI Club offers a wide range of activities and daily entertainment for adults and children alike.
There's a sport for all, whether it's a round of mini-golf for the family or the challenge of sea and sail.
Or you can simply opt out and discover some of the best ways to spend lazy days.
And as most activities are included in your holiday price, having a fun-packed holiday needn't cost you anything extra.
Lazy Days
For those who love to do nothing but just soak up the summer sun, HCI's beaches and attractive pools (most with free poolside sunloungers) are ideal for relaxing and working on that tan.
After all, there's always tomorrow to try something a little more energetic.
Sports in the Water…
HCI Clubs offer a variety of watersports such as windsurfing, sailing, pedalos, waterskiing, scuba diving and snorkelling.
You don't have to be an expert to have a go, and at some Clubs there's free tuition for beginners.
Turn to page 10 to see at a glance which sports are free at each Club.
…
Or on Dry Land
If you don't want to get your toes wet, why not try a game of tennis, volleyball, mini-golf or table tennis?
At some Clubs you can learn archery or take a keep-fit class too.
And as all sports are matched to your own ability, you can keep up with an old favourite or try your hand at something new.
The table on page 10 can help you find a club that's just right for you.
And for the Children
Our younger guests are well looked after too.
They're sure to have the time of their lives at the Pirates Club or Club 16, enjoying hours of fun with newfound friends and leaving you with new-found freedom.
Pages 8, 9 and 10 will give you more details about HCI's facilities and activities for children.
A World Outside
There's so much to enjoy at our clubs that once you arrive you may not want to leave.
But if you fancy a bit of exploring, there's a world outside waiting to be discovered, from the peaceful charm of local life to the hustle and bustle of markets and bazaars.
You'll find a range of optional excursions in every Club, or why not book a hire car before you go?(see page 83).
When the Sun goes down…
There's plenty to do in the evening at all our HCI Clubs.
No matter what your particular taste in entertainments, you'll be sure to find something to suit you…and it's all included in the price of your holidays, making Club evenings excellent value for money.
Whether it's a relaxing cocktail in the piano bar or the bright lights of the stage, HCI always has your enjoyment in mind.
Free Cheers!
At Clubs offering half or full board, you can start the evening enjoying either a table d'hôte, buffet-style or an à la carte meal.
Most menus offer a choice of continental and traditional British dishes from seafood and steak to pasta and paella, ensuring all tastes are catered for.
And what's more, at most Clubs there's free wine with main meals too…the ideal formula for relaxing and making friends!
On with the Show
Later in the evening, the curtains rise on a free cabaret-style show.
Some evenings there'll be a series of sketches laid on by the Club's Entertainments Team or a folklore show by guest dancers.
On others there may be a fun night of games and competitions.
And if you fancy an evening of stardom, you'll always be welcome to take part and maybe win a bottle of bubbly.
After all, it's all free for your entertainment.
Dancing Feet
From pop to waltz, slow to disco, there's music to set your feet tapping in most HCI Clubs.
Some offer live music from resident bands or guest artistes, and you can round off the evening with disco dancing in the nightclub.
Take a look at the individual Club pages to discover which are best suited to ‘night owls’.
Enjoy the Quieter Life
If your evenings are made for relaxing then why not enjoy a drink and chat with friends at the bar, or take a moonlit stroll along the beach, or simply sit back and absorb the atmosphere?
HCI has a theme to match every individual's mood, so you can each do whatever you want whenever you want…because, at the end of the day, the choice is always yours.
Free fun and games…
Happy children make happy holidays — for everyone.
At HCI Clubs we look after the children so that parents are free to enjoy their own holiday.
The Pirates Club
Free to all 4–11 year olds.
The HCI Captain will spend several hours a day arranging games, sports and competitions, as well as mini discos and the children's own shows in the evening.
At most Clubs, Pirates can sit at the Captain's table for an early evening meal, often with free lemonade or mineral water.
And all Pirates receive a free Club T-shirt and badge.
Some Clubs feature their own children's programme, not necessarily based on a pirate theme.
Club 16
Exclusive to 12–16 year olds.
HCI's Club 16 is designed to enable teenagers to have fun together.
A whole host of activities are arranged by the Club 16 leader.
This varies by Club and can include sports tournaments, trips out for meals and separate excursions.
And membership is free of charge.
The facilities table on page 10 will show you at a glance which Clubs offer a Club 16.
Infants
HCI cares about the very young too.
Some of our Clubs operate a day nursery for the 2–4 year olds.
Most Clubs have cots and high chairs available and can provide a baby-sitting service in the evening.
Please turn to the individual Club pages for full details of programmes and facilities available for children.
Free Holidays for Children
In some Clubs, we are offering free holidays for children aged 2–11 inclusive on selected departure dates.
These are available where indicated on the individual Club pages for a first child sharing a room with 2 adults.
The number of free places is limited, so book early to take advantage of this excellent offer.
When the free holidays have all been taken, the first child will still benefit from the child price shown in the price panel.
Reductions for all Children (2–11 year olds)
HCI offers discounts for all children aged 2–11 years inclusive at the time of travel.
The child prices shown alongside the adult prices in the price panel apply to the first child sharing a room or an apartment with 2 full fare paying passengers.
For the Second Child Sharing
In addition, HCI offers the following generous reductions for the second child sharing a room with 2 full fare paying passengers at all Clubs where you see this symbol 
For Single Parent Families
HCI also feature a special reduction for single parent families.
At all Clubs showing the symbol, one child sharing a twin room with one adult will benefit from reductions shown on the table above.
This offer applies only when a parent is travelling alone with one child, i.e. only 2 names on the Booking Form.
And for all other children
All other children sharing a room or not sharing will benefit from a 10% reduction off the appropriate adult price.
Special Reductions for Children aged 2–16 years inclusive
At the following Clubs all child prices and reductions apply to children aged 2–16 inclusive:
3rd Adult Sharing Reductions — A great offer for the over 12's
At many Clubs, HCI offers reductions for the third person sharing a room with two full fare paying passengers.
These are especially attractive to families with children aged 12 years or over.
You'll find these ‘3rd adult reductions’ in the individual Club price panels.
Low Prices for the Under 2's
Children under 2 years at the time of the return journey travel for just £15 on all flights.
They will not be allocated a seat on the aircraft and must sit on a parent's lap unless there is an unoccupied seat available.
Although infants do not have their own baggage allowance, a collapsible pushchair may be carried in the aircraft hold free of charge.
The cost of their food and cot where applicable should be paid directly to the Club.
These charges vary but you will usually pay between £2.00 and £5.00 per night for a cot.
Children under 2 also have free insurance cover, provided that the parents are covered under the HCI recommended insurance policy (read about the Norwich Union policy on pages 86/87).
How to qualify for these Reduced Price Holidays
(a)
All children must be aged 2–11 years inclusive on the day of departure (unless taking advantage of the special offers for children aged 2–16 years inclusive shown on this page).
(b)
The age of the child on the date of departure must be given at the time of booking and confirmed on the Booking Form.
(c)
We must confirm to you at the time of booking that there is a free or reduced price holiday still available on the departure date you require.
(d)
To qualify for the second child sharing reduction, both the first and second child must share a room or an apartment with two full-fare paying passengers.
(e)
All percentage child reductions including free children's holidays (i.e. 100% reduction) apply to the basic price (including airport charges), and applicable flight supplement and meals chosen.
Any other supplements e.g. for insurance premiums or room supplements, will be added afterwards.
N.B. A full deposit must be paid at the time of booking for all children, except infants, enjoying reduced price holidays.
Choose your Ideal Club
HCI Top Clubs
We are extremely proud of the standard and amenities at all our Clubs.
But some demand extra recognition, which they have received with our ‘Top Club’ award.
Wherever you see it in this brochure, you can be confident of very high standards.
No Surcharges Guaranteed
We guarantee that, whatever happens to our costs or the value of the pound, there will be no surcharges added to the cost of your holiday.
The price of your holiday is fully guaranteed and will not be subject to any surcharges.
Once you have made your booking and paid a deposit, then the cost of your holiday cannot be changed.
Collect Air Miles and Save on your HCI Holiday
Saving Air Miles means that you get even better value from your HCI Holiday.
The Air Miles that you collect can be exchanged for Holiday Vouchers that can be used to pay for all or part of your holiday.
There's no limit to the amount of vouchers you can save.
Around 100 companies all over Britain are giving away Air Miles vouchers to customers who buy their products and services.
So to save on any HCI Holiday all you have to do is go shopping!
Your travel agent has all the details.
He'll tell you why saving on your holiday has never been easier!
Club Descriptions
Each Club has its special character — from the lively fun of Cala Mesquida to the style and luxury of Maravilla at Ten Bel.
We want you to choose the Club to suit your needs, to ensure that you get the very best from your holiday.
For this reason, the Club descriptions are written by journalists and writers who have personally experienced the environment and unique atmosphere at each Club.
Read on to discover which Club would be best for you.
Savings for Groups
HCI means terrific value for parties travelling together.
Club together with your friends or family and you can cut the cost of your holiday.
N.B. (i) To qualify for a reduction, your group must all be full fare paying passengers who book, travel and stay together.
(ii) Two children qualifying for reduced price holidays (but not free holidays) count as one full fare paying passenger.
(iii) A free place includes the basic holiday cost, any applicable flight supplements and meal supplements, but excludes insurance premiums and Club supplements (e.g. for sea view, etc.).
Facility Ratings
— Details at a glance
Our facility rating panels are a quick reference, to help you choose the holiday that best suits your specific needs.
They cover the aspects of a holiday which are often the most important to our guests.
‘Entertainments’, ‘Facilities for Children’ and ‘Sports’, have been individually graded up to 5, 5 being the best.
You will find these ratings on each Club page.
These have been judged from what you tell us in the holiday questionnaire and we have also used our own expertise.
So, if you're looking for a holiday with lots of entertainments, we suggest you consider those Clubs with the highest rating in that category.
On the other hand, a Club with a low rating for children's facilities, for example, does not necessarily mean it is unsuitable for all families, simply that it is likely to have fewer facilities for children.
The detailed Club descriptions tell you exactly what each Club has to offer, so do take time to read them too.
Whilst we hope you will find these facility ratings a helpful guide when making your holiday choice, it is important you appreciate both that circumstances can change after our brochure goes to press and that such facilities cannot be guaranteed throughout the season, particularly where they are dependent on weather or the level of demand at a particular time.
Invariably, Club amenities do vary so not all Clubs of equal ratings will be the same in all respects.
Nevertheless, these ratings, together with the brochure description, the information available at your travel agent and the price you pay, offer the very best guide in helping you select your Club.
Club Representatives
You will find a Representative waiting to meet you when you arrive abroad.
At each of the Clubs featured in this brochure an HCI Representative will be on hand with regular visiting hours.
Highly trained and knowledgeable about the resort, our Representatives are there to offer you any help or advice you may need in order to get the best out of your holiday.
They can also tell you about worthwhile sightseeing and give you full details of excursions.
The cost of these is extra, of course, but you'll find them both reasonably-priced and interesting.
MAJORCA
The British have fallen in love with this Mediterranean island because it has everything for a perfect holiday: sunny skies, glorious beaches, bustling resorts, friendly people, fascinating sights and beautiful countryside.
And Majorca combines superbly the high-rise playgrounds of Palma, Arenal and Magaluf with the traditional charm of rugged hillsides, white-washed villages and the thousands of windmills designed to lift the underground water which keeps this island so luxuriant.
The local culture has much to offer the curious visitor, with culinary specialities such as‘tapas’, lobster, luscious prawns or suckling pig.
Island craftsmen make everything from leather goods and raffia to local pottery and beautiful hand-made jewellery using the famous Majorcan pearls.
And with the many and varied sights to discover at your leisure, Majorca really does have something special to offer everyone.
OUT & ABOUT
Formentor
In the North of the island, this beautiful peninsula has superb beaches set among scented pine trees and offers breathtaking views.
Manacor
The manufacturing centre for the famous Majorcan pearls.
Marvel at the displays in the elegant factory showrooms and don't forget your credit card!
Valldemosa
A small traditional style village which was the source of inspiration for some of Chopin's most romantic compositions.
Caves of Drach
Near to the pretty fishing village of Porto Cristo is an amazing series of underground caverns and lakes bordered with stalagmites and stalactites.
The tour ends with an interesting sound and light show.
Palma
The historic capital of Majorca, with its imposing cathedral and old port, dominated by the 600 year old Bellver Castle.
CALA MESQUIDA Beach Club
There is a place on sun-kissed Majorca that isn't even a little bit crowded.
Forget Palma and the beaches, where sun-lotioned bodies  lay shoulder to shoulder and there's never any room for you or your sunshade.
Leave behind the places you only visit once, wish you'd never been and vow never to return.
Come to an unspoilt sandy cove, to the north of the British holidaymakers' dream isle and find the place HCI has turned into their delightful and real value for money Cala Mesquida Beach Club.
Let's first set the scene.
Try to picture those views on postcards of Majorca which you are certain never REALLY exist.
The sunset over a deserted beach.
A single white sail on an azure-blue sea.
A field of wild flowers or an uncluttered soft, sandy beach with plenty of room — even in high season.
This is Cala Mesquida.
It's a picture postcard brought to life.
And how.
For this is the beach club that really has got EVERYTHING for the family.
I wandered along the sandy beach and saw just how mums and dads with kiddies and gran and grandad too, were enjoying a REAL family holiday in the sun.
Holidays aren't cheap — despite what some people say — and if you have two or three young children they turn out darned expensive.
But not here.
For, believe me, just about everything is included in the price in the brochure.
Like all good club holidays there is plenty going on.
There has to be.
For Cala Mesquida is some way from lively Cala Ratjada with its discos and bars.
Worth a visit — but there's really no need to go anywhere.
For EVERY night there is a different show in the Club's International Bar.
And EVERY day there is something going on for mum and dad or the kiddies.
If you tire of the beach and the windsurfers, pedalos or sailing dinghies — all included in the price of course— join the games and competitions run all day long back at the Club by the entertainments team.
And Cala Mesquida has the most dedicated and happiest bunch of Holiday Club Representatives I've ever seen.
Nothing was too much trouble.
The big hit with the kiddies had to be the Pirates Club.
Join as a Skull or Crossbone.
And there were prizes galore for everything from swimming — there are an incredible FOUR pools — to mini-golf or skittles or boules or…
It goes on and on.
Nothing has been missed out.
For mum's peace of mind there is a doctor on call, too, and a well run nursery with a nursery nurse.
It's so easy to make friends at Cala Mesquida.
And perhaps the best place is the dining room.
Everyone has a smile and we all wanted to tell what we had done that day or planned for the next.
And the food?
I know.
We all have our favourite stories about Spanish food.
But here's a place where the food is good and there is plenty to feed hungry teenagers too.
Plus plenty of wine or lemonade — again all included in your holiday price.
Majorca the isle of yobs and crowds?
Not here at Cala Mesquida.
They promise an honest to goodness family holiday in the sun and that's exactly what we got.
Great.
Journalist
Cala Mesquida Village
Cala Mesquida Village consists of small, chalet-style rooms set amidst pine trees.
The village rooms are linked to each other by paths with old-fashioned signposts pointing the way to the restaurant, nightclub, pools and beach.
The village is the place to stay if you enjoy a relaxed, informal atmosphere and want to be close to all the activities.
Accommodation
The village has 481 rooms with shower in chalets or two or three storey residences.
The following room types are available:
Twin rooms which will also take an extra put-you-up bed for a child under 11 only.
Please note space will be limited.
Twin rooms with terrace and sea view available at a supplement.
3 bedded rooms.
4 bedded rooms consisting of 2 singles and 1 bunk bed in 2 rooms.
4 bedded rooms with terrace available at a supplement consisting of 1 double and 2 singles in 2 rooms.
Single rooms available at a supplement.
Cala Mesquida Apartments
The self-catering apartments form their own little village set around the palm-fringed swimming pool.
There's a poolside bar here and lawns scattered with sunloungers for relaxing, plus tennis courts for the more energetic.
And, of course, all the daytime activities and evening entertainments of Cala Mesquida Village are yours to enjoy just a short walk away.
Accommodation
90 apartments with one bedroom plus lounge with two convertible sofas, cooking facilities, bathroom and terrace.
Prices are based on 4 people sharing.
Cala Mesquida Hotel
Set on its own rocky peninsula overlooking the sea, the hotel at Cala Mesquida is just far enough from the hustle and bustle to make it that little bit quieter and more relaxing.
The hotel has its own exclusive restaurant, a popular bar plus its own swimming pool and children's pool and, of course, the Club's main amenities and superb beach are just a couple of hundred yards away.
Accommodation
The hotel has 79 rooms.
Twins, three and four bedded rooms with bath or shower are available.
Many twin rooms will take an extra put-you-up bed for a child under 11.
Please note space will be limited.
Single rooms are available at a supplement.
Note: Children under 6 are not accepted at Cala Mesquida Hotel.
CLUB FACILITIES
Gardens and sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers; 4 swimming pools.
Hotel bar; poolside bar; nightclub bar; beach bar.
Hotel restaurant; village restaurant (buffet-style); cafeteria.
Shop; hairdresser; apartments' mini-market.
Children's pool; playground; babysitting available; cots and high chairs available; Nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the north-east coast of Majorca, 6 miles from Cala Ratjada.
FREE
Cala Mesquida is a Belhaven property
IN OUR OPINION
A lively family Club set on the most beautiful beach in Majorca, offering simple accommodation and a wide range of facilities for everyone.
ROMANTICA Beach Club
Whatever mood you are in when you arrive at HCI's Club Romantica…you can be sure that within a few minutes you'll feel at home in this pretty village of chalet bungalows surrounded by trees and flowers.
The large and very enthusiastic entertainments team create a welcoming atmosphere and ensure that there are plenty of activities to keep everyone happy.
But if all you want to do is sit in the gardens or laze by the pool, they will allow it!
That's the nice thing about Romantica…you can have a highly active holiday if you want to but if you don't, you can wander around the Club and feel like you've landed on a beautiful tropical island!
If, like me, you prefer the sporting life, then you are spoilt for choice here.
There's tennis, windsurfing, volleyball and snorkelling to name just a few of the activities.
And if you bring the children, they'll be off enjoying fun and games with the other youngsters at the Pirates Club.
Of course, as with all the Clubs, virtually everything is included in the price and you don't have to pay a penny extra.
Wine also comes free at meal times…what a way to start the evening!
Talking of the evenings…
Romantica really comes alive at night.
The entertainments team put on lively shows and just hours after arriving at Romantica I agreed to ‘star’ in their evening production of the musical ‘Grease’.
Some of the other holiday-makers didn't speak much English…but that's the beauty of HCI, everyone is there to have a good time and you find you make friends even if you don't speak the same language.
Overall, a really wonderful place — a tropical island, a sports paradise, a delightful golden, sandy beach, plenty to occupy the children, and evening entertainment…what more could anyone want from their holiday!
Suzy Walton
Travel Correspondent, LBC Radio
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers.
Beach bar; nightclub bar.
Air-conditioned buffet-style restaurant.
TV room and lounge; boutique; hairdresser.
Children's pool; playground, babysitting available; cots and high chairs available; Nurse/Doctor available.
Location
Situated on the east cost of Majorca, 3km from Porto Cristo
Accommodation
264 chalet-bungalows with bath or shower.
Twin, three-bedded and four-bedded rooms are available.
Twin rooms with terrace will take an extra put-you-up bed for a child under 11.
Four-bedded rooms consisting of two inter-communicating twins are available at a supplement.
Both of these room types are situated on a hill and reached via a flight of steep steps.
Single rooms are available at a supplement.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
A pretty village Club set amongst colourful gardens and with its own beach of white sand.
Romantica will be completely refurbished in time for your holiday in 1990.
Many of the chalets are set on a hillside reached by steps — not ideal for the infirm or very young children.
TROPICANA Beach Club
Hardly a day goes by without someone passing my desk with a question…
‘What's the best time of year to avoid Kenya's rainy season…?’
‘What's the exchange rate in China…?’
And to be honest, for questions like this, I usually have to refer to a book for an answer!
When someone comes up to me however and says, ‘Where can I take the family for a reasonably priced holiday?’
I give a silent cheer!
This one I can answer on the spot!
I can recommend any family will find what they are looking for at an HCI Club.
I blush when I recall the day I slipped out of the office, bound for HCI's Tropicana Beach Club…
I thought I was off on the usual, rather tedious type of assignment!
Had I read the brochure carefully I would have realised that the experience I was heading for was anything but tedious!
The Tropicana experience began for me as soon as I arrived…it may have been the small hours yet the reception staff were still delighted to greet the new arrivals.
You don't find that at too many holiday destinations!
When I awoke the next morning the view from my window almost knocked me out.
Just looking at the gardens, sun terraces and hills gave me an appetite!— Still that's no problem at Tropicana…with a buffet style service you can help yourself to as much as you like.
Drinks come free at meals you'll be pleased to know…lemonade for the kids and wine for Mum and Dad.
In fact that really is one of the best points of HCI…virtually everything is included in the price.
If you want to go sailing, play volleyball or have a round of mini golf it won't cost you a penny and the kids can be left in the Pirates Club while you spend the afternoon doing things you want to do…but you may have a job persuading them to leave a few hours later.
There's also a baby sitting service to allow you to enjoy the evening and, of course, all the practical things like cots and high chairs are available.
My first day at Tropicana was spent in a boat, on the beach, and in the bar.
I had planned an early night, but when I heard about the disco, I decided a visit to the Club's hairdresser and a night on the dance floor would be much more enjoyable!
Luckily, you don't have to dance every night…you have plenty of opportunity to sit back and relax in the evenings when the entertainments team do their bit!
And there's no telling quite what they will do…some nights they put on a full stage show, other times there may be a game or a sing song to join in with…but whatever the day, whatever the time there's one thing you won't be at Tropicana, and that's bored!
Suzy Walton Travel Correspondent, LBC Radio 
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers; poolside snack bar.
Beach bar; nightclub bar; Tortuga piano bar; snack bar; buffet-style restaurant; shop/boutique; hairdresser.
Children's pool; playground; babysitting available; cots and high chairs available.
Location
Situated on the south-east coast of Majorca, 2 km from Calas de Mallorca.
Accommodation
366 chalet-bungalows set in terraces of three and five.
Twin and three bedded rooms are available with bath or shower and terrace.
Twin and three-bedded rooms will take an extra put-you-up bed for a child under 11.
Please note space will be limited.
Single rooms are available at a supplement.
FREE
Tropicana is a Belhaven property
IN OUR OPINION
Chalet Style accommodation set in a beautiful, green valley, with its own sandy beach…an ideal Club for families.
EUROPA Holiday Club
There was a relaxed, easy-going atmosphere at Club Europa.
I think the Club's beautiful setting helped: a little village with squares and winding paths surrounded by gardens, on a pine-clad slope just outside Paguera.
It would have been so easy to spend a couple of weeks lazing by one of the swimming pools doing absolutely nothing in this idyllic setting, but there was so much going on that I was tempted off my sunlounger.
It was hard to know what to try first — tennis, squash, volleyball — no expert knowledge was required, just plenty of enthusiasm.
The children made lots of friends in the Mini-Club, under the watchful supervision of ‘Animators’ who organised activities in the morning and afternoon giving us some time to ourselves.
Some days, when we just wanted to soak up the sun, we took the free mini-bus down to Paguera's lovely, sandy beach.
We watched windsurfers and waterskiers racing through the water (and falling over!), while the children built sandcastles and paddled at the water's edge.
Once the sun started to go down, we strolled back to Europa through the town, enjoying the lively contrast of the boutiques and cafés to the calm of the Club.
In the evenings it was nice to meet up with friends in one of the Club's bars to discuss stories of the day before wandering into the restaurant to indulge in the delicious hot and cold buffet, washed down with free wine.
And then the multi-lingual Entertainment Team put on a great show.
Later on, younger guests stayed on for disco dancing while we walked back to our apartment to tuck our happy, tired children into bed.
Whether it's a relaxing or active type of holiday you like, there really is something for everyone at Club Europa.
CLUB FACILITIES
2 swimming pools (3rd planned for Summer 1990); terraced gardens; free poolside sunloungers; 2 poolside bars serving snacks; main bar; buffet restaurant; pizzeria; supermarket; souvenir shop; selection of shops and restaurants nearby; entertainments lounge; games room; open-air theatre; TV room with satellite television; Medical Centre with visiting doctor.
Free regular mini-bus service to Paguera beach.
Children's playground; playroom; paddling pool; children's section of main pool; cots and high chairs.
Location
Just outside Paguera on the road to Andraitx on Majorca's picturesque West coast.
Approximately 800 yards from the beach at Paguera.
Accommodation
350 rooms with bath/shower and balcony.
Half board prices are based on twin rooms which can take two extra sofa beds.
Accommodation-only prices are based on 4 people sharing a one-bedroomed Apartment with kitchenette and lounge with convertible sofa (double bed).
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
This modern Club is set on a pine-clad hillside and yet close to a lively and fashionable resort.
A good choice of landsports and children's facilities are available, appealing to an international clientele.
IBIZA
The charm and fascination of the tiny island of Ibiza stems from its wealth of contrasting scenery.
High rocky cliffs pitted with little sandy coves melt away into long stretches of silvery beach.
Scattered amongst the infinite variety of trees and plants are picturesque villages whose white-walled cottages have blended into the light-coloured landscape to give Ibiza the nickname ‘La Isla Blanca’— The White Island.
From all over Europe, young people are attracted by the free and easy spirit in Ibiza which makes a holiday so much fun.
Kings Road fashions are sold in the heart of Ibiza's historic capital whilst San Antonio boasts some of the best nightclubs in the Mediterranean.
All in all, it's a great place to leave behind the routine of life at home and really be yourself.
OUT & ABOUT
Ibiza Town
An exciting and lively town which combines old and new in great style.
Set on a hilltop, the old town is surrounded by seven rows of ramparts leading up to the bastion and cathedral at the summit.
The narrow whitewashed streets now play host to jet-setters, artists and students from all over Europe; and in the evening the whole town comes alive with plenty of discos and lively nightspots.
Santa Eulalia
At attractive little town with a cosmopolitan atmosphere and some excellent restaurants.
Traditional Ibicenco houses cluster around a fascinating 16th century church, marking the highest point of the village.
Formentera
An almost totally unspoilt island just off the coast of southern Ibiza whose lazy sun-drenched calm just waits to be savoured.
PORTINATX Beach Club
It was 11.3Oam and the crick in the back of my neck told me it was time to give up trying to read ‘War and Peace’ lying on a sunbed under the July Spanish sun.
A quick dip in the pool and then over to the bar for the day's first Cuba Libre was the answer.
It was not to be.
A member of the Club Animacion Team had volunteered me for the lilo race across the pool — the first prize a free drink — who could resist!
We were staying with our 17 year old daughter Rachel at Club Portinatx.
Set among gardens and pine trees, the club with its own beach, nestles on cliffs with splendid views across Portinatx Bay.
It was proving to be an ideal choice of holiday with a programme of free activities that gave us an easy opportunity to make friends with the guests form other nations who gave the Club such a cosmopolitan atmosphere.
From the first evening, Rachel established a circle of friends.
Apart from joining us for the evening meal and when she ran short of pesetas, we saw little of her for the rest of the holiday.
She'd be sighted occasionally at the aerobics class as we went to breakfast.
There was such a variety of activities and competitions for all ages — tennis, windsurfing, dinghy sailing, table tennis (some of which had free instruction).
However, there was always the option of doing nothing…just relaxing in the shade around the attractive pool and within easy reach of a cool drink.
Most evenings were spent at the Club, after a buffet meal which offered a wide variety of dishes, helped down by generous free wine followed up with coffee and brandy on the terrace.
Then it was time for the Club cabaret.
The international team, who are coaches and hosts by day, don their entertainer hats and launch into shows and competitions put together by the staff and holidaymakers, who would surprise themselves and us with their undiscovered talent.
The outdoor performance would finish with the audience and stars of the show attempting the speciality club dances.
If you hadn't met anybody by this time you certainly would now.
Even I scored with three kisses on the cheek during one rendering of ‘La Bamba’.
The evenings would usually finish on the terrace for a few quiet drinks with new found friends and then off to bed.
For the more energetic there was still the disco where you could dance until the early hours.
One big plus was that Rachel was off enjoying herself and we were close at hand.
Next year when she's eighteen she'll be back with or without her mum and dad and we'll still be happy.
George Cannon
Freelance Journalist 
Portinatx is a Belhaven property
IN OUR OPINION
A lively, dynamic Club with good facilities for sports and entertainments.
Ideal for young people or families with teenage children.
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; sun terraces; free poolside and beach sunloungers.
Poolside bar; snack bar; beach bar; club bar; disco bar.
Buffet-style restaurant; pizzeria.
Lounge; shop; open-air stage.
Nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the north-east coast of Ibiza, on the edge of the resort of Portinatx.
Accommodation
273 rooms in terraces of chalet-bungalows or 2 three-story residences.
Twin, three-bedded and four-bedded rooms with shower are available.
Four-bedded rooms consist of two inter-communicating twins.
Three-bedded rooms with terrace and twins with sea view and terrace are available at a supplement.
Single rooms are available at a supplement.
FREE
SAN MIGUEL Beach Club
When our 'plane touched down at Ibiza Airport, we were looking forward to a couple of weeks in the sun, hoping that the children would be amused and we could just relax.
All our expectations were fulfilled.
The situation was ideal.
A gentle stroll through the gardens led down to the beautiful long, wide beach.
The focal point of San Miguel was the swimming pool and, for the first couple of days, we were perfectly content to nurture our sun tans between cooling dips in the pool.
Now and then, waiters would serve us refreshing drinks from the bar and while we were busy unwinding, we were happy to know that the children were being well looked after in the Children's Club.
However, the atmosphere was so friendly and relaxed that it wasn't long before we made lots of friends and, spurred on by the Animation Team, joined in the occasional game of volleyball or tennis — you can hire racquets and even have expert tuition if you want to improve on your technique.
The children could take early dinner, but they usually preferred to eat with us in one of the dining rooms.
At dinner we were offered a choice of menu and the first course was often a buffet with the main course served by waiters.
The free wine really did put everyone in the right mood for the rest of the evening when you could sit back and be entertained or dance to the disco music outside on the terrace.
And what nicer way to round off the evening than to have a quiet nightcap on the terrace with new-found friends, or take a gentle moonlit stroll along the beach.
Tomorrow?
Well we've always wanted to have a go at windsurfing; visit Ibiza Town…or perhaps just climb back onto that sunbed!
OUR OPINION
Families especially will enjoy the relaxed atmosphere and delightful beachfront setting of Club San Miguel.
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens; sun terraces.
Bar service to pool area; lounge and bar; bar snacks available.
Two dining rooms; buffet style breakfast; weekly gala dinner.
Children's section of the pool; playground; early suppers; cots and high chairs available.
Location
Directly on the sheltered sand and shingle beach in the small resort of Puerto San Miguel. 3 miles from the local village of San Miguel.
Accommodation
110 rooms with two, three or four beds, bath and balcony.
FREE
MOJACAR
Scores of dazzling white Moorish dwellings stare down from this hilltop village at the shimmering Mediterranean, protected by the impressive peaks of the Sierra Cabrera.
The village of Mojacar is enchanting and provokes a desire to discover more about its fascinating history — how it was conquered by the Moors and recaptured centuries later by the Catholic Kings.
The Moorish influence is still present and many Arab customs and traditions have been retained, with houses bearing an image of ‘The Indalo’, an ancient totem god said to ward off evil spirits.
In total contrast to this ancient village is the long stretch of beach, nightlife, bars and bodegas, all of which add up to make a holiday in Mojacar a most memorable and enjoyable one.
OUT & ABOUT
Granada
Renowned as one of Spain's most interesting and beautiful cities.
A bustling shopping centre, an old Silk Exchange, the treasures of Alhambra Palace, the gardens of the Generalife combine to make a fascinating day out.
Caves of Almanzora
Even today, groups of gypsies still dwell in these amazing caves, carved deep into sandstone cliffs.
Almeria
The Provincial capital and port, with lots of shops, pavement cafés and local bars.
Mini-Hollywood
Between Carboneras and Almeria is Mini-Hollywood, set in real cowboy country, and the location for the filming of such epics as ‘Lawrence of Arabia’, ‘The Good, the Bad and the Ugly’, and many more.
Garrucha
A small fishing village with excellent restaurants where it is fascinating to watch the day's catch being landed.
PUEBLO INDALO Beach Club
It would not have been difficult to fill this page with a glowing report based entirely on first impressions.
My party of five soon felt at home and relaxed here.
Indeed, our first delight was the spacious and comfortable apartments, tastefully furnished, well equipped and overlooking this charming white-walled holiday village.
With all the excellent facilities at this lively beach club, it's not surprising why people opt for self catering holidays here.
There's a well stocked supermarket, shops and a range of eating places to suit all tastes.
I booked half-board and every night in the ‘EL PATIO ANDALUZ’, we helped ourselves to delicious hot or cold food, washed down with free wine or soft drinks.
At breakfast too, there's plenty of choice.
If only I'd been 10 years of age again, I'd have loved the ‘Pirates Club’.
You see the children happily following the Captain, as if they were being led through the streets of  Hamelin .
However, those of us too old for the elite ‘Pirates’ or ‘Club 16’need not feel left out.
Somewhere within the extensive grounds of this picturesque Club, there is always something to do.
And most of it's free.
There literally is everything under the sun, and you're free to do as much or as little as you want.
Me?
Well for the first few days I found enough energy to take an occasional dip in the pool and play a leisurely game of bowls.
But I've promised to go horse-riding, and I'll try my hand at mini-golf.
For the more energetic there's tennis, sailing, windsurfing; it's all here, waiting for us to take advantage.
Maybe I'll get motivated ma$ana.
Meanwhile I'm perfectly content just to lie in the sun by the peaceful ornamental pond.
Tonight I'll watch the world stroll by the Pueblo's busy ‘Los Naranjos’ square; the cool fountain will provide the perfect back-drop for the snap-shots.
After dinner it gets packed as the audience settles for the live, outdoor cabaret.
Tomorrow, who knows?
Maybe, I'll take a trip to Granada or that shimmering village of Mojacar on the hill.
Volleyball?
A pedalo?
Perhaps our HCI Rep will persuade me to go sailing.
Maybe I'll join the early keep-fit class.
Maybe I'll…
Paul Lockitt
Independent Radio Journalist
CLUB FACILITIES
2 swimming pools; gardens and sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers.
Poolside and beach bars; Lord Nelson pub.
Buffet restaurant; à la carte restaurant; cafeteria; Rose tea rooms: Spanish Bodega.
Satellite TV and video room; supermarket; hairdresser.
Children's pool; children's playground; cots and high chair available; baby sitting available; nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the Costa Almeria, 5 mins bus ride from the hilltop village of Mojacar.
Accommodation
550 apartments on several levels reached via steps, with bathroom, kitchen, terrace and living room with two single convertible sofas.
Weekly maid service.
Prices based on 4 persons in an apartment with one twin bedroom or 6 persons in an apartment with two twin bedrooms.
FREE
Pueblo Indalo is a Belhaven property
OUR OPINION
An attractive, Moorish style village offering well-equipped and furnished apartments and a wide range of facilities set amidst lawns and terraces.
A good choice for a family holiday.
COSTA DEL SOL
Aptly named ‘The Sun Coast of Spain’, the Costa del Sol has almost two hundred miles of golden beaches, interrupted here and there by cliffs plunging spectacularly into the deep blue Mediterranean.
Along the road from Malaga to Gibraltar, there are some of Europe's most fashionable shops, lively nightlife, restaurants, bars and cafés galore — a galaxy of fun and excitement in the coastal resorts.
Further inland, the gentle hills, olive and orange groves give way to magnificent Sierra Nevada and the sleepy white-washed villages of old Andalucia — land of the flamenco, strumming guitars and fiery fiestas.
A wonderful combination of holiday activity and local tradition all within reach of the sun-soaked beaches.
OUT & ABOUT
Puerto Banus
A sophisticated harbour just outside Marbella with a superb selection of fashionable bars, restaurants and nightclubs.
The Alhambra, Granada
An astonishing group of palaces and fortresses built in Spain by the Moors and now a legacy of their stunning architecture.
Gibraltar
Only an hour's drive away, visit the famous Rock for shopping and sightseeing and a taste of home with English pubs and afternoon teas.
Mijas
A classic Spanish village nestling amongst rugged hills, with white-washed walls, red roofs, narrow winding streets and picturesque views.
PLAYA DEL SOL Beach Club
The superb setting of the Playa del Sol Beach Club helps you to switch off the moment you arrive.
There is a wonderful feeling of space created by the lawns and gardens which are a real treat with great masses of bougainvillea, oleander and hibiscus.
You have a choice of accommodation.
You can stay in the main hotel or opt for one of the bungalows which are spaced throughout the gardens, giving you privacy and delightful surroundings.
From early morning there is the sound of tennis balls swishing through the air.
Indeed, the Club's tennis courts, and the practice court are extremely popular with ‘aspiring’ Beckers and Edbergs, displaying varying degrees of competence.
Now don't get the impression that the Club is devoted to enlarging the egos of ‘would be Wimbledon champions’.
It's not.
It is however a great choice for those who like an active holiday.
There is sailing, windsurfing, archery, mini-golf and all these pursuits are free of charge — so it is a pity not to make use of them when you have the opportunity.
The Club atmosphere is casual but with an exciting dash of cosmopolitan sophistication.
While the majority of guests are British, there are Belgians and Dutch whom you will enjoy getting to know over lunch or dinner.
Talking of food, calorie counting is to be recommended, otherwise I'm afraid the waistline will suffer a little; yes, even if you do join in the aerobics of the keep fit.
The food, particularly the lunchtime buffet is good.
And very important…the wine — as much as you can guzzle — is free!
After dinner, you can stroll along the beach, relax at the bar, or sit back and watch an evening show performed by the versatile Club staff.
It may not be the London Palladium but it is a smash hit!
Then perhaps a little dancing.
For those who know nothing of the quick-step, the shake or the twist, there is a late night disco.
This is a great family holiday.
Children of all ages have a marvellous time.
There is a day nursery for toddlers and the Pirates Club for children from four to eleven years.
Even teenagers, often difficult to entertain, rate it highly.
You would too, if you were learning to be a DJ, or perhaps being coached in your favourite sport!
Everything is taken care of here.
You can simply relax and let it all happen around you.
On the other hand — you could just drop those inhibitions and take part.
Either way your holiday will be great fun and great value for money.
Margaret Cunningham
Freelance Journalist
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terraces.
Poolside bar; club bar; snack bar.
Buffet-style restaurant with à la carte section.
TV room; shops/boutiques; hairdresser; open-air stage.
Children's pol; playground; baby sitting available; cots and high chairs available; nurse available.
Location
Situated on the Costa del Sol, 10km from Estepona and 8km from Puerto Banus.
Accommodation
390 rooms in bungalows or two main residences.
Prices are per person in a room with 2 or 3 beds, bath or shower and terrace.
Single rooms available at supplement.
4-bedded rooms are 2 inter-communicating rooms at a supplement.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
A choice of chalet-bungalow or traditional hotel-style accommodation in an extensive garden setting right by the sandy beach.
The perfect spot for a family holiday.
TENERIFE
The largest of Spain's beautiful, sub-tropical Canary Islands, Tenerife basks under a hot sun just two hundred miles off the coast of Africa, sharing the same latitude as Florida and California.
The scenery is dramatic — a breathtaking mixture of strange volcanic deserts and lush vegetation — a landscape dominated by the snow-capped peak of a dormant volcano, Mount Teide.
These islands have been Spanish for centuries.
The architecture and culture feel pleasantly familiar and the friendly atmosphere makes Tenerife particularly attractive.
Tenerife has an excellent all year round climate, especially on its sun-drenched southern coast, where many of the island's superb, modern resorts are situated.
OUT & ABOUT
Los Cristianos
An old fishing village, now transformed into a splendid modern resort.
Old world charm and jet-age amenities rolled into one.
Puerto de la Cruz
The island's biggest tourist centre with plenty of character and variety, from smart boutiques and bars to an ‘Arab Market’, plus the superb San Telmo Lido.
Octopus Park
Bags of fun for people of all ages, with 12 water slides from gentle slopes to the ‘Kamikaze Rum’.
Mount Teide
A dominating, magical snow-capped mountain which soars to over 12000ft.
A cable car will take you most of the way.
Unforgettable views.
Orotava
A charming Canadian town nestling in the eternally lush and fertile Orotava Valley, whose beauty and mild climate have attracted visitors for over a hundred years.
TEN BEL Holiday Club
Whispers filled the coach as we drove along Ten Bel's tree-lined entrance.
‘Isn't it huge,’ we all echoed.
Yes, and in one day here you'll find more to see and do than two weeks spent almost anywhere else.
Why not list your own holiday requirements and then tick them off one by one as you discover for yourself what Ten Bel has to offer.
If a suntan is top of that list give it top marks — after all, this is where the Spanish sun comes for its holiday.
The eight self-contained villages which comprise this modern Club each have their own character but there are no boundaries, you're free to wander and use all the facilities.
Soon you'll discover the tennis courts and children's fun-park and, most impressive of all, the enormous sea pool for scuba-diving and windsurfing.
For HCI guests the daytime fun and games are centred around Drago with its lively family atmosphere.
But no-one will mind if you choose to opt for another forty winks on your sunlounger.
If you want to get away from it all completely there are five other pools to choose from!
Most parents though tend to avoid a secret pirates cave where only members of the Pirates Club are allowed.
For a few hours each day the HCI Captain keeps them occupied like a regular Mary Poppins with games excursions and rehearsals for junior showtime.
Choice is the secret of Ten Bel's success and at meal times you'll find plenty of it.
The generous buffet is both pleasing to the eye and the taste buds, with free wine to get you in the mood for an evening of entertainment.
At the Starlight Bar the HCI team present a nightly show with the emphasis on fun, whilst in Maravilla's Honolulu Bar there's dancing and international acts performing for your pleasure.
As someone who loves travelling my motto has always been, ‘never return to the same resort until you've seen what the others have to offer’.
Ten Bel is the exception to the rule.
Paul Lockitt
Independent Radio Journalist 
IN OUR OPINION
A choice of holiday styles and accommodation from the lively fun of Drago to the sophistication of Maravilla, all within one, superbly designed resort.
Ten Bel Drago
Drago offers a simple style of accommodation and is the focal point of HCI's lively activity at Ten Bel.
By day, the Pirates Club takes centre stage with games, activities and competitions — even the parents join in!
In the evening after a buffet-style meal washed down with free wine, Drago's Starlight Bar comes to life with live music and cabaret entertainment.
By night the bar is transformed into a disco, playing night-club sounds ‘til the small hours.
Drago Accommodation
261 rooms with bath/shower, terrace, kitchenette and lounge with convertible sofa.
Prices are based on: A studio for 2.
A one-bedroomed apartment for 4.
A two-bedroomed apartment for 6.
Tenbel Saver
Tenbel Saver allows you to benefit from all the facilities of Ten Bel at a lower price.
You choose the date and airport and leave the choice of accommodation at Ten Bel to be allocated on arrival.
Your accommodation may be in any one of the eight mini-villages within the Ten Bel complex.
Tenbel Saver Accommodation
Rooms allocated will have bath/shower, kitchenette and lounge with convertible sofa.
Prices are based on: A studio for 2.
A one-bedroomed apartment for 4.
A two-bedroomed apartment for 6.
Ten Bel Maravilla
Ten Bel at its very best.
Maravilla offers excellent accommodation and a sophisticated environment.
Daytime activity concentrates on soaking up the sun by the pool and contemplating at leisure which of Ten Bel's many activities to try next.
Once the sun goes down you can enjoy dinner in Maravilla's own restaurant, then sip cocktails and listen to music in the Honolulu Bar.
Maravilla Accommodation
285 well-appointed rooms with bath/shower, terrace, kitchenette and lounge with convertible sofa.
Prices are based on: A studio for 3.
A one-bedroomed apartment for 4.
A two-bedroomed apartment for 6.
Ten Bel Geminis
Geminis provide a contrast to Drago with a more relaxed cosmopolitan atmosphere.
A choice of board arrangement is available — self-catering for the more independent, whilst those on half or full board can savour the delights of the extensive buffet which, for Drago and Geminis guests, is open throughout the day — so meal times can be totally flexible to suit your own daily plans.
At Ten Bel, Geminis provides the best of both worlds — an ideal environment for a relaxing holiday, with the lively activities of Drago only a moment's walk away.
Geminis Accommodation
227 rooms with bath/shower, terrace, kitchenette and lounge with convertible sofa.
A choice of half board or accommodation only is available.
Prices are based on: A studio for 2.
A one-bedroomed apartment for 4.
A two-bedroomed apartment for 6.
CLUB FACILITIES
Gardens and sun terraces; 6 swimming pools; free poolside sunloungers; 5 poolside bars; 2 nightclub bars; 2 pubs; cocktail bar; La Ballena International Nightclub.
Drago/Geminis buffet-style restaurant; Maravilla restaurant; Don Giovanni à la carte restaurant; selection of restaurants nearby.
Shops/boutiques; hairdresser.
Children's pool; Damon Park amusement playground; cots and high chairs available; baby listening service; baby sitting available; medical centre.
Location
Situated on the south coast of Tenerife, 5 mins. from Las Galletas.
FREE
GRAN CANARIA
Gran Canaria, the third largest of the Canary Islands, is an island of contrasting scenery, with a superb climate all year round, particularly in the south where it is said that the temperature never varies by more than five degrees.
The nickname ‘miniature continent’ has been attributed to Gran Canaria because of its startling variety of scenery — from jagged mountains and volcanic craters to cool pine-clad valleys; from burning, sandy deserts to tropical plantations of banana, coffee and sugar-cane; and from sophisticated, lively resorts to ancient towns and sleepy agricultural villages.
You'll find them all on this one small island.
OUT & ABOUT
Las Palmas
The busiest port of Spain and a popular stopping point for luxury cruise liners.
A marvellous city for duty-free shopping, local Canarian craftwork and a wealth of museums and art galleries.
Playa San Agustin
With its casino and the fabulous ‘La Scala’ nightclub, featuring top class international cabaret acts.
Maspalomas
A large area of Sahara-like sand dunes — ideal for secluded sunbathing.
A lush green oasis on one side boasts a selection of smart boutiques, bars and restaurants as well as an 18-hole golf course.
Puerto Rico
An attractive resort with two picturesque marinas, a lovely cove of golden sand and a seaside lido, with lots of very lively bars and restaurants to visit in the evenings.
SUNWING Club Hotel
From the moment you step in to the cool, colonial atmosphere of Sunwing's reception with its cane and luxurious pastel furniture you know you're in for a real treat.
The welcoming staff of this Scandinavian hotel are efficient and helpful, ensuring your holiday runs smoothly and the fun and relaxation never stop.
The rooms are a feast for the eye too — attractive accommodation with good cooking facilities and a large private bathroom and balcony — the perfect place to rest your weary head.
But before you even think about rest you'll be eager to soak up the special intimate atmosphere of Sunwing — chatting at the bars, tucking into the superb breakfast buffet, eating in the à la carte restaurant or having a pool-side snack, the emphasis is on fun and friendliness.
An abundance of sunbeds around the most spectacular pool you'll ever see beckon you to unwind with the gentle lapping of the sea as background music.
The pool is on five levels with swishing waterfalls, rockeries and even a Chinese-style bridge!
Stir yourself if you can for a swim or join in the water polo, gymnastics, water basketball and volleyball and meet foreign friends.
In just a couple of days you'll find your feet and get that special feeling that you belong in your Club.
Children have just as much fun too — there's a Club 13 and Club 18 as well as an active miniclub for the youngest holidaymaker!
A playground and playhouse keep the tots happy while the teenagers have a ball with a whole host of absorbing activities.
The evening is the time for a cocktail or two, superb food and wine and entertainment form the Club Cabaret!
Fun, magic, music and mime will give you a breather before digging out your dancing shoes to round off the evening with a turn on the nightclub floor!
Jackie King
Freelance Journalist 
IN OUR OPINION
The Sunwing Club Hotel is Scandinavian-managed and offers high standards of accommodation and a magnificent pool right on the sea's edge.
CLUB FACILITIES
Pool on several levels; sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers.
Poolside bar; snack bar; nightclub bar.
Scandinavian buffet breakfast; à la carte restaurant.
Mini market; hairdresser; video games; solarium; sauna and massage.
Children's pool; playground; cots and high chairs available; nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the South coast of Gran Canaria, next to the village of Arguineguin and 10km from Puerto Rico.
Accommodation
270 well-appointed rooms with bath/shower, well equipped kitchenette and terrace.
Prices are based on: Studio for two (with 2 sofa beds).
Larger studio for two adults (2 sofa beds) with an extra bed for a child under 11 available.
One-bedroomed apartments for three with convertible sofa in the lounge plus an extra bed for a child under 11 available.
FREE
LANZAROTE
Lanzarote is unique amongst the Canary Islands; a land of unusual beauty and vivid contrasts.
Born out of volcanic eruptions, the island's interior consists of dramatic fields of black lava, interspersed with oases of palm trees, subtropical vegetation and pretty white-washed villages.
The best beaches are to be found in the south and east, lapped by gentle clear waters and warm sea breezes.
This is the setting for most of the island's attractive resorts of white and green villas, set amongst landscaped gardens and scarlet hibiscus.
Each resort has its own character, from romantic Playa Blanca to lively Puerto del Carmen or sophisticated Costa Teguise, and yet they all share the traditional friendliness which visitors find so appealing.
OUT & ABOUT
Jameos del Agua
One of the Cuevas Verdes natural caverns which has been transformed into a restaurant and stunning underground nightclub.
Mirador del Rio
In the north of the island, a lookout point with breathtaking views across to Graciosa Island, reputed to be the real Treasure Island.
Fire Mountain
A 1500ft volcano in the Timanfaya National Park.
Take a camel ride up the slopes or a coach tour around the summit.
Here the temperature just below the surface is hot enough to cook on.
El Golfo
An unusual, vividly green lagoon, separated from the sea by a beach of black volcanic sand.
Puerto del Carmen
A modern and lively resort with plenty of bars, cafés and boutiques to browse through.
SUNWING Club Hotel
Having holidayed previously in Sunwing Crete and enjoyed excellent standards of service and accommodation synonymous with the Sunwing name, we decided to try the island of Lanzarote under the same safe banner.
Situated just 10 minutes form the centre of Lanzarote's largest and most popular resort, Puerto del Carmen, the Sunwing Club Hotel is in a beautiful position, right opposite the lovely beach of Matagorda.
The atmosphere of the Club was one of happy, relaxed holidaymakers and friendly staff who immediately made us feel completely at home.
Our accommodation was spacious and comfortable and, as usual with Sunwing, absolutely spotless.
On our first day we headed for that beautiful beach…but we didn't make it the temptation was too great to lounge by probably the largest and most stunning freshwater pool in the Canaries.
The gently curved outlines of the Club buildings protect the huge terrace area when the breeze is strong and create a real ‘sun trap’ to help with the most important thing — your sun tan!
On our more active days, when we had a go at volleyball or windsurfing at the beach, we were always ready for the 4 o'clock ‘after beach’ party at the poolside where the animation team served coffee, cakes and liqueurs at special prices and hosted games and competitions.
Children of all ages are never forgotten at Sunwing — there's a ‘Club 13’ and ‘Club 18’, as well as a miniclub for the youngest (and most energetic) holidaymakers.
With activities going on every day and most evenings we hardly ever saw our two.
In the evening, after a superb meal in the à la carte restaurant, we were treated to a Sunwing show followed by dancing to the latest sounds — only for those who weren't too tired after a hard day's sunbathing!
I honestly can't think of anything we wanted that this holiday didn't provide.
The combination of HCI atmosphere and reliability with Sunwing service is a real winner in our book — plus the sunshine of course!
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers.
Poolside bar; nightclub bar.
Scandinavian buffet breakfast; à la carte restaurant; pizzeria.
Supermarket; hairdresser; boutique.
Children's section of swimming pool; children's playground; cots and high chairs available.
Location
Situated on the south east coast of Lanzarote on the beach of Matagorda, just outside Puerto del Carmen.
Accommodation
333 apartments with bath/shower, well equipped kitchenette and balcony or patio.
Prices are based on: Studio for 2.
A one-bedroomed apartment for 3 with convertible sofa in the lounge.
A one-bedroomed apartment for 4 with 2 convertible sofas in the lounge.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
A well-designed aparthotel with good quality accommodation set around a superb swimming pool.
Clientele is Scandinavian and English with a mix of ages.
TUSCAN Club Apartments
King Hussein of Jordan no less has beaten a path to Costa Teguise, selecting Lanzarote, a land of unusual beauty, for his get-away-from-it-all home.
And His Royal Highness should be praised for his choice of holiday resort.
Tourists too can expect a right Royal welcome, for the traditional friendliness of the islanders makes everyone feel at home.
Costa Teguise itself is a stylish resort with striking whitewashed buildings, just a stone's throw away from Lanzarote's busy capital Arrecife.
And setting foot inside Tuscan Club apartments you know that you've made the right choice.
The spacious apartments come complete with a well-equipped kitchenette, tastefully furnished lounge, private bathroom and a secluded balcony for relaxing.
It's an ideal base from which to enjoy your stay.
Tuscan apartments offer a relaxing holiday for both young and old.
The children's club keeps the youngsters happy most mornings with sports, videos and competitions, leaving Mum and Dad to soak up the sun around the pool or make use of the sports facilities ranging from the relaxing to the exacting.
Volleyball, tennis and table tennis are on hand for the more energetic, or how about a game of water polo in one of the Tuscan's fabulous swimming pools.
Down on the beach in Costa Teguise, you can organise windsurfing lessons the island is one of the sport's top venues.
After all that, there's no better way to wind down than in the Club's sauna and let the aches and pains flow away.
In the evenings, you can take your pick of a variety of bars and restaurants in Costa Teguise.
But there's really no need to leave Tuscan for there is a delightfully decorated restaurant and the bar stays open until the early hours.
The joy of it all is that this is a resort which is peaceful — you can hear the Atlantic waves breaking on the seashore.
But you can guarantee that there will be something happening in the bars, restaurants and clubs which are buzzing with energy.
An island of great beauty beckons.
It has good beaches, dramatic scenery and has even been given the royal nod.
It cannot be missed.
David Welford
Gloucester Citizen 
IN OUR OPINION
An attractive Club built around two swimming pools, but offering a low key sports and entertainment programme with the facilities of Costa Teguise close by.
A good choice for a relaxing holiday.
CLUB FACILITIES
Sun terraces; two swimming pools; free poolside sunloungers.
Poolside bar; main bar; snack bar.
A la carte restaurant.
Children's pool; cots and high chairs available.
Location
Situated on the east coast of Lanzarote on the edge of the resort of Costa Teguise, 10 minutes from the beach.
Accommodation
145 apartments with bathroom, terrace, kitchenette and living rooms with convertible divan.
Prices based on: A one bedroomed apartment for 3.
A two bedroomed apartment for 5.
Both apartment types can take an extra bed for a child under 11.
FREE
FUERTEVENTURA
Fuerteventura is a true desert island whose character revolves around its sand beaches = surely among the world's most exotic; quite certainly you'll never find the like within four hour's flying time from Britain.
Nestling between the islands of Gran Canaria and Lanzarote, Fuerteventura is the least developed of all the Canary Islands with an unspoilt landscape revealing its dramatic origins.
Village life has changed little here and the peaceful pace of local life is reflected in the style of holiday.
In the south, the Jandia Peninsula is a 20 mile stretch of continuous white sands backed by a mountain range.
And with a fabulous climate of around 250 days of sun a year, tempered by refreshing sea breezes, this southern shore has become a paradise for those who want not more from a holiday than relaxation or sport or a combination of the two.
Naturist beaches can be found here whilst conditions are ideal for snorkelling, diving and deep sea fishing, and indeed the world windsurfing championships are held here annually.
OUT & ABOUT
Corralejo
A quiet little fishing village on the northern-most tip of the island, where you can sample the day' catch in traditional-style restaurants or browse around the shops and bars.
Pajara
A lovely hamlet situated in the middle of a small volcano with a church of Gothic and Aztec design.
Betancuria
The original capital of the island until destroyed by the Berber pirates.
See the magnificent church of St. Mary, surrounded by small white houses set amongst palm trees and stunted eucalyptus.
Caleta de Fustes
With its 17th century circular castle.
The horse-shoe shaped beach has an underwater shrine with a statue of the Virgin in the Rock, the island's patron saint.
JANDIA MAR Club
Having sampled many of the better known holiday spots around the Mediterranean, we decided this year to be more adventurous and pay a visit to a desert island.
Fuerteventura has a well deserved reputation for being an unspoilt land of beautiful white, sandy beaches dotted with small oases of civilisation, and we were certainly not disappointed.
Our two weeks were spent at the Jandia Mar Beach Club, where consistently high quality is assured by the Sol management.
The apartment was spotless, with a well appointed lounge and a kitchenette with a fridge, making the ideal haven to return to from the heat of the Canarian sunshine.
We could have catered for ourselves, but preferred the no-hassle option of half board which allowed us to indulge in the superb hot and cold buffet dinner provided with free wine.
I'm really not the energetic type on holiday — building up a tan by the pool with a good book is my idea of heaven.
But Richard like to unwind by being active.
And that's the beauty of an HCI holiday, which made Jandia Mar the perfect choice.
There was a small gymnasium, squash and archery for Richard to choose from at the Club, and just down the road he could go windsurfing or waterskiing, whilst I lazed with the other guests.
Some were parents enjoying the luxury of a few hours away from their children, who were fully occupied with games and competitions at the miniclub.
The people we met during the day became our table companions in the evening.
After dinner, we had the choice of watching a cabaret show performed by the Sol entertainments team, but more often than not, we opted for a relaxing drink in the Tenerife bar.
All in all, a good combination of relaxation and activity, good food and wine, in a beautiful location, Jandia Mar has to be the ideal answer to that often-heard question: ‘Where shall we go next summer?’
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; poolside sunloungers; gardens; sun terraces.
Tenerife bar; poolside bar (serves snacks).
Pub (serves snacks).
Small buffet-style restaurant.
TV and video room; card room; supermarket; boutique/souvenir shop; bars and shops nearby.
Children's paddling pool; children's playground; cots and high chairs.
Location
Situated 300 yards across the road from the white sandy beach of Jandia in the south-west of Fuerteventura. 5 mins from Morro Jable.
Accommodation
294 one-bedroomed apartments with bath/shower, kitchenette, terrace and lounge with two sofa beds.
Prices are based on 4 people sharing.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
A modern apartment complex, ideal for a relaxing holiday for couples or families.
International clientele.
MOROCCO
The timeless world of North Africa offers a fascinating and refreshingly different style of holiday.
The long, white sandy beaches are clean and open, the sea is blue and inviting, and the climate boasts 300 days of sunshine a year.
But despite all these obvious assets, Morocco's countryside is still unspoilt by mass tourism.
This is a country of unexpected contrasts: cosmopolitan shops and bustling markets; sun-baked beaches and snow-capped mountains; lush oases and burning desert sands; orchards; palm groves and vineyards.
And those looking for the story-book world of graceful minarets, the mysterious Kasbah and the far muezzin's cry won't be disappointed either.
A visit to Morocco is a truly unforgettable experience.
OUT & ABOUT
Chaouen
A typical Moroccan market — noisy crowded and colourful.
This fascinating Berber village is 2000ft. above sea level and surrounded by majestic mountain scenery.
Rabat
The modern-day capital of Morocco.
Tree-lined avenues of boutiques and cafés contrast with the traditional style Medina.
Don't miss the Mausoleum of Mohammed V.
Tangier
A modern, cosmopolitan town dominated by its ancient kasbah, a huge Arab fortress overlooking the sea.
Fez
The oldest of the imperial cities and capital of the first kingdom of Morocco 1200 years ago.
A kaleidoscope of remarkable architecture, palaces, and mosques.
Gibraltar
Britain's most famous rock is just across the water.
Enjoy a traditional pub lunch or go shopping in familiar named stores in the busy Main Street.
NOTE A full British passport is required to enter Morocco.
Passport holders of other countries should check to see if a visa is required.
Children travelling on their parents' passports must have their photograph in the passport.
A returnable deposit of 10,000 Dhs is payable at the border with video equipment.
M'DIQ Beach Club
Club M'Diq is carefully sited on the Mediterranean coast close to the fishing village of M'Diq in the Rif region of that country, within easy reach of the exotic landscapes and fascinating old towns of Northern Morocco.
Since the Club is, literally, on the very edge of the wide beach, from the very moment of waking in the morning you are on the spot for that pre-breakfast swim, the windsurfing lesson, a ‘cruise’ on a pedalo or a mini yacht, or a walk along the beach of white shells and sand to either the resort of M'Diq or Smir Restinga.
Here at Club M'Diq you can either do your own thing or involve yourself in the daily and evening activities and events available for free; you can lazy on the spacious sandy beach, or go off on the optional excursions to see something of what this colourful Moslem country has to offer.
Perfection is to mix the two aspirations.
It really is excellent value too, since the price includes most sporting and recreational activities, and as much wine as one can drink at means — you can enjoy a superb family holiday there.
My wife and I met people of all ages and nationalities; we particularly appreciated the enthusiastically-friendly and helpful staff.
Meals were substantial and varied; the optional lunch (if you're not on full board) is Moroccan, dinner is basically European with a dash of Morocco.
The recreational facilities range from horse-riding to para-sailing, while inland from the Club the countryside is criss-crossed with tracks for walking where you can discover rural villages, lone mosques and secret lakes among the low hills.
We were there in Spring and walked on a carpet of wild flowers.
The Rif is a mountainous, wild, beautiful region of Morocco.
Its capital is Tetouan, eleven miles from M'Diq and reached by local bus, taxi or excursion coach.
There are optional excursions also in the other direction, to the free port of Ceuta (you'll never find cheaper duty-frees!),
Tangier, Gibraltar and elsewhere.
Christopher Portway
Annabel Magazine
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terraces; free poolside and beach sunloungers.
Poolside bar; beach bar; club bar; disco bar.
Buffet-style breakfast and lunch; set menu for dinner; self service taverna.
Children's pool; cots and highchairs available; nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the Northern coast of Morocco, close to the village of M'Diq and 13km from Tetouan.
Accommodation
300 rooms with shower and terrace.
Twins, three and four-bedded rooms are available.
Rooms will take an extra put-you-up bed for a child under 11.
Please note space will be limited.
Four-bedded rooms consist of two rooms divided by a curtain.
Rooms with a sea view are available at a supplement.
Single rooms at a supplement.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
In a superb beachside location, M'Diq offers simple accommodation, a wide range of sports facilities and a friendly, informal atmosphere.
TUNISIA
With its fabulous long beaches of soft, white sand, basking in eternal sunshine, its shimmering turquoise waters and cool, elegant hotels, Tunisia is the ideal holiday destination for sun-worshippers.
It is also an exotic and exciting world of different sights, sounds and scents which has remained unchanged for hundreds of years.
Often referred to as the ‘Crossroads of East and West’, modern-day Tunisia retains the influence of Carthaginian and French conquest mingled with the native Islamic culture.
In the heart of old Roman medinas are bustling, colourful souks waiting to be explored, with bargains in copper, poetry and leather to be haggled for.
And the local restaurants offer a range of inexpensive local delicacies or international dishes to be sampled.
From the barren Sahara in the south to the fertile wine-producing plains of the north, Tunisia is a land of variety and surprise just waiting to be experienced.
OUT & ABOUT
El Djem
Famed for its 30000 capacity colosseum which in Roman times played host to many a blood sport.
Desert Safari
For a total change of scene, visit the Sahara with its imposing sand dunes, green oases and the Berber villages of Matmada, Douz and Tozeur.
Port El Kantaoui
Often called the ‘Tunisian St Tropez’, this beautiful garden village houses a marina of sleek yachts, a selection of sophisticated waterfront boutiques and restaurants, and a superb 18-hole championship golf course.
Tunis/Carthage
Tunis is a combination of modern sophistication with the medieval charm of the Medina.
Barter in the souks for brass and copperwork, jewellery or leather goods.
Nearby Carthage contains the intriguing ruins of that once prestigious Phoenician and Roman city.
VENUS Beach Club
In the heat of the Tunisian sun, Club Venus is a cool and peaceful location for a perfect holiday.
The day begins early and hours of endless sunshine stretch ahead with miles of perfect beach just yards from the Club, the dedicated sunbather couldn't wish for more.
On the sand, open a lazy eye and watch others do the work; the sea and sky are alive with colour as the energetic try their skills at para-gliding and water skiing or zip past on jet bikes and pedalos.
While the adventurous take advantage of the Club's free windsurfing lessons, others simply swim a few lazy lengths of the pool (and with a sunken bar at one end, there'll never be a better reason!).
It takes a hard heart not to get involved in at least some of the games and sports on offer — especially when everything's free — and even aerobics taken on greater appeal when there's an inviting pool to plunge into to cool down.
Even the least active holidaymakers find it difficult to resist the lure of a camel ride along the beach.
Tempting, too, to join one of the numerous excursions to see the once-in-a-lifetime sights of the Sahara or photograph the picturesque houses in the blue-and-white setting of Sidi Bou Said.
But for those who decide to relax and let life drift, the Club has plenty to offer.
The ‘Café Maure’ services traditional refreshments and Tunisian sweets and dates to cross-legged customers, whilst the shady terrace festooned with plants and colourful flowers is the perfect setting for a cool drink.
Certainly all tastes are catered for at Club Venus.
Meals are served in the air-conditioned atmosphere of the pine-furnished restaurant, with free wine and a choice of menus including Tunisian favourites.
During the day, take your pick of anything from a pizza to a sizzling steak served at the poolside barbecue grill — and afternoon coffee takes on a flavour all of its own when enjoyed with a fresh pastry cooked before your eyes.
At the end of the day, there are experiences to be shared, new friends to be introduced and tans to be compared over a convivial drink.
The young — and those with stamina left to spend!— round off the fun at the sound-proofed Venus disco.
And the rest?
Well, the cool beauty of a starry Tunisian night watched from the peace of the terrace is a perfect finale to anyone's day…
Eleanor Rodger
Freelance Journalist
CLUB FACILITIES
2 swimming pools; gardens and sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers.
Club bar; sunken pool bar; beach bar; nightclub bar.
Buffet-style breakfast/lunch; set menu for dinner; moorish coffee bar.
TV room; video games; bazaar; souvenir shop; open-air stage.
Children's pool; playground; cots available; babysitting available.
Location
Situated on the east coast of Tunisia, 7km from Hammamet.
Accommodation
280 rooms with bath, shower and balcony.
Twin rooms will take a 3rd bed.
Sea view rooms available at a supplement.
All rooms air-conditioned.
FREE
OUR OPINION
A small, friendly Club with an international clientele, set on a superb beach with a good choice of sports facilities.
YUGOSLAVIA
Many people are attracted to Yugoslavia because it offers such great value for money.
This is an important point, but is just one of the many benefits offered by this fascinating country.
The Istrian Peninsula has a rugged coastline of pine-clad headlands between innumerable bays and inlets.
Small pretty fishing villages of terracotta rooftops and cobbled streets mingled with modern resorts, whilst the unspoilt interior contains graceful forests, golden cornfields, rich vineyards and dramatic mountain peaks reflected in deep, clear lakes.
As well as beautiful landscapes, Yugoslavia has a lively and very distinctive sense of tradition.
The folk dances and national costumes are a delight to see and the splendid copperware, embroidery and lace make original souvenirs.
The Yugoslavs are a friendly people who are eager to please and will always be happy to help you.
OUT & ABOUT
Pula
The main attraction of this ancient fortified town is the huge Roman amphitheatre, where many fights between gladiators and wild animals were once held.
Other Roman remains include the public baths and triumphal arch of Augustus.
Bled
The small alpine town, with is medieval fortress and museum, is built on a rock 150 metres above a glittering lake of the same name.
The magnificent views of the lake and surrounding snow-covered peaks well justify the nickname ‘Pearl of the Alps’.
Postojna
One of the largest and most beautiful grottoes in the world.
Its enormous underground halls, cave ornaments and rivers are very impressive.
Venice
Built on a multitude of lagoons during the golden age of European culture, this Italian city is one of the most beautiful on the Adriatic, with 400 bridges spanning canals instead of streets.
The city was and is home to many great painters, sculptors, poets and composers…a city of romance.
ZORNA Club Hotel
Many resorts claim you'll have a fabulous time there, but I've found one that really lives up to its promises.
The place is Club Zorna at Selena Laguna, set beside a beautiful lagoon of clear water surrounded by trees, and yet right at the heart of a lively holiday complex with nightclubs, bars, restaurants and a sports park.
To fit everything in here you have to be up for an early breakfast.
If you're energetic there's a choice of so many land to water-based sports and activities, too numerous to name — and almost too mind-boggling to make a decision on.
Sun lovers are in for a treat, too.
The beaches are tiny and busy but that doesn't worry anyone, for there are beautiful pine covered grassy slopes, overlooking the luminous Adriatic Sea, on which to relax.
Evenings are just as lively when the entertainments team create a fantastic atmosphere, with live music and cabaret to join in or sit back and watch.
But many people would prefer to do just what I did, and take a stroll along the most beautiful scenic promenades.
The walk from Club Zorna along the Porec Riviera is magic, stopping for tea and admiring the wonderful scenery.
Porec itself, an exquisite little port, is sheer bliss.
Just 100 yards from the seafront and you step back through the centuries, giving you a real feel of medieval life.
Polished stone alleyways lead to an array of craft shops and tiny cafés — and the prices are astonishingly low.
When you get back to the Club Zorna Hotel, the action is still going on, whilst at the International Nightclub just a few hundred yards away, the night's just beginning — and I went to Yugoslavia thinking it would be restful!
But there's so much for everyone that you can get away from it all.
There are excursions to beautiful mountain-fringed Lake Bled, mighty Lim Fiord, the cool Postojna Caves or the famous Lipica Stud Farm.
If it's crowds you want, you can even get to Venice in three hours.
Another great thing common to Eastern European countries, there is no apparent holiday rowdyism or crime, and one felt safe wandering the streets, even in the early hours of the morning.
It was a perfect holiday and one never to be forgotten.
Linda Wyeth
Good Holiday Magazine
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; sun terrace.
Restaurant; club bar.
Supermarket; shops nearby.
Children's pool; cots and high chairs available; baby-listening service (at Zorna); nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the West coast of the Istrian Peninsula, at the centre of the Selena Laguna holiday complex, 5km from Porec.
Accommodation
266 rooms in Zorna.
Twins and three-bedded rooms with shower are available; Rooms with terrace are available at a supplement.
Single rooms at a supplement.
140 apartments in Astra.
Prices are based on apartments for four with two bedrooms (one double bed, two singles), shower and kitchenette.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
This friendly Club Hotel is set at the edge of a lagoon at the centre of a resort complex offering a range of facilities.
A good choice for families.
GREECE
Perseus, the Gorgon Slayer; Aesop the fable writer; Socrates the great philosopher…3000 years ago Gods and Mortals, Poets and Politicians, Artists and Athletes were founding Greek civilisation.
And in this wonderful land of sun, rich wines, and warm nights, anything was possible.
It still is today.
Out among the olive groves and white-washed villages, or in the streets and galleries, you realise how little has changed.
And the archaeological remains give authenticity to the fascinating legends of Greek mythology with the most famous of them all, the Parthenon, looking down from the acropolis over the bustling city of Athens below.
Here you can enjoy all the comfort and convenience of modern tourism without losing any of Greece's own special flavour.
OUT & ABOUT
Athens
A fascinating city with much to enjoy.
During the day, the Acropolis is not to be missed and souvenirs can be bartered for in the Flea market.
By night, the Plaka District comes to life with its wealth of shops and restaurants to tempt passers-by, as the warm night air fills with the aroma of charcoal-grilled meats and the rhythm of bouzouki music.
Delphi
Once the religious and moral capital of the classical world.
The sanctuaries of Apollo and Athena, the theatre and the Stadium should not be missed.
Mycenae
This haunting ancient city played a crucial role in the history of Greece.
The ruins of its Royal Palace, the Lioness Gate and the tomb of Agamemnon are all world famous.
Corinth
A superbly preserved architectural site beside the dramatic Corinth Canal which links the Ionian and Aegean Seas.
POSEIDON Beach Club
Breakfast's marvellous at the Poseidon Club in Loutraki.
Even in May we just wore shorts and tee shirts on the open air terrace.
Imagine doing that at home at eight in the morning.
Early tennis players were already up and away but we dawdled on enjoying yoghurt and fruit, scrambled eggs, bacon and excellent Greek bread as we watched, across the turquoise Aegean below us, the sun changing the colours of the mountains behind Corinth.
The Club's beautifully sited on a sunny bay facing the dramatic spiky mountains of the  Peloponnese coast.
On the quiet side of the bay, little coves have been scooped out of the shingle.
People take it easy here, lying under beach umbrellas, stretching out in the sun or slipping into the sea for a swim.
I wished our teenage children had been with us, they would have revelled in all the water sports, in the bay.
Most of the sports and excellent tuition are included in the price.
Everyone does their own thing.
While Mary did her dance practice her husband Ian joined us with other families on some of the excursions.
There's so much choice, with trips to Athens, Delphi, and Mycenae.
Some guests hired cars, others strolled the mile or so into the pleasant seaside town of Loutraki, others never left the Club.
I chatted the one grandmother, who hard hardly seen her grandson who has made friends with another eight year old in the children's club.
‘It's a real rest for my daughter,’ she said.
‘Nothing to think about, everything laid on, three meals a day, plenty for the children and a family show every night.
I think we're planning to come back next year.’
Meals are easy and casual.
Breakfast and lunch are well-presented with abundant and mouth-watering self-service buffets.
Dinner is waiter service.
Wine, free and copious at both lunch and dinner, overcomes language problems.
By the end of the evening new found friends either carry on their conversation in the elegant Artemis bar or enjoy the hilarity of the nightly show.
I enjoyed the contrast at the Club, the jollity round the pool, the quietness of the airy room near the Artemis bar where people read or played cards, the shady walkways where nine gardeners work hard with hose and hoe keeping the bougainvillea brilliant and the geraniums glowing.
If the children had been with us they'd have been in the disco, fortunately soundproofed, every night.
On our last night we dined on fresh local fish in the Club taverna sitting at a table close to the water's edge.
As we looked across the water to Corinth and listened to the haunting bouzouki music I saw why so many people return year after year to Poseidon.
IN OUR OPINION
Consistently voted HCI's Top Club by guests who return here year after year.
High standards of food, sports facilities and entertainments.
A superb choice for the discerning holidaymaker.
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terraces; deckchairs.
Poolside bar; taverna.
Artemis bar; main bar; disco.
Buffet-style breakfast and lunch; set menu for dinner; mineral water flows from taps.
Boutique hairdresser; video entertainment.
Children's pool; playground; cots and high chairs available; nurse/doctor available.
Location
Situated on the South-west coast of Mainland Greece, on the Bay of Corinth, 3 kms from the spa resort of Loutraki.
Accommodation
360 air-conditioned rooms in the main building or bungalows, with 2 or 3 beds, shower and terrace.
A supplement is payable for sea view rooms in the main building and for the larger deluxe bungalows with bath.
FREE
RHODES
Legend has it that Rhodes, largest of the Dodecanese islands set in the blue Aegean Sea, was home to the sun god Helios…and little wonder given this island's mild climate and long sun-drenched summer days.
Enchanting towns and villages, ancient temples, and elaborate mosques, all bear witness to a turbulent past when Rhodes was governed by Romans, Arabs, Turks and Crusaders.
But apart from historical sites, visitors come to enjoy the island's long sandy beaches and inland scenery of olive-clad hillsides and sweet-smelling pine forests.
Modern resorts offer every amenity for shopping during the day, and a choice of clubs, discos and casinos at night.
And the local tavernas are the best places to sample the delicious Greek cuisine or to simply sit back with a glass of ouzo and watch the world go by.
OUT & ABOUT
Rhodes Town
An impressive medieval walled town built by the Knights of St John, with a plethora of towers, battlements, mosques and the picturesque Mandraki harbour.
In the new part of the town, wide boulevards house a range of tempting duty-free shops for buying silverware and ceramics.
Petaloudes
The famous Valley of the Butterflies where, between June and September, millions of butterflies come to feed on the resin from the Storax trees.
A photographer's paradise.
Lindos
A pretty village of whitewashed houses and narrow, twisting streets, nestling at the foot of the ancient Temple of Athena.
The summit can be reached by foot or by donkey, with breathtaking views of the surrounding scenery.
IRENE PALACE Beach Club
Irene Palace offers the perfect setting for a sun-drenched holiday in one of the most unspoilt hot-spots in Greece.
The island of Rhodes boasts 300 days of sunshine each year, making it ideal for sun worshippers.
The elegant arabesque-style hotel skirts the Mediterranean shoreline on th east side of the island, with sweeping coastal plains and craggy mountains providing a dramatic backdrop.
But for the many guests who lie basking in the sun, around the pool or on the Club's beach, the most familiar view is the endless expanse of brilliant blue sky.
The great thing about this holiday club is if all you want to do is laze about in the sun, they'll let you.
But there's also plenty going on — you can ride the waves on the windsurf or explore rocky caves with a snorkel.
If you can manage it, you can keep on the go all day, hitting winners on the tennis court or flying the British flat at water polo (let's hope we do better this year?), or competing in the Irene Palace swimming Olympics.
If it's perfect for the adults, it's paradise for the kids.
Once they've joined in the Pirates Club, you'll be lucky to see them at all, as they go through their paces for the junior cabaret (where a lot of hidden young talent come to light), or as they enjoy the treasure hunts and fancy dress parties.
And what's best is knowing that the supervision is first class.
Let's face it, it can be tiring enjoying yourself all day!
Luckily, the Palace's spotlessly clean and well furnished rooms provide the perfect haven for a late siesta before dinner.
Then you can relax over a cocktail on the verandah as the sun sinks low, and reflect on a day well spent.
You can sit out on the terrace to enjoy your meal which is buffet style offering a wide choice of menu and a temptation to over indulgence.
After dinner, the hotel cabaret and band take over the easy task of keeping you happy.
As you sip coffee and liqueurs in the Aquarium bar with new-found friends, you'll hear yourself making the firm promise ‘I'll be back’.
Emma Patterson
Radio Trent
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terraces; free poolside sunloungers.
Poolside bar; ‘Aquarium’ bar.
Buffet-style restaurant; Irene's grill room à la carte restaurant.
Card room/lounge; mini-market; video games; gymnasium; jacuzzi; terrace entertainments area.
Children's room and playground.
Location
Situated on the north east coast or Rhodes between Faliraki and Lindos.
Accommodation
237 well-appointed rooms with 2, 3 or 4 beds, bath/shower and terrace.
Sea view rooms available at a supplement.
Single rooms available at a supplement.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
the Irene Palace offers high standards of accommodation plus a friendly atmosphere — a delightful setting for a relaxing holiday.
CRETE
The largest and most southerly of the Greek islands, Crete is a perfect combination of modern tourism totally enveloped in the remains of Europe's first civilisation.
There is evidence of the Minoans throughout the island — the palace of Knossos, seat of King Minos; the Diktaean Cave, said to be the birthplace of the great Greek god Zeus; and the many museums and galleries housing the memories of a bygone era.
Today, visitors are warmly welcomed to share Crete's ancient history and to enjoy its breathtaking landscapes of 8000-foot mountains, deep valleys, extensive beaches, sparkling bays and lively resorts.
Crete is a real must if you enjoy a combination of relaxation and exploration in a climate which attracted the Minoans here in the first place.
OUT & ABOUT
Knossos
Famous site of the 1400 roomed palace of Minos, where many treasures were uncovered by Sir Arthur Evans at the turn of the century.
Heraklion
This walled and moated capital of white walls and terracotta roofs mingles traditional charm with a bustling centre of pavement cafés, shops and a colourful street market.
Examine the Minoan exhibits in the Archaeological Museum or wander round the ancient port.
Vai Beach
One of Crete's many superb sandy beaches, fringed with palm trees.
Vai is a recognised beauty spot and has been used as a film location.
Gorge of Samaria
A one or two day visit to this eleven mile long spectacular gorge — the longest in Europe.
Aghios Nikolaos
Named after its Byzantine church, this former fishing village is now the island's most attractive and chic resort, with good shopping and a varied selection of restaurants and characteristic tavernas.
SUNWING Club Hotel
Combine sun-tropical warmth and sunshine with Scandinavian efficiency and you've got Sunwing, Crete.
The hotel is owned by Vingresor, the Swedish tour company who are part of Scandinavian Airlines, and the internationally high standards reflect it.
The half hour drive east of Ierapetra along Crete's largely unspoilt southern coast was to Analipsis where the hotel nestled above a great rock-fringed bay.
Two clean, exclusive beaches with tempting acres of sand; there were two pools (one for children) and the shouts and squeals of beach games.
Initially, though, just lazing in the extensive grounds surrounded by bougainvillea and hibiscus blossoms, felt perfect.
(Lazing's highly recommended if you've been up for the 8.30am aerobics.
‘We don't get many English for that,’ grinned the Swedish coach.)
Waterskiing, windsurfing, pedalos and tennis cost extra.
But not the water gymnastics or the 5 o'clock jog for those who like it hot!
There was no compulsion to take part in anything.
Sunwing's staff, plus the versatile HCI Rep. created a friendly, laid-back atmosphere.
They also performed cabaret shows with cameo acts ranging from Abba to Zorba the Greek.
Meanwhile, the hotel's English radio programme from 6.30–7pm highlighted what was on.
Three young people's clubs were popular: miniclubs (Snow White and the Seventy Dwarfs) for 4–9 olds, Club 13 for 10–13 and Club 18 for 14–18 years.
Specialist programmes were organised, plus supervised evening excursions.
Adult trips included bustling Aghios Nikolaos, tranquil inland villages and a visit to the awe-inspiring Minoan Palace of Knossos.
And even though the courtesy coaches which run three times a week to Ierapetra and Sitia got booked days in advance, local buses were reliable and cheap.
Bast of all, though, was the room to come back to: large, cool and spotless with air-conditioning, sun-trap balcony and a fridge we had stocked with chilled goodies.
A slice of Swedish-style luxury in the sun.
John Hazel
Deputy Editor, Good Holiday Magazine
CLUB FACILITIES
Swimming pool; gardens and sun terrace; poolside bar; free poolside sunloungers.
Beach bar; main bar.
Large buffet-style Scandinavian breakfast; buffet style restaurant; ‘Trattoria’ Italian à a carte restaurant.
Mini-market; hairdresser; laundry.
Children's pool; playground.
Location
Situated on the South-East coast of Crete, ½km from Makrigialos.
Accommodation
295 rooms in the main Apollon hotel building.
Twin rooms have fridge, internal radio, telephone, bath/shower and balcony and will take an extra bed.
Rooms are air-conditioned in high season.
Twins with sea view are available at a supplement.
FREE
IN OUR OPINION
…
Set in a beautiful location above two fabulous sandy beaches, this Scandinavian-managed hotel offers good standards of accommodation and efficient service.
Spring Specials
In April, HCI are offering a series of special one-off holidays at selected Clubs in the Canaries and North Africa.
Choose between half board and self-catering on a range of durations and enjoy the great prices for you and unbeatable savings for children.
All prices are per person in £'s and include airport charges.
Remember to add insurance (page 86/87).
For details of child reductions see page 9.
Car Hire Hertz
Enjoy your holiday in style driving around in your own car.
Go where you want, when you want!
Discover little known beaches.
Go out for a meal in out-of-the-way places (they're always the best!)
Then join in the nightlife of neighbouring resorts without any how-do-I-get-home worries.
We have got together with Hertz, the world's largest car rental company, to offer you competitive rates for reliable hire cars pre-booked in the U.K. All of these pre-booked Hertz cars are usually less than seven months old or have covered no more than 31,000 miles (50,000kms) are checked, cleaned and full of petrol and are delivered to and from your Club at no extra charge.
In nearly all cases, you'll find you pay less if you reserve your car in advance and, of course this also saves you any worry as availability is guaranteed.
Just complete the booking form on page 89 and we'll take care of the arrangements.
Car hire cannot be pre-booked within seven days of departure.
If you are unable to book in advance or you decide to leave your booking your hire car until you reach your destination, contact your HCI Representative in resort for details of local car hire prices.
What's included
(a)
Delivery and collection to and from your Club.
(b)
Unlimited mileage.
(c)
Expenditure on oil and maintenance repairs, which will be refunded on production of receipts a the end of the rental.
(d)
Cover for third party, fire and theft, and Bail Bond in Spain, the Balearics and the Canary Islands, but exclusive of Personal Accident (see below) and contents cover.
(e)
Local government taxes.
(f)
Collision Damage Waiver which covers the renter's responsibility for accidental damage to the vehicle.
What's not included
(a)
Personal Accident Insurance, available at a supplement, but also included in the Norwich Union cover described on pages 86/87 and insurance of the car's contents.
(b)
Garaging, petrol, parking and traffic fines.
(c)
VAT in Spanish and Greek areas.
Spanish areas currently at 12% and Greek 16%.
N.B. VAT is not currently charged in the Canary Islands.
(All subject to change).
Please Note:
1.
Driving licences and permits — All drivers must be at least 21 years of age (23 in Greece) and must produce a valid national driving licence, held for at least a year, when taking delivery of the car.
Only those named as drivers at the commencement of the rental may drive the car, and each one must sign the rental contract with the hire company.
2.
In Spain an ‘Old style’ green British Driving Licence must be accompanied by an international Driving permit.
A ‘New style’ pink British/EEC Driving licence is sufficient by itself.
3.
Minimum rental bookable in advance is for three days.
For one or two days see the HCI Representative in your resort.
4.
Prices given in each resort area are the actual rates in the foreign currency and are applicable only to those who book in advance.
Prices in sterling (in brackets) are shown at exchange rates applicable on 25th July 1989 and are a guide only.
5.
Car Hire cannot be pre-booked within 7 days of departure.
If you are therefore unable to make a booking, see the HCI Representative in your resort.
6.
Upon delivery of the car, the driver(s) will be asked to sign the Hertz's conditions of Hire, making the rental the subject of a direct contract between each driver and Hertz.
If you decide to hire a car, just state this when you confirm your holiday and complete the box on the booking form on page 89.
A prepayment of £25 as part of the car hire cost is required.
This will be shown on your Holiday Details Form and Final Invoice, and you pay the remainder in resort in local currency (the £25 will be deducted at the exchange rates applicable at the time of payment in resort).
Should you be forced to cancel your car hire booking after the Payment Date shown on your Final invoice a cancellation charge of £25 will be applied.
7.
On collection of the car, clients paying cash will normally be asked to pay a further deposit roughly equivalent to the remaining cost of the rental and the full tank of petrol.
Clients paying by credit card will normally be asked to sign a blank credit card voucher in lieu of this deposit.
Where necessary a full reconciliation will take place at the end of the rental.
8.
If you require delivery of your car to the airport into which you are flying, please state this at the time of booking.
Special Note:
Special car hire offers at individual accommodation are arranged with local car hire companies and are subject to availability and not pre-bookable.
See your HCI Representative on arrival in resort.
N.B. None of these hire cars is an open-top jeep.
Information about your Holiday
WHAT'S INCLUDED IN THE HOLIDAY PRICE
The basic cost of your holiday, as set out in the individual price panels includes the following.
TRAVEL DOCUMENTS — including flight tickets and luggage labels.
These will be sent to you or your travel agent about two weeks before you travel.
AIRPORT CHARGES including foreign and U.K. airport taxes and passenger charges and airport security charges.
YOUR FLIGHT — and a free baggage allowance of 20 kilos (44lbs) unless indicated otherwise on your tickets.
FREE SNACK OR MEAL IN-FLIGHT —(according to the time of day).
COACH OR TAXI TRANSFERS — from the resort airport to your chosen accommodation and vice versa.
THE SERVICES OF YOUR HCI REPRESENTATIVE
VAT — on all holidays to the EEC.
The following exchange rates have been used in calculating VAT and known costs for the prices, as quoted in the Financial Times of 25th July 1989.
Spanish Peseta 193.50; American Dollar 1.6180; Greek Drachma 267.15; Tunisian Dinar 1.5561; Moroccan Dirham 13.7503; Yugoslavian Dinar 325.26.
YOUR ACCOMMODATION — prices are calculated for one of the following arrangements and this is indicated at the foot of each Club description.
(a)
Full board — includes bed, continental breakfast, lunch and dinner.
(b)
Half board — includes bed, continental breakfast and dinner.
(c)
Bed and breakfast — bed and continental breakfast.
(d)
Self catering — no meals included.
Where alternative arrangements are available, this too is indicated in the individual Club descriptions and the price is shown in the supplement section of the price panels.
…
AND WHAT'S EXTRA
ANY SUPPLEMENTS — indicated in the price panels for the extras you wish to reserve, e.g. single rooms, sea views, etc.
FLIGHT SUPPLEMENTS — where applicable, are shown in the Flight Timetable on page 90/91.
HCI RECOMMENDED INSURANCE AND FLIGHT DELAY PROTECTION (see pages 86/87) for which premiums are: up to 9 nights £16.25; up to 17 nights £18.45
CLUB AND RESORT FACILITIES — some Clubs charge for the use of certain facilities, e.g. mini-golf, tennis courts, saunas, sun loungers, parasols, and nightclubs etc.
REFUNDABLE DEPOSITS — on self catering holidays, which you are usually asked to leave with the reception of the apartments, to cover any possible breakages during your holiday.
COST OF VISAS — where necessary.
EXCURSIONS — and other optional facilities.
COTS AND FOOD FOR INFANTS —(i.e. babies under 2 years of age).
In addition some clubs levy a service charge for infants payable in resort.
HOLIDAY PLANNER
To help you prepare for your holiday, round 11 weeks before you go away we'll send you our FREE HCI Holiday Planner.
It's full of useful information, from essential details on health matters to how to get to the airport and phone home from abroad; from where to park your care at the airport and how to get the best possible tan.
TRANSFER TIMES
Transfer times cover the average period taken from leaving the airport to arriving in your resort.
Obviously the times shown are approximate since journey times can vary due to a number of reasons e.g. weather, road works, traffic, etc.
SEA VIEWS
Please note that where accommodation is described as having a sea view, this means that a view of the sea will be available when standing on the balcony or terrace.
If your room does not have a balcony or terrace, a view of the sea will be available from the room.
Not all accommodation with sea view will face the sea directly and, on occasions, trees may partially obscure the view, particularly from rooms on lower floors.
HEALTH REGULATIONS
It is sensible to have typhoid, polio and cholera vaccinations for Africa (unless you have been immunised within the past 10 years).
More information about health is set out in our Holiday Planner which will be sent to you or your travel agent about 11 weeks before you travel.
Regulations may change so it is wise to consult your doctor or Travel Agent before travelling.
You may also like to obtain health leaflets SA40 and SA41 from your ABTA Travel Agent or from your local Department of Health and Social Security.
SINGLE ROOMS
HCI has negotiated special rates for single guests and selected Clubs throughout this brochure, and we are delighted to be able to pass this benefit on to you.
Please note that these rooms are offered subject to availability — as supply is limited, we advise you to book early to avoid disappointment.
Where there are single room supplements, these apply to all prices except where otherwise indicated.
Sometimes single rooms may be inferior in standard or position to other rooms in the Club.
The extra charge is for the convenience of having a room to oneself.
PASSPORTS AND VISAS
A British visitor's Passport (valid one year) is sufficient for most holidays in this brochure and can be bought at any Post Office on production of two photographs plus an expired 10 year Passport on two identifying documents, one of which must be an expired British Visitors Passport or your birth certificate.
A full ten year passport is required for holidays to Morocco.
If a child travels on a parent's passport to Morocco, a photograph of the child suitably endorsed by the Passport Office must be in their passport.
Guests travelling from Spain to Morocco on an excursions must also be in possession of a full 10 year passport and children must have their own passports.
However, regulations do change.
If in doubt, ask your travel agent or the Passport Office.
Remember that wives or children travelling alone must have their own passport, and that newly arrived infants must be included in their parents' passport in advance of their departure date.
Passengers with an Israeli stamp in their passport who wish to visit an Arab country should contact the Passport Office.
It may be necessary to obtain a supplementary passport.
Visitors to Greece on a package holiday using a charter fight may visit Turkey or any other neighbouring country for the day but must not stay overnight.
Some countries require passports to be valid for a certain period after leaving that country and you are advised to check details with the Consulate of any country you will be travelling to.
If you hold a commonwealth or other passport, check with the Consulate of the country or countries you will be visiting whether you require a visa.
There are often long delays in obtaining visas; be certain to apply in time.
It is your responsibility to be in possession of a valid passport and any visa which may be necessary.
If you need to apply for a passport, do so at least 12 weeks before departure.
EXTRA BEDS
Many Clubs have some twin rooms into which three or four beds can be fitted and in the majority of cases, a price reduction is offered for the third and/or fourth person sharing.
We should, however, like to point out that the extra beds will usually be fold-away or camp bed style and that you may find floor and drawer space cramped.
BUILDING WORK
As holiday areas increase in popularity, building work or enhancements to the infrastructure are a not unexpected feature, and often start without any prior warning to tour operators.
Similarly Clubs have to be refurbished or decorated.
This may take place during your stay and prior warning may not be given.
Obviously Club managements try to ensure that this work is carried out with the minimum of inconvenience to guests.
Wherever we are aware of development work which is likely to affect significantly the enjoyment of your holiday, we shall always do our best to inform you before you travel.
HANDICAPPED GUESTS
We want to make it easy for everyone to go abroad on holiday, regardless of limited mobility or other handicaps.
Once you have decided where you would like to spend your holiday, please check with your travel agent whether or not the Club and resort are suitable for people with a physical disability or mobility problem.
Given sufficient advance notice, we'll also be happy to carry collapsible wheelchairs on any of our flights.
We will endeavour to give you the best possible service to ensure a trouble-free and enjoyable holiday.
BROCHURE ACCURACY
All the facts about the Clubs and resorts in this brochure are checked and re-checked for accuracy by our special department in Birmingham, by our resort staff and, wherever possible, by hoteliers.
However, it is still possible that hoteliers, nightclub owners etc. may decide to change their facilities making them permanently unavailable.
In low season especially, facilities may be unavailable, e.g. a pool may be emptied for cleaning, a disco closed for redecoration etc.
Similarly after we have printed the brochure, a hotelier may decide to change the meal service either to buffet style or back to traditional waiter service.
During local or national holidays abroad, certain facilities such as museums, sightseeing tours and shopping may be limited — if you feel your enjoyment might be diminished by such limitations, please check with the relevant National Tourist Office.
Such events are regrettably beyond our control.
However, when we are told of any significant changes, we will inform you at the time of booking or, if you've already booked your holiday, you will be contacted as soon as reasonably possible if there is time before your departure.
SECURITY
HCI is a trading division of Horizon Holidays Limited, part of the world's largest travel group, which owns a chain of travel agencies and Britain's leading holiday airline, Britannia Airways.
Part of an international organisation, with assets of £3.47 billion, the company also has interests in newspapers and publishing as well as travel.
NUMBER OF NIGHTS IN YOUR ACCOMMODATION
The ‘no. of nights’ stated on all of the price panels refers to the number of nights accommodation booked for you.
Some flights are night flights — when you arrive in the resort your room is immediately available, as it has been reserved for the whole night.
This, therefore, counts as one of your holiday nights.
Similarly, guests who have booked half or full board may miss a meal on arrival or departure due to the timing of the flight.
Where this is the case, our pricing of the holiday has been adjusted to compensate.
On the last day of your holiday it is standard practice to be asked to check out of your room in the morning.
However, a courtesy room will sometimes be made available to be shared between a group of guests.
HOW TO BOOK
See your ABTA travel agent — Your local HCI expert.
Your local ABTA travel agents are the HCI experts and in the best position to give you unbiased advice.
They will handle all queries and communications for you, and their services are free.
You can call in in person, or phone to make you reservation or enquiry.
By completing parts of the Booking Form in advance, you can also help your travel agent and us to handle your booking more efficiently.
If you phone us first, you will be asked to send in a signed Booking Form, pay the deposit and only then can any booking be confirmed.
How to Make Your HCI Holiday Booking
Once you have chosen your holiday, your ABTA travel agent will make your booking for you.
If your choice is available, a Reference Number will be given and it is essential that this number is written in the space provided on the Booking Form.
To give you time, should you need to agree the details with others, we will normally hold your holiday choice until the close of business on the following working day, when it will automatically lapse unless you instruct your travel agent to confirm the booking to us.
To confirm the booking, you will be required to sign the completed Booking Form and pay the appropriate deposit.
We will then forward a Holiday Details form to your travel agent, verifying details of the booking.
You should insist that your travel agent provides you with the Client Copy.
If you want to make your booking directly with HCI contact the Horizon Holiday Shop, Broadway, Edgbaston Five Ways, Birmingham B15 1BB (Tel: 021 632 6282)
Group Bookings
If you wish to make a reservation for 10 or more people, contact your travel agent, and don't forget the special discounts we make for most groups — see page 11.
To help you get organised a group option may be held for up to one month before deposits are required, and names need not be supplied until 12 weeks before departure.
After that date any name changes will incur an Amendment Fee — see page 11.
Late Bookings
You can book your holiday right up to the day of departure.
For bookings made within six weeks of departure, you will be required to pay the full cost of your holiday at the time of booking.
However, please remember that some holidays require visas or inoculations, which may take several weeks to obtain.
Special Requests
If you have any special requests (such as‘low floor’ etc.),
HCI must be informed when you confirm your holiday booking and details must be inserted on the Booking Form.
We shall do our best to meet your requirements BUT NO GUARANTEE IS GIVEN.
Payment
When you have confirmed your booking and paid your deposit, within 2–3 weeks we will forward a Holiday Details form to you or your travel agent, verifying the confirmed holiday contract you have already made with us.
Around 11 weeks before departure, a Final Invoice detailing the exact holiday price will be sent.
Payment of the balance, as shown on the Final Invoice, is due no later than 8 weeks before departure.
Queries and Communications
When you book your holiday through a travel agent, all communications between you and HCI will be made through the travel agent.
If you have any queries, please contact the travel agent through which you booked quoting your Reference Number, departure date and the resort you will be visiting.
HOLIDAYS AND OFFERS ARE SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY SO BOOK EARLY.
Holiday Insurance
Summary of Benefits per Insured Person
Cancellation or Curtailment
Medical and Associated Expenses including Repatriation
Hospital Benefit
Baggage Delay (after 12 hours)
Baggage and Personal Effects (limit £200 for valuables and any one article)
Money
Personal Accident
a)
Death
b)
Loss or irrecoverable loss of use of one or more limbs or eyes
c)
Permanent total disablement from following usual occupation (other than as provided by (b) above ).
(For children under 16 years of age inclusive, the death benefit is limited to £1,000).
Personal Liability
Missed Departure
Under the special cover we have arranged for you with the Norwich Union, all Insured Persons of any age are covered, and the Policy will cover you should you have to cancel your holiday for certain reasons.
In addition, cover is provided for loss of cash or baggage, medical expenses, repatriation etc., while you are away.
The cover afforded by the Master Policy issued to HCI Club Holidays office is set out below; no separate certificate(s) will be issued.
CHARGES (PER PERSON)
The appropriate charges will be added to your Final Invoice.
As cover under Section 1 is immediate, bookings for insurance cannot be cancelled and no refund of premium is possible.
GENERAL
1.
The length of the holiday you have booked will determine the period of your insurance cover.
You are covered from the time of leaving home to the time of arrival home from your holiday.
(Plus Section 1 from date of booking).
2.
There are no exclusions relating to:(a) age;(b) pre-existing medical conditions including recurring illness and physical defects, except for any consequence of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) or any AIDS related complex;(c) pregnancy (please read note on page 91).
3.
Geographical limits: all destinations detailed in this brochure and intermediate stopping places.
4.
Children under two years of age at the date of return are fully covered by this insurance when travelling with an Insured Person.
Benefits per Insured Person
SECTION 1 — CANCELLATION OR CURTAILMENT — not exceeding Final Invoice costs excluding insurance premiums.
Reimbursement of
(i)
irrecoverable deposits or tour operator's charges arising from cancellation of the holiday or
(ii)
(a)
a proportionate amount of irrecoverable tour operator's charges arising from curtailment of the holiday and
(b)
necessary additional hotel and travel expenses to return to the home address within the British Isles (up to £500 if the total cost of curtailment exceeds the Final Invoice costs) arising from curtailment of the holiday due to any cause arising from curtailment of the holiday due to any cause beyond the control of the Insured Person except:
(a)
Government regulation or act or currency restriction
(b)
strikes or labour disputes
(c)
unemployment other than redundancy
(d)
disinclination to travel or continue the holiday
(e)
financial circumstances of any Insured Person
(f)
failure of the tour operator or any provider of transport or accommodation to fulfil the holiday booking
(g)
non-issue of visas
SECTION 2 — MEDICAL AND ASSOCIATED EXPENSES INCLUDING REPATRIATION (Limit £500,000)
Reimbursement of medical, hospital and treatment expenses while on holiday (including emergency dental treatment) and hotel and repatriation expenses to the British Isles necessarily incurred arising from injury sustained or sickness declaring itself during the period of the holiday (including those of any one person required on medical advice to accompany the Insured Person).
If you require hospital attention and the cost exceeds £50, the HCI Representative at the resort can, if necessary, make payment on behalf of the Norwich Union.
Cost of transport of body or ashes to the home address in the British Isles in the event of death.
Alternatively, the cost of burial abroad limited to £1,000 per Insured Person.
‘Repatriation
to the British Isles if recommended on medical advice will be arranged by your HCI Representative, the cost of which will be met under this section.
Where necessary, the use of a specially equipped air ambulance will be provided.
SECTION — HOSPITAL BENEFIT (Limit £10 per day up to £200)
An additional amount of £10 per day up to a maximum of £200 is payable for each day an Insured Person is in hospital as an in-patient during the period of the holiday.
We have made arrangements for this payment to be made in the resort by the HCI Representative on behalf of Norwich Union.
SECTION 4 — BAGGAGE AND PERSONAL EFFECTS (Limit £1,000)
Loss or damage to personal effects and baggage taken, sent in advance or purchased on holiday (including clothing and personal effects worn or carried on the person, trunks, suitcases and like receptacles).
Maximum payment in respect of jewellery, furs, gold and silver articles, watches, binoculars, photographic, audio and video equipment £200 in total.
Maximum payment on any one article or pair or set of articles — £200.
N.B. — Payment will be the intrinsic value of each item or cost of repair whichever is the less.
Cover does not apply to items that are hired, borrowed and not the property of the Insured Person.
In the event of the Insured Person being deprived of baggage for at least 12 hours from the time of arrival at holiday destination due to delay or misdirection in delivery, the Norwich Union will pay to the Insured Person an amount of up to £75 for emergency purchase of essential items of clothing and requisites subject to certification of such delay, misdirection and expenditure by the HCI Representative.
We have made arrangements for this payment to be made in the resort on behalf of Norwich Union.
No cover applies in the respect of unattended baggage and personal effects.
PLEASE NOTE
1.
ANY LOSS  OR DAMAGE TO BAGGAGE ETC., WHILST IN THE CUSTODY OF CARRIERS (AIRLINES, BUS COMPANIES, ETC.)
MUST BE NOTIFIED IMMEDIATELY IN WRITING TO SUCH CARRIER BUT IN ANY EVENT WITHIN THREE DAYS OF DISCOVERY AND IF POSSIBLE A REPORT OBTAINED AT THE TIME OF ARRIVAL.
2.
THE COVER PROVIDED DOES NOT INCLUDE COMPENSATION FOR DELAYED FLIGHTS.
SECTION 5 — MONEY (Limit £200)
Accidental loss of money (cash, bank or currency notes, cheques, travellers cheques, postal or money orders), travel tickets, petrol coupons or credit vouchers.
N.B. — Loss of sterling limited to the amount permitted by currency regulations if any in force at the date of holiday.
ANY LOSS OF MONEY MUST BE REPORTED TO THE POLICE WITHIN 24 HOURS OF DISCOVERY AND A REPORT OBTAINED.
SECTION 6 — PERSONAL ACCIDENT (Limit £15,000)
Accidental bodily injury sustained by the Insured Person during the period of the holiday which independently of any other cause results in:
BENEFITS PER INSURED PERSON
(a)
death
(b)
(i)
total and irrecoverable loss of all sight in one or both eyes rendering the Insured person absolutely blind in the eye or eyes beyond remedy by surgical or other treatment
(ii)
total loss by physical  severence or complete and irrecoverable loss of use of either one or both hands and/or both feet
(c)
permanent total disablement (other than as provided by (b)(i) and (b)(ii)) entirely preventing the Insured Person from following his/her usual occupation
Benefits (a) for an Insured Person under age 16 is limited to £1,000.
This cover includes:—
Exposure — Bodily injury includes exposure resulting from misfortune by any aircraft or other conveyance where travel is permitted in which the Insured Person is travelling.
‘Bodily Injury’— excludes any sickness, disease or medical disorder.
SECTION 7 — PERSONAL LIABILITY (Limit £500,000)
Indemnity in respect of legal liability for accidental injury to Third Parties and/or accidental damage to their property.
Norwich Union will also pay all costs and expenses incurred with its written consent.
SECTION 8 — MISSED DEPARTURE (Limit £300)
Reimbursement of additional hotel and travelling expenses necessarily incurred up to a maximum of £300 to reach the booked destination in the event of the Insured Person arriving at the U.K. departure point too late to commence the booked holiday as a result of the failure of public transport services or due to an accident or mechanical failure involving the motor vehicle in which the Insured Person is travelling.
Claims will be paid on condition that the Insured Person has taken reasonable steps to complete the journey to the U.K. departure point on time.
SECTION 9 — LEGAL EXPENSES (Limit £5,000)
Payment of costs and expenses of (i) lawyers, legal and paralegal advisors and other necessary professional advisers in a destination country,(ii) the obtaining of medical, professional or photographic evidence and reports and of documentation required in order to obtain legal representation (iii) notarial, certification and legalisation fees, transportation costs to obtain documents and translation costs, incurred by the Insured Person up to a maximum of £5,000 in total in pursuit of compensation and damages arising from or out of injury to or illness or death of the Insured Person occurring during the period of insurance PROVIDED always that the Insurers shall have complete control over any legal proceedings and the selection, appointment and control of lawyers.
CONDITIONS AND EXCLUSIONS — GENERAL
1.
(a)
Written notice shall be given to the Insurer without unnecessary delay of any loss, damage or injury or sickness.
All certificates, information and evidence required by the Insurer shall be furnished at the expense of the Insured Person or his/her legal personal representatives.
(b)
The Insurer may at its own expense take proceedings in the name of the Insured Person to recover compensation or secure an indemnity from any Third Party in respect of any loss or damage covered by this insurance and any amount so recovered shall belong to the Insurer.
(c)
No refund of premium will be allowed once insurance has been effected.
2.
This insurance does not cover any consequences of war, invasion, act of foreign enemy, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), civil war, rebellion, revolution, insurrection or military or usurped power (other than under Sections 2, 3 & 6) while the Insured Person is away from the British Isles provided always that the cover so provided is subject to cancellation by the Insurer by giving seven days notice by registered letter to HCI Club Holidays.
SECTION 1
3.
This section does not cover the first £25 each claim each person except loss of deposit claims.
SECTION 1, 2, 3 AND 7
4.
These sections do not cover any claim arising directly or indirectly from any death, injury, illness, expense or other liability attributable to Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and/or HIV related illness including Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and/or any Mutant derivative or variations  thereof however caused.
SECTION 2
5.
This section does not cover expenses recovered under a reciprocal health arrangement and the cost of treatment in the British Isles, available under a State Insurance Scheme.
SECTION 2 AND 3
6.
These sections do not cover wilfully self-inflicted illness or venereal disease.
SECTION 2, 3 AND 6
7.
These sections do not cover:—
(a)
(i) bodily injury sustained while under the influence of or (ii) disablement due wholly or partly to the effects of intoxicating liquor or drugs other than drugs taken in accordance with treatment prescribed and directed by a qualified registered medical practitioner but not for the treatment of drug addiction.
(b)
bodily injury sustained while taking part in racing by horse motor or motorcycle, motor rallies and competitions, mountaineering where ropes or guides are normally used, pot-holing, skin-diving or aviation (except when travelling solely as a passenger).
(c)
wilfully self-inflicted injury.
SECTION 4 AND 5
8.
These sections do not cover:—
(i)
loss or damage arising from delay or from confiscation or detention by custom or other official;
(ii)
loss or damage to stamps, documents, contact or corneal lenses or loss of passports;
(iii)
the first £25 of each and every claim each person each section except in the case of delayed or mis-directed baggage which is subsequently delivered to the Insured Person.
(iv)
loss or damage caused by the process of cleaning, repairing or restoring any article, wear and tear, the action of light or atmospheric conditions, moth or any other gradually-operating cause;
(v)
loss, destruction or damage directly occasioned by pressure waves caused by aircraft and other aerial devices travelling at sonic or supersonic speeds;
(vi)
mechanical or electrical breakdown or derangement.
In addition in respect of money:—
(vii)
money not held for social or domestic use;
(viii)
shortages due to error, omission or depreciation in value;
(ix)
losses not reported to the police within 24 hours.
9.
The Insured Person shall obtain from the HCI Representative certification of the deprivation of baggage for at least 12 hours, due to the delay or mis-direction and the expenditure made for emergency purposes.
10.
The Insured Person shall take such steps for the recovery of his/her property as if he/she were not insured and take all ordinary and reasonable precautions for the safe keeping of the property insured.
SECTION 4 AND 7
11.
These sections do not cover:— loss or destruction of or damage to any property whatsoever or any loss or expense whatsoever resulting or arising therefrom or any consequential loss directly or indirectly caused by or contributed to, by or arising from
(i)
ionising radiations or contamination by radioactivity from any nuclear fuel or from any nuclear waste from the combustion of nuclear fuel.
(ii)
the radioactive, toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of any explosive nuclear assembly or nuclear component thereof.
12.
If there is any other insurance covering the same contingencies, the Insurer shall not be liable to pay or contribute more than its rateable proportion.
13.
If any difference shall arise as to the amount to be paid under these sections (liability being otherwise admitted), such difference shall be referred to an arbitrator to be appointed by the parties in accordance with statutory provisions.
Where any difference is to be referred to arbitration, the making of an award shall be a condition precedent to any right of action against the Insurer.
SECTION 6
14.
(i)
Payment shall not be made to the Insured Person under more than one of the benefits (a) to (c) in respect of the same injury or of the same period of disablement.
(ii)
After a claim under one of the benefits (a) to (c) has been admitted and become payable, no further liability shall attach to the Insurer.
(iii)
Payment under benefit (c) shall be payable only on certification by a medical referee of permanent total disablement as defined and not before the expiry of 104 weeks consecutive disablement.
(iv)
If after a reasonable period of time has elapsed, the Insurer having examined all evidence available, has no reason to suppose other than an accident has occurred, the disappearance of an Insured Person shall be considered as constituting a claim under this policy.
If at any time after payment has been made by the Insurer in settlement of such claims the Insured Person is found to be living any sum so paid by the Insurer shall be refunded.
SECTION 7
15.
This section does not cover liability:—
(a)
arising directly or indirectly by, through or in connection with 
(i)
the ownership, possession or use by or on behalf of the Insured Person of any mechanically-propelled vehicle or aircraft.
(ii)
caravans, watercraft or hovercraft owned by the Insured Person or hired by him/her under a hire purchase agreement;
(iii)
the occupation or ownership of land, buildings or immobile property;
(iv)
any wilful or malicious act;
(b)
assumed under any agreement unless such liability would have attached not withstanding such agreement;
(c)
for bodily injury or disease contracted by any person under a contract of service or apprenticeship with the Insured Person when such injury or disease arises out of and in the course of his/her employment by the Insured Person;
(d)
arising directly or indirectly by, through or in connection with the carrying on of any trade business or profession;
(e)
for loss of or damage to property belonging to or held in trust by or in the custody or control of the Insured Person (other that self catering accommodation where only the first £50 of any loss or damage is excluded);
(f)
where the granting of such indemnity is contrary to any law Government order or decree of the country concerned.
16.
On the happening of any event likely to give rise to a claim under this section the Insured Person shall:—
(a)
without unnecessary delay report in writing to the Insurer and provide all information and assistance which the Insurer may reasonably require;
(b)
immediately forward all correspondence, legal process or any other document to the Insurer unanswered;
(c)
refrain from discussing liability with any third party.
The Insurer shall be entitled to take over the conduct in the name of an Insured Person in the defence or settlement of any claim or to prosecute in the name of an Insured Person for its own benefit any claim for indemnity or damages or otherwise and shall have full discretion in the conduct of any proceedings and in the settlement of any claim.
17.
In respect of any claim or series of claims for which this cover provides an indemnity to an Insured Person against his/her legal liability, the Insurer may at any time pay to the Insured Person the limit of indemnity after deduction of any sum(s) already paid as compensation or any lesser amount for which such claim(s) can be settled, and upon such payment being made, the Insurer shall relinquish the conduct and control of and be under no further liability in connection with such claim(s) except for payment of costs and expenses recoverable or incurred prior to the date of such payment.
SECTION 8
18.
This section does not cover failure of public transport services caused by strike, riot or civil commotion in respect of which warning has been given prior to the commencement of departure from home.
SECTION 9
19.
This section does not cover:—
(a)
costs incurred in the pursuance of a claim against a Travel agent, Tour Operator, Insurer or Carrier (excluding a foreign Travel Agent),
(b)
legal expenses incurred either prior to the granting of support by the insurers or without their written consent, and
(c)
any claim reported to the insurers more than 180 days after the commencement of the incident giving rise to a claim.
Delays
Extension of period of insurance is automatic without extra charge if necessitated by delay of Public Transport services.
How to claim:—
Cancellations
Complete the claim form on the reverse of the Cancellation Invoice which will be sent to you after the cancellation advice is received by HCI.
(Do not contact the Norwich Union without first obtaining the Cancellation Invoice).
Other Claims:
Obtain an appropriate claim form (e.g. baggage/money or medical expenses) by either telephoning Norwich Union on 0603 683924 (24-hour answering machine), or on 0603 683195, or by writing to the Norwich Union clearing stating that you travelled with HCI at: TRAVEL CLAIMS, NORWICH UNION FIRE INSURANCE SOCIETY LTD., P.O.
BOX 2, 7 SURREY STREET, NORWICH, NR1 3NR
Your Final Invoice should be sent in with the completed claims form.
If injury or sickness is sustained and medical attention is received, you should if possible, pay and obtain receipted accounts together with a certificate showing the nature of the injury or sickness.
All claims should be notified as soon as reasonable possible after the expiry of the insurance.
You are advised to detach these pages and keep them with your travel documents.
Please also retain your copy of the Final Invoice until after your holiday as this will be needed should you have to make an insurance claim.
Complaints procedure:
Norwich Union's aim is at all times to provide a first class standard of service.
However, there may be occasions when you feel that this objective has not been achieved.
Should you have any query or complaint regarding this insurance please contact HCI.
If after taking this action you are still dissatisfied, please write to the Chief Executive, Norwich Union Insurance Group, Surrey Street, Norwich, NR1 3NG.
When you have received a reply from the Chief Executive and if you remain dissatisfied, you may:
a)
Approach the Insurance Ombudsman Bureau, 30 Southampton Row, London WC1B 5HJ (telephone 01 242 8613)
b)
Approach the Association of British Insurers.
Its address is: Consumer Information Department, Aldermary House, Queen Street, London EC4N 1TT (telephone 01-248 4477).
Alternatively, one of its Regional Offices may be contacted for which the address and telephone numbers can be found in local telephone directories.
Please state that you travelled with HCI.
DELAY PROTECTION PLAN
There are those occasions completely beyond our control when a flight is delayed.
But since this is the start of your HCI Holiday, we believe it's our responsibility to look after you and we always do our best to provide meals at meal times and accommodation on overnight delays.
In addition, if you have taken out insurance with Norwich Union as detailed above, we provide you with additional protection.
after a 12-hour delay you have the right to cancel and get a full refund of all the money you have paid us, excluding insurance premiums.
or, if you continue on your holiday, we will give you £20 compensation for the first 12 hours' delay; for each subsequent 12-hour delay we will give you a further £10 — up to a maximum of £60 per person in total.
this money is in addition to any meals or accommodation we provide.
these benefits apply for whatever reason your flight is delayed and will be paid automatically by HCI upon your return from holiday.
If you do not choose the insurance policy that we have arranged with the Norwich Union, please ensure that you are fully protected against possible delays, as it is only through the policy that you have bought that compensation can be paid to you.
Fair Trading Charter
PROTECTS YOUR INTERESTS.
Please read this.
We want you to know that you will always get a fair deal when you book with us.
YOUR COMMITMENT TO HORIZON HOLIDAYS LTD. — TRADING AS HCI.
1.
YOUR HOLIDAY CONTRACT
At the time of asking for your holiday booking to be confirmed, you must sign a Booking Form accepting this Charter.
Your contract is made on the terms of this Charter and is subject to English law and exclusive jurisdiction.
2.
PAYMENT FOR THE HOLIDAY
You pay a deposit of £60 per person when you book.
This is your only commitment until 8 weeks before departure.
Around 11 weeks before departure, we will send out a Final Invoice showing the balance you owe us.
If you have taken the Norwich Union Insurance policy, the premium will be shown here.
You must pay the balance at least 8 weeks before departure.
If you don't, we reserve the right to treat your booking as cancelled, in which case you could be liable to pay us cancellation charges up to 100% of the Final Invoice total in accordance with paragraph 4 below.
Any money paid by you to a HCI appointed travel agent under a booking for a holiday in this brochure is held by him as our agent from the date you receive our confirmation of your holiday booking until the agent pays that money over to us.
Normally, you will receive confirmation at the time of booking.
3.
IF YOU CHANGE YOUR BOOKING
If you want to change any details of your booking (e.g. transfer to a different holiday, departure date or airport), we will do our best to help.
We charge an Amendment Fee of £12 per person named on the booking for each detail of the booking changed.
However, if within 6 weeks of departure you change your booking to a later date, the cancellation charges will apply as shown in paragraph 4 unless the new holiday departs on or before the original departure date, when the normal fee of £12 per person will be charged.
Where the price varies depending on the number of persons booked into the accommodation and you wish to change that number of persons, the price will be recharged on the basis of the new party size as shown in the price panel.
Any increase in price per person payable as a result of a part cancellation is not a Cancellation Charge and so is not covered by Norwich Union Insurance.
A separate Cancellation Charge will be levied in respect of bookings cancelled in accordance with paragraph 4.
A new Holiday Details Form or Final Invoice will be issued as appropriate, on which the Cancellation Charges will be shown.
4.
IF YOU CANCEL YOUR HOLIDAY
You or any member of your party may cancel you booking, or part of it once it has been confirmed, but the instructions will only be valid if in writing and signed by the person who signed the Booking Form.
Your written instructions should go either to the travel agent you booked with asking him to notify us immediately, or, if you booked direct, to the Horizon Holidays office.
To compensate us for the expense of processing your booking and for the risk that we may not be able to resell the holiday we charge a cancellation fee on the scale shown below.
The amount payable (by whomever signed the Booking Form) depends on when we receive your written instructions — the more notice you give, the less we will charge.
N.B. You may make a claim if your cancellation falls within the terms of the insurance policy negotiated by HCI with the Norwich Union, if you have taken that cover.
Full details are given on pages 86/87.
Clients taking alternative holiday insurance should refer to their own policy.
5.
IF YOU HAVE A COMPLAINT
If you have a complaint about your holiday, please inform your HCI Representative immediately.
Matters can be most easily be sorted out for you on the spot whilst you are in resort, when your Representative, who is authorised to deal fully with any complaint, can see and understand the exact nature of any problems you have.
In the unlikely event that matters cannot be resolved to your satisfaction in the resort, the Representative will ask you to record details of any problems on a Holiday Report Form, of which you will be given a copy, and you must then follow up your report by writing to the Customer Relations Department at our Birmingham Head Office (quoting the numbers of your Holiday Reference and Holiday Report forms) within 42 days of returning from resort.
We will not accept liability in respect of claims that we receive after that date.
6.
HOLIDAY PARTICIPATION
We reserve the right to decline to accept or retain any person as a client if their conduct is disruptive and affecting the enjoyment of other holidaymakers, and we shall be under no liability for any extra costs incurred by such a person as a result of our doing so.
Aircraft captains are legally entitled to deny boarding to any passengers presenting themselves at the aircraft who, cat the captain's absolute discretion, are unacceptably under the influence of drink or drugs.
Any passengers who is denied boarding on the outbound flight for that reason, shall be deemed to have given notice of cancellation of his/her booking at that moment, and Cancellation Charges will apply in accordance with paragraph 4 above.
7.
YOUR ACCOMMODATION
The accommodation provided is only for the use of passengers shown on the Final Invoice as confirmed by us; subletting, sharing or assignment is prohibited.
8.
YOUR TICKET'S CONDITIONS
When you travel with an air or sea carrier their Conditions of Carriage apply, some of which limit or exclude liability.
These Conditions are often the subject of international agreements between countries, and copies of the Conditions which apply to your air or sea travel are available for inspection at the travel agent where you book your holiday, or at Horizon Holiday's office.
OUR COMMITMENT TO YOU
1.
PROVISION OF YOUR HOLIDAY
We will arrange for the provision to you of the services which form part of the inclusive holiday as confirmed to you.
These services will be provided either directly by ourselves or by independently contracted suppliers.
When you or your travel agent asks for your holiday booking to be confirmed, we allocate your chosen holiday to you and give confirmation of the booking at that moment.
That also acts as our acceptance of the booking on the terms of this Charter and your holiday is secured from that moment.
We will later send you or your travel agent a Holiday Details Form verifying the details of the holiday that you have already booked.
All holidays and offers advertised in this brochure are subject to availability.
2.
OUR GUARANTEE ON PRICE
WE GUARANTEE THAT THE PRICE OF YOUR HOLIDAY WILL NOT BE SUBJECT TO ANY SURCHARGES ONCE YOU HAVE MADE YOU BOOKING AND PAID A DEPOSIT, THEN THE COST OF YOUR HOLIDAY CANNOT BE INCREASED.
Whilst we reserve the right to increase or decrease brochure prices at any time, the price of your holiday as shown on your Holiday Details Form and will not be increased unless you amend your booking after it is issued.
3.
IF WE CHANGE YOUR HOLIDAY
It is unlikely that we will have to make any changes to your holiday, but we do plan th arrangements many months in advance.
Sometimes we may need to make changes which we reserve the right to do at any time.
Most of these changes are very minor, but where they are significant, we will inform you or your travel agent when you book or, if you have already booked, as soon as is reasonably possible if there is time before your departure.
If a major change becomes necessary, we will inform you or your travel agent as soon as is reasonably possible if there is time before your departure.
A major change is one that we make to your holiday arrangements before departure, that involves changing your UK airport(s), resort area or time of departure or return by more than twelve hours or a change of accommodation to a Club not featured in this brochure.
You then have the choice of either:
A.
accepting the changed arrangements as notified to you; or
B.
purchasing another available holiday from us; or
C.
cancelling your holiday.
If you choose A or B we will pay you compensation on the scale shown below.
Important Note Compensation payments do not apply to changes caused by reason of war or threat of war, riots, civil strife, terrorist activity, industrial disputes, natural and nuclear disasters, fire technical problems to transport, closure or congestion of airports or ports, cancellations or changes of schedules by scheduled airlines and similar events beyond our control.
But see also our Delay Protection Plan on page 87.
4.
IF WE CANCEL YOUR HOLIDAY
We reserve the right in any circumstance to cancel your holiday, and, in this event, we will return to you all monies you have paid us or will offer you an alternative available holiday to purchase, or comparable standard, in no case, except for reasons of war etc. (see Important note above), will your holiday be cancelled less than 8 weeks before the scheduled departure date.
5.
WHAT HAPPENS TO COMPLAINTS
We can normally agree an amicable settlement of any complaints we receive.
However, if we cannot agree, then you are entitled to refer the dispute for decision by an Arbitrator appointed by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, provided your claim is not more than £1,500 per person or £7,500 per Booking Form and does not involve physical injury or illness.
The Arbitration Scheme provides for arbitration of documents, a simple and inexpensive method with restricted client liability on costs.
Any dispute must be referred within nine months of your return from holiday.
Full details are available on request.
Alternatively, you may of course go to your County Court or other suitable court.
6.
OUR RESPONSIBILITY FOR YOUR HOLIDAY
We accept responsibility for ensuring that all component parts of the inclusive holiday which you book with us are supplied to you as described in this brochure and to a reasonable standard.
If any such part is not provided in the advertised manner, we will pay you appropriate compensation if this has affected the enjoyment of your holiday (see important note above).
Also, if you purchase in resort through an HCI-uniformed Representative a local excursion, trip or tour, we will pay you reasonable compensation if it is not as advertised on the HCI Noticeboard or Information Book or in the HCI Resort Guide.
7.
PERSONAL INJURY (WHILST PARTICIPATING IN ARRANGEMENTS MADE BY US)
We have taken all reasonable and proper steps to ensure that proper arrangements have been made for all the holidays which are advertised in this brochure and for excursions as described above and that the suppliers of the various services which will be provided to you as part of the inclusive holiday are efficient, safe and reputable businesses, and that they comply with the local and national laws and regulations of the country in which they provide those services.
We have no direct control over the provision of services to clients by suppliers.
However, subject to the Note below, we will pay to our clients the equivalent of such damages as they would be entitled to receive under English law in an English court for any personal injury to the client including illness or death, caused by the negligence, as understood in English law, of the servants or agents of ourselves or of any of our suppliers contracted or sub-contracted by us to provide any part of the arrangements for your holiday as described in this brochure, or excursions as described above, except for air or sea transportation arrangements for which separate conditions apply (see 8 opposite).
Note We will make payments as stated above provided (a) the injured clients notify us of any claim for personal injury within 3 months of their return from holiday;(b) they assign to Horizon Holidays Ltd. any rights against a supplier or any other person or party they may have relating to the claim; and (c) they agree to co-operate fully with us should we or our insurers wish to enforce those rights which have been assigned to us or to which we are subrogated.
This assignment is necessary to enable us to try and recover from suppliers and compensation paid to clients and associated costs as a result of personal injury to clients caused by the negligence, of those suppliers.
It is not our wish to profit from such assignment, and in the unlikely event of our recovering more than such compensation and costs, any excess will be paid to the injured clients.
8.
PERSONAL INJURY (UNCONNECTED WITH ARRANGEMENTS MADE BY US)
If any client suffers personal injury, including illness or death whilst overseas arising out of an activity which does not form part of the inclusive holiday arrangements or excursions as described above and which is the responsibility of a third party, we will give you help in your resolving of any claim you may have against that third party.
This help will include the provision of translation services, communications with authorities and others in foreign resorts, the recommending of foreign lawyers (if needed), explanation of procedures to be followed and the notification to you of any time limits, subject to our spending on all such activities on behalf of yourself and your party a maximum of £5,000 in total.
If you have taken the recommended Norwich Union insurance cover you must make an insurance claim under the Legal Expenses section in respect of any legal fees incurred abroad for that purpose, and if you have taken alternative insurance, you must do likewise under any Legal Expenses cover provided by it.
Flight Information
YOUR JOURNEY
AIRCRAFT AND FLIGHTS
Actual flight numbers are not known at the time of going to press.
In most cases your holiday flight is planned to be on a Boeing 737 or 767 jet aircraft operated by our sister company, Britannia Airways.
However, we reserve the right to substitute alternative carriers/aircraft types as necessary.
Where this arises it is not possible to transfer to another holiday or to cancel without incurring normal cancellation charges (see page 88).
Some flights may stop at an airport en route for technical reasons, e.g. refuelling.
Where this is known in advance it has been noted on the flight tables.
As factors affecting this requirement are sometimes not known until departure date, we cannot always notify you in advance.
N.B.
(i)
Airline regulations vary but many will refuse permission to fly women who will be 28 or more weeks into pregnancy on the date of return travel.
If in doubt, check with the airline concerned.
(ii)
As is usual, bookings for holidays advertised in this brochure are accepted subject to the granting of licences by the Civil Aviation Authorities, to whom application has been made.
BRITANNIA AIRWAYS
Britannia Airways, Britain's leading holiday airline, is our sister company, and so we are able to give you the benefits of the airline's long-standing experience and high standards of service.
TICKETS & TIMINGS
After we have received your payment, and approximately 2–3 weeks prior to departure, you will be sent a holiday wallet with your tickets and luggage labels.
Check the flight numbers and timings carefully.
Those shown in the Flight Timetable are for guidance only and may have changed .
Remember you must check in at least 1 hour 30 minutes before take off for most flights.
N.B. There are occasions, completely beyond our control, when a flight is delayed but, since this is the start of your HCI holiday, we believe it's our responsibility to look after you and we always do our best to provide meals at mealtimes and accommodation on overnight delays.
Also, if you have taken our insurance with Norwich Union you receive additional protection.
(See pages 86/87 for details).
FLIGHT SUPPLEMENTS
Prices shown in the club price panels are based on those departures where there is no flight supplement (shown as nil).
If you travel on a flight from another airport or at a different time, or on a different day, a flight supplement is often payable.
The amount is shown in the right hand column of the Flight Timetable.
Flight supplements vary between days of the week, departure and arrival times.
For these reasons supplements for 7 night holidays may be different from a 10 night holiday, and sometimes a 10 or 11 night holiday may have a higher supplement than a 14 night holiday.
Should any additional flights be introduced after publication of this brochure then they will be calculated on the same basis.
WIN A HOLIDAY UP TO THE VALUE OF £1500
NO NEED TO BOOK
Plus 25 RUNNER UP PRIZES OF £100 HOLIDAY VOUCHERS
WITH BELHAVEN
HCI features six Belhaven Clubs in the brochure located in Mallorca, Ibiza and mainland Spain.
Each Club is set in spacious grounds with an adjacent sandy beach and all offer outstanding value for money proving a popular choice with our clients over a number of years.
Now under new ownership the Clubs offer even more facilities and entertainments plus some fabulous special offers for Summer 1990.
Here is your chance to win a free holiday to any one of the Belhaven Clubs featured by HCI in this easy to enter competition.
There is no need to book; just answer three simple questions — you'll find lots of help in the HCI brochure.
Fill in your name and address and send your completed entry to arrive no later than 31st March 1990.
Rules
1.
There is no need to book a holiday before entry to this competition.
2.
Only one entry per household will be accepted.
3.
Entry to the competition closes on 31st March 1990 and the winner will be notified by post by 30 April 1990.
4.
The entrant who correctly answers the questions will be awarded the prize of a holiday at any Belhaven Club (subject to availability) up to the value of £1,500.
In the event of a tie, the prize will be awarded to the entrant who answers the tie break in the most apt and amusing way.
25 runner up prizes will be awarded of a £100 holiday voucher to be used against any Belhaven Club holiday featured within the HCI brochure.
5.
A panel of independent judges will be appointed.
Their decision will be final and binding and no correspondence will be entered into.
6.
All entries become the property of HCI.
7.
Additional brochures can be obtained from the competition address.
8.
Persons involved in the promotion, employees of the Company and their relatives are not eligible for entry.
9.
No cash alternative to the prize will be offered.
10.
A list of correct answers and the name of the prize winner can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed envelope to the competition address marked ‘Belhaven Competition Results’.
11.
Entry to the competition implies acceptance of these rules.