

Values and social relations
The previous chapter suggested that the Hispanic heritage was the major element contributing to the cultural formation of Latin America and, since values constitute a vital component of culture, the Hispanic influence has been considerable in shaping norms.
At the heart of these have been the institutions of church and family and a code of behaviour based on personal honour.
Commentators on Spanish culture through the centuries have pointed to its emphasis on dignity and the corresponding fear of shame which leads to behaviour that is continually concerned to respect others and, above all, their individuality (Pitt-Rivers 1977).
The resulting emphasis on personalism and personalised relationships has become very much a feature of social life in the New World, too.
CHURCH
Durkheim's investigations into religion, with their historic results, were prompted by the fact that he saw religion as the major source of values and, despite increasing secularisation, religion still plays an influential role in society's moral codes.
With the exception of the indigenous groups of Plantation America and some small groups who have been evangelised by Protestant missionaries, Latin Americans are Roman Catholic.
The conquest brought not only soldiers to Latin America but also priests and missionaries, for the christianising mission of the Spaniards and Portuguese was vital to their cause.
These priests were instructed to, if possible, incorporate and then translate pagan religion and culture into the Catholic orthodoxy, rather than destroying completely these alien beliefs.
This proved more feasible for the Incas than the Aztecs but eventually, with varying degrees of repression, the indigenous people were brought into the Catholic fold.
Some historians have argued that, once the Indians had become part of the Christian community, their cause was championed by the church who protected them from some of the worst excesses of colonial power (Poblete 1970).
Like the argument concerning the church and slavery, however, it must be remembered that, although priests may have alleviated the lot of a small number, the colonial epoch still retains a place in history which is notorious for the brutality shown to the Indians.
During the colonial period, the church was closely aligned with the state, giving full support to the dominant power and, in return, receiving special privileges.
The church for its part acted as an administrative agency of colonial expansion and a major institution of social control.
After political independence, however, many Latin American countries became involved in conservative-liberal struggles, forcing the church to make a choice between the elite groups.
In general it allied itself with the conservative sector, knowing it could then rely on the wealth and status of this group and, in return, offering a value system that supported their regimes.
It was in this role that the Catholic church entered the twentieth century.
‘In the main, the church and its leaders drew their importance from the support they gave to the existing powers and from their multiple involvements in education, social welfare and administration.’
(Vallier 1967: 193).
The church, having survived independence movements, inter-elite struggles and, in the case of Mexico, the virulent anti-clericalism of the revolution, continues to be an important institution in twentieth-century Latin America.
Its strength lies partly in its scope, for Roman Catholics make up about 90 per cent of the population; for instance, the figure is 89.1 per cent for Brazil (LAB 1982) and 88.7 per cent for Mexico (1980 Census); and also in its institutional links with other aspects of life, such as education, health, leisure and community activities.
But the power and attitudes of the church vary considerably with different Latin American countries.
Colombia, often considered the most traditional of the Latin American republics, is a clerical country.
The church has a strong hold on education, the clergy command great respect from the population and the church leaders, like other Colombian elites, have not favoured social change.
The Chilean church, however, has often been referred to as ‘the most progressive Catholic system in Latin America’.
(Vallier 1966: 220).
The hierarchy, often in the hands of the liberals, has promoted reform  programmes, such as technical training for peasants and the forming of cooperatives in the shanty towns, become involved in politics through the reformist Christian Democrat party and opposed the brutalities of the military regime since 1973, by speaking out openly against their excesses and providing soup kitchens for the needy.
Mexico is a country where the church does not have a strong grip on the population because of the force with which the revolutionaries opposed the clergy, believing them to be partly responsible for the backwardness of rural areas.
The revolution made education secular and reduced the wealth of the church by confiscating some of its land.
Today although church schools have emerged again and crucifixes and images of the Virgin Mary and the saints are to be found adorning many homes, especially in rural areas, the church's influence on the dominant groups in society is not great.
The question, then, relates not so much to the continuing vigour of the church, but as to which direction it will take.
Will it continue to uphold the conservative values of those in power, or will it offer a more radical alternative?
In this century, differences have emerged between leading churchmen in the region and, especially since the 1960s, the differences have developed into significant splits within the church.
Prior to the middle of this century, the Catholic Church had concerned itself predominantly with spiritual matters.
The Second Vatican Council (1962–65), however, redirected the church's interests towards the temporal world and especially issues such as justice, human rights and freedom.
Not only was the traditional ideal of union between church and state relinquished but also the Council stressed the responsibility of the church to pass moral judgements, even on matters touching the political order, whenever basic personal rights or the salvation of souls make such judgements necessary.
‘Many bishops in Latin America, Asia, and Africa, since the end of the Council, have exercised this prophetic role vigorously, denouncing political disappearances, torture, economic exploitation, and racism perpetrated by authoritarian regimes in their countries.’
(Smith 1982: 5) This shift in official church policy has made possible a greater integration of religious and secular values and also the move from legitimisation of the existing social structures towards the promotion of greater equality.
In Latin America, the Second Vatican Council was followed up by a meeting of bishops from all over the continent in Medellin, Colombia.
The message to emerge from this conference was one of liberation, from both spiritual and material bondage, and this liberation was to be achieved by the participation in the whole life of the church, not just church services.
The conference also stressed the development of Christian Base Communities — CEBs.
This is an  aspect of pastoral development in which small groups meet together principally for Bible study but, in many cases, they may be devoted to promoting other activities as well, such as literacy classes or agricultural cooperatives.
The CEBs represent a radical move for the church for various reasons.
They are, for a start, a product of the local community, not the church hierarchy.
They are organised and led by the people and, although a religious leader is present to offer assistance, the nature and activities of the group are decided by the members.
The organisation is highly democratic, for lay readers are elected and then must consult their members in decision-making.
Many nuns and priests who have worked with the CEBs have found that members become much more self-confident, they no longer feel cowed by fate (Montgomery 1983).
Accompanying these changes in the policy and organisation of the church was the growth of new developments in theology, which have come to be known as the Theology of Liberation.
This is a truly radical development for the church, because it takes much of its thinking from Marxism.
Liberation Theology explicitly links society, politics and religion and in so doing, bases much of its social analysis on dependency theory.
Poverty, injustice and other secular problems are, therefore, seen as being the result of exploitation by world capitalist powers.
Any sort of improvement for the masses must involve a reordering of the social structure.
This change can not take place without the involvement of the people themselves and, therefore, they must be moved from their traditional passivity towards an active role in shaping their own lives.
In line with the movement towards participation in temporal affairs, liberationalists believe that they must demonstrate genuine Christian love by committing the church to creating a more egalitarian society through religiously inspired political action.
Liberation Theology, therefore, advocates action and exhorts the clergy to emerge from the cloisters to help the people to help themselves.
The call for action has been put into practice in some parts of Latin America, especially in Central America.
After the successful Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, two priests were included in the Marxist government.
This was going too far for the established church in both Rome and Nicaragua, with the result that the Pope called for their resignation.
In 1983, the Pope, concerned by the spread of Liberation Theology, visited Central America, ostensibly in order to promote church unity.
The Nicaraguan part of the tour was marked by a well-publicised clash between the Pope and Sandinistas, which was prompted by a briefing-paper presented to the Pope by church right-wingers.
The same split between conservatives and progressives can also be found in Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador .
In the latter, the  progressives have been active in the top echelons of the church hierarchy.
Archbishop Romero, although thought to be a moderate when he took up the Archbishopric, proved himself to be a zealous proponent of Liberation Theology, broadcasting his masses, which included political messages, to the people throughout the country, by radio.
Romero linked his readings with the reality of life in El Salvador and each week his sermon was followed by ‘a reading of every documented case of persons who had been killed, assaulted, tortured or disappeared by any group on the left or the right’.
(Montgomery 1983: 78) Since far more attacks were brought about by the government's death squads than the left, Romero's vast audience soon became aware of what was happening in their country.
Romero's beliefs and bravery, however, cost him his life for on 27 March 1980 he, too, was assassinated by a professional hit-man hired by the extreme right.
These events in Central America demonstrate the church at its most radical.
Many churchmen, however, have not been happy with these developments, which have given rise to schisms threatening enough to warrant the Pope's visit.
Some church leaders fear that a political commitment on the part of the church would undermine the value of the spiritual dimensions of the Christian faith, for it threatens their mission of salvation.
For many, the whole idea of using Marxist concepts of analysis is out of the question for a Christian and the spectre of communism has been one of the most divisive aspects.
Another fear of the critics of Liberation Theology is that the logic of the argument leads to violence, since violence may be the only means available to overthrow corrupt regimes and this, they feel, no Christian should condone.
In many areas, the split is not into a clear cut one of those for and against, but often includes middle groups who are sympathetic to some of the ideas of Liberation Theology but can not go all the way with it.
In Central America, three groupings can be identified.
The institutional church, preoccupied with orthodoxy and fundamentally opposed to Marxism because it is viewed as materialistic and atheistic , is made up of bishops, priests, laity and religious movements who, though not very numerous, are powerful, partly because the laity of the group belong to the wealthier classes.
The centrist sector, who favour a middle way, is opposed to repression and violence whether it is from right or left.
This group, which does not ally itself with either American intervention or with Marxists, represents the greater part of the church in Central America.
The popular church, with its base in the CEBs and animated by Liberation Theology, feels that risks must be taken to right the social and political evils of the world and so is sympathetic to revolutionary movements.
Though not large, this sector of the church is qualitatively important.
Weber suggested that the Protestant ethic produced the value orientations and attitudes in which capitalism could prosper and that Catholicism, like most other religions, hinders social progress.
It could he argued that Latin America offers a good example of this.
Catholicism, for centuries, allied itself with conservative forces opposed to progress but now that elements within the church have come out in favour of change, they appear to be opting for a more socialist, rather than capitalist, line.
‘Traditional Catholic principles, once an obstacle to change in emerging capitalist economies, when they were identified with corporatist ideologies, now appear to be more compatible with various socialist models of development.’
(Smith 1982:4).
EDUCATION
Other institutions have come to challenge the church's traditional dominance of the value system.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, education has an important part to play in development, in both its contribution to structural change and to changing values.
In the former, education can provide more people with the skills and information to secure them good jobs and, thus, produce an increase in the number of people prepared for fulfilling and materially rewarding occupations.
This can open up new opportunities and create social mobility.
Values are maintained or altered because education is one of society's mechanisms of socialisation.
Education, too, can be directed to encouraged certain ideals.
Education is a sector which has expanded greatly in Latin America.
There can be no doubt that it is a growth area, which has had distinct achievements in many countries.
Traditionally, the prerogative of the elite, education is now available to most Latin Americans.
Have these developments brought about social mobility?
The difficulty with the argument, that more and better education leads to mobility, is that better-trained people do not, on their own, lead to an increase in the number of better-paid jobs.
As Kahl has said, education ‘reinforces the existing status system and provides for movement within it’(Kahl 1970: 137), but this suggests that it does not change the system.
It is industrial growth, the expansion of bureaucracies and services, and social and economic policies of governments, that shape a society's occupational profile.
Education can equip people to fill these positions, but it does not control the expansion or contraction of the job market.
Some sociologists claim that low levels of social mobility only provide movement within the system but that, on a bigger scale, this mobility can change the system (Kahl 1970).
This, however, still overlooks the fact that the larger numbers of better educated have  no power base from which to bring about change, if there are no jobs or positions in society for them.
What has been happening in Latin America is that the growth of education has been much faster than structural change in society, with the result that some of the potential value of education for social mobility is lost.
Some Latin American educationalists predict that the ensuing frustration of an educated population that can not find appropriate work, will lead to social conflict.
In quantitative and qualitative terms, how extensive have the changes in education been?
Literacy rates, a good indicator of educational achievement, have improved very considerably during the century.
In 1895, the illiteracy rate for the population aged fourteen years and over was 53 per cent in Argentina, and 68 per cent in Chile.
Even by the second decade of this century, the illiteracy rate for the Brazilian population was about 80 per cent.
By 1950, there had been improvements but they were slow in taking place.
In that year, with the exception of Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba and Uruguay, the illiteracy rate of populations aged over fifteen years, exceeded 30 per cent in all Latin American countries, 50 per cent being recorded in Brazil and higher percentages in Central America (Rama 1983: 16).
It is since the 1950s that the expansion in education has really accelerated, with a resulting boost to literacy rates.
Now, in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, they have topped the 90 per cent mark, with 94.2 per cent(1982), 95.6 per cent and 96.3 per cent (1983) respectively.
Mexico is not far off, with 87.9 per cent(1983).
Apart from Haiti, with illiteracy as much as 63.1 per cent in 1982, even the poorer countries record relatively high literacy rates — 87.9 per cent in Nicaragua in 1981 and 92.0 per cent in Paraguay in 1984 (Inter-American Development Bank 1985).
These improved rates have been brought about by increasing school enrolment.
In the period from 1950–80, the school-age population (under twenty-four-years-old and over five) attending school, doubled.
By 1980 in Argentina six out of every ten individuals of school age were incorporated in the educational system.
This growth has accelerated in recent years, much of it taking place in the 1970s and it has been concentrated more in the higher levels of the education system.
Between 1950 and 1980, participation in higher education rose from 5 to 16 per cent, in secondary from 15 to 25 per cent , and in primary education from 50 to 90 per cent (Filgueira 1983: 69).
Education, in recent years, has been characterised by less rigidity, less concentration and greater opportunities for mobility, but all these features become more apparent higher up the educational pyramid.
These changes have brought about a reduction of inequality in education throughout the region.
This expansion of education has not brought about a similar  increase in social mobility.
Class background is an important factor in the level of schooling achieved, partly because the higher the level the greater the cost (if only in terms of opportunity costs) and partly because educational facilities are best in the well-to-do residential areas.
Eckstein found in Mexico that in over three generations, there had been little upward occupational mobility, especially into the white-collar class (Eckstein 1977).
But it is not just that access to the increased educational facilities is conditioned by social background, even where people achieve educational mobility, the economic structure has not provided a corresponding increase in jobs to match that mobility in occupational terms.
Eckstein found that the best educated had access to the most rewarding jobs, ‘but because such jobs are not expanding as rapidly as schooling, education in itself provides no guaranteed job’.
(Eckstein 1977: 205).
Filgueira points out that the reduction of inequality in education
is in contrast to the behaviour of income distribution, where inequity has been but little reduced during the same periods, and which shows extreme relative rigidity and concentration in comparison with the greater equalizing capacity of the educational system.
The figures for inequality in income distribution in the countries of the region (for example, Uruguay, 0.49; Brazil, 0.70; Chile, 0.50) are always higher than those for educational inequality, and dynamic trends suggest that the gap between them tends only to widen.
(Filgueira 1983: 70)
Filgueira suggests that, since the major educational developments have taken place so recently, it may be too soon for them to have brought about greater reorganisation in society.
He does add, however, that structural changes are also necessary to accommodate the benefits of educational expansion.
The growth of formal education systems could not have taken place without the incorporation of sectors in society, which had previously been excluded.
The expansion of primary education has benefited the peasantry and the urban poor, in particular, since rural education has lagged behind urban.
A United Nations study showed that most of the students completing secondary education, represented the first generation of their family to reach this level (Filgueira 1983: 71).
Those who reap the benefits of higher education, however, are recruited predominantly from the middle and upper classes.
A study of Uruguayan professionals who graduated in 1970, revealed that barely 11 per cent came from families in which the father worked in skilled or unskilled manual occupations.
Mobility, however, is greater if educational levels of fathers and graduates is measured.
Eighteen per cent of the professionals had fathers with incomplete primary schooling, and 27 per cent came from families where the father had  achieved no more than a primary level of education.
The graduates had frequently been more successful than their fathers, in educational achievement but, in general, were entering occupations of similar status to those of their fathers (Filgueira 1983).
The proportion of students from poorer families who enter higher education is similar in other Latin American countries, though there are variations according to courses and institutions.
Short and intermediate courses and those which do not involve the student in heavy costs tend to have a more democratic social composition.
But the greater the prestige and reputation of an institution, the more it will recruit from the upper echelons of society.
Although biased towards the higher levels and urban areas, the quantitative development of education has been very significant.
However, so far, it seems that this has had little influence on the redistribution of wealth and power in society.
This suggests that either educational reform has just not gone far enough or that, although improved educational standards constitute an important development goal, they can only be effective when accompanied by structural changes in the rest of society.
Perhaps both are the case.
In terms of values, education is the way in which young people experience socialisation.
Traditionally, literacy campaigns in peripheral rural areas would rely on the Bible, which was not just a source of reading material but, also, a way of encouraging conformity.
In the same way, the literacy campaigns of the Cubans and the Nicaraguans have used Marxist-Leninist tracts, and other material, in line with revolutionary ideas.
In the years following the violence of the Mexican revolution, great attention was paid to the content of education, in an attempt to involve the young in the principles of the revolution, but this emphasis has declined in the second half of the century.
In general, education has reinforced society's values, but there have been some experimental attempts at providing education to radicalise values.
One of the most famous was Freire's Movement of Popular Culture in Brazil's north-east, which was aimed at raising the consciousness of his students.
Freire wanted to bring people to a critical awareness of their real situation in the socio-economic context, only then could they really learn and understand.
He argued that the lack of awareness of the needy in Brazil's poorest region only facilitated their exploitation.
Education, he believed, should offer a means of escaping from the alienation and poverty that bedevils that area (Freire 1968).
Freire's experiment was cut short by a military coup, so it is difficult to judge the results.
Many schools, colleges and universities in Latin America are part of the church's empire and so values, inculcated here, are in line with the dominant Catholic Hispanic mores.
Dissent has occurred at times  among university students in attempts to radicalise dominant ideas.
One of the most famous occasions was the student movement in Mexico in 1968, when student marches, demonstrations and general opposition to the government of the day prompted the intervention of the army.
In the final analysis students, although able to generate new ideas and disseminate them within a limited circle of people, do not have power and are no match for the military.
MASS MEDIA
One of the visible contradictions of the Third World that is apparent in Latin America is the spread of sophisticated and technological forms of mass media in poverty-stricken areas.
The recently arrived visitor in Mexico City is quick to notice the mass of television aerials that rise from the shacks in the poorest districts of the city.
The stereotype of the Mexican peasant, dwarfed by his sombrero and sitting by a cactus should, perhaps, be more realistically presented as listening to his radio set.
A study of peasant families in the Cochabamba area of Bolivia revealed that 90 per cent of them owned radios (Ortega 1982).
The contradiction is probably most apparent in Mexico, where cheap radios, televisions and films can so easily be imported from the USA, but the media is also very much a feature of contemporary life in other Latin American countries.
In terms of statistics, Argentina ranks 5th and Uruguay 19th in radio set ownership in the world, Argentines owning more radio sets per 1,000 of the population than the British.
When it comes to television sets, Latin Americans are not so well endowed.
Out of 138 countries, Argentina is ranked 42nd, Uruguay 53rd, Panama 58th, Venezuela 59th, Mexico 65th, Brazil 66th, Chile and Costa Rica 68th, Colombia 70th and Cuba 71st for television set ownership per 1,000 of the population.
In comparison with other peoples of the world, Latin Americans read newspapers more than watching television, but less than listening to the radio.
Uruguay, this time, outranks Argentina, coming 22nd in world figures for newspaper circulation.
Out of 134 countries, several Latin American republics appear in ranks between 37 and 53 (The World in Figures — figures for 1975–76, newspapers 1970–75).
The debate over the role of the media is similar to the master/servant debate over bureaucracy.
Is the media merely a tool that can be used by the dominant group in society to bring about whatever change or lack of change they require or does it, by its nature, shape the influence it has on the population?
The discussion is closely linked to the different approaches of modernisation and dependency theories.
The modernisation school sees the media as, on the one hand, an aspect of modern society and, on the other, a means by which elites can modernise further.
Joseph Kahl, in his attempt to measure modernism, picks out participation in the mass media as one of his key criteria of the modern.
For him, modern man reads newspapers, listens to the radio, watches television and follows national and international events.
In his research on Mexico and Brazil, he found that a good proportion of his samples were interested in following national and international news on the radio and in the newspapers (Kahl 1970).
The power of the media, as a mechanism for change, lies in the scope and breadth of the population it reaches.
Often referred to as a means by which a nation, or even the world, can become a community, it makes possible the transmitting of messages from a small group of people to a vast number.
Television and radio can be used for educational purposes, to spread modern values and inform people.
In Mexico and El Salvador, television has been used experimentally as an educational medium and, in Brazil, classic novels have been serialised to give people a knowledge of their own culture.
In theory, the media can be used to promote certain policies though, in practice, this is not often the case, partly because broadcasting, the obvious channel, needs to attract advertising to finance itself and, since educational programmes do not often have mass appeal, they are unlikely to draw in the necessary funding.
The Cubans, however, with the help of state resources, have used television and film to encourage the development of the values of the revolution, especially where these are at variance with traditional and deeply held views.
Television has been used to promote equality between the sexes by showing short features suggesting that sons and daughters should be brought up equally at home and girls not expected to wait on their brothers.
Taking the perspective of the dependency school, mass media in the LDCs is an aspect of cultural imperialism.
The technology necessary to produce films, and television and radio programs, is so much more advanced in the industrialised countries than in the LDCs, that it is frequently much simpler and cheaper to import material than to produce it in the Third World.
Although countries like Mexico, Chile and Brazil have budding film industries, the products of which are now reaching the industrialised world, it is still North American and European films that predominate in the cinemas of Mexico City, Santiago and São Paulo.
Brazilian cinema has expanded particularly rapidly, for its share of the domestic market has risen from 14 per cent in 1970 to 38 per cent today (LAWR Brazil 25 Nov. 1983) but, nevertheless, this still leaves nearly two-thirds to films from abroad.
Television and radio in the region have several  channels so, while some are devoted to local issues and productions others are packed with imported serials, films and games.
Not only are foreign programmes often better made, but they also have the allure, real or imagined, of being sophisticated or trendy.
The point about imported material is that it contains the values of the society where it was made and, so, through modern techniques of diffusion, all social levels of a Third World society are exposed to the product of a small group of people in the industrialised world.
The world becomes a community, which is influenced by the small elite who control the media.
‘In a dependent society the media demonstrate the imperialist system's concept of change — a conception which in fact ends up being the denial of change.’
(Mattelart 1978: 23).
The implicit values in drama are made more explicit in the advertising that sponsors and accompanies the fiction.
In promoting consumer products, in competition with each other, the advertisements promote the values of capitalism — the stress laid on wealth and working hard in conventional modes to try and achieve it, competition and the importance of consumer goods as an expression of self and status.
According to Mattelart, North American advertising agencies in Latin America have gone one step further by explicitly promoting models of political development (Mattelart 1978).
Although it is clear that the potential for considerable influence is there, how effective is the mass media in changing or maintaining values and behaviour patterns?
A study of drinking patterns in Mexico reveals the strength of advertising.
Mexico has one of the highest rates of alcoholism in the world, which appears to be the result of the coincidence of traditional and modern advertisement-inspired modes of behaviour.
Mexicans have always been known for heavy drinking because traditional forms of alcohol are cheap, peasants often making their own, and this is a classic way of forgetting the drudgery of poverty.
But, in recent years, alcoholism has become a greater and nationally recognised social problem.
The figures show that beer and spirits together constitute the industry with the greatest publicity in Mexico (Harvey 1983).
Those with a little cash to spend, who want to be modern and sophisticated, as advertisements suggest, buy imported whiskey and brandy.
As a result, alcoholism affects all levels of society and all age groups.
Not only visual representation, but the written word, too, is not free of imperialism.
Latin American newspapers, unable to afford their own reporters in different parts of the world, often use syndicated news from North America or other foreign sources.
This bears the imperialist nation's view of world events and is then reproduced for the mass of Latin Americans to read.
As well as newspapers, and for those whose literacy level is not up to the language of a newspaper, comics for adults are widely available.
An aspect of popular culture  that is not found much in the industrialised world, comics are read by all levels of society and all age-groups.
Changes within the institutions which influence values are taking place and, in general, reflect a gradual shift towards the values of contemporary capitalist societies, corresponding to the process outlined in the previous chapter of incorporating peripheral groups into society.
The ideas that the media purveys are certainly both modern and an aspect of cultural imperialism, for they emanate from the core countries of the capitalist world.
Education has expanded very significantly, thus giving a much greater number of people information and skills to assist them in improving their living standards.
The church, however, seems to be out of step for, having opposed change for so long by supporting the status quo, it is now demonstrating an element of true radicalism since a minority of its clergy wish to take change beyond capitalism towards socialism.
However, as with education, the impact of change has been limited by a lack of a corresponding expansion of the job market.
This suggests that economic and political factors are vital in shaping the nature and extent of the effects of changes within these institutions, an argument that will be examined more closely in later chapters.
For the moment, it is important to relate these changes to one of the themes of the book and see whether they have brought about less inequality.
This chapter looks, in particular, at the realm of social relations.
PERSONALISM
Despite the spread of values emphasising achievement and competition, personalism remains an essential feature of social relations in Latin America, probably because of the continuance of uncertainty and insecurity.
Relationships between two people anywhere in the world can be expressed in terms of a dyadic contract (Foster 1967).
The formal institutions in society provide the individual with a framework and, within this, he/she can choose with whom to interact, thus setting up a dyadic contract, that is, an informal relationship that binds two people.
Although informal, this relationship can be recognised through reciprocity.
Whether it be through the exchange of goods, services, esteem or confidence, all relationships are marked by some sort of reciprocity.
The exchange of food and drink through dinner parties, coffee mornings, pub evenings, etc., is a universal means of establishing and maintaining social relations.
In Latin America, relationships are built up in this way not just for personal support but, also, to promote commercial and political ends.
The Brazilian panelinhas are informal groups made up of a number  of dyadic contracts, that is, people linked by personal ties — family, kin, friends — but the members are selected according to their occupation.
Each panelinha tries to represent a range of occupations, such as doctor, lawyer, banker, engineer, architect and a variety of different businesses.
Members of one group will try and do business with each other, rather than outsiders, knowing they have the advantage of the personal contact and can, therefore, trust the person concerned (Leeds 1974).
It is not just in professional and business circles that personal contacts help people obtain jobs.
From her Mexican study, Eckstein reports that about 38 per cent of the men with factory and white-collar jobs said they obtained their work through a personal acquaintance (Eckstein 1977).
Dyadic contracts can be divided into colleague contracts referring to relationships between those of equal status and patron-client contracts, where the status of those involved is different.
Colleague contracts, such as most friendships, involve an exchange of similar kinds of things whereas, in the patron-client relationship, the different status is reflected in the fact that the patron offers something quite different to the relationship from the contribution of the client.
One of the most widespread expressions of the colleague contract is compadrazgo .
Compadrazgo , as Latin Americans call ritual or pseudo-kinship, is a means by which people imbue relationships of friendship with the lasting and obligatory character of kinship.
Friendship has the advantage of choice, friends are chosen by the individual concerned but it is, also, flexible and not necessarily lasting.
Kinship is binding and permanent but permits no choice of personnel, the individual must accept the relatives he has.
Compadrazgo is a compromise which attempts to combine the best of friendship with the advantages of kinship (Foster 1967).
Compadrazgo relations are set up through the ritual sponsorship of the church system of appointing godparents for children.
On at least four ritual occasions in the life of a young person — baptism, confirmation, first communion and marriage — the parents have the opportunity of asking friends to sponsor them, thus becoming their godparents.
This establishes a set of permanent relationships between parents, godparents and child/godchild in which the most important social relationship excludes the child, for it is between parents and godparents.
They become compadres or ritual kin.
The godparent may have a ritual role to the child, such as participating in his wedding ceremony, and taking on certain responsibilities regarding his religious education, but the relationship that is strongest and requires respect, warmth and the obligation to help at all times, is the one between parents and godparents.
In the task of fortifying oneself with supportive personal relationships,compadrazgo offers extensive manipulative opportunities.
Each ceremony for each child requires a new set of godparents so, as most Latin American couples have many children, there are numerous opportunities for establishing new sets of compadres .
Moreover, one can extend secondary relationships to the kin and compadres of a compadre , with whom one has a primary relationship.
In the early years of married life, a couple may try and establish as wide a social network as possible and, then, in later life if they feel that it is sufficient, they may ask relatives to be godparents, thus reaffirming existing kinship ties, rather than extending the network further.
At the level of village life, this pattern provides stability and cohesion, for villagers are interlinked by the criss-crossing relationships of compadrazgo .
In urban areas,compadrazgo is more informal though, in some areas, just as effective.
There is, however, considerable regional variation.
In Mexico, especially in rural areas, it operates as an important principle of social organisation while, in Chile, it has lost a lot of its formal and obligatory nature and is not very meaningful for many people.
Clientelism, however, continues to be a firmly entrenched pattern of social relations throughout the region.
The exchange of dissimilar things in the patron-client relationship occurs because the patron offers the qualities that accrue to his superior status, that is, power and influence to help the client while, in return, the latter contributes support and esteem.
From this the client gains assistance which he needs in his weak position.
The peasant, for instance, who wishes to sell his avocados or pots in the local market may need a licence to do so, something that is outside the realm of the usual activities of a peasant, especially an illiterate.
His patron, usually the local landowner, can acquire the necessary application forms and show him what to do with them.
For his part, the patron gains the personal support of the client and, when he has accumulated a number of these clients, he becomes a prestigious person in the area due to the cumulative honour from them.
This support can be turned into power by an astute patron.
The patron can call on his clients for active support, a facet which is important in local power struggles.
Candidates in local elections can expect their followers not only to vote for them but to campaign for them as well.
Political power can be built up in this way, with the result that many Latin American leaders owe their position to a network of clientelist relationships.
Although the status difference may be emphasised in the style of the relationship, with client addressing the patron as usted , but the latter using the more familiar tu , the whole relationship is imbued with a personal element.
Patron and client may be compadres , in which case the patron is expected to take an interest in the child.
The initiative to set up the relationship often comes from the client though, at times, this is difficult because he has to approach someone in a very different social position.
In this case, he may resort to the use of a palanca .
Literally meaning a lever, the palanca is a means of access to the patron, he/she is an intermediary between the two.
While studying Tzintzuntzan, the anthropologist George Foster found that the female villagers would ask his wife to approach him for a favour (Foster 1967).
It may seem, so far, that in terms of clearly defined benefits, the client comes off best out of the deal.
However, in the long term this is not the case, because of the extent of the power that can be gained by patrons.
The client gets help for day-to-day problems, but the price he pays for this is to be the landlord's follower, to do his bidding and accept his view of the world.
In this way, a small number of landowners can control the peasantry in rural areas.
It is a way in which the dominant class of landowners manipulates a subordinate one.
Through clientelism, the allegiance of the peasant is to his patron rather than to other peasants, so that it is more difficult for solidarity between those in the peasant class to develop.
The structuring of loyalties vertically in this way inhibits the development of horizontal bonds and thus class identity among the poor.
Moreover, clientelism prevents the peasant making contact with the wider society.
As the landowner acts as intermediary, the peasant gains no experience of wider society and must depend on his patron for his interpretation of the world.
The essence of clientelism requires class differences and, therefore, although it softens the harshness of status differences it also ensures their continuation.
Far from declining with industrialisation and urbanisation, clientelism has flourished.
Many businesses, including large and successful ones, are based on the personal relations of clientelism.
SIAM is a large Argentine industrial-commercial complex which was run, by Torcuato Di Tella, as a family business.
Those at the top level had Di Tella's confidence through a relationship of kinship or friendship and links between middle and upper management levels were based on personal relationships.
Di Tella took a personal interest in the lives of his workers, giving gifts at weddings and on the birth of children and taking responsibility for the health and welfare of the workers and their families.
In return, he could count on their loyalty and support for him and the firm.
There was little delegation of authority, but Di Tella's personal participation enhanced his authority and gave him considerable control.
This style of management continued after his death (Wolf and Hansen 1972).
Rothstein argues that patron-client relationships are well suited to the peripheral capitalist development that has taken place in Latin America because they are a way of paring down the number of recipients of industrial gains, when these gains are few in number.
Economic growth in Latin America has accumulated benefits in the hands of a few, rather than distributing them as predicted by the modernists.
The small surplus that is distributed is so limited that it can not be shared by all, but patronage is a mechanism of selecting a few workers to benefit.
Clientelism is a strategy used by capitalists and workers to adapt to a situation where there is limited mobility.
For the worker, patronage yields access to some of the benefits of industrialisation and, for the manager, it is a way of distributing a small number of benefits, at the same time assuring support and a disciplined labour force (Rothstein 1979).
FAMILY AND GENDER
The most obvious place to turn to for close ties is the family.
The family offers the potential for a large number of links and is a source of permanent relationships, even if conditions around one are changing.
Large families and the recognition of a wide network of kinship ties is a feature of Latin American life.
Expansion of this network is greatest among the rich, where people may retain contact with one hundred to two hundred relatives.
In this connection, family names are important.
Latin Americans maintain the Spanish custom of adding the mother's surname after the father's, thus denoting both families of origin.
In some countries, names demonstrate aristocratic status and the elite may be referred to, as it is in Peru, as the forty families.
But the family among the rich is not only a source of prestige, it has a very instrumental aspect, family networks are manipulated in the course of politics and business.
Some of the most modern industrial companies in Latin America are family businesses, whose boards of directors are made up of relatives and close friends who can be trusted.
Businesses are sometimes seen as a source of employment for family members.
The owner of a large concern may well feel an obligation to find a position in his firm for a hard-up cousin.
Above all, the family is a property-owning unit, whether the property is a business, estates, land or houses, so that these resources are controlled and acquired by succeeding generations through the family.
For the poor, the family is not a mechanism to control resources, but an institution to turn to because of the scarcity of resources.
The scope of their kinship networks is smaller, but just as significant because they provide help in times of hardship.
It is usually to relatives that the peasant migrating to the city turns for help in the new and frightening environment.
It is kin, often, who provide shelter during the first days in the town and who help the migrant build  his/her own home.
It is they, too, who lend him/her money for the journey and help him/her look for a job in the urban environment.
The migration process frequently involves a chain of relatives from rural village to urban neighbourhood.
Traditionally, the family was patriarchal and authoritarian.
The head of the family frequently had under his control a large number of people, both relatives and servants, and considerable resources.
The best documented examples come from Brazil, where the patriarchal family appeared after the Portuguese colonisation with the agrarian families.
The patriarch's power over his wife and offspring was absolute and often rigorously exercised.
The strength of the institution can be seen in the fact that it lasted for generations in the sugar estates, despite social changes taking place around it.
The strongly authoritarian role of the head of the family has been undermined by the opportunities created by urbanisation for young people to be independent and earn a living outside the family, and by conceptions of the North American family as portrayed by the media.
Nevertheless, the family remains patriarchal and a key institution in society.
Much of its strength can be attributed to the vigorous support of the church, which has always placed the family at the centre of Christian living.
The church's view, that marriages sanctioned by religious ritual should not be broken, is reflected in divorce laws.
In several Latin American countries there is no legal concept of divorce.
In Mexico, however, where the state broke with the church quite violently during the revolution, divorce is possible (and, indeed, in some places very easy).
The church's opposition to mechanical and chemical contraception and to abortion, greatly encourages the large families that are so characteristic of the region.
The population explosion has been one of the major phenomena in Latin America this century.
Since 1950, the population has been steadily increasing from 164 million to 448 million in 1989.
This is very much a Third World phenomenon for, throughout these areas, the rate of population increase is considerably higher than in the industrialised world.
For the period from 1975–82, the annual rate of population increase was 2.9 for Africa, 1.4 for East Asia, 2.2 for South Asia, 1.5 for Oceania and 2.5 for Latin America.
Europe, however, during this period had an annual rate of only 0.4.
Even for LDCs, the Latin American rate is high.
Apart from West Africa, with a rate of 3.1, Middle America is the sub-region with the highest annual rate of population increase (3.0) in the world (Demographic Yearbook 1982).
Although, as suggested in Chapter 1, not a major development problem, rapid population increase is a cause for concern in the region.
It has meant that in Mexico, for instance, although the proportion of illiterates nationally has decreased every decade, in  recent years absolute numbers have been increasing.
Birth control, however, is a very controversial issue.
Some programmes, set up by North American and international development agencies in order to alleviate the population pressure on food and thus reduce poverty, were aimed at direct population control rather than giving the woman the right and freedom to control her own fertility.
These have gained the reputation for testing unsafe contraceptives on poor Latin American women and enforced sterilisation.
The Peace Corps, the United States volunteer programme, has been expelled from both Bolivia and Peru for its activities in sterilising peasant women without their knowledge (Bronstein 1982).
Fear, partly due to rumours about these sterilisation programs, and ignorance, prevent the majority of Latin American women from using contraceptives.
The attitude of the church has made it difficult for governments to openly promote birth-control programs, that do anything more than advocate natural methods.
In Mexico, the government has encouraged the spread of contraceptive methods through television advertisements, advocating the advantages of small families, but it has been forced, because of the influence of the church, to take a low profile and operate very discreetly.
Throughout Latin America, except for Cuba, abortion is illegal but, nevertheless, a considerable number of women do resort to abortion, which is often carried out in unhygienic and inadequate conditions.
Their numbers are estimated at 800,000 per year in Mexico and 280,000 in Colombia, even though in both countries women experiencing abortion can be punished by imprisonment.
For Latin America as a whole, Bronstein suggests that 30 per cent to 50 per cent of all maternal deaths are from improperly performed abortions (Bronstein 1982).
Undoubtedly, rapid population expansion in Latin America can be traced, in part, to machismo .
Taken from the Spanish word,macho , meaning male,machismo refers to an ideology of behaviour in which distinctly different lifestyles are deemed proper for men and women.
Machismo is an exaggerated cult of virility which expresses itself in male assertions of superiority over females, and competition between men.
To fulfil macho behaviour patterns, a man must show no fear, demonstrate sexual prowess, father many children and exercise tight control over female kin.
Adultery is seen as natural for a man, but a serious offence for a woman.
Machismo is a New World phenomenon with roots in old world cultures.
Concepts of honour and shame associated with manliness can be found in many of the cultures of southern Europe but, while this behaviour pattern seems to have declined in Spain, it has flourished in Latin America.
Since its early expression was in the form of sexual relations between conquering white soldiers and dominated Indian women, it has taken on a  distinctly aggressive element which can emerge in the form of violence.
It is a characteristic of mestizo Latin America, for studies of Indian communities often reveal a relative absence of machismo .
Its counterpart is marianismo , the submissive female role.
The ideal woman is gentle, kind, long-suffering, loving and submits to the demands of men, whether they be husbands, fathers, sons or brothers.
She has an infinite capacity for humility and sacrifice and an abundant store of patience.
In one area, however, she does come into her own, since she has spiritual strength and moral superiority.
This strength makes her the centre of the family and the one responsible for keeping members together.
The role model for women is the Virgin Mary, hence the term marianismo .
Gender roles in Latin America are conditioned by these cultural factors embodying the notions of machismo and marianismo , and also by structural factors, which relate to the peripheral capitalist nature of development in the region.
Machismo is receiving some challenge from women's movements and organisations, but these are only supported by a very small number of women.
Most women's groups are primarily concerned with political aims, they work often for the right to fight equally alongside their men to achieve political liberation, rather than fighting for women to replace men in superior positions.
Women's movements as responses to economic and social problems are increasing rapidly in the region.
In Chile, they provide a source of protest against the military government; in Bolivia, the miners, wives fought alongside their husbands to get better working conditions and pay; Nicaraguan women have formed a distinct group within the Sandinista revolutionary movement; and in Brazil, women's groups have formed to protest at price rises in food and other essentials.
WOMEN'S ROLES AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE
Changes in structural factors have taken place in the form of peripheral capitalist industrialisation, which has had a considerable impact on the participation of women in the labour market.
Extent of labour force participation is an important indicator of the position of women because on the one hand, it is a way in which women contribute to the economic development of their countries and, on the other, because work is a major source of income which gives access to education, culture, power and other factors influencing social status.
Many modernisation theorists argued that industrialisation would open up opportunities for women, providing them with a greater variety of possible roles and increasing chances of social mobility and a less subservient existence.
There is a good deal of evidence to  show, however, that industrial capitalism places women on the periphery of the economy, and for women in a Third World country which is itself on the periphery of a world economy, the situation is even more difficult.
In a pre-industrial society women may have important occupations in handicrafts or in garden agriculture, jobs which can be done in the home.
But industrial development takes remunerative work out of the home, making it more difficult for wives and mothers to participate.
Women participate in poorer jobs and in the tertiary sectors, areas which have suffered the most from peripheral capitalist development.
The high rates of unemployment so characteristic of underdeveloped countries make women especially vulnerable.
For example, in Brazil, peripheral capitalist development is responsible not only for a lower level of participation of women in agriculture but also a lower level of integration of women in urban development.
In 1872, 45.5 per cent of the workforce of the nation were women, but by 1920 this proportion had dropped to 15.3 per cent and by 1950, it had fallen even further to 11.3 per cent(Saffioti 1978).
‘It is not industrialisation per se that creates underemployment and marginalisation, but an industrial finance capitalism and advanced technology (intensive in capital) which does not permit fundamental changes in the economic structure.’
(Vasquez de Miranda 1977: 273)
In the stage of early capitalist development the demand for labour in a previously agricultural economy is high.
But in a situation where industrial growth is conditioned by the needs of monopoly capitalism, as happened in many underdeveloped countries, this stage may be virtually omitted.
Because of multinationals, industrial production means little improvement in levels of employment.
Therefore, opportunities for men and women, though especially the latter, are limited to traditional and backward sectors such as subsistence agriculture and domestic service.
The latter has become the major occupation for women, for about one quarter of Latin America's female workforce are maids — 25.5% of the female labour force in Bogotá in 1985 were domestic servants (López & Pollack 1989) and 32 per cent of the total Brazilian female workforce are live-in maids (Filet-Abreu Souza 1980).
Nash argues that the position of women has deteriorated despite development activities because of the concentration on production for profit rather than for the welfare of the population in many Third World countries.
This leads to a so-called rationalisation of economic activity which implies the increasing use of technology at the expense of human labour (Nash 1977).
One of the reasons why women are more vulnerable than men with the introduction of highly technologised industry is that female workers are considered inappropriate for mechanised industry.
In  Guatemala, for instance, changes in the character of the manufacturing sector influenced the participation rates of women in the labour market.
The industrial censuses of 1946 and 1965 showed a decline in female workers from 22 per cent to 18 per cent.
The largest declines were in textiles, tobacco, chemicals, rubber, paper and food.
For male workers, however, employment was rapidly increasing in the areas of electrical appliances, transportation and furniture which first appear in the 1965 census as well as metal products and some of the areas traditionally open to women — chemicals, paper and rubber (Chinchilla 1977).
Similarly, Bolivian women lost out to men in the mechanisation of the mines.
From the early period of tin mining to the 1940s women were often concentrators of minerals.
When the new methods of concentrating minerals were introduced, large numbers of female workers were replaced by male in the sink and float plants.
Since 1960, with the complete mechanisation of the mines, no women have worked as metal concentrators (Nash 1977).
The result is that the rate of labour-force participation by women in Latin America has hovered around 20 per cent and remained fairly stable for over twenty years (ECLA 1975).
Table 4.1 shows that 
Latin America has the lowest female participation rate of any region in the world, including the Middle East, despite their stringent constraints on women's activities.
The table also shows that, in the fifteen years from 1960–75, there was a tendency for female labour  force participation to increase in the industrialised world and decline elsewhere, except Oceania.
In Latin America the percentage of the total female population who worked, decreased during this period showing that, as in other LDCs (with the exception of Oceania), the proportion of women in the labour force was smaller in 1975 than previously in 1960.
There is some evidence to show that the poverty caused by the economic crises of the early 1980s has drawn more women into the labour force.
By 1982, 36.5% of Peruvian women and by 1984, 32.4% of Chilean women were participating in the labour market (López and Pollack 1989).
It must be remembered, however, that participation rates of women in the workforce are notoriously inaccurate.
Women are often statistically ‘invisible’ because they work in areas that are not recorded as full-time occupations.
Much of women's rural work, such as caring for poultry, milking and craftwork within the home is not included, as men are registered as the family breadwinners, as farmers, and women as housewives.
So, too, similar ‘home industries’ of women in the towns do not find their way into occupation statistics.
The official statistics, therefore, can only be used as indicators, rather than accurate statements, but they do offer some guides to the occupational picture.
There are some exceptions to this general trend.
Some large firms have demonstrated a preference for female workers, often on the grounds of their supposed nimble fingers though, in reality, usually because they can be paid less and are less likely to unionise and form any opposition to management.
Firms that have employed women in this way are, for example, the American concerns, the maquiladoras , that have been set up in northern Mexico near the US border.
These receive tax concessions for operating in Mexico but their location is so close to North America that they are near their distribution networks and markets, and other North American facilities.
They employ women for long hours and often in poor conditions in the production of textiles, pharmaceuticals and a variety of other items.
There has been some expansion, too, of opportunities for women in the white-collar categories of employment;
The rapidly rising number of girls receiving middle and higher education, coinciding with the growth of urban bureaucratic and commercial activities, has led to a corresponding increase in the number entering clerical and professional or semi-professional employment, generally prior to marriage and temporary or permanent withdrawal from the labour force.
The very expansion of the school systems has by itself created an enormous job market for teachers, with women in the majority.
In the sluggishly expanding industrial labour market women have lost ground relative to men, and an important proportion of the  women who must seek work because of inadequate earnings of the husband or because the family lacks a male breadwinner continue to be restricted to domestic service, street vending, and other marginal low-income occupations.
(ECLA 1975: 13)
The growth of large corporations and banks with international involvements has expanded commercial activity which requires clerks and salespeople.
In Guatemala, the proportion of women in clerical work rose from 20.4 per cent in 1950 to 34.1 per cent in 1973, and those in sales from 30.2 per cent to 35.1 per cent(Chinchilla 1973).
In Brazil the rates of participation in the workforce of women with university education are 66 per cent for married and 77 per cent for single women (Filet-  Arbreu Souza 1980).
There are various reasons for this.
Although, generally, women lag behind men in educational achievement, at higher levels the proportion of female students is not very different from that of male, with the result that a small number of highly educated women enter the labour market each year.
Despite the general lack of opportunities for women, sex-typing of occupations reserves some areas of work mainly for them.
jobs which represent an extension of the wife-mother role, such as nursing and teaching, and those which require an attractive image, such as secretaries, are predominantly filled by women.
In Venezuela, women represent 74.6 per cent of teachers and 59.5 per cent of those in the medical professions (Schmink 1977).
It seems, too, that traditional values that prescribe a life of domesticity are weakening.
According to Safa, ‘the ideology that equates female confinement within the home to higher class status has begun to influence working-class women at the same time that its influence has begun to wane among women of the elite’.
(Safa 1977: 134).
but the crucial factor which makes it possible for middle-class women to enter the labour force and, at the same time, maintain traditional values in the home, is the existence of the domestic servant.
The presence of maids obviates any need for husbands to undertake traditionally female tasks and so, while a woman following her career does challenge a husband's machismo in the sense that it gives her some independence (both economically and socially), it does not do so in the sense of changing his role in the home.
In general, women have not benefited much in the job market from capitalist industrialisation nor have they gained much influence in society outside the family through political channels.
The political activity of women is limited and, in the few cases where they do achieve positions of some power, these positions are often linked to the traditional female role.
Elsa Chaney found, in her study of women active in government in Peru and Chile in the late 1960s, that they were overwhelmingly engaged in feminine stereotyped tasks related to education, health, social welfare and cultural fields.
Out of the 167  women interviewed, nearly 70 per cent did stereotyped female work and/or held appointments in agencies carrying out tasks considered of particular concern to women.
As a result, she epitomised the successful political woman's role as that of a ‘supermother’(Chaney 1979).
If capitalist industrialisation has done little to improve the position of women, is there any evidence to suggest that they have fared better with alternative paths of development?
Both Nicaragua and Cuba have seen significant changes for women, but the Cuban example is particularly instructive, since there has been time for new gender roles to develop.
As the Cuban revolution was dedicated to reducing inequalities of all kinds, it was only a year before the Federation of Cuban Women (FMC) was set up to tackle the problems facing women.
Since previous to the revolution the majority of women had very low levels of education and, therefore, few opportunities open to them, the FMC embarked on an educational program and a rehabilitation scheme for the many women who found themselves in degrading and unrewarding situations.
To this end, schools were set up for peasant women and for prostitutes, who were numerous since Havana had previously been a notorious entertainment centre for North Americans, to give them an education and to provide them with some skills and training ready for the job market.
It must be remembered, too, that the early years of the revolution saw a great demand for labour in order to rebuild the economy and, also, to fill the immense gap left by the departing middle class.
As industrialisation takes work out of the home, women, if they are to be encouraged to join the labour force, must be assisted in child and home care.
The state, prompted by the FMC, has taken numerous measures to encourage women in this way and has set up nursery schools, crèches, workers' canteens, automatic laundries, the provision of medical facilities and a system of grants.
Laws were passed to make it easier for women to participate filly in the development of their country as well as maintaining their family life.
Perhaps the most radical of these is the Family Code, adopted in February 1975.
This is one of the most progressive pieces of legislation in the world in attempting to establish equality between men and women as the rule in marriage.
According to this law, both partners in a marriage have a duty to help each other, must share the housework and have the same obligations and duties concerning the raising and education of their children.
The Code particularly guarantees the participation of both men and women in the economic, cultural and political order of the country (Latin America and Caribbean Women's Collective 1980).
Nor is the law an arid statement of ideals, for defaulters may be taken to court by their partners.
There is no doubt that the FMC which, by 1980, represented over  80 per cent of Cuban women, has done much to improve opportunities for women and, above all, to give them dignity and respect in society.
They provide a very active participation in the many voluntary groups supporting the revolution and contribute much more than previously to development through participation in the labour force.
The main area of weakness lies in the political arena.
When it comes to the obvious sources of power, gender differences seem to be similar in socialist Cuba to capitalist Latin America.
Most full-time political representatives in Cuba are men, with very few women standing for election and even fewer succeeding.
This problem became one of national concern when Fidel Castro commented on the elections to the Popular Power Assembly in Matanzas Province.
In this case, women represented 7.6 per cent of the candidates proposed and only 3 per cent of those elected.
Investigations followed which revealed various reasons.
Lack of time was one factor, for many women now had work outside the home as well as family responsibilities.
Some felt that women lacked the cultural and political training necessary.
Machismo was still very evident, for many people felt that men were better suited than women to lead and, in some cases, women had been forbidden by male relatives from entering politics.
Cuba has gone a long way to reducing gender inequalities, though power relations still clearly favour men, a fact of which all Cubans, including their leaders, are very aware.
In 1974, Fidel Castro said, in his closing speech to the Second Congress of the FMC, ‘We live in a socialist country, we made our revolution sixteen years ago, but can we really say that Cuban women have in practice gained equal rights with men and that they are fully integrated into Cuban society?’
(Latin American and Caribbean women's Collective 1977: 96)
CONCLUSION
The manipulation of the web of personal relations has an ambiguous role for, on the one hand, it serves to ease difficulties and build bridges across social divides but, on the other, it helps to maintain the status quo and, therefore, the inequalities in the social structure.
Resorting to personal ties to survive or advance is a mechanism which has been used to some effect over the generations, but which prevents people turning to organisations or political activity which might, in the long run, prove more effective in solving their problems.
Inequalities between patron and client, peasant families and land-owning families and men and women, therefore, continue.
Where modern values have been incorporated they have often not reduced inequality.
Because the elite, through their superior wealth, are better able to live up to the so-called modern values, which are  all the more costly to support because of their external source, they are further differentiated from the poor.
The latter, through mass media and education, are made aware of the ‘new’ but are unable to attain this.
As Kahl found during his research in Mexico and Brazil, the higher the social status the greater the likelihood of modernism (Kahl 1970).
New values thus have the effect of reinforcing traditional differences.
For example, managers of large companies have usually reached their positions through the traditional channels of manipulating the personal ties of kinship,compadrazgo , clientelism and friendship and also through the modern channels of merit, that is , acquiring qualifications and skills.
To obtain the appropriate qualifications, however, is a costly business, for the most desired are earned through attendance at expensive North American business schools.
As we have seen, higher education in Latin America is predominantly the prerogative of the rich and, so, to have the opportunity to display merit, the Latin American businessman must come from a wealthy background.
The so-called modern values bring about a convergence of culture through improved mass communications, the elites of Third World countries come to share the same culture as those in the industrialised world.
This reinforces the social inequality and regional disparities encouraged by the concentration of wealth and capital in the big cities and in the hands of the dominant classes.
Changing rural society
Although Latin America is becoming increasingly urban, rural society still represents a very sizable sector.
At the beginning of the 1980s, about a third of the total labour force was employed in agriculture.
The farmers of the region are predominantly peasants, who depend mainly on family labour, as nearly four-fifths of the agricultural sector are smallholders, cultivating one-fifth of all farmland.
The characteristic feature of this sector is its heterogeneity, brought about by the changes of the last few decades.
Some countries such as Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Colombia, are at the forefront of agricultural development.
The vast irrigated areas of Mexico's north-west have produced a highly modernised fruit and vegetable industry.
In the south of Brazil there are multi-million-dollar soybean processing plants owned by multinationals and surrounded by large-scale mechanised farms.
In other areas, like the Peruvian and Bolivian Andes, traditional farming techniques, such as the digging stick, machete and hoe, are used.
Countries vary as to the proportion of the farm labour force taken up by the peasantry.
In Bolivia, the proportion is 90 per cent; in Brazil, Ecuador, Panama, Peru and Venezuela it fluctuates between 70 per cent and 80 per cent ; in Guatemala it is 60 per cent ; in Colombia, El Salvador and Mexico 50 per cent ; and in Argentina, Costa Rica, Chile and Uruguay less than 50 per cent (López Cordovez 1982).
This chapter examines the way that change has taken place, in particular in relation to social structure in terms of changing social relations of production, and the contribution to this process of  change made by different social groups, such as political elites and the peasantry.
The changes that take place vary and result from three different kinds of processes.
Firstly, the penetration of capitalism into rural areas brings about the spread of the commercial nexus, usually through the market system.
This generates a number of economic changes which because of the overlap of social, economic, political and religious systems in rural communities, have extensive social repercussions.
Secondly, some change may be organised from above in order to encourage agricultural productivity and curb social injustice.
These are agrarian reform programs, planned at government level to alter land distribution and modernise traditional agricultural methods, and also policies concerning food production and distribution.
Thirdly, peasant mobilisation may be a source of change.
Although the peasantry have not often been prompted to rebellion, they have played a major role in a national revolution in two Latin American countries, Mexico and Cuba.
The peasant economy, which is affected by these processes, can best be defined in Stavenhagen's words:
‘The peasant economy can be defined quite simply as that Form of farm production (and associated activities) in which the producer and his family till the land themselves, generally utilising their own means of production (tools and instruments), with the object of directly satisfying their basic needs, although for a number of reasons they may find themselves required to sell a part of their produce on the market in order to obtain goods which they do not produce.
(Stavenhagen 1978: 31)
PENETRATION OF CAPITALISM INTO RURAL AREAS
Andrew Pearse describes this process as the incorporative drive of national market systems and he argues that it is the major cause of rural change (Pearse 1975).
He does not deny internally generated change, which might occur from natural factors, such as drought or population growth, but suggests that the latter forces are more important in pre-industrial conditions.
The incorporative drive refers to national level forces which emanate from an urban centre and gradually involve more peripheral areas in a national way of life.
It includes three main elements: the spread of the market system; the spread of a communications system; and the penetration of national institutions.
The spread of the market system brings the peasant into contact with a nation-wide network of distribution.
Business is now done  through a middleman, an outsider with whom he, initially at any rate, does not have a personal long-standing relationship.
The market makes it possible for the peasant to grow and sell cash crops, rather than just maintaining a subsistence economy and therefore to produce a surplus.
The penetration of the national capitalist system also makes available the consumer goods, which can be purchased with the income from the surplus.
The market system holds out opportunities for the peasant, but it also makes his situation more precarious.
As the peasant moves from subsistence agriculture to the production of cash crops, he loses the security that a subsistence plot provides, that is a basic food supply.
If the cash crops fail for any reason, he has nothing to fall back on.
The peasant is also vulnerable in the market for he has to operate within a new system of values, one that emphasises competition, astuteness and individuality.
He is unfamiliar with national levels of price-fixing and laws of supply and demand.
At the same time, improvements in communications raise aspirations and hopes.
Radio, television and films project images of sophisticated living that are often presented as being available to all who work hard enough.
Consumer goals which were never contemplated by the peasantry in the past, now appear on the screen in their own homes and villages.
Better roads and more efficient and cheaper forms of transport have facilitated contact between town and country.
The penetration of national institutions seeks to incorporate the peasantry into a variety of local segments of national organisations, such as schools, church groups, political parties, peasant unions and cooperatives.
These are often sponsored by the urban middle class, with the result that there may be some incongruence between these programs and the needs of country people.
Lenin contrasted two types of development that can result from the penetration of capitalism in agriculture: the Kulak or American path and the Junker path.
With the Kulak path, some members of the peasantry adapt successfully to the market system, thus becoming relatively wealthy, while other peasants only become impoverished, so creating internal social differentiation within the peasantry.
The wealthy become capitalist farmers, often employing the poor whose impoverishment leads to the loss of their land.
The Junker path involves the increasing proletarianisation of the peasantry, who lose their plots to encroaching landlords (for a more detailed discussion of Kulak and Junker paths, see de Janvry 1981).
Pearse identifies the same process as the Kulak path when he shows how the incorporative drive draws out what he calls the progressive element among the peasantry (Pearse 1975).
A small number are able to manipulate the new situation because they are able to get credit, to establish good terms of trade with middlemen and to generally come to terms with the different conditions.
The majority  of the peasantry, however, have neither the resources nor the social advantages necessary to become entrepreneurs.
Because of debts they are often forced to sell their land and therefore lose the means of livelihood that their family has known and understood over the generations.
Security is lost and the traditional social networks have broken up in favour of the commercial nexus.
The Kulak path has occurred in many different parts of Latin America.
Changes that have taken place in the Highland Zapotec region of Oaxaca, Mexico, are a good example.
Kate Young's data from the two villages of Copa Bitoo and Telana reveal how social differentiation can take place (Young 1978).
In the nineteenth century, both villages were self-sufficient, mostly in maize, the land was owned communally and there was no internal stratification.
Prestige was allotted according to the principles of the ritual cycle.
The little money that was needed to pay state taxes and church tithes and to fund festivals, was obtained from the sale of cotton lengths, which were made by the women.
In the 1860s, the supply of cotton dried up because the Mexican cotton growers had started replacing North Americans, who had become involved in their civil war, as suppliers of cotton for England.
As Oaxacan peasants needed some source of cash, the men started seasonal migration, which was disliked because the plantations had a reputation for malaria and poor living and working conditions in general.
At this point the two villages started on different paths.
In Telana, coffee cultivation was introduced by the local cacique .
Coffee could be grown quickly, cheaply and easily and sold for cash.
Gradually coffee came to replace maize as the main agricultural produce of the community and foodstuffs were bought with surplus cash.
Specialisation was underway and, since households were now in competition with each other, reciprocal labour agreements disappeared and each household became more dependent on its own resources.
During the turbulent years of the revolution, coffee production declined, but in the 1930s, new coffee wholesalers entered the area and began to buy for cash.
Telana now became involved in not only the national market economy, but also an international one, as these wholesalers were buying for export.
During the period from 1938 to 1954, the world market price of coffee rose twenty-two-fold, so Telana prospered from these boom years.
The community was now devoted to coffee growing, subsistence plots had disappeared and internal differentiation was taking place.
Those who did well out of coffee growing started employing labourers and consolidated their control over the best land.
The women, who had lost their craft specialisation, had few opportunities to develop any new specialisms and so lost the independence and prestige they had had from making cotton lengths.
After 1957, coffee prices fell drastically, with the result that all the  villagers suffered.
They had no subsistence plots to fall back on, some tried reviving traditional handicrafts but these could not compete with the manufactured goods that had been made available by the market system.
The wealthier survived because they had control of tracts of good land, but the poorer villagers had to sell the little land they had, to pay off debts and were compelled to work as landless labourers for the rich.
The 1970s saw considerable migration from Telana, as desperate peasants went in search of work.
The peasantry of Telana had become involved in international trade, with the result that they were affected by world booms and slumps.
Some had fared considerably better than others, leading to a differentiated society.
Kate Young found that three classes had developed on the basis of wealth, land ownership and relation to the means of production.
Firstly, there were the rich, who owned farms and employed labour in both agriculture and the home and who made up 20 per cent of the population.
The middle 30 per cent owned land but did not employ labour, as they relied on family members.
The poor were the landless who provided labour for the rich.
Copa Bitoo, although internally differentiated, had not developed such a marked stratification system.
Copa Bitoo had moved away from a subsistence economy, but was producing fruit and nuts for the local market, not for export.
Here, similar classes were emerging but only about 10 per cent were able to employ wage labour regularly and only 20 per cent provided it regularly.
The bulk of the villagers fell into the middle category.
Both communities demonstrate the way that involvement in the market system creates differentiation, though this is greater where bigger fluctuations take place.
Participation in local markets and national capitalism generates differences, but insertion in the international system accentuates the peaks and troughs of economic cycles, which means a greater gap between rich and poor in peasant communities.
The categorisation of rural change into the two alternative paths of Kulak and Junker is schematically useful, but does not exhaust the possible forms of agricultural development.
Roxborough demonstrates how both paths have been combined in the agricultural history of Chile (Roxborough 1979).
The process of proletarianisation itself is a more complex issue than might at first be supposed.
Proletarianisation implies an increase in the number of wage labourers, which can be demonstrated by statistics, but figures also show that in some parts of Latin America, the numbers of the peasantry are increasing.
Between 1970 and 1981, the agricultural population of Latin America increased by 8 million persons, of whom 4 million are described as producers, 5 million as peasant farmers and 1 million as landless workers, who must therefore seek work in wage-earning occupations  (ECLAC/FAO 1985).
At the same time, as the next chapter shows, many of the rural population have been migrating to urban areas in the hope of joining the labour force there.
Is it the case that the rural sector is undergoing a process of proletarianisation or peasantisation?
(See Goodman and Redclift 1981 for a good discussion of this debate).
PROLETARIANISATION OR PEASANTISATION?
Marx originally argued that the growth of large-scale industry led to the demise of the peasantry and the development of the proletariat.
His argument is that the penetration of capitalism into the countryside leads to the articulation of the capitalist mode with the subsistence economy, which in turn leads to the diversification of the village economy, with wage migration becoming an increasing part of rural life.
Small peasant farmers can not compete with capitalist concerns, with the result that they often lose their land to them and end up working for them or migrating to the towns in search of wage labour.
Modernisation theorists too thought that the peasantry, through the diffusion of modern ideas and consumer goods, would develop out of existence.
Some Latin American social scientists working on the topic have suggested a two-stage process, in which the penetration of capitalism initially leads to an increase in wage-earning workers, but this is followed by a stage of the intensification of capitalism, characterised by deproletarianisation and semi-proletarianisation (Miró and Rodríguez 1982).
It is the argument of this section of the chapter that the deepening of capitalism in the countryside has led to a heterogeneous pattern of labour relations, according to area and nature of commercial expansion.
Proletarianisation has occurred in Latin America because the peasantry have been dispossessed of their land or because their land has become insufficient to support a family.
Dispossession has been encouraged by the transformation of the estate to a modern commercial farm.
Traditionally the landowner need not cultivate the land intensively to provide sufficient to maintain prestige and a very good life-style.
Today, with greater opportunities for profits from export and the advantages of modern transport and mechanisation, the landowner exploits his property to the full to maximise production and profits.
In this situation, it is often cheaper to hire labour on the open market when needed than to maintain workers and their families permanently on the estate.
For this reason, many landowners have followed the Junker path, taking over the land of sharecroppers and colonos and compelling them to sell their labour on the open market.
Small peasant farmers, who own their own plots have often been  compelled to sell land through poverty and debts.
As land is passed on over the generations, it gradually ceases to be a viable unit.
The process of proletarianisation has also received some impetus from the spread of agribusiness in the region.
Agribusiness refers not just to large-scale rural enterprises, but to concerns which have an integrated system of production and distribution.
Agricultural produce is grown, processed and distributed within the one company, although these activities may, and usually do, take place in different parts of the world.
The influence of agribusiness is felt throughout the Third world, though North American firms have found a major outlet in Latin America.
The areas of agro-industry in which transnational corporations and other private foreign investors in Latin America are most active are branches of milling, oils and fats, chocolates and sweets, and meats and dairy products.
This gives them a distinct influence on the development of agriculture and the food economy of the region.
Large-scale commercialised farming, that is agribusiness and domestic agricultural enterprises, have to compete with other big corporations for investment capital and markets and must therefore make profits as efficiently as possible.
To this end, commercialised farming emphasises different forms of labour utilisation according to the needs of the company in different areas.
In some cases, firms, such as Nestlé in regions of Brazil, having purchased haciendas , are now running them with modern agricultural techniques.
In other parts of Brazil, giant corporations exist alongside small peasant producers, with whom they have developed a complex inter-dependence, based on the supply of goods rather than labour.
In several countries the second stage of the Miro and Rodríguez thesis is in operation.
For example, the Banana Company of Costa Rica, a subsidiary of United Brands, has been converting plantations to African palm production, an enterprise which has a guaranteed internal market, as Costa Rica imports nearly all its vegetable oil.
This economic activity requires less than half the labour needed in banana cultivation and therefore must result in the loss of a number of jobs (LAWR 1983).
In some areas, mechanisation is replacing labour although in the countryside this has not gone as far as on North American farms.
Some harvesting machines are now being used in Brazilian sugar plantations and Mexican sugar and cotton fields.
The shift from labour intensive coffee growing to capital-intensive soybean production in Brazil created unemployment for tens of thousands of workers in the early sixties (Burbach and Flynn 1980).
The form of social relations of production which is on the increase in the region is semi-proletarianisation.
This is due to the seasonal nature of so much agricultural work, which makes it cheaper for the company to employ labourers during the planting or harvesting  rather than maintain a labour force throughout the year.
Seasonal workers do not have the security of full-time employment, since they must seek other means of support for part of the year.
The pay is very low, as cheap labour is part of the incentive for entrepreneurial farmers, nor do they receive even the minimum security benefits of full-time work.
Agribusiness that operates in sectors marked by seasonal fluctuations has been prone to this sort of employment.
Del Monte employed in 1976 about 1,750 workers in Irapuato, Mexico, but only 120 were permanently employed.
Ninety per cent of the remaining seasonal workers worked for four to six months a year for a low wage.
(Burbach and Flynn 1980).
Semi-proletarianisation takes a variety of forms.
A rather unusual example are the boias-frías in Brazil.
These labourers, who have no access to land ownership, live in urban areas but are unable to find work there.
They therefore travel daily from town to country to do seasonal work as agricultural labourers.
Their name is derived from their food, which these are obliged to take with them and eat cold.
Semi-proletarianisation is closely linked to temporary intra-rural migration, as numbers of peasants move to a particular area for seasonal work and then move back to their small plots of land or on to another area, where a different crop has reached the planting or harvesting stage.
This is particularly apparent in Central America, where it is estimated that seasonal migrants make up 70 per cent of the labour force employed in agriculture.
In El Salvador, about half the active agricultural population are employed for less than six months of the year (Miró and Rodríguez 1982).
Guatemala's large seasonal migrant population, who work on the coffee and cotton plantations for part of the year, sometimes migrate over the border to the plantations in southern Mexico.
Intra-rural migration is also evident in South America.
On the Bolivian altiplano 1.2 persons per peasant family migrate temporarily to seek work (Ortega 1982).
In areas such as northern Argentina, central Chile, Peru, various regions of Brazil and Mexico, this is becoming a basic element in the subsistence of the economy.
The intensification of capitalist farming his not meant the disintegration of the peasantry, for there is evidence to show increasing numbers of peasant farmers in many regions.
Census data for a group of seven countries, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Honduras, Peru and Venezuela, for the 1960s and 1970s, show that the number (if agricultural units of less than 20 hectares in these countries rose from 4.7 million to 6.5 million, that is by 38.5 per cent(Ortega 1982).
This expansion is the result of several factors.
Firstly, subdivision, because inheritance is shared between siblings, takes place throughout the region.
Secondly, agrarian reform has in some areas such as Peru and Chile (in the early 1970s) had the effect of dividing  large expropriated landholdings among the peasantry.
Thirdly, new territories have been cultivated, thus extending the agricultural land available, as for example the colonisation of new lands in Amazonia.
Between the 1950s and early 1970s, 140 million hectares in the region were brought under cultivation for the first time (Ortega 1982).
How can the existence of these two apparently contradictory trends, proletarianisation and peasantisation, be explained?
There is an obvious demographic point that has to be made first.
The population has been increasing so fast in most Latin American countries that despite out-migration, the numbers of the peasantry are still on the increase.
But there are more fundamental factors, to which attention must be drawn.
Industries in the LDCs have demonstrated a structural incapacity to absorb all the migrants and all those in search of work.
Neither industry nor farming can absorb the population of working age.
As a result, many of the peasantry maintain a subsistence plot but, since this is usually insufficient to support a family, the male members of the family have to seek seasonal labouring work, leaving the women to maintain the family farm.
In Mexico, where 51 per cent of farm units are infra-subsistence, that is, not big enough to support a peasant family, the peasant must find other forms of income (Stavenhagen 1974).
The small farmer can combine the seasonal work offered by agribusiness and urban enterprises with his family farm and must do this to survive.
For the employer, a part-time workforce means a cheap labour supply which contributes to capital accumulation.
In some cases, the link between the peasant sector and commercial farming may rest on the sale of goods rather than labour, as in the following example taken from the state of São Paulo.
The almost absolute dependence of the small and medium-sized landholders on large-scale capitalist enterprise is illustrated by the case of tea, where the ago-industries possess their own haciendas and the organisation of labour is completely of the wage-earner type.
However, these agro-industries also deal with family or independent units of production, to which they supply fertilisers and other production inputs.
These same enterprises send their trucks for transporting merchandise during the harvest periods, and the classification of tea leaves for quality is also done by the enterprise, without the participation of the small producers, who are paid in accordance with this classification.
These small farmers may be tenant farmers, sharecroppers or owners of small farms.
(Miró and Rodríguez 1982: 57).
This continuation of the peasant sector alongside the development of industrialisation is a distinct aspect of capitalist development in the periphery and characterises much of rural development in the LDCs.
Capitalist industrialisation in the periphery, often because of transnationals which can import sophisticated technology, has not been  able fully to absorb all the labour available.
Commercialised farms that do rely on labour frequently use seasonal labour.
The subsistence economy, however, provides security for irregular workers.
The peasant economy, therefore, reproduces the labour force for capitalism at a low cost because, due to the subsistence sector, men can be employed on an irregular basis.
The peasant economy provides a reserve of cheap labour for capitalism and so contributes to capital accumulation.
Moreover, subsistence plots produce goods at competitive prices by the working of long hours, using unpaid household labour and accepting low standards of subsistence.
The conclusion of this is that ‘the constant recreation of the peasant economy is functional for the capitalist system’(Stavenhagen 1978: 35).
Thus the capitalist mode articulates with the peasant mode, with the latter playing a subordinate role and the former benefiting.
The capitalist economy, while ensuring the continuance of the peasant sector, does not allow it to develop sufficiently to extricate itself from its subordinate role, for this would destroy its value for capitalism.
This articulation, however, does generate its own contradictions.
The resulting poverty of the peasantry, who must find work in two different sectors to survive, limits their spending power and therefore discourages the purchase of consumer goods.
This inhibits the growth of a market which would stimulate local economic development and so promote the expansion of manufacturing firms.
AGRARIAN REFORM
Both international politics and the philosophy of the day gave rise to a number of agrarian reform programmes in the 1960s and 1970s.
Prompted by the fear of another Cuba in the region and desires for economic growth, Latin American political elites came to an agreement with the United States over aid for reforms.
Thus, the Alliance for Progress, which gave rise to many agrarian reform programmes, was set up in the early 1960s.
At the same time, modernisation theory still influential in the 1960s, suggested that the removal of obstacles to change was necessary for development and a major obstacle in Latin America was the hacienda .
Modernisation implied the elimination of these feudal-like institutions and the modernising of agriculture, both socially and economically
In social terms, the hacienda system represents a very unequal distribution of land, with a small number of people monopolising the bulk of cultivable land.
In 1960, before agrarian reform got underway, there were 111 million rural inhabitants of whom some 100,000 owned 65 per cent of total agricultural land (International labour Review July-August 1961).
This pattern of land distribution reflects such great  disparities and brings about so much poverty that it represents one of the major problems that agrarian reform has addressed.
The other problem is economic.
The large estate system leads to an inefficient use of the two most abundant factors of production in Latin America, the land and the labour force.
Traditionally, the large estates have concentrated on one crop, often for export.
This leads to an underemployment of land and labour, because neither is being fully utilised throughout the year.
Cattle-ranching requires only a small number of cowboys and large tracts of land, which could alternatively be intensively cultivated, with the result that there is underemployment of labour and a low physical and economic return per unit of surface area.
Not only does this mean that the rural population is not being fully utilised in terms of labour power, it also means they are too poor to provide a substantial market for industry.
Agrarian reform was needed to release the peasantry from traditional forms and low levels of remuneration in order to increase their purchasing power to provide a stimulus for the growth and expansion of local manufacturing firms.
Agrarian reform programmes have two basic aims, one of which is redistributive, to provide a juster pattern of landholding and alleviate poverty by giving the peasants more substantial plots of land.
The other is productive, to provide more agricultural produce by more economic and efficient means of farming.
In order to achieve these goals, an agrarian reform programme should have three main elements.
Firstly, a broader distribution of the ownership and control of land is necessary, but this on its own is not sufficient.
Secondly, in order to make redistribution successful, both in economic terms and for the beneficiary, the implementation of modern, efficient and productive techniques is needed.
It is not enough to enlarge a peasant's piece of land, he must have the wherewithal to cultivate it.
Finally, to be successful, an agrarian reform program should include the development of comprehensive and realistic programs of community development including schools, health programmes, services for the protection of life and property, the construction of local roads and bridges, agricultural extension activities and farm credit facilities.
A supportive infrastructure is needed to make the best use of the land.
Most Latin American countries have embarked on some sort of land reform programme, though these have varied considerably across the region in scope and depth.
In countries like Colombia and Venezuela, there has been some tinkering with the traditional agrarian system, but on the other hand, Cuba has experienced a complete restructuring of the agrarian sector.
Some countries, such as Mexico and Chile, have gone through periods of quite radical change, only to be followed by changing political conditions, which have led to a reversal of policy.
In order to see what can be achieved by a successful agrarian reform policy and yet how these achievements can subsequently be reversed, it is worth examining Chilean agrarian changes.
Agrarian reform was put into practice in the second half of the 1960s with the passing of a law, which made it possible to expropriate estates of over 80 hectares and they began by taking over the most economically inefficient.
The basic criteria of the reform programme were: firstly, the peasants should gain ownership of the land they worked; secondly, they should be encouraged to become full and active citizens of the nation; and thirdly, productivity should be improved at all levels of agriculture.
Embodied in these are the two elements of social justice and increased productivity.
Once the land had been expropriated, it was to be turned into cooperatives but, because the government felt it would be difficult for peasants, who had had no previous experience of administering a large farm, to move straight to a cooperative, there was an intermediary stage.
This, referred to as the land settlement, was run by the peasants but with the supervision of officials from the agrarian reform agency.
The peasants, therefore, had the chance to get experience of administration and problem-solving but, at the same time, had experts to assist and prevent mistakes of any magnitude.
The intermediary stage was intended to last for three to five years.
From 1964 to July 1970, agrarian reform involved the expropriation of 1,408 properties, with about 30,000 beneficiaries (Kay 1978).
Towards the end of the decade, with elections looming, land distribution decreased in favour of greater emphasis on raising agricultural yields.
The 1970 elections were won by a coalition of left-wing parties, led by a Marxist, Salvador Allende, with a radical programme which included a pledge for a total and speedy programme of agrarian reform.
The new government decided to use the existing legal framework to save the time and possible difficulties that new laws might bring about, hut with certain modifications.
Expropriations were to be speeded up and the land settlements were to become new reform units, with wider criteria for membership, thus increasing the number of beneficiaries.
Different types of reform unit emerged, but the most common, known as Peasant Committees, were not very different in their organisation from the previous land settlements.
All the reform units offered their members security in the form of assured employment and access to a plot of land and full voting rights in the unit.
The wider implications of agrarian reform were tackled in this period, for there was a redistribution of credit in favour of smallholders and the state took over some marketing networks, though this was primarily to get supplies to the urban consumer at low prices, rather than to assist agriculture (Castillo and Lehmann 1982).
Within two years, the Popular Unity government had expropriated 3,278 farms, that is, over twice as many estates as the previous government had done in six years (Castillo and Lehmann 1982).
The main losers were the hacendados and those who gained were the permanent workers, who benefited from increases in the minimum rural wage and from secure employment.
This meant a redistribution of income in the rural sector from the wealthy to the permanent workers, though it may be the case that there was a widening differential in incomes between permanent and temporary workers.
The great achievement of this period was the eradication of the very large hacienda from the countryside.
In 1973, according to official statistics, there were no privately owned properties of over 80 hectares in Chile.
The economic results of the reforms are very difficult to judge because the period was too short for any economic stability to be achieved.
In 1973, Chile experienced a military coup in which Allende and thousands of his followers were killed, others fleeing into exile.
The new government set about reversing previous policies, not least of which was agrarian reform.
The agrarian reform units were dismantled, either by returning land to previous owners or distributing it to others.
By 1979, just under 30 per cent of the land in the reformed sector had been restored to its former owners (Castillo and Lehmann 1982).
The remaining land was to be given out in family units, in line with the government's ideology of private ownership.
Since the remaining land was not sufficient to accommodate all the 75,000 beneficiaries of Chilean agrarian reform, the military regime started a selection process.
A point system was introduced in which participation in the management of the agrarian reform units and in unions tended to count against people, whereas qualifications such as holding a degree in agronomy gained points.
The average size of each plot of land available rose, with the result that fewer people could benefit.
The effect of this was that, of the 75,000 original beneficiaries, 51 per cent did not receive any land.
The military's policy brought about a greater disparity in landholdings and by 1977, the large estate was back, since there were 1,512 estates of over 80 hectares that year (Castillo and Lehmann 1982).
In economic terms, many of those who still had land in the pears following 1973 were not able to farm it successfully.
The institutions which had previously been set up to aid small farmers had their lending capacity cut considerably, making it difficult for many of the beneficiaries to find sufficient capital.
Although until April 1980 it was illegal for beneficiaries to sell land, researchers found evidence of land being sold and also of farms that had been turned over to sharecropping.
This suggests that many small farmers, unable to cultivate successfully, turned to the sale of renting of land.
The  farmers who are successful are those with medium-sized farms, who are growing for export.
Agricultural and fishing exports increased four-fold in value from 1974–77.
The produce is mainly fruit and luxury vegetables for upper income groups.
Export requires resources for capital investment, which excludes the small farmer, but the growing of fruit and vegetables does not necessitate very large tracts of land and, therefore, the medium-sized farmer can accommodate this.
Chilean apples were on sale in British supermarkets in the early 1980s, despite the vast quantities of apples grown in Britain.
The result in Chile is that poor, small farmers exist alongside medium-sized farms which are capital intensive and produce for export, and a large number of the rural population have become landless and are poverty stricken.
The difficulty with many agrarian reform programmes has been achieving both social justice and economic growth.
In Cuba, the former has been emphasised with marked success, while economic growth has been subject to fluctuations.
Development there has been described by Lehmann as ‘modernisation with fitful growth’, because the expansion of the state apparatus has meant modernisation in terms of growing bureaucracy and an increase in formal, at the expense of clientelist and personal, relationships at work but at the same time agricultural productivity has been erratic (Lehmann 1982).
The predominant unit of production in rural Cuba is the state farm, although there exists, despite the nationalisation of privately owned businesses in the 1960s, a distinct private sector in the countryside, half of which lies in Oriente province the home of the peasants who supported Castro in his bid for power.
What the development of state farms has meant is the demise of the peasant plot based on unpaid family labour, the reduction of seasonal employment and a growth in proletarianisation.
It is worth pointing out that before the revolution, Cuba, due to its sugar-based economy, had relatively fewer smallholders and relatively more agricultural labourers than most Latin American countries.
The revolution, through state control, has given agricultural labourers greater security and better wages by turning them into state employees.
The success of collectivisation is revealed by the increasing number of cooperatives in the private sector.
This mushrooming of the producers' cooperatives, often through the amalgamation of small farms has been welcomed by Cuban leaders because the cooperatives are generally well integrated into the revolutionary process.
Nicaragua, which has also had a socialist revolution, has a greater emphasis on the private sector in its agrarian policy.
This sector plays a leading role, not only in controlling the greatest share of land, but also in producing three-fifths of the volume of agricultural production (Curtis 1983).
Because of Nicaragua's dependence on agricultural  produce and agro-exports, it has been important not to let production levels fall.
As a result, because the properties that were expropriated were modern commercial farms, the government has maintained the structure of production, but, unlike the organisation prior to the revolution, the workforce now has a say in administration.
Small farms in the public sector have been grouped together in cooperatives to gain all the benefits possible from size and concentration.
At the same time, the social benefits in the few years since 1979 have been significant.
Unemployment fell due to agrarian reform from about 32 per cent in 1979 to 20 per cent in 1980 and unionisation has got well underway (Petras 1981).
Agrarian reform programmes have differed in their emphasis, whether it be on land distribution or agricultural production.
Often it seems that although there is in theory a clear commitment to land reform, in practice programmes concentrating on higher levels of production are preferred.
The first agrarian reform in the region took place in Mexico after the revolution and went through its most radical phase in the 1930s, when much good land was turned over to the ejidos , the public sector.
During the 1940s, the government, having decided that sufficient redistribution of land had taken place, began to concentrate on increasing agricultural productivity.
Today the major part of the public sector operates below subsistence level, while production is concentrated in a small number of large, efficient private enterprises.
In other countries, despite the rhetoric of the Alliance for Progress that stressed social justice, the officials, bureaucrats, agronomists and administrators frequently implemented and supported programmes that could demonstrate that they could bring about higher levels of production.
It is the large farm, with its abundant land and capital and modern machinery, that has invariably been perceived as capable of greater yields.
Indeed the commitment to size for greater productivity is demonstrated by the socialist countries, who own large modern farms, but replace the private owner with the state.
This assumption that big means better can be questioned.
Many commentators have noted the fact that the small plot of land may produce more per acre than the large, because of necessity it is cultivated more intensively (see CEPAL review 1982 for example).
The Ecuadorian peasantry seem to be particularly productive.
A study of the Ecuadorian censuses for 1954 and 1974 estimated that production on the smaller units had grown by an average of 2.7 per cent per year during the period, but on the larger units, growth was at the rate of 1.2 per cent.
The Bolivian peasantry have also demonstrated impressive rates of output.
Between 1950 and the mid 1970s in the Bolivian Andes, the production of cold and temperate-climate crops, grown by the peasantry, expanded at an average annual rate  of 4.4 per cent, particularly high levels being recorded in the 1950s after agrarian reform (Ortega 1982).
FOOD POLICIES
Agrarian policies have come to be focused less on land tenure arrangements and more on the growth and distribution of food.
If there are problems of malnutrition and hunger, these can be tackled at source by attempts to produce more food.
Greater food production also means improved incomes for farmers.
To understand government policies concerning food, we need to look at nutritional levels and the quantity and nature of food production.
Statistics for calorie consumption in the region show that despite considerable variation between different areas, nearly all the countries raised their calorie requirement satisfaction rates during the 1970s, the greatest progress being made by the countries with initially the lowest levels.
According to these rates the best-fed people of the region live in Argentina, Costa Rica, Cuba, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay, while Bolivia and Haiti still maintain low levels of calorie intake.
Dietary changes also reveal improvements in food consumption patterns, since there has been an increase in the consumption of oils, chicken meat, eggs and milk, which in the past have been beyond the reach of many of the poor.
Sugar contributes more to calorie intake than in the past, mainly due to the increased consumption of processed beverages and foods, which may bode ill for the population's teeth, but also reveals increased purchasing power.
The declining contribution made by cereals and pulses to calorie intake affects the low income groups (López Cordovez 1982).
It could be interpreted as a shift towards other foodstuffs or as a worrying decline in the basic calorie consumption of the poor.
Latin America's nutritional levels are higher than in many other parts of the Third world, and yet it is estimated that 15 per cent of the region's children suffer from medium to high-level malnutrition, which means, given the differences within the region, high levels in some areas (López Cordovez 1982).
One of the major factors inhibiting greater improvements in consumption levels is inflation, to which food prices become very vulnerable.
Because of inflation, real food prices in the great majority of Latin American countries were higher at the end of the 1970s than the beginning.
It is estimated that 60 per cent of the rural population of Latin America lives in conditions of poverty (ECLAC/FAO 1985).
when it comes to the level of food production, it needs to be pointed out that food production rates for the region are not unimpressive.
FAO statistics show that in the period from 1971–80, Latin  America had the highest growth rate (3.9 per cent) in food production of the various world regions (Figueroa 1985).
Increased yields were made possible by mechanisation and the expansion of the cultivated area.
with the recession of the 1980s, however, agricultural production grew by only 1.6 per cent from 1981 to 1984 (ECLAC/FAO) 1985).
Part of the problem lies in the fact that much of this produce is exported and therefore land which could have been utilised to feed a domestic market is supplying an overseas population.
In the early 1980s, 80 per cent of agricultural exports were made up of the following items, in order of importance: coffee, sugar, soya beans, oil seed meal and oil-cake, cotton, cocoa, bananas, beef and live cattle, maize and wheat (López Cordovez 1982).
Governments argue that they need these exports to obtain the foreign currency wanted to finance the region's debts.
Agribusiness, which has been moving into the luxury end of the market, with the growth of carnations in Colombia and strawberries in Mexico for sale in the United States, has contributed to the high level of exports.
Agribusiness has also found a profitable outlet in the production of animal feed.
Much of the Colombian countryside has been turned over to the growing of soya and sorghum to feed chickens, thus depriving the Colombian peasants in the area of a food supply and contributing to the increased protein deficit in Colombia.
Similarly, most of the Peruvian anchovy catch is turned into fishmeal to feed chickens.
At the same time, the volume of agricultural products being imported to the region is increasing.
This increase was at an annual rate of 10 per cent between 1975 and 1980, due to increased purchases of wheat, maize, sorghum, vegetable oils, dairy products, beans and sugar, all basic foodstuffs.
A third of these imports came from the region itself, but over 60 per cent came from the industrialised countries (López Cordovez 1982).
wheat has come to be an important imported product which reflects the increasing consumption of bread as a staple, rather than maize-based food products such as tortillas .
Armstrong and McGee make a more explicit connection between the growth of agribusiness and commercial farming on the one hand and increase in agricultural imports on the other.
Between 1960 and 1978, ‘Food imports rose in a number of countries where agribusiness and local commercial farmers have been most active in modernising the sector (Argentina, Colombia, Guatemala and Mexico)’(Armstrong and McGee 1985: 77).
what is required in Latin America is a policy that will stimulate food production for the domestic market and the raising of income levels of the rural poor.
Given a situation where land is being used to provide agricultural produce for export, one solution to the problem of food shortages, would be to make the land that supplies  the domestic market more productive.
Scientific breakthroughs made this seem possible and gave rise to the Green Revolution.
This international campaign, aimed at increasing the productivity of land by means of the introduction of science-based technology had, as its goals, freedom from hunger for the populations of LDCs and also a freedom from food dependence.
Latin America is not alone in the world in being an agricultural producer and at the same time dependent on imported foodstuffs.
The aims were to be implemented through accelerated increases in food production, which were made possible by the discovery of high-yielding grain at two international research centres in Mexico and the Philippines.
Between 1953 and 1970, the high-yielding seeds, which were introduced in a number of LDCs, such as Mexico, Colombia, India, The Philippines, Sri Lanka and Indonesia, often led to more abundant harvests of rice or wheat.
In Mexico, entrepreneurs in wheat production achieved quite a high level of profitability.
In order to get the best results from the new seeds, technology in the form of machinery, chemical products and fertilisers, was necessary and therefore capital was required to purchase these.
The new cereals were capable of doubling or trebling the produce of a cultivated hectare but this could only be done by investing in a package of changes.
Therefore only those who could afford this, either on the basis of capital or loans and those who could master the changes and new technology were able to benefit.
In Asia, the miracle rice was wiped out in many areas because it had not been treated with the necessary chemicals.
The Green Revolution in Latin America has led to a Kulak path of development.
Some have done well, but they are those who have more land, have access to capital, have higher levels of education and are generally more socially advantaged.
It encouraged the incorporation of the peasant community into the wider society, because it operated through the market.
Peasants were enticed away from subsistence agriculture because of the potential profits and, in order to buy the necessary equipment and fertilisers and to sell the final produce, they had to work through the market.
In Mexico, the private sector was able to take advantage of the new seeds, but the peasants on ejido land, often unable to get credit and farming for the first three years without fertilisers were not so productive.
From 1953-.65, the period when the Green Revolution was underway, the wheat yields of the ejido sector lagged behind those of the private sector (Pearse 1980).
The technology that was needed to cultivate the high-yield grains successfully often had to be imported, which led to the suggestion that food dependency was being exchanged for technological dependency.
Moreover, the necessity for greater capital and technological  inputs and the move away from a subsistence agriculture involved the peasant in greater risks.
In Colombia, many of the peasants were persuaded to give up their coffee and cocoa trees, which though not highly productive, could be relied on to produce and, instead, to take up seasonal crops such as corn, soybeans and tomatoes.
Cultivation of the new crops required tractors, fertilisers and pesticides, and plants, such as tomatoes, need constant care and spraying.
This implies capital investment and, although credit was available for the Colombian peasants, interest rates were high.
Rubbo cites the example of a farmer, who borrowed the equivalent of $800 to plant tomatoes.
A month before harvesting, the plants were washed away by some unusually heavy rains, leaving the farmer with a loan and interest that he was unable to pay (Rubbo 1975).
The new seeds were a scientific success but in their introduction to the LDCs, too little attention was paid to the social and political context.
The programmes were implemented by governments through existing political channels, thus allowing dominant groups to take advantage of the situation.
Many countries who received aid to introduce the Green Revolution had repressive regimes, whose policies had in the first place brought about the poverty.
The Green Revolution did bring about an increase in the production of food, which is needed for both urban and rural populations.
Those who benefited from improved earnings, however, were not the rural poor, but the farmers who were able to take advantage of the opportunities the Green Revolution had to offer.
The main problem was that the socio-political implications of scientific and technological change were not thought through thoroughly.
A growing urban demand for food has tended to stimulate production in the larger and more commercialised enterprises, but this is not of necessity nor is it always the case.
The potential for developing a peasant economy can be seen in the Ecuadorian situation.
In the 1970s, Ecuador enjoyed an oil boom, which for a few years gave a boost to the economy as a whole, though the gains were felt mostly in the urban sector.
This led to an increase in urban employment opportunities and the expanding workforce gave rise to a greater demand for food.
Rural-urban migrants were able to take advantage of the former, often sending financial assistance back to their relatives in the countryside and so contributing to increased income levels there.
Urban consumer demand was met by an expansion in food production by the farmers in the Sierra, who, although still the poorest members of Ecuadorian society, had benefited from agrarian reform.
The consequence was a real, though small, rise in the incomes of this peasantry (Commander and Peek 1986).
The circumstances of this case are unusual because of the oil boom, and the following economic crisis of the 1980s, which has now  eroded the income gains of those small farmers, has demonstrated the inability of the economy to sustain the development that had taken place.
The fact that economic growth had been externally generated meant that when the outside impetus, rising world oil prices, receded, there was no continuing growth.
Nevertheless the Ecuadorian case shows that the peasantry can respond to and benefit from the food demands of the urban population.
with the problem of hunger still in evidence in LDCs, some Third World governments have turned to other strategies to make the best use of resources and organise distribution, the onus being on distribution as much as production.
Mexico, as the world's fifth largest oil producer in 1980, was able to take advantage of its large revenues to finance a new development strategy known as SAM, the Mexican Food System.
The aim was to use the wealth from one natural resource, to fund a system that would return Mexico to self-sufficiency in basic foods.
The policies had three main objectives: to increase home production of strategically important food crops (maize, beans, rice and sugar); to organise the distribution of food to the benefit of the rural and urban poor; and to improve the nutrition of particularly vulnerable groups (Redclift 1984b).
Peasants were encouraged to cultivate basic food crops such as beans and corn by the raising of their prices and by assistance in the form of free, improved seeds, cheap fertiliser and credit facilities being made available.
The government organisation concerned with food distribution was improved and expanded, so that its subsidised outlets could be found in many poor areas, both urban and rural.
The nutritional elements were especially innovative.
At the time about 35 million Mexicans, over half the country's population, failed to reach per capita daily food intakes of 2,750 calories and 80 g of protein, the most vulnerable of these being women and children.
To attack this problem, a Recommended Basic Food Basket was introduced, which meant the subsidising of essential foodstuffs.
Despite what would seem admirable objectives and a sound financial backing, SAM was short-lived.
One of the problems was political, for a change in government, accompanied by the repercussions throughout national and local-level bureaucracy that this entails, occurred in 1982 and altered the commitment of organisations to SAM.
Even before the change, many of the policies, by the time they had been through the rather over-bureaucratic structures, became distorted and did not benefit the peasants to the extent that they should have done.
In common with many other Latin American countries, it was the weakness of technical and administrative institutions in charge of peasant agriculture that was partly to blame for the failure of a rural development policy.
The peasants themselves were, at times, reluctant to trust government officials and resisted  interference from the state.
SAM did nothing to reduce the investment of American-owned companies in Mexican food production, which dominate the fertile irrigated areas (Redclift 1984b).
The national economic crisis led to the removal of many of the subsidies on foodstuffs.
The National Foodstuffs Commission, replacing SAM, has been set up to implement government strategy that consists of price supports for basic food production, special incentives to producers of priority foodstuffs, the phasing out of subsidies for non-priority foodstuffs and a plan to tie retail prices of basic foods to increases in the national minimum wage.
National level plans to bring change to the countryside have varied across the region and changed in emphasis.
Initially the stress was on land tenure arrangements with the agrarian reform programs, but in many areas the focus then moved to the production of food and some governments are now concerned with distribution and access to food.
Plate 1 Spice traders, Mexico.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 2 children with dolls.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 3 Tortilla and coke, Mexico.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 4 On the steps of the cathedral, Guatemala.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 5 Carrying thatch, Guatemala,(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 6 market women, Guatemala.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 7 Religious procession, Virgin and Sun, Guatemala.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
Plate 8 Market day, Guatemala.
(Copyright Hamish Wallace).
PEASANT MOBILISATION
It has been suggested that agrarian reform is a reformist strategy for undermining the revolutionary potential of the peasantry by providing rural populations with sufficient reforms to prevent any outright opposition to the system.
The peasant, who receives a plot of land through redistribution becomes a member of the petty bourgeoisie, identifying his interests with those of the farmer.
This view is well expressed by de Janvry and Ground when they say ‘the primary role of the reform sector is political.
Its function is to stimulate the development of a conservative agrarian petty bourgeoisie and thus reduce the threat of social instability in the countryside’(de Janvry and Ground 1978: 106).
Others have disagreed with this, but from different perspectives.
Petras and Laporte suggest that agrarian reform brings about revolutionary attitudes through the frustration felt by those who have failed to benefit (Petras and LaPorte 1971).
Other studies have showed that profiting from agrarian reform can be combined with a more radical political commitment.
Bossert found that the peasants in Chile's central valley with the highest levels of political consciousness were precisely those who benefited from agrarian reform.
He concludes that agrarian reform can, therefore, play a part in raising the revolutionary potential of the peasantry (Bossert 1980).
The debate over the radical or conservative nature of the peasantry is a long-lasting one which still continues with some vigour.
‘The peasants are conservative’ view combines early anthropologists and Marxists in its supporters.
The anthropologists saw the rural smallholder  as the bearer of tradition and wedded to the same way of life as the generations before him.
For Marx, the peasant represented a conservative force because of his structural position in society, which separates him from those who might share his class interests.
Low levels of class consciousness are exacerbated by clientelism, which links the peasant through personal relationships to someone in another class.
In some cases where peasant movements have taken place, they are said to be clientelist-based.
Galjart argues that, despite the successes of the Brazilian peasant leagues and rural syndicates, these were not class movements, but ‘followings’ of an innovative patron.
He shows that the organisers of those leagues were not local peasants, but outsiders, often Catholic priests or members of the communist party.
Their achievements, such as wage rises and the setting of minimum wage levels, were not won through class struggle, but received as favours from local government in the expectation of their political support in return.
In some instances, the followings of different leaders competed with each other for different favours.
In this way, they operated in a patron-client manner rather than as a united class opposing another and winning reforms through class struggle (Galjart 1964).
Contrasting views of the peasantry point to their radical participation in the Mexican and Cuban revolutions, peasant movements such as that of La Convencíon in Peru and the high levels of political consciousness of some sectors of the Chilean peasantry.
These views stress different factors that encourage peasant mobilisation.
The now famous middle peasant thesis suggests that certain sectors of the peasantry, precisely those which the anthropologists and Marxists labelled as conservative, have the potential for political mobilisation (Wolf 1969).
According to this thesis, the wealthy peasant has no reason to rebel and the poor landless peasant is limited in his actions by his dependence on a landowner.
Any sign of political activity would cost him his livelihood.
The middle peasant, the small freeholder, has the tactical leverage of independence.
He is in a better position than others to initiate confrontation and he has some resources at his disposal.
wolf suggests that it is this sector that provides the catalyst for rebellion and he shows how, in six major revolutions in the world, it is the middle peasantry who have formed the pivotal group for peasant action.
In Mexico, the peasants from Morelos, led by Zapata, were middle peasants fighting to prevent the loss of their land.
In Cuba, although Castro did not receive the support of the colonos as a class before 1959, half his fighting force was made up of peasants from the Sierra.
These wolf calls middle peasants because, although they were squatting illegally on the land, in practice they owned and worked their small plots.
The debate over the middle peasantry can only be resolved by referring to concrete situations.
Kay suggests that the action of a particular peasant group varies according to the nature of the dominant mode of production.
‘The middle peasantry may be a revolutionary force during the transition from feudalism to capitalism, a conservative force in capitalism, a fascist force under the threat of socialism (or capitalism in crisis), and a reactionary force under socialism,(Kay 1978: 119).
The mode of production is, as always, important and, as Kay suggests, the transition from feudalism to capitalism may well stimulate peasant action.
Wolf shows how the areas in Mexico where there was considerable peasant agitation during the revolution, were those where farms were modernising and becoming more capitalist.
In Morelos, the landowners, compelled by increased competition and encouraged by improved communications, were expanding their sugar estates and, in so doing, encroaching on peasant lands.
Capitalist agriculture was also expanding in the cotton areas of Durango and sugar plantations of Sinaloa, which were other areas of peasant revolt.
In the south of the country, in places like Chiapas, where most peasants were landless and there was little modernisation, the countryside was relatively quiet (Wolf 1969).
It can be argued that the peasantry in LDCs today have revolutionary potential because their situation is so similar to that of the urban proletariat in Marx's day.
Marx's argument that the proletariat becomes a revolutionary force because: machinery reduces differences thus homogenising the labour force; the nature of work in a modern factory requires organisation; and the exploitation of the industrial system leads to poverty and alienation, can be applied to rural society in Latin America.
Imperialism focused on one or two natural resources, thus creating a homogeneous agricultural proletariat, all doing the same labouring job.
The colono system and rural proletarianisation, encouraged by agribusiness, led to a factory-like situation.
Domination, first by a foreign power and then by an elite, leads to poverty and alienation.
This argument puts forward the notion that the peasantry working in these conditions would provide revolutionary potential.
According to Shanin, the peasantry, in general, have a low level of class consciousness, but in times of crisis this rises (Shanin 1971).
This would certainly explain the frequently found apathy towards radical politics but, at the same time, the revolutionary potential, when provoked.
There is clear evidence that the peasantry have risen in rebellion on historic occasions, but how much likelihood is there of their political mobilisation in the changing context of rural Latin America?
In the Southern cone countries, the peasantry represent a small sector and one that is diminishing.
But in Central America and the  Andean countries, they constitute one of the major groups in society.
Reactions here vary according to different situations.
Peruvian agrarian reform has had the effect of raising the consciousness of the peasantry.
In Ecuador there has been little unionisation, but organisations based on ethnicity have given the indigenous rural population an effective foundation for action.
In Guatemala, the Indian population has opposed attempts to seize their land by wealthy landowners and the army.
Nicaraguan peasants, having played a vital part in the Sandinista revolution, are participating actively in agrarian reform.
Peasant federations in Costa Rica, a country with a reputation for democratic institutions and relative equality, have been protesting at the surprisingly skewed distribution of land, by seizing unused land belonging to multinationals.
The peasant movement in El Salvador has developed through the peasants’ own ability to organise and form a union in the face of growing landlessness and poverty.
Pearce argues that two catalysts, the church and the revolutionary organisations, encouraged the movement to rebel and support the guerrillas in the civil war, but she stresses that these acted as catalysts rather than agents.
In the guerilla areas of El Salvador, the peasants for the first time have the chance to administer their own lives and here they have set up elected councils, along with health and education programs and they organise production (Pearce 1986).
CONCLUSION
Changes in the countryside have had different implications for the rural population depending on: nature of the terrain; extent and type of capitalist penetration; existence and extent of agrarian reform; access to government assistance; and levels of peasant organisation.
The result is a varied picture with interlocking modes of production, but in general these changes have promoted economic and social differentiation.
The two aims of increasing productivity and redistribution that have permeated agrarian thinking have often been seen as competing rather than complementary.
In response to the multiplicity of factors affecting their lives, the peasantry have shown that they can act positively, making the most of opportunity when it presents itself.
In the face of repressive regimes, the peasantry have shown a capacity and willingness to organise and mobilise.
Urbanisation
One of the major social phenomena in Latin America since the Second world war and one that has had a profound effect on the social transformation of the continent, is the urban explosion.
In the 1950s, Latin America was predominantly rural, now the majority of its population live in towns and cities.
Table 6.1 shows how urban Latin America has become since 1960.
The rapidly rising birth rate is only part of the explanation, since the birth rate has not risen as fast as urban populations have increased.
Urban population figures have been rising at a much greater rate than rural.
Roberts, using statistics for 1960, 1970 and projected for 1980, shows how in six of the largest Latin American countries, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela, the urban population has grown at a faster rate than has the total population (Roberts 1978).
This suggests that the expansion is largely due to rural-urban migration, which is estimated to account for 40–70 per cent of urban growth in the post-war period up to 1970 (Morse 1971), and about 50 per cent since then.
These statistics are well supported by local studies of rural areas demonstrating out-migration and urban studies showing an influx of peasants.
Tough Latin America is more urbanised than most other parts of the Third world, the process of urbanisation is very much a feature of LDCs in general.
‘In the space of one generation, two hundred million people have moved from the countryside to the cities of Asia, Africa and Latin America’(Hellman 1986: 216).
From 1950 to 1980 in Latin America, 27 million people migrated from rural to urban areas (Hurtado 1986).
This rapid growth of urban areas reflects a process of concentration.
Capital, very often originating from abroad, is being concentrated more in the industrial centres, not just towns but big cities where it can prosper.
People follow in search of work, adding population concentration to capital accumulation.
Armstrong and McGee see this as contributing to the growth of countries with more industrialised centres and the decline of the smaller republics, thus intensifying regional disparities (Armstrong and McGee 1985).
Industrialisation has clearly led to economic growth.
Expansion in output was fuelled by growing external demand and generally expansive domestic economic policies.
Although consumption grew faster than output leading to a rapid expansion of imports, the generally improving terms of trade rendered the trade gap small.
The very impressive rates of growth reached, especially in Brazil, can be seen in Table 6.2.
In the early 1980s these rates were greatly influenced by the economic crises prompted by debt problems, with negative rates being recorded for most countries.
By 1984, however, economic growth had begun to pick up again.
RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION
Before looking any further at the process of migration, it is necessary to ask why it is taking place and, therefore, to examine the motivations of migrants.
These are often described in terms of‘push-pull’ factors, the ‘push’being those that drive migrants from their villages, while the ‘pull’attract them to the city.
‘Push’ factors refer to the difficulties of earning a living that were described in the previous chapter.
It follows that one of the major ‘pulls’ of urban life is the opportunity of employment, though this is often not borne nut by reality.
The city also holds out the hope of a better education for the migrants' children, urban facilities, modern consumer goods and a variety of cheap diversions.
The emphasis is very much on the hope of betterment and opportunity, the town offers a fluid situation, where the chance of improvement may arise, unlike the countryside, where opportunities are far more limited.
Though conditions are poor in the towns, poverty is not as great as in rural areas.
Who are the migrants? with regard to age, they are mostly young adults, who have fewer ties and are therefore more mobile and who are also more likely to be attracted by the ‘pull’ factors.
The highest rates are to be found among the population between the ages of 15 and 30 (Ortega 1982).
A similar situation exists with African migration where especially with the early stages of migration, out-migrants are mostly young adults (Roberts 1978).
In virtually all migration statistics, females outnumber males (Gilbert   1974; Bossen 1984; Simmons, Diaz-Briquets and Laquia 1977).
It is true that females predominate in most Latin American populations, but the difference between numbers of males and females in national populations is much smaller than the difference between them in migrant populations.
As agricultural work is considered a male occupation, there is little employment available in rural areas for women.
In one rural Argentine study, the contribution of the sons to the family productive unit was in the form of agricultural tasks, but that of the daughters took the form of monetary contributions, earned through migration (Miró and Rodríguez 1982).
A Chilean study reveals that at the peak migration ages of 15–29, there were 62 males for every 100 females.
For migrants aged 30–49 years, the ratio was 75 males for every 100 females (Simmons, Diaz-Briquets and Laquia predominantly male (ISS-PREALC 1983).
There, men frequently migrate to the towns, leaving their families behind either to be visited at week-ends or to join them in the town at a later date.
women play a larger part in agricultural activities in the African and Asian contexts than the Latin American.
Generalisations about the education level and skills of the migrants are difficult to make for such a numerous and varied section of the population.
Evidence from Peru, Chile and Mexico demonstrates that it is the more educated and more skilled who migrate (Roberts 1978).
The census data on immigration to Lima since 1940 shows that, with the exception of Ancash, migrants come from departments with the highest literacy rates (Roberts 1978).
Roberts goes on to link educational achievement with the level of economic development of the region of out-migration.
He proposes a time perspective in the analysis of skill level and the pattern of movement.
In the early stages of migration, the peasants come from the richer and more developed rural areas and so frequently have more skills to offer when they reach the town, than those in the less developed areas.
with time, migrants begin to come from poorer parts.
In the case of Peru, initially the departments that contributed the most migrants to Lima were Ancash, Junín, Ica, La Libertad and Arequipa.
All these departments had experienced economic development by large-scale enterprises and often for the export economy.
with the exception of Ancash, they also had the highest proportion of people living in urban places.
Very few migrants came from poorer regions such as Puno in the south.
Latterly, Lima has been receiving more migrants from the poorest and remotest departments.
Roberts reports a similar trend in Mexico and Brazil, demonstrating that as capitalism penetrates further into peripheral regions, so these areas contribute more to the migratory process.
The migration process may involve more than one stage.
Stage  migration occurs when a peasant moves to a provincial town for some time and then on to the city.
It has been suggested that stage migration is most likely to take place in countries where there is a significant network of small towns and villages, such as Chile, Brazil and Colombia.
In countries where the non-metropolitan population is farm-based, such as Bolivia, migrants to the capital city are more likely to be rural (Simmons, Diaz-Briquets and Laquia 1977).
PROBLEMS OF SHELTER
The impact of the migrants has varied from country to country, but two areas which stand out as having been profoundly affected throughout the continent are housing and employment.
Initially it was the basic problem of shelter that attracted social scientists, with the result that the main concern was for the home environment of the poor.
The rapidly increasing urban population has placed an impossible strain on the provision of housing.
The housing deficit in Mexico is about 4 million units, which means that about 30 per cent of the population is in need of housing (Hurtado 1986).
Since the standard housing of towns and cities has been unable to provide shelter, urban populations have been compelled to take the situation into their own hands and put up their own homes.
These squatter settlements have sprung up in great abundance, generally in undesirable and inaccessible areas, which are unsuitable for standard building.
The settlements are often found on steep slopes, such as those in Rio de Janeiro, which ever the hills behind the luxury tourist attractions of Ipanima and Copacabana beaches.
Often referred to as shanty towns, these make-shift settlements now house one-third to one-half of the population of many cities.
The self-built homes of Mexico City have increased from 14 per cent of the population and 23 per cent of the built-up area in 1952 to more than half the total population and built-up area today (Hurtado 1986).
By 1982, at least 50 per cent of the total population of Guayaquil, Ecuador lived in poorly constructed and overcrowded homes (ISS-PREALC 1983).
Each country has a different name for them, often reflecting local attitudes, such as the graphic villas miserias in Argentina, highlighting the poverty of the communities.
On the other hand, Peruvian squatter settlements were named young towns in 1968, in order to emphasise the youth of their inhabitants and to suggest a hopeful future for them.
The Chileans use their local word for mushrooms,callampas to imply that they spring up overnight.
The squatter settlements originally came into being through illegal land invasions.
A group of urban poor, some of whom may be recent  migrants, driven by the insanitary conditions, high rents and overcrowding of the slum areas, squat on a piece of unused land, and hastily erect a temporary shack.
Since the invasion is illegal, it is often met with some sort of opposition but in general, the shanties remain, mostly because there is nowhere else for their inhabitants to live.
The shacks are constructed out of any materials that are to hand, such as planks, cardboard, canvas, thatch, mud, corregated iron and often rubbish, but these are temporary and often improved upon at a later stage.
At first, the settlement consists only of shacks, there are no roads, no water, no street lighting, though urban facilities may in time be extended to these areas.
Once in existence, the settlement attracts new migrants, thus expanding quickly.
The shanty town of Cuevas in Lima, founded by a group of 500 in 1960, had a population of 12,000 by 1970 (Turner 1970).
One of the issues that arises concerning the inhabitants of squatter settlements is integration into city life, since many of them are migrants and all of them are living in an area which is peripheral, in terms of city services and location.
Patterns of adaptation to city life vary across the different countries.
The relationship of the squatters to urban populations has often been expressed in terms of marginality.
This concept implies peripheralisation, an existence on the borders of society, where there is a lack of participation in the urban social structure.
Marginality may occur on different levels.
Cultural marginality refers to a different set of values, lifestyle and cultural patterns from the urban environment, thus suggesting that migrants may still have rural attitudes and traditions though living in the town.
Bonilla argues that the lack of integration of Rio's favelados (the inhabitants of Brazilian shanty towns) into city life is due to their rural values and orientations which are different from those of the city-born and though modified to some extent by the new situation, still hinder a smooth-adaptation (Bonilla 1970).
Cultural marginality, which encompasses the culture of poverty concept (Lewis 1966), has been largely discredited because of the implication that traits such as apathy and passivity, which are the hallmarks of the culture of poverty, are very strongly imbedded in those who grow up in such a culture and therefore prevent them responding positively if opportunities arise.
In many cases, the traits of resignation and the low inspirations that Lewis describes are merely responses to the situation in which the poor find themselves and will therefore change if the situation changes.
Many sociologists have been reluctant to employ the notion of cultural marginality because of the qualitative differences it implies between squatters and their urban counterparts living in the city centre, but have used structural marginality to assess the lack of participation in the urban system.
Portes argues, from research in  Santiago, that marginal man is really one who is in a state of transition (Portes 1970).
He found there was no real difference between Santiago marginals and those in higher strata in a cultural way, that is, they shared the same values and aspirations, but the squatters were unable to realise these because of structural features.
Both urban and marginal men believed that education was the best means to achievement, but the former had better opportunities to actually benefit from schooling.
The main difference between the integrated and the marginal man is not qualitative but a quantitative difference in the structure of occupational, educational and housing opportunities.
Although the terms marginal and marginality have frequently been used to address the situation of squatters, they have also been strongly criticised.
The notion of marginality carries with it the sense of dualism, since it implies being on the boundaries of urban and rural society, but not integrated into either.
Marginality can be criticised on the same grounds, that is to say a separation of rural and urban is not useful since many of the problems of rural areas stem from the integration of the two.
Marginal implies that squatters are outside the system, rather than a part of it and, therefore, that they are outside the class structure.
The research by Portes shows that the difference between the squatters and the urban population is one of degree rather than kind, the implication being that they are disadvantaged within the system, rather than being outside it.
Perlman found the notion of marginality to be a myth in Brazilian favelas , because the inhabitants, far from being peripheralised, were involved in urban political activities and leisure clubs and were fully aware of what the city had to offer (Perlman 1976).
Many of the squatter settlements exhibit high levels of social organisation and stability rather than marginal characteristics.
Lomnitz has shown how squatters manipulate social networks to establish themselves in the city (Lomnitz 1977).
A rather different approach is taken by Turner, an architect who, for some time, worked in Lima (Turner 1965).
In reaction to the many comments to the effect that shanty towns are full of poverty, misery and crime, he pointed out that these settlements were an improvement on the city centre slums.
The Turner thesis stresses the self-help that is so fundamental to the squatter settlements.
according to Turner, many migrants arrive in the city and, after spending a short time in the wretched conditions of the slums, decide to improve their living standards by moving to a squatter settlement.
This represents an improvement in various ways.
In terms of space, sunlight and unpolluted air, the squatters are better off than they were in the crowded, unventilated and noisy slum courts.
Most important of all, there are no rents to pay and no fear of eviction.
Research in Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela, carried out several years after Turner's work, lends support to some aspects of the  Turner thesis, but not others (Gilbert and Ward 1985).
Turner's view that migrants move into the city slums and then out to the shanty towns, is not so much the case now since the large number of spontaneous housing settlements and the widespread knowledge of their existence make this sort of housing immediately available.
In Mexico city and Bogota for instance, most new migrants find accommodation in rooms in the squatter settlements.
The argument that these spontaneous housing settlements are a superior form of accommodation to the city slums is borne out by the consolidation that takes place in low-income settlements.
In many Latin American countries, governments have realised that the cheapest way of attempting to solve the housing problem is to upgrade existing housing settlements and ease the development of new sites and services, rather than attempt the seemingly impossible task of constructing buildings sufficient to house the urban population.
The kind of assistance that governments have offered has usually been through self-help schemes, the giving out of land titles to the inhabitants or offering loans.
In 1974, there were 80 proposed or completed self-help schemes in 27 countries throughout the world, that were taken up by governments or the world Bank (Gilbert and Gugler 1982).
Successive governments in Peru since the 1950s have brought improvements to the settlements through a variety of measures.
This reached a peak with the military regime (1968-.80) which, in order to raise standards through self-help, improved many settlements by installing city services, handing out land titles and strengthening community organisations through the training of local leaders.
Their policies culminated in attempts to turn the young towns into vast cooperative centres, by bringing industry to the settlements.
Self-help schemes have contributed to the consolidation and upgrading of housing in the settlements, so that in countries like Peru, Chile, Venezuela and Brazil, some of the accommodation is of two storeys and houses are constructed of brick and other regular building materials.
Consolidation has been accompanied by an increase in renting, a phenomenon which existed for some time in African shanty towns, before it became common in Latin America.
Gilbert and Ward found that renters made up 36.4 per cent of their sample of inhabitants of spontaneous housing settlements in Bogota, 12.7 per cent of those in Mexico City and 4.5 per cent in Valencia (Gilbert and Ward 1985).
Although the proportion is still small in Valencia, in all three areas of their research (Bogota, Mexico City and Valencia), it is on the increase.
Further research on renters and owners showed that the main difference between them was age.
Renters were younger and at an earlier stage in the developmental cycle.
Many of the owners had once been renters, thus, suggesting  a pattern where young migrants, who cannot afford land or property rent until they have sufficient savings to set up a home of their own.
Renters are not ‘down-and-outs’, but those who do not yet have the opportunity to own a home, though they may well do so in later life.
Another reason why the increase in renting is likely to continue is its relationship to land prices and availability.
Gilbert and Ward found the highest ownership levels in Valencia, where land is cheap and the highest levels of renting in Bogota, where land is expensive (Gilbert and Ward 1985).
Since land prices, which are related to land availability, are, in general, rising it would seem likely that renting would increase.
The turner thesis has been criticised by Marxists for overemphasising the differences between the slum dwellers and the squatters.
They argue that the differential in living standards between the two groups is minimal and to see this as social mobility is to detract attention from the important fact that they are all part of the large urban poor whose poverty is due to the wider social formation and, in particular, the capitalist mode of production.
Self-help schemes relieve the state of the immediate necessity of providing housing and offer a cheap source of shelter, thus making it possible for the poor to survive on very low incomes (Burgess 1978).
The criticisms of both marginality and the Turner thesis have suggested that the problems of spontaneous housing cannot be fully understood without some reference to the wider society.
The initial founding of a squatter settlement is, itself, an illegal act and, therefore, a challenge to authority.
Latin American governments have responded in different ways, some taking a generally sympathetic approach through assisting self-help schemes, as in the Peruvian case, but even these may resort to repression.
The Peruvian military reacted with force during the Pamplona invasion in May 1971, when they tried to evict the tens of thousands who had participated in this huge squatter invasion in Lima, with the result that there were several injuries and one death (Collier 1975).
Other governments have viewed the spontaneous housing settlements as wretched areas, which not only house society's drop-outs, but are also breeding grounds for crime and radical political activity The Brazilian government has tried to eradicate the squatter settlements for these reasons, which is especially the case in Rio de Janeiro, because of the added factor that it is an international tourist centre and the favelas are so visible on the steep hillsides behind the luxury hotels and beaches.
Some of the favelas have been knocked down, but there still remains the problem of shelter for their inhabitants.
As a result, when shacks disappear, others appear in other parts of the city.
The government has attempted some favela removal programs, but these have not been very successful, mainly because  the new housing schemes are too expensive.
The great advantage of spontaneous housing is its cheapness and, until governments can provide adequate housing with the same attraction, they are not likely to be successful.
For the government-sponsored Cidade Alta housing project in Rio de Janeiro, only families earning at least three minimum salaries were acceptable, which eliminated about 40–69 per cent of the clientele.
In some cases where favelados have moved to new housing schemes, they have been unable to meet the payments, which are periodically increased because of inflation and, therefore, had to return to the favelas .
Self-help schemes provide Latin American governments with a cheap solution for housing the poor, but the contribution they make to the wider socio-economic structure is more far-reaching.
As Gilbert has suggested, ‘Self-help keeps the Third World economy functioning’(Gilbert and Gugler 1982: 113).
For a start, it allows the poor into the housing market by keeping costs low and not threatening higher-income groups.
Where there is consolidation, this offers up opportunities for commercial and industrial companies, for example, where materials such as glass, bricks, cement, tiles and pipes are supplied in large quantities for construction.
Marxist arguments support this view, pointing out that cheap housing reduces the pressure on wages, allowing the labour force to reproduce itself despite low wages and in this way contributing to capital accumulation in the capitalist sector.
On a political level, these schemes help to maintain the status quo, because they satisfy some of the minimum housing needs of the poor and so reduce pressure for radical reforms.
As the satisfaction is just sufficient to prevent people resorting to large-scale political opposition, governments are not pressured into more forceful measures, such as urban reform or progressive taxation.
INFORMAL SECTOR
In the 1970s, partly due to growing criticisms of marginality, which were linked to the increased strength of dependency theories, attention switched away from housing to focus on problems of employment and the economic structure.
It became clear that most investment and credits in the urban sector had been used to finance further mechanisation and capitalisation, creating limits to labour absorption of industrial sectors.
Since job opportunities in industry have been limited in this way, how do the millions who are coming to the city earn a living?
Although a small number do find work in factories as semi-skilled or unskilled labourers, a significant aspect of the Latin American economy is the large size of the service sector.
Table 6.3 shows how   this sector grew during the 1960s and 1970s.
As a result the productive sector is employing a relatively small number of the labour force, while the sector that serves the region absorbs greater numbers.
Despite the lack of opportunity in regular wage-earning work, official unemployment figures are not very high (see Table 6.4).
This is largely explained by the statistics for ‘disguised’ unemployment or underemployment, which often reach striking levels (see Table 6.5).
Since Latin American governments offer no real assistance to the unemployed, many of the poor are compelled to earn a living through irregular and haphazard means.
The category of underemployment refers to an area of work that includes street selling, shoe-shining, refuse collecting for sale, prostitution and many other activities which offer no security and bring in very meagre earnings.
Table 6.5 reveals a slight contraction in this sector during the 1970s, but nevertheless in 1980 it still represented over a third of the economically active population for the region as a whole.
The economic crises of the 1980s have contributed to its expansion in this decade.
Some social scientists have conceptualised these workers in terms of a reserve army of labour.
In this case, they would constitute a pool of labour which can be utilised in boom periods and disregarded in recessions.
This view sees the experience of the Third world as being little different from that of the industrialised countries.
The   large numbers who are unable to find regular work are not seen as a phenomenon characteristic of underdevelopment, but part of the capitalist division of labour and, therefore, a similar feature to the industrialisation process of European countries, differing in terms of quantity rather than quality.
For Marx, however, the function of the reserve army of labour was keeping wages low and, to this end, the absolute size of the reserve army need not be very great.
The high numbers and continuing growth of this sector in Latin America would suggest that concepts of European analysis are not sufficient.
This sector has also been referred to by some as a lumpenproletariat.
The implication here is that these workers have rejected the dominant values of society and are made up of criminals, prostitutes, drug-addicts and other drop-outs (Lloyd 1982).
This image clearly does not correspond with the material presented so far in this chapter.
Others use the term sub or proto-proletariat to mean that these members of the urban poor are in the process of becoming a working class, though they have not yet achieved this status.
It implies a commitment to the urban way of life and urban employment, and the final development of this sector, at some time in the future, into a proletariat proper (Lloyd 1982).
The expansion of the sector in the 1980s presents a genuine difficulty with this concept.
The terms underemployment and ‘disguised’ unemployment have a negative ring about them and do little to help our understanding of this type of work.
In order to shift the emphasis towards a more positive interpretation, Keith Hart in 1973 introduced the concept of the informal sector (Hart 1973).
The division between formal and informal is based on the distinction between wage-earning and self-employment, with the key variable being the rationalisation of work, in other words whether or not labour is recruited on a permanent or regular basis for fixed reward.
The emphasis on self-employment means that new income-generating activities can be identified.
The term informal sector has become widely used.
What are the characteristics of the informal sector?
For a start, there is considerable freedom of entry for all involved, unlike the formal sector where barriers exist in the form of qualifications, contracts and other institutional restrictions.
Secondly, this sector is highly competitive, there is a complete absence of the monopolies which predominate in the formal sector.
Linked to this, is the absence of foreign ownership within the informal sector, the entrepreneurs and pedlars are local people.
Finally, pricing mechanisms operate in a different way from the formal sector, where they are fixed.
They fluctuate according to the personal factors of those involved in the transaction (Davies 1979).
This sector supplies both the poor and the rich and produces both goods and services.
Although all the activities lack security, they vary  in the extent of their irregularity and in the nature of the work involved.
Street sellers of different kinds are an important group, whether they be street pedlars who manage to buy chewing gum, newspapers, sweets, balloons, ornaments, fruit and any number of miscellaneous items wholesale, or the women who make snacks for sale in the streets.
A good illustration of the latter can be found in Domitila Barrios de Chungara's account of the daily lives of a Bolivian miner and his family.
She relates how she, like many other miners, wives, sells foodstuffs in the street in order to make up for what her husband's wage does not cover in necessities.
Domitila makes and sells pies and because this requires all the tasks of preparing the vegetables, buying the meat, cooking the pies, and then selling them, the children help her.
Shopping at the company store often means a long wait in the queue, so the children line up for the groceries, while Domitila sells her pies (Barrios de Chungara and Viezzar 1978).
This sector also includes outworkers for manufacturing and repair operations, who sub-contract work to do in their own homes or small workshops such as shoe manufacturers (Peattie 1982); beggars who are often more organised than they appear (Ruiz-Perez 1979); prostitutes; garbage pickers who can sell various types of waste paper, refuse and bottles; the living-in domestic servants paid low wages and provided with board and lodging who, according to Lloyd, constitute a category which is included within the informal sector by default (Lloyd 1982), and others who work on some sort of irregular basis.
Because of the varied nature of this sector and because of criticism of the term informal sector, itself, other attempts to clarity and analyse this area have been made.
Informal sector implies a dualist interpretation of the urban economy, since it proposes a dichotomy between a formal modern capitalist sector in which big businesses and multinationals flourish, and the mass of the poor who are unable to benefit from participation in this sector.
The implication is that poverty is due to lack of involvement with successful capitalist enterprise and, though a minority of the poor do become successful entrepreneurs by building up small businesses from street selling, the vast majority are poor because they are excluded from the modern economy.
There is also a problem in delineating this sector since self-employment is considered such a crucial factor.
Occupational statistics that deal with categories of employment make no distinctions within the self-employed group.
As a result, chewing gum sellers and the successful carpenter who has his own furniture business, fall within the same category.
The important point to focus on is the relationship between the modern economic sector and the informal sector which is clearly not as negative as the formal/informal dichotomy would imply.
Many social  scientists see a direct link between these sectors similar to that between urban and rural society and between Latin America and the metropolis, that is a relationship of exploitation.
It is not because of the poor's isolation from the modern sector that they remain poor, but because they provide a cheap human resource for that sector.
Moser points out that the majority of small-scale enterprises, of the type described in the informal sector, fit into the character of petty commodity production (Moser 1978).
This allows us to refer to Marx's analysis of this phenomenon.
He argues that petty commodity production exists as a subordinate form in all modes of production, but thrives particularly in the transition from feudalism to capitalism.
It contributes to the development of capitalism in two ways.
Firstly, it has its roots in commodity production and private ownership of property and, as such, forms the basis for the gradual development of capitalism, through increases in the scale of production.
Secondly, it acts as a source of capital and labour which can be indirectly utilised by other forms of capital that may be operating in different spheres of the economy.
It is this second point which is especially relevant in the case of Latin America.
The Marxist view is that petty commodity production indirectly contributes to the surplus in the modern economy, which is so necessary for capital accumulation (these points are well developed by McEwen Scott 1979).
The argument is, then, that a greater surplus can be extracted from this sector by not employing its members on a regular wage-earning basis.
This is a similar argument to the Burgess critique of Turner, emphasising the way that self-help shelter houses the poor cheaply, thus making low wages and the resulting capital accumulation more feasible.
Quijano, amongst others, takes this argument a stage further by utilising a modes of production approach.
He contests that petty commodity production is a separate mode of production from the capitalist one, but that it articulates with it to facilitate the expanded reproduction of the capitalist mode (Quijano 1974).
The relationship between capitalist and non-capitalist modes is one of exploitation, in which the former creams off the surplus from the latter.
In this way, it benefits capitalism to maintain non-capitalist modes of production, rather than engulfing them within the rubric of the capitalist mode.
In order to fully comprehend the nature of the relationship between these sectors of the economy, it is necessary to look at the empirical material.
THE GARBAGE PICKERS OF CALI
A significant indicator of poverty in any society is the number of people who can be seen poking in rubbish bins looking for something  that is still usable, since surviving off society's rubbish epitomises ultimate poverty.
Birkbeck's study of garbage pickers in Cali, Colombia, suggests that they should not be viewed as vagrants left behind by economic development but as workers who are part of the industrial system (Birkbeck 1979).
He argues that this activity should be seen, not just as an expression of poverty, but as a cause of it.
The garbage picker may be excluded from real opportunities within the urban economy, but, nevertheless, his work is closely integrated into the modern economy.
The paper industry in Cali has two sources of raw materials: long-fibred softwood pulp is imported from Canada, Scandinavia and Chile to make the best quality paper, while waste paper is recycled for poorer quality products.
In Cali, about 25,000 tons of waste paper are collected each year, of which the garbage pickers contribute some 15,000 tons.
Characteristic of LDCs, the paper industry has experienced foreign penetration and is dominated by one giant company.
Cartón de Colombia was founded in 1944, largely on the basis of North American capital, that is now in the hands of the Mobil Oil Company.
Although laws were passed in the 1960s, reducing the share of United States' capital in the firm, it still remains the major shareholder.
The waste paper necessary for the industry is bought from warehouses which are not part of the Cartón de Colombia company.
There is a contractual relationship between firm and warehouse, saying that all the waste paper, with a few exceptions, will be sold to the factory at a fixed price.
The warehouses are organised in a hierarchical manner with a central one buying from satellite warehouses, which are situated in the poorer residential areas of Cali, so that they are near the homes of the garbage pickers.
The garbage pickers are not employed by Cartón de Colombia or the warehouses, nor do they have any sort of contract with them.
The price of goods varies for the same item, in fact Birkbeck noted as many as ten different prices for the same type of waste paper.
The price is more likely to relate to the individual picker and the regularity with which he sells to the warehouse.
Buyer and seller strike a bargain with each individual purchase.
It is difficult to assess the number of garbage pickers, because this fluctuates seasonally and because they are not really enumerated in official statistics, but Birkbeck estimates that at the time of the study, there were between 1,200 and 1,700 garbage pickers in Cali.
This is not a startlingly high number but, bearing in mind that each probably supports a family, some 5,000 to 10,000 may well depend on the income from garbage picking The pickers operate in different ways.
The largest group work at the municipal garbage dump near the banks of the river Cauca.
They collect here each day when the municipal truck appears and go through the refuse looking for resellable objects, which are put in  a sack to he sorted out later.
Others intercede at an earlier stage, working along the routes that the municipal trucks take.
In between the time the dustbins are put out and the truck arrives, the pickers have been through the contents of the bins.
Others go round residential neighbourhoods with their carts collecting different kinds of scrap from shops and houses.
Due to the irregular method of payment, the amount of income is low and variable.
Most pickers earn the equivalent to the government minimum daily wage in a day's work, but they do not get any of the benefits of social security payments, minimal though they are, that employed workers receive nor the security of a regular wage.
As most of the domestic waste for recycling is collected by garbage pickers, why do Cartón de Colombia not directly employ the garbage pickers?
Clearly, it is cheaper for them to operate like this because they do not have regular wage bills to pay.
The income the garbage pickers receive for each item is extremely low and reduced even further by the competition between them, which is encouraged by the system that is very much a buyer's market.
The small regular labour force that is employed by the company is relatively well paid, receiving three times the minimum wage.
To take the garbage pickers on at this rate would increase their costs and would bring about the additional cost of security benefits.
This also gets round problems of fluctuation, when business is slow, they do not have to maintain a regular workforce.
There is another relevant factor.
In this way, labour is kept fractionalised.
The small but relatively well paid labour force is kept separate from the garbage pickers who are further divided between themselves by intense competition.
The labour force realises its relatively privileged position and, therefore, does not embark on serious attempts at collective bargaining.
It is significant that the union which represents the employed workers of Cartón has never been on strike.
A final factor contributes to the low income of garbage pickers and this relates to their involvement in the international economy.
Of the two materials that are used in the paper industry, pulp is always preferable to waste paper and in Cali, pulp can easily be imported.
For waste to be a competitive commodity, it must be distinctly cheaper than the pulp.
If garbage pickers were to become regular employees, the price of waste paper would rise by at least three times and it would not he worthwhile the company buying it.
The garbage picker appears to work for himself but is in fact part of an industrial organisation.
The nature of his relationship to big industry is to reduce costs through piecework and division of the labour force.
ARTICULATION BETWEEN SECTORS
A related difficulty with the concept of informal sector arises from the range of activities it covers.
Bromley points out that there is a great difference between the truly independent street seller and seasonal workers, who work for a regular wage though not on a permanent basis and who would be included in the informal sector category (Bromley 1979).
He prefers to use the term casual work to cover this broad area, and defines it as ‘any way of making a living which lacks a moderate degree of security in income and employment’(Bromley 1979: 6).
Since the similarities between informal sector seasonal workers and formal sector factory workers are greater than between some groups within the informal sector, such as street sellers and seasonal workers, Bromley suggests a continuum of categories as a more useful form of analysis.
The continuum stretches from stable wage work to true self-employment.
It can be divided into four broad and occasionally overlapping ideal-type categories which, in order of decreasing similarity from stable wage work, are short-term wage work, disguised wage work, dependent work, and true self-employment at the polar extreme of the continuum.
Short-term wage work is work that is paid for and contracted for a specific period of time, whether that be a day or a season.
This would include workers employed in tourism for a holiday period, shop assistants who are employed for a Christmas or summer season and construction workers who are employed on a contractual basis.
Disguised wage work refers to work where one or more enterprises appropriate part of the product of a person's work without the person officially being an employee of the firm.
Many firms in manufacturing and repair operations use outworkers who perform the work in their own homes, being paid for each completed piece.
Small clothing shops in Lima frequently operate in this way.
Merchants purchase the materials and prepare the parts ready to be put together as garments, which are either collected by, or delivered to, the outworkers, who sew the pieces together.
The garment has to be completed within a certain time, then the outworker is paid the requisite sum.
In this case, the firms relinquish responsibility for the instruments of production, which are provided by the workers themselves (McEwan Scott 1979).
With dependent work, the worker appears to work on his own but, in reality, he is dependent on a firm or group of firms for some vital part of his work, such as premises, equipment, supplies, or outlet.
In this case, a proportion of the product of the worker's labour is appropriated through the payment of rent, repayment of credit or purchases of supplies at prices disadvantageous to him.
Many taxi drivers in Latin America, unable to afford their own vehicle, have to  rent one, thus only being able to earn what is left over after deducting fixed rental and running costs.
In a similar position would be a street trader, who regularly deals with a certain wholesaler and who could only gain credit from him by guaranteeing to purchase his goods.
In this way, he becomes dependent on the wholesaler.
The truly self-employed works quite independently, without involving himself/herself in any form of wage work.
This category has the least security, but the greatest freedom of manoeuvre.
Street pedlars, who buy from wholesalers according to availability and cost, and those who make up or cook foodstuffs for sale, would fit into this group.
One importance of the continuum is that it is a more precise form of categorisation than the simple dichotomy.
But what is more important is that it outlines the links between casual work and the formal economy, setting these out in terms of declining significance.
In each case, the links are exploitative.
The seasonal workers and outworkers do not receive the security or the minimal benefits that are available to regular workers.
The firm saves on this and, at times, provision of facilities or equipment, thus, making it a profitable exercise for the managers.
The taxi driver and the street trader, once tied to debts or rental, cannot accumulate sufficient to provide their own capital and can be further exploited.
Even the truly independent are dependent on social and economic conditions, which are unfavourable to them.
They are operating at the bottom end of the market with no capital and no security.
Poverty is compounded by inflation which has reached extreme levels in the region, as demonstrated by consumer price indices.
Between the initiation of the Chilean price index in December 1978 and April 1983, the index registered a 157.5 per cent increase for low-income families and a 142.7 per cent increase for higher income groups.
In the twelve-month period from February 1982 to February 1983 alone, consumer prices rose 42.9 per cent(LAWR 1983).
In 1986, 160 million in Latin America and the Caribbean (38% of the total population) were living below the poverty line.
In LDCs in general, the poor are disadvantaged because they have low levels of education and training and therefore have few skills or qualifications to help them.
Because of their position in the class-structure they do not have access to useful connections which, as we have seen, are so valuable in Latin America.
Caught in the poverty trap, they are unable to make the savings necessary for business ventures.
Their plight is reinforced by their close proximity to wealth.
As capitalism deepens, modifications take place in the informal sector, which in general take the form of an increased articulation between the formal and informal sectors.
Safa contrasts the stronger  links that exist between the two sectors in Colombia as compared with those between the two sectors in the less-developed economy of an area like northern Nigeria (Safa 1982).
Increased articulation will have two principal results.
Firstly, the pattern of poverty already outlined will be the case for the majority.
Informal sector activities such as subcontracting will limit the numbers employed in the formal sector, thus curbing permanent, regular employment.
Secondly, for a few, increased articulation will provide entrepreneurial openings.
Gwynne suggests that this aspect has been neglected by researchers, who have concentrated on street pedlars and garbage pickers rather than the small-scale manufacturing sector, which does have the potential for growth (Gwynne 1985).
He cites the entrepreneurial success of modular furniture makers in Caracas.
Because high-rise flats became so popular in the city in the 1970s, the demand for modular furniture appropriate for small residences rose.
This was answered in part by a number of small-scale entrepreneurs operating in the shanty towns.
Although based in the informal sector, they used some modern sector facilities such as newspapers to advertise their work and because of lower costs were able to compete successfully with large furniture manufacturers.
The entrepreneurs in this case were able to take advantage of the low costs of the informal sector, but also use the modern facilities of the formal.
This close interlinking of the sectors benefited the entrepreneurs.
The rapid expansion of the informal sector is a feature that Latin America shares with other Third World areas.
Calcutta's industrial development in the 1950s occurred without a corresponding expansion in regular employment.
Research revealed that, as a result of this, the biggest single occupational groups were petty traders and domestic servants, while only 2.8 per cent of all earners were factory workers (Goldthorpe 1975).
Much of the debate that has been discussed, arose from East Africa.
The earliest studies were carried out in Kenya, which led policy-makers to suggest self-employment as the answer to lack of formal sector employment (King 1979).
Gerry's study in Dakar, Senegal, reveals similar links between apparently independent petty producers and large enterprises, as exist between the garbage pickers and the paper industry (Gerry 1979).
CONCLUSION
Motivated by a desire for a better life, rural populations have migrated to urban areas and the resulting expansion of cities has meant problems of shelter and employment.
For many, the movement is one of  horizontal mobility rather than vertical.
Some of the discussion of the informal sector and the Turner thesis suggest that, for a minority, there may be small improvements in housing or occupation, but the majority remain part of the mass of the urban poor.
Poverty arises because of the lack of remunerative and secure forms of employment.
As the large informal sector becomes more entrenched in Third World economies, the articulation between sectors becomes stronger, with resulting poverty for many, but opportunities for a few.
what also emerges from these pages is that the poor are not necessarily apathetic about their situation, nor are they bound by a culture of poverty, but are quite capable of positive action to attempt to solve their problems.
The construction of spontaneous housing settlements and the way this has induced several governments to support self-help schemes demonstrates the way squatters have taken the situation into their own hands and provided themselves with some sort of shelter.
The inhabitants of the shanty towns have frequently achieved stability and social organisation through the establishment of personal networks and voluntary associations.
The informal sector has on occasion generated small businesses and creative enterprises.
In some countries, action has been taken further in the form of political protest movements.
This has been especially evident in Peru and Chile, where goals have been fought for and won in this way.
Although Gilbert and Ward found little sign of political protest in the areas of Colombia, Venezuela and Mexico where their research was carried out (Gilbert and Ward 1985), Castells documents protest movements in Mexico City (Castells 1982).
Social movements, which represents a new and increasing response of urban population to problems, are analysed in the next chapter.
Social classes as agents of change
Chapters 5 and 6 have discussed the changes that have been taking place in rural and urban areas and the effects these have had on social structure, poverty and inequality.
It is now necessary to situate these in the wider context of the social formation and in particular class structure.
The mapping out of social classes is valuable initially in providing a broad picture of society, but more importantly because it helps to explain the dynamics of social change.
Change is invariably the result of class struggle and conflict, so that any understanding of social change requires a knowledge of how social classes act.
In the analysis of change, the various theorists have focused on different agents of change, which are often social classes.
Given the great variation that exists in wealth, social organisation and culture in Latin America, it is not easy to find a simple, but also heuristic schema for class analysis, and perhaps for that reason the exercise has not been attempted very often.
One of the most useful class outlines to appear is that developed by Portes and is used here as a guide to the ramifications of class (Portes 1985).
He takes as his criteria for class membership: firstly, the position of individuals in the process of production and their mode of sharing in the distribution of the product; secondly, control over the labour power of others and thirdly, mode of remuneration.
These criteria make the concept flexible and appropriate for the study of LDCs, as well as being operational.
In this way, Portes distinguishes five social classes.
The dominant class, having control over both the means of production and over labour power, derives  its remuneration from profits and salaries and bonuses linked to profits.
This is the class that enjoys both power and wealth derived from capitalist investment.
The bureaucratic-technical class does not have control over the means of production, but does have control over labour power and, unlike the dominant class, finds its remuneration not in profits but in salaries and fees.
This refers to the professionals and white-collar workers whose earnings are linked to their skills and qualifications rather than capitalist ventures.
The formal proletariat has control over neither the means of production nor labour power, but its members earn regular wages which give them a security that the mass of the poor lack.
The informal petty bourgeoisie, like the dominant class, has control over means of production and labour power, since its members own their own small enterprises.
Their level of operation, however, is quite different as their irregular profits serve to keep them only slightly above subsistence level.
The informal proletariat does not have the independence that control over means of production and labour power implies and must survive at subsistence level on casual wages.
How do the various classes fare in terms of participation in national wealth?
This can be assessed by linking class structure to income distribution figures.
Portes suggests a correlation between the dominant and bureaucratic-technical classes and the top decile in the income distribution table and also between the informal proletariat and the poorest 60 per cent of the population (Table 7.1).
In this case, between 1960 and 1975, the dominant and bureaucratic-technical classes increased their share of national income by about 1 per cent, at the expense of the informal sector, which experienced  a decrease of 1.3 per cent .
Portes suggests that UN agencies, using a more restricted definition of informal proletariat, would equate it with the poorest 40 per cent.
This group has also lost out, its share being reduced from 8.7 per cent to 7.7 per cent.
It should be pointed out that despite increasing income concentration, there has been a general improvement in the quality of life.
A Physical Quality of Life Index, which refers to indices of infant mortality, life expectancy at age one, and adult literacy shows an improvement for all the seventeen Latin American countries to which the index was applied in the period from 1950 to the mid-1970s.
In 1950, the index ranged from 36 for Guatemala to 77 for Argentina, but by the mid 1970s, it had risen to a range of 43 for Bolivia and 90 for Puerto Rico (Felix 1983).
Portes also suggests figures to show the percentage of the population of each class in each country in 1970 and 1980.
This demonstrates class differences between the different areas (Table 7.2).
These show that the dominant and bureaucratic-technical classes together do not exceed 15 per cent of the Economically Active Population in any Latin American country and in most their proportion is much lower.
The dominant class alone comprises no more than 4 per cent of the EAP in any country and no more than 2 per cent for the whole of Latin America.
Despite similarities in size across the continent in these two classes, there is greater variation in the proportion of the population in the formal proletariat, but they relate to levels in economic development.
In the southern cone countries of Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, which are highly urbanised and have advanced industrial complexes, the formal proletariat makes up more than half the EAP.
In Costa Rica, Panama and Peru, where economic development has taken a distinct path unlike the rest of the continent, the formal proletariat represents a quarter of the EAP.
It is worth noting, however, that Brazil is not far off the quarter-mark with 20.5 per cent.
Another conclusion that can be drawn from this table is that, apart from the southern cone countries, those who work in the modern sector of the economy comprise a minority of the population.
A closer look at class composition and role will put flesh on the bones of distribution statistics and also explain the extent to which the various classes have acted as agents of change.
BENEFICIARIES OF THE SOCIAL ORDER
Traditionally the dominant class had its basis in landownership, but over the years these elites have often shifted their capital to the urban sector because of the possibility of better returns on it, and, on occasion, because of agrarian reform.
Today the number of companies   that are privately-owned by Latin Americans is small, because important sectors of industry, agriculture, mining and commerce are controlled by foreign-owned or state enterprises.
Top earners in Latin America may be owners or managers, they may work in foreign or local firms and they may work in state or private enterprises.
The group that Portes subsumes under the heading of a dominant class are internally divided, but have enough in common for Portes to call them a class.
Potential divisions within the class arc numerous.
The dependency theorists logically identified the main distinction as being between the national bourgeoisie, whose enterprises were based on local capital and the comprador bourgeoisie, whose interests were tied to foreign capital.
They initially thought that competition from powerful foreign interests would encourage the national bourgeoisie to take an anti-imperialist stand.
It was soon realised, however, that the national bourgeoisie was too weak to pursue an independent line and being themselves involved in the complexities of dependent development, their orientations remained the same as the rest of the dominant class.
In Argentina, for instance, the national bourgeoisie has various indirect links with foreign capital.
Many local industrialists rely on credit from international loan agencies, others import essential supplies and the majority import essential equipment.
Petras and Cook found that only 4.9 per cent of their sample of the top national bourgeoisie were nut dependent on technology that originated from abroad.
These industrialists welcomed foreign capital, because they felt that it stimulated economic activity in general, from which they could all benefit (Petras and Cook 1973).
In Peru, up-and-coming executives use a period of employment with a multinational as a form of training in the methods and values of big business and then may shift to employment with state or private Peruvian firms or go into business on their own (Becker 1983).
Other commentators have drawn attention to the basic distinction between owners and managers, which is important for a strict Marxist analysis.
This distinction, however, carries less weight, where managers of multinationals have control over much greater economic resources and far more people's livelihoods than the owners of small local firms.
One would also expect a difference in attitudes between general managers of state corporations and those of transnationals.
The expansion of the state in the economy has led to an increase in the number of state employees, some of whom direct vast industrial complexes.
The top personnel in these enterprises have been referred to as a state bourgeoisie. we can, therefore, identify three fractions: domestic capitalists; managers of multinationals and top administrators of public enterprises.
What the different groups all have in common is their control over production processes in the economy and over the labour of a number of subordinates.
Their remuneration comes from this position and takes the form of profits or high salaries and bonuses tied to profitability, so that their financial reward is linked very closely to the success of the firm.
Since all the members of this class wish to preserve the status quo, they unite politically to support conservative regimes and oppose radical forces that propose significant social changes.
Evans argues that the three fractions have a common interest in capital accumulation and in the subordination of the mass population and therefore cooperate in what he calls a ‘triple alliance’ between elite local capital, international capital, and state capital.
Local capital is not assumed subordinate because the local bourgeoisie has certain economic and political advantages, which can be used when dealing with multinationals.
There is some competitiveness within the alliance, but this is reduced by bargaining and a working cooperation is maintained (Evans 1979).
The main feature of the bureaucratic-technical class is that although it lacks effective control over the means of production its members do have control over the labour of others in their subordinate position in bureaucratic structures.
Unlike the dominant class, remuneration is tied to specific salaries and fees rather than the profitability of a firm.
In Latin America, this class is composed mainly of middle-level management and technical personnel in domestic, state and foreign enterprises, and functionaries of the state bureaucracies, including the armed forces and independent professionals.
This class maintains the smooth running of the social order and economic system, but differs from the dominant bourgeois class in that its wealth is not derived from capital.
With the dominant class, it shares in the control of the existing social order and benefits from that order (Portes 1985).
The dominant and bureaucratic-technical classes benefit from the system, but how do they act in this privileged position?
Do they initiate change and if so, what kind of change?
Although the terminology and implications differ, both traditional Marxists and non-Marxists have attached a progressive role to the new entrepreneurial classes that emerge with industrialisation.
Marx saw them as promoting the bourgeois state, which was an advance on feudalism and which, in turn, would give rise to the proletarian state.
Modernisation theorists, leaning heavily on the experience of Western Europe argued that the middle class erodes the traditional order and promotes economic, political and social progress.
In the Latin American context, Johnson took the lead in proposing the middle class as the spearhead of change, by detailing the areas in which he considered they had influenced government in a progressive way in  five major republics (Johnson 1958).
Empirical research in the 1960s demonstrated that even in the cases where the middle class had been initially progressive, success had given them a conservative outlook and led them to join forces with the traditional elite rather than with the working class (Ratinoff 1967, Sunkel 1965).
A closer look at the bourgeoisie, in terms of their social background, relationships with other classes and political opinions, lends support to the argument that, in practice, they are not the class that is going to bring about radical change.
Entrepreneurship has not been a significant mechanism for social mobility in Latin America.
Several studies have shown that successful Chilean industrialists since the 1930s, before which immigrants dominated the industrial scene, have come from land-owning or well-to-do families (Johnson 1972, Cubitt 1972).
Research on Colombian entrepreneurs reveals a similar pattern, with only 9.5 per cent coming from working-class backgrounds.
what is particularly interesting about the latter findings is that four-fifths of the socially mobile were born outside Colombia.
Lipman points out that it is easier to gain the necessary qualifications and training for success in Europe.
This would suggest that social mobility within Colombian society is more limited than the figures imply (Lipman 1969).
The country that has demonstrated the greatest upward mobility through entrepreneurial channels is Argentina, which was one of the first to industrialise and has had probably the greatest influx of immigrants.
Imaz found that about a quarter of the Argentine industrial elite, at a time when industrialisation was getting well under way, were self-made men from neither middle- nor upper-class backgrounds (Imaz 1964).
Explanations for this lack of mobility lie in the international context.
Initially, the immigrants provided too much competition for the aspiring local working class, as, coming from countries where the process of industrialisation was under way, they were able to use their knowledge and experience to seize the initiative in entrepreneurial activity.
More recently, multinationals and foreign capital, with all their implications, have made vertical upward mobility difficult.
The promising entrepreneur finds it very hard to compete with multinationals, which can always outproduce him and undercut his prices because of the very scale of their operations and capital.
To compete successfully with multinationals, the entrepreneur must acquire knowledge, qualifications and specialised training similar to the managers and technical staff that the foreign company can afford to employ.
Higher education is expensive in Latin America, and especially so the education, such as business qualifications from the United States, that is desired for running large firms.
Only the offspring of the wealthy can afford to benefit.
These factors again demonstrate why the wealth  produced by productivity, on the basis of foreign capital and in a situation of unequal opportunity of access to qualifications, does not produce the desired trickle-down effect.
Given their social background, it is not surprising that the bourgeoisie, in most Latin American countries, has close links with landowners.
Research in both Argentina and Chile has revealed the close links between industrialists and agrarian interests (Chilcote and Edelstein 1974, Petras 1969).
In the case of Chile, it is argued that the successful new urban groups have been coopted by the land-owning oligarchy.
According to Sunkel, the major changes have been industrialisation, urbanisation and an expansion of the economic and social activities of government which have, together, brought an improvement in the standard of living of urban middle-sector groups.
Chilean social structure has always had a small elite, with a great concentration of power and, instead of presenting a challenge to them, the successful industrial and commercial groups have become incorporated into their ranks.
This social fusion has taken place through intermarriage and access to the social circles and institutions which denote prestige in society, such as organisations, clubs and landed estates (Sunkel 1965).
This point is supported by Johnson, who goes on to demonstrate that, as a result, Chilean industrialists have not developed their own independent ideology and value system.
Questions about their politics elicited answers which were, generally, conservative and not in favour of progressive ideas.
Johnson found little support among them for the reformist policies of the government of the day.
Less than a quarter were in favour of the government having the power to expropriate land, which offers little support to the opposition to the landed elite thesis (Johnson 1972).
Considerable evidence shows that, to date, those who have been successful through industrialisation and urbanisation have not been an independent, dynamic and progressive force in Latin America, but why?
Chilcote and Edelstein argue that it is because of the type of industrialisation that has taken place.
Industrialisation was prompted by the failures of Europe and the United States during the Great Depression and the Second world war, leading to import substitution, rather than a conscious development policy.
The implication is that industrialisation was not the planned result of a dynamic, forward-thinking group but a reaction to a crisis (Chilcote and Edelstein 1974).
The point is that so much economic growth in Latin America, from the enclave economy to contemporary multinationals, has been brought about by foreign concerns, which has denied the local entrepreneurial groups their historic role in leading, organising and financing this process.
The only time they had the opportunity was, almost by default, during import substitution, but Latin Americans  were soon overshadowed by the transnationals.
Since so much capital has external sources, the bourgeoisie have not come through the same phase of saving and investment, as did their European counterparts, but have moved straight to a consumption stage.
One argument states that the Latin American bourgeoisie has never had sufficient capital to promote the economic development it wanted and has, therefore, had to import capital.
The counter-argument is that it is precisely the importation of capital that has prevented the local bourgeoisie accumulating its own on a grand scale.
As a possible agent of change, the bourgeoisie was discarded by dependency theorists, but in the wave of post-dependency criticism, there have been attempts to resuscitate this role for them.
Becker says that it is expecting too much of Third world bourgeoisies to think they can bring about societal transformations on a grand scale or act in the ‘heroic’ way of entrepreneurs a century ago (Becker 1983).
He characterises the mining bourgeoisie in Peru as a corporate national bourgeoisie, which he considers to be progressive as it is nationalist and developmentalist.
This new bourgeoisie is innovative technologically; internationalist, since its members partake of universalistic norms of technocracy and the managerial ideology; and it promotes development, through a desire to compete with transnational companies.
The group is strong because it has access to power through its institutional involvement with the state, which is why Becker calls it a corporate bourgeoisie.
Becker asserts that greater social mobility is possible in a society where the new corporate bourgeoisie is the dominant class than where family firms predominate in the economic sector.
The conservative aspect of the new bourgeoisie is that it establishes a more durable form of capitalism, but as Becker does not see socialism as the only way of ushering in progress, this does not present a problem for him in his depiction of the new corporate bourgeoisie as promoters of development.
THE WORKING CLASS
The formal proletariat is defined by its lack of control over both the means of production and the labour of others (Portes 1985).
Its remuneration in the form of wages may not be very high, but does offer a measure of security, in that wages are contractually established and regulated under existing labour laws, which means that in theory they can not be arbitrarily withdrawn or altered.
The formal proletariat is basically urban in composition and along with the dominant class and the bureaucratic-technical class, makes up (what is referred to as) the modern sector of Latin American economies.
The Latin American working class has its similarities to and differences from the  working class in other Third world areas.
Where the nature of development has been capital intensive in LDCs, the proletariat will be small.
The previous chapter showed how so much of the rural-urban influx has been absorbed by the informal sector, rather than regular working-class employment.
Even if development is not capital intensive, but relies on labour power, what is emerging in Latin America is a pattern of part-time employment, whether it be seasonal work in rural areas or informal-sector activities in urban.
To survive in this situation, it is necessary to have more than one economic activity.
Though small, the working class in Latin America, because of higher levels of urbanisation and industrialisation, is relatively larger and better established than in most other Third World regions.
The pattern of increasing underemployment, both rural and urban, may be one that will be followed by the other LDCs.
Figures for the proportion of the total population in the labour force are quite revealing.
In the mid 1970s, while almost half the population of the United Kingdom and the United States, 47 per cent and 45 per cent respectively, were in the labour force, in Mexico, with its very young population, only 28 per cent were.
Chile had a similar 28 per cent and Peru 29 per cent, while Venezuela and Brazil fared a little better with 31 per cent and 32 per cent of the total population in the labour force (World in Figures 1978).
What this means is that only a relatively small proportion of the population is earning and has the burden of supporting a large number of old and young.
Portes using statistics for 1972, has assessed the proportion of the Latin American economically active population that constitute the formal proletariat as being 22.4 per cent(see Table 7.2).
Although the working class is of recent formation, it operates in a variety of different working situations.
The Latin American economy is characterised by a large number of very small firms and yet some workers are employed by large transnationals using the most modern technology and employing thousands of workers.
where mineral-extracting enclaves still exist, the workforce lives in its own community, a long way from major urban centres.
The various levels of technology employed also mean that workers have very different skills and qualifications.
It has been argued that these divisions within the working class are unreconcilable and prevent it acting as a strong, united, radical force.
The proposition put forward by this view is that technology shapes the problems, demands and forms of organisation of workers and it is precisely the levels of technology that vary so much between the modern, dynamic, industrial sector and traditional areas.
The better off within the working class have often been referred to as a labour aristocracy, though the term has been used differently by various social scientists.
Some use it generally to refer to those  workers whose income is higher than most others.
Arrighi and Saul more specifically consider the labour aristocracy to comprise the skilled technicians in large factories and sub-elite of clerks and teachers (Lloyd 1982).
Others identify the labour aristocracy as workers who have high earnings because they are employed by multinationals or foreign firms which, as Roxborough points out, is closest to Lenin's original meaning (Roxborough 1979).
The implication of the term is not only that it is a privileged group but that, as a result, its members will not desire change and so be a conservative force in society.
The two issues at stake with the labour aristocracy thesis are: can this relatively privileged sector of society be a militant force for change or will it want to maintain the status quo?
Can this group remain within a united working class or will it pursue selfish interests, separating itself further from the remainder of the working class?
Humphrey's research on workers in the Brazilian motor industry in the 1970s shows that, in this particular case, a group of relatively highly paid workers in a modern sector of the economy did not behave as a labour aristocracy, but took on a vanguard role in providing political leadership for the working class as a whole (Humphrey 1982).
He also points out similar situations in Argentina in the 1960s, when car workers were involved in revolutionary unionism and urban insurrection, and in Mexico, where they have fostered some of the stronger, independent unions.
In the Brazilian situation, it was the auto workers who took the leading role in the industrial disputes of the 1970s and early 1980s.
They took full advantage of the general liberalisation, that was the government's policy at the time, to fight against the constraints imposed by the labour system.
Despite their relatively high wages, these constraints had imposed burdens on working conditions.
Through their militancy, they won union autonomy and union reform.
Humphrey says ‘in the seventies, at least, factors which distinguished auto workers from other sections of the working class enabled them to adopt a vanguard role’(Humphrey 1982: 231).
Because they worked for large, modern firms, the state was closely involved with their employers, which meant their industrial grievances led them into conflict with the state.
To challenge their employers, they had to challenge the labour system itself.
Their activities were supported by, and benefited, the rest of the working class.
Support can be seen in the upsurge of working-class activity that accompanied the strikes of 1978 and 1979 and the way that the union's leader, Lula, became such a popular figure.
The union reform that was won by these workers benefited the working class in general.
Humphrey calls the differentiation of the working class thesis technologically determinist because he says it attaches too much  importance to technology.
The development of industry is part of a process of the accumulation of capital that involves not only technological changes, but also other factors.
The working class are affected by the changing relationship between labour and capital, the changing role of the state and new forms of labour legislation.
The aim of management is to make profits and, therefore, its strategy with the labour force is directed to this end, not dominated by technology.
The factory, too, is not solely a technical institution, it is a social organisation, influenced by political, social and economic aspects of society at large.
Although Humphrey emphasises that one can not rule out the possibility of auto workers being a conservative force in the future, he does demonstrate that, at this particular historical-political conjuncture, their militant action provided a catalyst for change for the working class.
The political stance of the working class will rely heavily on the nature, size and development of the labour movement.
It is the union movement which has, in the industrialised countries, been the basis of action.
A look at the development of the labour movement in Latin America will lead us into the debate over the radical/conservative nature of the working class.
Spalding has divided the period of growth of the labour movement into different stages (Spalding 1977).
The formative period from 1850 to 1914 witnessed the birth of a clearly identifiable movement, with labour organising for the first time on a massive scale.
Prior to that, guilds had been the only groupings of workers.
In Argentina, the formative period began with the formation of mutual aid associations for shoemakers and printers and ended with the foundation of the General workers' Union and three general strikes.
The period from 1 914 to 1933 Spalding identifies as the expansive and explosive period.
This was a time of peak union activity for many countries, for from Europe provided workers with different organisational concepts.
In the southern cone countries, the union movement, having spread to white-collar workers and peasants, erupted in large-scale worker protest.
All this union activity did not occur without any reaction from the elite.
For them, the expansion of the labour movement was perceived as a threat of communism, so various measures were resorted to in order to control labour, ranging from crude repression to legal limitations on union activity.
At the same time, many governments offered social reforms to ease the plight of workers and give them fewer grounds for opposition.
This labour legislation included laws governing female and child labour, improvements in working conditions and social security provisions.
But, even where there were legal improvements, enforcement was often limited and, given the nature  of the labour market in Latin America, many workers remained outside the legal framework, which applied only to industrial workers.
Spalding calls the period from 1930 to the present day the cooptive period because of the attempts made by the elite to integrate labour into the established political and social framework.
By this time, politicians had realised that organised labour represented a bloc of votes, which could be very valuable to candidates.
Control from above was won by the use of various mechanisms.
Ideologies, such as nationalism and developmentalism, were used to counter the influence of communism.
Nationalism encouraged workers to identify with their nation rather than their class, while developmentalism asked the worker to sacrifice short-term gains, such as better working conditions and remuneration, for long-term interests, on the basis that industrialisation benefits all in the long run.
Labour codes as a mechanism of control were introduced in most countries.
These included: the power to intervene in labour federations and unions; control over candidates in union elections; provisions governing the legality of strikes and unions; legal distinctions between white- and blue-collar workers which have the effect of dividing workers; and the prohibition of certain groups (often government employees) to form unions.
Spalding also suggests that the introduction of highly technologised industry, leading to high levels of unemployment, has weakened the labour movement and made political alliances necessary.
Spalding concludes that, with few exceptions, such as the tin miners in Bolivia, labour has been coopted by these mechanisms and not proved itself to be a revolutionary force.
It is true that the very process of mobilising labour by elites for their own support has brought workers together for political action and this could form the basis for the development of an independent labour movement, but this has, so far, been prevented by the mechanisms of control (Spalding 1977).
Spalding's stages could be criticised for being somewhat vacuous.
The term formative is fairly obvious for the beginning of a development process so, also, the term expansion for the next stage.
Nor do the stages neatly fit all Latin American countries.
Nevertheless they do provide a rough scheme for organising the multitude of empirical facts concerning the growth of unions.
what is more polemical, is the conclusion that the labour movement, despite periods of radicalism and fervent political activity, has become a conservative force in Latin America.
THE ROLE OF THE PROLETARIAT DEBATE
For Marx, class consciousness, which develops with the increasing struggles that the workers have with management, is a key factor  contributing to the revolutionary role of the proletariat.
In Latin America, the supporters of Spalding's view would argue that the working class has not developed into a fully fledged class for itself.
Much of this can be explained by the cooptation which has taken place through the mechanism of clientelism.
As with the peasantry, strong ties of loyalty and obligation tend to prevent the development of permanent horizontal links.
These may shape the activities of unions, so that their political manoeuvring is based on clientelist relationships, rather than class relationships.
Payne argues that in Peru, this method has been very successful, for by using it, the organised workers realised a greater improvement in wages than the unorganised white-collar workers, and achieved a rise in their real income, even in the face of inflation (Payne 1965).
These tactics have been used by unions in Mexico, where cooptation through the state bureaucracy has taken place as the labour movement is integrated into the organisation of the governing party.
Mexico's electoral system has given power continuously to the party that emerged triumphant from the revolution, the Revolutionary Party or PRI.
One of the three major sectors of PRI represents labour and within this, the CTM, the main confederation uniting Mexican unions, predominates.
The CTM has a complex organisation of state-wide, regional and local federations, based on geographical cohesion and industry-wide unions on a national and regional level.
In any industrial plant, there is a local union headed by a general delegate.
The close integration of labour with the ruling party means that labour has no independent base.
It assumes that the interests of workers are national, rather than class interests, which may not always be best for the workers, as a class.
Mexico is often depicted as being characterised by ‘charrismo ’, the phenomenon of trade unions being controlled by the state, in order to keep wages down in the service of capital accumulation and accelerated economic growth.
It is frequently argued that the political stability and rates of economic growth of the post-war period rest on the control of subordinate classes by the Mexican state.
Since the union organisations are part of PRI, they have a dual function: firstly, as a pressure group lobbying for a greater share of social benefits for labour; secondly, as an apparatus of political control of the working class.
These functions are coordinated through clientelism, which exists between local leaders and their fellow members, and also between local leaders and national and regional leaders, with the local leaders this time being the clients.
In San Cosme, as elsewhere in Mexico, union leaders have an important say in job placements in factories and can exert influence on behalf of their members at regional and national levels.
Control of jobs and access to political leaders can be used to win political support for themselves.
In the role of clients, these local leaders bring in their  own supporters behind their patron, in return receiving political advancement for themselves and small benefits for the union (Rothstein 1979).
Lomnitz argues that this situation is exacerbated and class identity weakened by the lack of informal ties and solidarity between workers.
She says that as Mexican workers socialise mostly with the extended family, there is little personal contact with coworkers (Lomnitz 1982).
The linking of the national President of Mexico with the workers through clientelist relationships can be seen in the pattern of strikes over the years.
Gonzalez-Casanova, using statistics for numbers of strikes per year, suggests that these follow the presidential-type policy of the government of the day.
He found that the greatest number of large-scale strikes broke out when the presidents were known for their populist and pro-worker policies.
This implies that workers and union leaders felt themselves protected and even encouraged by the presidential power.
Presidents who followed less radical policies or more open alliances with the property-owning national and foreign sectors, they felt to be less sympathetic to their cause and, therefore, less likely to respond to their wishes.
It was clearly patronage that they were seeking, rather than a confrontation with another class.
The unions had sought and relied on government policy, rather than developing mass working-class organisations characterised by class consciousness (Gonzalez-Casanova 1968).
Roxborough criticises the standard account of the Mexican labour movement, for its one-sided emphasis on the aspect of control over the rank and file (Roxborough 1984).
He argues that the extent of this control has been exaggerated, and as evidence documents a number of cases of successful, although sometimes shortlived, insurgent labour movements that have taken place.
He found in his research on Mexican unions that there was no direct link between union affiliation and militancy, in other words the unions that were controlled from above were not less likely to be militant.
This is not to say that the Mexican unions are likely to become revolutionary tools to be used against a capitalist state, but nor are they conservative in supporting the status quo.
Roxborough believes it unrealistic to expect unions to play such a revolutionary role in Latin America today and predicts that with the growing economic crisis in Mexico, the unions will become more militant (Roxborough 1984).
From the point of view of Spalding and Gonzalez-Casanova, the working class is seen to have been coopted by the political elite, offering them political support in the form of votes of union members and receiving, in return, favours such as improved wages or working conditions.
This strategy is not necessarily unsuccessful and, indeed, in Peru (Payne 1965) and Mexico, workers have received some definite material rewards through this procedure.
There is no doubt, too, that the time during which the working class did best in Argentina was the Peronist period, when clientelism linked the labour force with the powerful.
In 1954, the last full year of the Peronist era, the wage-earners' share of the national income was 30.6 per cent, an all-time high (LAWR 1983).
Peron was a political patron at the highest level, who offered his workers definite improvements in return for their support on which he depended.
Although these mechanisms may provide short-term micro-level benefits, they do not encourage the development of an independent organisation with its own ideology, which would then be in a position to spearhead change to bring about real and long-lasting improvements.
Favours are won through reciprocity, not through militant industrial action.
Contrasting views, based on different areas, portray the working class as having greater potential for radical action.
Lloyd points out that it is often those who are called a labour aristocracy, who are the most militant.
‘It is they who are most exploited and they are conscious of this.
Bargaining, however, tends to be confined within the company.
Selfishness is also seen in their apparent lack of concern for the poor but what, in effect, could they do?’
(Lloyd 1982: 119.)
Among the African poor, this militancy is often seen as leadership, rather than being viewed antagonistically.
Argentine unions, which were shaped from above, are some of the strongest in Latin America.
Peron needed the union movement for support and, indeed, it was the labour movement who brought him back from exile and won him the presidency.
Workers' organisations were then created and expanded, with the assistance of patronage, but in order to defend workers' interests.
When Peron was overthrown, these organisations were strong enough to resist opposition.
To this day, despite periods of extreme repression, they have survived, often having to spend long periods underground.
The Bolivian tin miners and the Chilean unions have demonstrated that it is possible for the labour movement to develop a revolutionary role in Latin America.
The Bolivian miners performed the classic vanguard role when they participated in the Bolivian revolution and became a significant partner in the revolutionary party that took control.
Today, however, the power of one of the most militant movements in the region is threatened by the decline of the tin market (Martin 1986).
Along with Argentina, Chile was one of the first countries in Latin America to experience union organisation and by 1970, the labour movement had emerged as a strong and ideologically independent organisation.
The new left-wing government, under the leadership of Allende, restructured the economy into three sectors: the social-property sector, made up of state enterprises and those to be  expropriated; the private-property sector; and the mixed-property sector, made up of enterprises where the capital was owned jointly by the state and private individuals.
The workers, wanting participation in management, exerted pressure on the union leadership and the government, who came to an agreement in December 1970, that ensured the participation of workers in the running of enterprises in the social and mixed sectors of the economy.
Concrete modes of putting this into operation were discussed by a commission and put into effect by June 1971.
The expropriated firms were run by an administrative council, made up of eleven members, five elected by the workers, five appointed by government, and a director appointed by the President.
Of the workers' representatives, three were elected from the shop floor, one from the administrative workers and one from the technicians, engineers and graduate staff.
Worker participation was a notable achievement, but the Chilean proletariat went further in their radical actions, by setting up the cordones .
These were the result of spontaneous revolutionary activity from the base, which even embarrassed the union leadership, and demonstrate a high level of class consciousness among the mass of workers.
The cordones were units of industrial organisation made up of workers from various enterprises, which were brought into being by the Bosses' strike in October 1972.
A left-wing party outside government had, for some time, been calling for the workers to seize factories and, when they found themselves shut out by the closing of firms by management in the Bosses' strike, the workers were prompted to action They seized firms and, having taken them over, set up a cordón in the area.
They made an inventory of the industries in the zone and then made contact with union members in them.
It was, frequently, these groups that were responsible for worker takeovers for, if any of the firms in the area were still in the private sector, the local cordón would encourage the workers to take control.
One such cordón was the Cordón O'Higgins which in 1973, grouped fifteen enterprises and, with a base of 11,000 workers, mobilised 5,000 of them.
This activity worried the union leadership and the government because, although they were committed to a strong social-property sector, the government was adamant that this should be achieved by legal and orderly means.
The government was, also, committed to a private sector as, in its manifesto, it had pledged support for the small businessman, of whom there were many in Chile.
Legality was important to the President because, although he had won the presidential election, he did not have a majority in Congress.
He, therefore, could not afford to support illegal methods, which would give the opposition in parliament and the middle class, in general, genuine grounds for opposing him.
The Chilean case shows that the working class were prepared to take the situation into their own hands and adopt radical action over the heads of their own leaders.
they were highly organised and ideologised and, prompted by a sympathetic political situation and finally by the political actions of management, they became a powerful militant force.
Chile's previous period of democracy and the way that the labour movement had developed it independent, political base and strong organisational structure during that time, made possible the development of militant collective action on the part of the proletariat.
‘The political stance adopted by a class at any given time will be i part a function of the structure of the political system as whole and the concrete possibilities which exist in a specific situation for the application of various kinds of class alliances’(Roxborough 1979: 82).
this is true of the working class in Latin America, whose political stance has varied across the region.
Most of the evidence from Mexico lends support to the spalding view, while the data on the Allende period in Chile show very distinct revolutionary potential.
Humphrey stresses that his conclusions relate only to the Brazilian auto workers under study at that particular time.
The next chapter looks at the way in which the working class has been involved in class alliances in order to capture the state and exert influence that way.
POPULAR SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
Portes' last two class categories both belong in the informal sector.
The informal petty bourgeoisie is a term that is rarely found in attempts to outline class structure in Latin America, but Portes' usage refers to small-scale entrepreneurs, who have similar characteristics in the class analysis to the dominant class, but who operate at a very different level and have a somewhat precarious existence.
Since petty entrepreneurs make use of casual labour, often in the form of unremunerated family workers, they can be classified as informal unlike the dominant class, who hire workers through contractual mechanisms.
There is a distinct rural segment of this class which is made up of small commercial farmers, who depend on a casual labour supply.
the development of the urban informal proletariat has been discussed fully in the previous chapter, its rural counterpart being the agricultural semi-proletariat.
There is some disagreement about the size of the informal proletariat, which is not surprising given that its informal nature does not lend itself to the gathering of statistic, but most commentators see it representing about 40–60 per cent of  the economically active population.
Since the 1950s, its composition has altered, in that there has been a shift from the rural informal proletariat to the urban.
whatever disagreement there may be about size, there can be no doubt that this sector will not disappear easily and there is every evidence to show that with the economic crises of the 1980s, it has been increasing.
In the early days of shanty-town development, there were suggestions that the squatters would become a strong political force with the potential for threatening the status quo.
Land invasions are a highly militant form of action, which require courage on the part of those involved.
But in most cases, the land invasion represented the peak of political activity.
In general, further energies went into consolidation, as the struggle for day-to-day survival offered little time or opportunity for political mobilisation.
Exceptions to this were the case of the Chilean urban poor before and during the Allende period and Peruvian collective action during the 1960s and 1970s.
Although this sector has rarely produced a highly organised and successful political movement, it is becoming more of a source of protest, that is gaining significance in contemporary Latin America.
Popular protest movements are becoming more common and although they are usually multi-class in membership, they often originate in poor urban neighbourhoods.
These social movements express new forms of social struggle, which have arisen out of the relative failure of other sectors of society to make significant changes and out of changing socio-economic conditions.
They are not confined to Latin America, nor even to the LDCs, as they represent a common response to some of the problems of contemporary capitalism.
Three major processes are identified as being responsible for new forms of subordination that inspire resistance in the form of new movements: firstly, a commodification of society as individuals are increasingly brought into a market system; secondly, bureaucratisation resulting from increasing state intervention into daily life and finally cultural massification as the influence of mass media becomes more pervasive (Slater 1985).
The term social movement refers to a wide range of groups with certain characteristics in common.
Firstly, they are multi-class, which does not mean that class struggles do not exist.
These are new antagonisms which emerge as social conflict is diffused to more social relations.
Secondly, instead of being located in a work situation, these groups are usually based in a community, often a neighbourhood or some form of local grouping.
They bring together people with a shared experience of suffering the same problems.
Thirdly, social movements are organised around specific demands such as the need to defend the legality of land-holdings; the desire to get access to water and electricity; or the need to protect human rights.
Fourthly, the movements are based on a principle of democracy, so that they have very little in the way of hierarchy or authoritative positions.
Finally, Portes suggests that in the struggle, the groups rarely come into direct confrontation with the dominant class, but usually with members of the bureaucratic-technical class who staff the agencies of the state (Portes 1985).
There are a number of different groupings, which may be included under the rubric of social movement: neighbourhood councils, which include the gamut of barrio and community organisations aimed at solving problems of urban facilities and also those that are concerned with living standards, particularly in the form of rising prices of food, transport and other necessities; women's movements, which have become particularly  prominant in Grenada and Nicaragua, but which also exist in more localised forms in other countries; human rights groups, which have become so well-known on a national scale in Argentina, but are also active at neighbourhood level as for example in São Paulo, where one was formed in 1978 in the barrio of São Miguel after one of the inhabitants was victimised by police brutality (Singer 1982); CEBs, as described in Chapter 4, are spreading now throughout the continent; regional movements have emerged in countries where the interests of one region have been subordinated to those of other areas as in Peru; and political protest groups, which in the extreme become guerrilla groups, such as Sendero Luminoso in Peru.
In general these movements have operated only at grass-roots level, but in some areas they have been joining up to form networks of organisations of the urban poor.
In Mexico in the early 1980s these networks had joined to form the National Council of Popular Urban Movements, with their main demand being that every poor family had a right to a piece of land for a dwelling (Cockroft 1983).
One grass-roots group of this kind, which has been relatively successful is the Cost of Living Movement (MCV) in São Paulo (Singer 1982).
It originated in the Mothers' Clubs in a parish in the southern part of the city.
The members wrote a letter to the authorities protesting at the increases in the cost of living, which had exacerbated problems of nutrition, health and transport.
After the letter was published in the press during some local elections, the inhabitants decided to continue with the campaign by carrying out research on the effects of these rises on lifestyles.
Seventy Mothers' Clubs distributed 2,000 questionnaires, which showed that the average worker in that part of São Paulo earned one and a half minimum salaries, which was not sufficient to cover costs of food, rent, mortgage of land payments, clothing, transport, medicine, school equipment, electricity and water for their families.
This was followed by a demonstration, to which the Governor of the state was invited, but he did not attend.
Various suggestions were made, but little was done, leading to disillusionment, which almost ended the movement.
The following year, however, it was revived with the aim of extending it to other neighbourhoods of the city.
Gradually the movement spread until by 1978, it was able to assemble 5,000 people with a petition for which almost 1,300,000 signatures had been collected, but the petition received little attention from the authorities.
Although the petitioners realised that it was government policies which were responsible for the impoverishment of the masses, the movement did not oppose government, it appealed to it for improvements.
Although the MCV failed in its immediate objectives, it can claim some achievements.
It had managed to reach the mass of people and make them aware of possible means of tackling their problems.
Consciousness-raising of this type has spread, as the MCV has emerged in other cities and in other states.
The new social movements represent a very positive force, they unite people in different occupations to confront a problem and in so doing, they raise consciousness.
Because they operate at grassroots level, they involve people in the issues that really matter to them, which may be the reason why they have often been so dynamic.
The problem is that the factors which contribute to their dynamism are also disadvantages.
Because they focus on local-level, small-scale issues, their achievements must by definition be limited to that level, and success, that is the accomplishment of the task, may even mean the disbandment of the movement.
Also the lack of organisation, although contributing to the involvement of members, makes it difficult to expand and develop these movements to any sort of state or national level.
How much notice the authorities will take of them remains to be seen.
CONCLUSION
The changes that have been taking place in Latin America and the economic growth that the region has experienced have not brought about any redistribution of income in favour of the low-income groups, the trend has been if anything slightly towards a greater polarisation of wealth.
The dominant and bureaucratic-technical classes, through lack of motivation and the organised working class, due to its size and nature, resulting from peripheral capitalist development, have not been revolutionary forces in the region.
Perhaps as Becker has suggested for the bourgeoisie (Becker 1983) and Roxborough for the proletariat (Roxborough 1984), it is expecting too much to place the burden of revolution on the shoulders of any one class.
The two major revolutions of modern times in the region, Cuba (1959) and Nicaragua (1979), were both brought about by multi-class coalitions.
It is more realistic to look for advances which are significant for those concerned.
The new social movements represent a multi-class force for change, but so far, have in general been limited in their achievements.