

CHAPTER ONE
Maggie Jordan entered Reception from the back door to find her best friend Susan staring out of the window.
‘Are you all right?’ she queried when she saw the expression on Susan's face.
‘Come and have a dekko at this, will you.
It's right queer,’ Susan said without turning around.
‘What is it?’
Maggie asked, joining her at the window.
‘Just look at that sky!’
A heavy bank of clouds, very dark and tinged with deep red and purple, was creeping across the sky, while at the same time a lower bank was moving rapidly in the opposite direction.
The overall effect was weird and uncanny.
‘I've never seen a sky like that in my life before,’ Susan said softly, wonder in her voice.
Neither had she, Maggie thought, feeling she could have stood there all day gawping up at it.
For some unknown reason prickles sprang up all over her shoulders and down the length of both arms.
She ran a hand through her wavy auburn hair.
‘At least it's stopped raining,’ Maggie said.
It had been bucketing down when she'd left home that morning.
‘Aye, but not long since.
And there's more to come, that's obvious,’ Susan replied.
She and Maggie worked at The Haven hotel where they'd been employed since leaving school three years previously.
Susan turned on Maggie.
‘Are you away then?’
It was Maggie's half-day.
‘I am.
And twenty minutes past my knocking off time.
But lunch was pandemonium.
I was fair run off my feet.’
She'd been waitressing in the dining-room for breakfast and lunch.
Her duties weren't merely confined to waitressing however; like all the girls at The Haven she did whatever was required of her from changing bed linen to washing dishes.
‘It's been a busy summer right enough,’ Susan commented.
It was already 12 August 1935.
‘Which has pleased Mr Lawler,’ Maggie smiled.
Mr Lawler owned The Haven.
‘You can say that again.
He's been positively coining it since the season started’
‘Aye.
Last season was good, but this one is even better.’
Maggie changed the subject.
‘Now about tonight, are you still on for the pictures?’
‘Darned tooting I am!’
Susan enthused.
‘I wouldn't miss Douglas Fairbanks Jnr for the world.’
The film playing at the local kinema was Chances , a war-time romance also starring Anthony Bushell and Rose Hobart.
‘I'm really looking forward to it too,’ Maggie smiled.
‘And we'll have fish and chips afterwards.
Just like always.’
‘Couldn't do without the fish and chips,’ Maggie agreed.
Her brown eyes suddenly twinkled.
‘I wonder…?’
‘Wonder what?’
‘If those two English lads from Northallerton will turn up at the pics?
They said they might.’
Susan giggled.
‘I think you fancy that Tom.
Can't say I blame you, he's very nice.’
‘He's all right.
Cyril's nice too.’
Susan giggled again.
‘Cyril!
What a name!
But a lovely kind face and such broad shoulders.’
He certainly had those Maggie thought, broad as the proverbial barn door.
Tom's were broad, but not a patch on Cyril's.
‘We must make sure we get there before the start of the programme,’ said Maggie, giving Susan a wink.
‘You mean while the lights are still up?’
‘Precisely,’ Maggie nodded.
‘So that if they're there they'll see us.’
‘And hopefully join us.’
Susan giggled a third time.
She was about to say something further when the telephone rang.
‘I'll knock on your door at quarter to six,’ Susan said as she hurried to answer it.
‘I'll be ready’
‘Good afternoon, The Haven hotel,’ Susan said into the telephone, waving to her as Maggie left Reception through a wooden flap which was part of the counter.
Outside the hotel Maggie turned up the collar of her mac.
Straight home? she wondered, then decided she'd go down to the front and see if her dad was there.
She'd have a natter with him if he were, something she often did on her half-days.
The air had a peculiar smell to it, she noted, as she made her way down the street towards the front and the spot where her dad tied up his boat.
It was a metallic smell that you could somehow taste, which she found quite unpleasant.
Hello Maggie, and how are you the day?’
The friendly voice belonged to Mrs Caskie who lived just along from Maggie and her family.
‘Fine, Mrs Caskie.
What about yourself?’
‘I'm not too bad, thank you.
Mustn't grumble.
What an awful day, eh?’
‘Awful,’ Maggie agreed.
‘And this August too.’
Mrs Caskie shook her head.
‘If it wasn't so warm it would be more like November or December’
Maggie glanced up as lightning flickered across the sky, followed seconds later by a loud crack of thunder.
Leaving Mrs Caskie, Maggie waved across the road to Clarice McKechnie who was a year older than her and was engaged to a lad from Oban whom she was marrying early in the new year.
It started to rain again, a light drizzle that caused umbrellas to pop up all over the place.
When she reached the front, Maggie stared out to sea.
The sea was a dull murky green, and angry.
Waves broke on the shore and eventually expired in a froth and myriad of bubbles.
There wasn't a seagull to be seen Maggie suddenly realized.
At this time of afternoon there were usually hundreds swooping and screeching overhead.
Charlie Jordan was sitting beside his boat enjoying a pipe while he repaired some tackle that had been damaged.
A blackboard set on an easel at the rear of his boat proclaimed, Fishing Trips, Shark Fishing a Speciality.
‘It's yourself, Maggie,’ Charlie smiled as she came up to him.
‘I wondered if you might come down and say hello.’
‘How's business?’
He pointed a horny finger at the sea.
‘Anyone taking a small open craft out on that needs his head examined.
I wouldn't even chance it by myself, far less take holidaymakers with me.’
Further along the shoreline a wave crashed, followed by another, louder than the last.
Maggie exclaimed when spray lashed against her face.
‘I'll walk you back if you like.
I only hung on here thinking you might turn up,’ Charlie said.
‘What about the boat?’
‘Tide's on the way out so she'll be all right for now.
I'll come back and check the situation this evening.’
Maggie gazed at the twenty-foot-long boat that was her father's main source of livelihood.
She was called Lucky Lady and had originally been bought by grandfather Alec, some forty years ago.
During the season Charlie used the boat to take holiday-makers out on fishing and pleasure trips.
Out of season, he fished by himself, selling his catch on the quayside to the fish agents and passers-by.
Mid-winter he carved figures in wood and whalebone, the latter called scrimshaw, which Mr Lambie, who owned Lambie's Shop & Gift Emporium, sold for him, taking a percentage profit from every item bought.
Charlie's scrimshaw was particularly beautiful, an art that had taken him years to perfect and of which he was extremely proud.
He had the whalebone sent to him from the port of Leith from where several whalers operated.
‘So what do you make of this weather?’
Charlie asked.
Maggie shifted her attention from Lucky Lady to her dad.
‘You tell me.’
Charlie secured the tarpaulin with a length of hairy string from his pocket.
‘It's going to get worse before it gets better.
I'll bet on that.’
More lightning flickered overhead, followed this time by several cracks of thunder, each a tearing whiplash of sound.
‘I'm sure you're right,’ Maggie replied.
He snorted, and rubbed his nose with a finger.
‘There's a funny smell been about for…’
‘A sort of metallic smell?’ she cut in.
‘I noticed it when I left the hotel.’
He considered that, then nodded, ‘Aye, metallic.
That describes it exactly.’
‘And you can taste it — at least I can.’
Charlie stood up.
‘I can too.
What we both need is a good strong cup of tea to wash it away.
So let's go on home eh?’
‘Anything you want me to carry?’
He shook his head, and started walking away from the boat, Maggie falling into step beside him.
‘Is it the pictures tonight?’
Charlie asked as they reached the road that ran along the top of the shore.
Maggie nodded.
Susan and I are going.
Douglas Fairbanks Jnr is in the big film so it should be good.’
Charlie thought of the kinema, the dear old kinema, and smiled to himself.
It was years since he'd been there, but there had been a time when he'd gone every week, sometimes twice.
He and April, Maggie's mum, had done a great deal of their courting in the back seats of the stalls.
There had been no sound in those days of course, twenty odd years ago now.
Mrs Wedderburn had been the piano accompanist, a reed of a woman who wore wire-framed spectacles and reputedly drank like a fish.
His smile widened as many fond memories came flooding back.
He must go to the kinema again soon, he and April.
And perhaps, though he doubted she'd agree, they could sit once more in the back seats for old times' sake.
They stopped briefly at Smellie's tobacconist while Charlie bought a half ounce, then continued through the drizzle to the narrow cobbled street where their cottage was.
‘I'm back!’
Charlie yelled as he hung up his oilskin coat.
‘Me too!’
Maggie also called out.
Wee Charlie, aged seven and the youngest in the family, appeared out of the parlour where he'd been playing.
He had an impish look about him, and the most beguiling manner, a combination which never failed to capture the hearts of all who came into contact with him.
‘Hello horror,’ said Charlie, clapping his hands and gesturing Wee Charlie to come to him, which Wee Charlie did at a run.
Charlie laughed as he gathered his only son into his arms.
If there had been room in the hallway, he would have swung Wee Charlie round in a circle.
‘Miss me horror?’
Charlie demanded.
‘Not in the least, Dad,’ Wee Charlie replied, teasing him.
He might be young but he still had a highly developed sense of humour.
Charlie feigned outrage, then hurt.
‘What!
Not at all?’
‘Not at all.
Though…’
Wee Charlie trailed off.
‘Though what?’
‘If you were to give me a ha'penny I might tell you different’
Charlie laughed, and gently cuffed him on the head.
His son was a continual source of amusement and delight to him.
‘Get away with you, you Philistine!’
‘All right, make it a farthing then,’ Wee Charlie instantly retorted.
‘I'll make it a smack on your backside for cheek if you're not careful,’ Charlie declared, joking as well.
Maggie went through to the kitchen where April was rolling pastry and Pet, her fourteen-year-old sister, paring and cutting up apples.
The remaining member of the family was her big sister, Laura, who was married and living in Glasgow.
‘Apple tart or pie?’
Maggie queried.
She loved both.
‘Tart and some jam turnovers,’ April replied.
‘Yummy,’ Maggie said as Charlie and Wee Charlie, arms twisted around one another, came into the room.
‘I thought you'd be back early,’ April said to Charlie.
‘I only hung around as long as I did thinking Maggie might come and see me, which she did,’ Charlie replied.
‘Have you heard the thunder?’ said Pet to Maggie, and gave a mock shudder.
She was terrified of thunder.
‘Are the rivers up?’
April asked Charlie.
She was referring to the North and South Heys which flowed from their source at Ranlodden Moor towards the six-hundred-foot hills that towered over Heymouth.
‘A bit, but not as much as they might be considering the rain we've had,’ Charlie answered.
That was all right then, April thought, and got on again with her pastry rolling.
‘I'm dying for a cup of tea,’ Charlie announced.
‘I'll make it,’ Maggie told him, crossing to the range where the kettle was boiling, as it was more or less constantly throughout the day.
‘Can I have some lemonade?’
Wee Charlie asked hopefully.
‘Yes,’ replied Charlie.
‘No,’ said April simultaneously.
April looked at her husband.
‘Don't you go spoiling him now.
He had a glass earlier on.’
Charlie gave his son a wry smile.
‘Sorry, wee fella, but if your mum says no then no it is.’
‘Oh Mum!’
Wee Charlie complained.
April glared at him.
‘Don't you start now!
Don't you start.’
‘Come with me — I want to show you something,’ Charlie said to Wee Charlie.
He'd just remembered he had a couple of toffees in his oilskin coat pocket.
April might have forbidden Wee Charlie to have any more lemonade, but she'd said nothing about sweets.
‘Half fill this from the tap, will you,’ requested April, passing Maggie a saucepan.
Maggie thought of Tom from Northallerton and hoped he would come to the pictures that night.
He was in Heymouth for another eight days and…
She exclaimed in surprise as water ran into the saucepan.
‘What is it?’
April asked, glancing around from what she was doing.
‘This water's filthy.
Just look at it!’
Wiping her hands on her pinny April came over to the sink.
Sure enough, the water gushing from the tap was the colour of brown sauce.
‘Well that's never happened before,’ April mused.
Maggie emptied the pan.
‘We certainly can't use that.
So what are we going to do?’
‘It will probably clear itself before long,’ Pet commented from across the kitchen.
‘It might.
Then again it might not,’ said April.
‘If the system has broken down it could take days for it to be sorted out.
What a nuisance!’ she muttered darkly.
‘I've an idea.
To be on the safe side why don't we stand the zinc bath out the rear and let that fill up with rainwater?’
Maggie suggested.
‘That's a thought,’ April nodded.
Looking out of the window she saw that the drizzle had become heavy rain.
The zinc bath would soon be filled Charlie came back into the kitchen and was told the news.
He frowned as he stared at the brown water still gushing from the tap.
‘I presume it is the system and not us in particular?’
April queried.
‘Has to be the system,’ he confirmed, wondering how on earth this had come about.
It was working a few minutes ago, Pet stated.
‘It's over an hour since we last used the tap,’ April corrected her.
Pet's brow creased.
‘Seems like just a few minutes ago’
‘It's been over an hour,’ April repeated for Charlie.
Then told him about Maggie's suggestion of putting the zinc bath out the rear.
‘I'll do that right away,’ he said.
Maggie turned off the tap as there was no point in letting it continue to run.
When Charlie returned, he instructed Pet, ‘Run over the road and knock on the McDougalls' door.
Ask them if they're having the same problem.’
To April he explained, ‘I believe they're on different pipes to us so it's just possible their water might be unaffected.’
‘Send Wee Charlie.
I'm busy with these apples,’ Pet answered, quite the little madam.
Charlie didn't reply, just gave his daughter a stare — which was enough.
She hurriedly left the room.
A few minutes later Pet was back.
‘Their water is just as bad.
I told Mrs Mack about us putting the zinc bath outside and she said she'll do the same.’
‘You never know the minute till the minute after,’ murmured April, shaking her head.
‘Who else for tea?’ asked Maggie.
April and Pet declared they'd have a cup.
‘And a biscuit?’ said Charlie.
‘There's a bought tipsy cake in.
You can have a slice of that,’ April told him.
Charlie's face lit up.
Tipsy cake was a great favourite of his.
While they were drinking their tea and talking about the filthy tap water, there was a knock on the outside door.
‘I'll get it.’
Wee Charlie yelled through.
‘Mr Lawler!’
Maggie exclaimed, jumping to her feet when her boss appeared in the kitchen.
‘I'm sorry to trouble you on your half-day Maggie, but I sorely need your help,’ Lawler explained.
‘Here, let me take that from you,’ said Charlie, reaching for the bowler hat Lawler was holding.
‘That's kind, Mr Jordan, but I can't stay,’ replied Lawler, hanging onto his bowler.
‘Surely you'll have a cup of tea with us?’
April smiled.
‘As you can see it's already made’
Lawler shook his head.
‘I'd love to but I'm afraid I just don't have the time.
I must get straight back to the hotel’
‘So what can I do for you, Mr Lawler?’
Maggie queried.
‘As you know it's the twelfth, the start of the grouse season, and I ordered thirty brace from the Ranlodden Estate which are supposed to be collected about now.
They're on tonight's menu.’
Maggie nodded.
The grouse were to be a special feature on the menu.
‘The plan was for Bryce to drive up and get them, but he's up to his eyes in trying to draw substantial amounts of water from our well.
The normal supply of water has turned brown and unusable.’
The Bryce he was referring to was the general handyman.
‘Same here,’ Maggie commiserated.
‘I would have driven myself except we've had a party of Australians land on us looking for accommodation on the off-chance.
We're able to put up most of them, while the remainder I've sent round to The Beach Hotel.’
Here Lawler pulled a face.
He loathed turning business away.
He went on.
‘And as you know Mrs Lawler has gone to…’
‘Are you asking me to collect the grouse for you?’
Maggie interrupted with a smile.
‘I'd be ever so appreciative if you could, lass.
And as I'm putting you out on your half-day I'll make it up to you, there will be something extra by way of a thank you in your pay packet on Friday’
Maggie had always wanted to drive and passed her test first time.
She often drove errands for Lawler.
‘I'll be happy to go for you, Mr Lawler.
To be truthful I'd nothing special planned for this afternoon anyway.’
‘Oh that's good of you, Maggie!
Thank you very much.
I do appreciate it,’ he replied gratefully.
‘Where's the van?’
‘Outside.
I brought it over for you,’ Lawler said, groping in a pocket.
He produced the van key on a ring, which he handed to Maggie.
‘It's just been filled up with petrol so you've no worry there.’
‘I'll leave right away,’ Maggie promised.
‘You're a darling!’ he beamed.
Lawler rubbed his hands together.
‘Right then, I'll away back to the hotel and see how those Australians are settling in.’
To Charlie he said in a confidential tone, ‘Strange people the Australians.
Very brash and loud, though nice and friendly with it.
No class though, certainly none of that.’
Maggie smiled to herself.
Lawler was renowned as a snob which was in total contrast to his wife.
But then Mrs Lawler came from a ‘good’ background, while it was well known that Lawler was an entirely self-made man.
Maggie saw Lawler out, then returned to her tea, finishing it in a single swallow.
‘I'd better scoot then,’ she said.
Listen, I've got nothing special planned for this afternoon either.
Do you mind if I come with you?’
Charlie asked unexpectedly.
‘Not at all, Dad.
I'd enjoy the company’
‘Good.’
Then to April, ‘I'll have a word with Parkinson the gamekeeper if there's anything you'd like.
How about a couple of rabbits?’
‘We haven't had rabbit for a while.
They'd make a change.
And how about a brace of grouse for ourselves?
We could have them on Sunday as a treat.’
I'll see what I can do, Charlie nodded.
Maggie and Charlie went out into the hallway, where she put her mac back on and he his oilskin coat.
‘I haven't been up top for some time,’ he said.
‘Can I come?’
Wee Charlie asked, having appeared out of the parlour.
‘If you like,’ smiled Maggie.
‘Och, I don't think I will then,’ said Wee Charlie contrarily.
‘You're a horror,’ laughed Charlie, tickling his son under the chin.
‘Will you play with me when you get back, Dad?
I'm playing knights of the round table’
‘I'd love to,’ Charlie agreed.
‘Promise?
Cross your heart and hope to die?’
‘Cross my heart and hope to die,’ Charlie stated solemnly.
‘You can be in charge of the baddie knights and I'll be Sir Lancelot, the bravest and best knight of all.’
Charlie was chuckling as they left the cottage.
‘What a boy!’ he said.
The game with Wee Charlie would be fun — they always were.
The van was old but a good and reliable runner.
Once they were under way Charlie pulled out his pipe and lit up.
‘It's like a winter's afternoon, not a summer's one,’ commented Maggie, switching on her lights Charlie nodded.
In all his years he'd never known an August day quite like it.
They drove into the High Street, then turned into Bridge Road, which crossed the North Hey.
‘That river has risen quite a bit since earlier on,’ murmured Charlie.
Maggie glanced sideways at the river, having been concentrating on the fairly heavy traffic.
It was now well up, and flowing very fast indeed.
The South Hey would be the same, as they both acted in tandem.
She sniffed.
‘And that smell's got worse’
It had indeed, Charlie thought.
He wondered it if were connected in some way with the fouling of the water system.
Charlie spotted and waved to Don Gillies, a drinking partner of his who also arranged fishing and excursion trips during the season.
Don waved back and then gestured towards The Bell Inn where he was clearly heading.
Charlie shook his head and mouthed the word ‘Tonight!’
Don gave the thumbs up.
‘Are you sure you don't want to join him?’
Maggie asked, having caught this little exchange.
‘I can get your rabbits and the brace of grouse.
Nor will I be offended, I assure you.’
Charlie gave her a thin smile.
‘It's a matter of economics, lass.
I would like to go with Don, but don't feel I can afford the pub twice in one day.
I'll have my pint this evening.’
A few minutes later they were starting up Heymouth Brae, the road that connected Heymouth with the summit and world beyond.
The brae was extremely steep, bordered on either side by meadows and patchy woodland.
In the old days it had taken six horses to haul a vehicle the two thousand yards from the bottom of the brae to its top.
Charlie watched as Heymouth and the sea dropped away beneath them.
A holiday-maker had once described the ascent to him as ‘like going up to Heaven’.
It was an apt description.
They passed a house which seemed to hang perilously onto the hillside.
The Thorns lived there, newcomers who'd only moved in the year before.
‘When you get to the summit can you stop in the lay-by?’
Charlie requested.
‘If you want.’
He puffed on his pipe.
‘Any particular reason?’ she probed.
‘It's a grand view.
Is that particular enough?’
Maggie laughed.
‘Aye, all right then.’
She was amused by his dry tone.
Not for the first time she thought her father would have made a wonderful actor.
The van laboured its way up the final stretch of the brae, its engine protesting at the strain.
They were now at the summit and Maggie pulled into the lay-by, positioning the van so that they overlooked Heymouth.
Maggie stared at people walking about far below, tiny creatures that could hardly be recognized.
There was The Haven, and to the right, the kinema where she'd be going later.
She gazed at the stubby brick lighthouse, which was over two hundred years old, and had been built to guide the fishing boats home safely to harbour.
She shifted her attention to the main car park which was full.
There were a lot of holiday-makers currently in Heymouth, as it was an extremely popular resort.
Someone had ‘discovered’ Heymouth years before, and the beauty of this little fishing village cast an irresistible spell on those who, undaunted by its remote situation and the lack of organized transport, began to stream in from all over Britain.
In time, the ever-increasing number of visitors had opened up an entirely new source of income for the Heymouthians, and instead of having to depend on fishing as their primary source of income, they found the tourist trade was theirs for the developing.
‘It's a view I never tire of looking at.
I think it must be one of the most beautiful in the world,’ Charlie sighed.
‘Do you think you might be biased, Dad?’
Maggie teased.
‘Of course I'm biased!
But I also believe it to be true.
As far as I'm concerned what we're looking at could be Paradise itself.’
Paradise itself!
‘Even in this gloom and with the rain pelting down?’
‘Even in this gloom with the rain pelting down,’ he confirmed defiantly.
Leaning across she kissed him on the cheek.
‘You're lovely, Dad.
A 100 per cent gold-plated smasher.
I think comparing it to Paradise is a bit strong, but I know what you mean’
‘Does that mean you agree or disagree with me?’
She smiled.
‘It means I know what you mean.
Now we'd better get on if Mr Lawler is to get those grouse in time.’
And with that she reversed the van, turned it round and drove back on to the road.
Soon they turned down a side road which led to Drumbreck House where Sir Ewen McLay lived.
He owned Ranlodden Estate, which consisted of all thirty-nine square miles of the moor.
They drove in silence, Charlie contentedly puffing on his pipe, the only sounds being the patter of rain on the van roof and the brushing of the windscreen wipers.
‘Look!’ said Charlie suddenly, pointing out of his window.
‘What?’
‘The sheep in the burn.’
Maggie stopped the van so she could see what he was talking about.
The burn was swollen, the sheep in question bobbing up and down in the middle, apparently held there by something under the water.
‘Is it alive or dead?’
Maggie queried.
‘Can't tell from this distance.’
‘You want to go over there then?’
‘If it is alive we might be able to help.’
Charlie glanced at his daughter.
‘I'd hate to think we passed on by if the beast is suffering.’
‘Come on then,’ she said and, opening her door, hopped out.
The moment they stepped on to the moor itself their feet sank almost to the ankle.
Their feet made loud sucking noises as they tramped over to the burn.
The branch of a tree, embedded in the bottom of the burn, was supporting the sheep which had become firmly wedged against it.
Maggie blinked and wiped the rain from her face.
‘It's as dead as a dodo,’ she said, referring to the sheep.
Charlie stared at the sheep, whose eyes were wide open while its mouth was pulled back to reveal two rows of large, yellowy teeth.
A cold shudder ran through him.
‘It's dead all right.
Drowned probably.’
They stared at the dead sheep for a few seconds longer, then went back to the van.
As she got in, Maggie glanced up at the sky.
The heavy bank of clouds was still there, the areas of red and purple had expanded, their colours now violently intense.
In the distance lightning flickered.
For some reason it made Maggie think of silent music, each flicker a celestial note.
Between there and Drumbreck House they came across a number of swollen burns and encountered streams where no streams had existed before.
It was with relief that they reached Drumbreck House, parking among the outbuildings where they hoped to find Parkinson, the gamekeeper.
Inside the first, they came across Bob Merryfield, chief ghillie, sorting out part of the day's bag.
‘Mr Parkinson is with Sir Ewen in the big house, but he'll be along in a few minutes,’ Bob informed them after Maggie explained why she was there.
‘Terrible day,’ commented Charlie by way of making conversation.
‘Terrible indeed,’ Bob agreed.
‘The ‘guns’ had to call it off by mid-day.’
‘The weather?’ asked Maggie.
‘Partly that, and the birds themselves.
They just refused to be flushed.’
Maggie immediately thought of the lack of seagulls she'd noticed when she'd been down at the sea-front.
She was about to mention it when Parkinson appeared.
He was positively grim-faced.
‘Good afternoon, Mr Parkinson.
Mr Lawler has sent me from The  Haven to collect the thirty brace of grouse he ordered,’ Maggie said with a smile.
Parkinson snorted.
‘There will be no thirty brace for Lawler the day.
I can let you have eight brace, and that's all.’
‘Only eight!’
Maggie exclaimed, disappointed.
Charlie saw his brace disappearing down the plug-hole.
‘Eight brace and Lawler's lucky to get that.
I've never known such a disastrous twelfth!’
Parkinson replied.
‘Sir Ewen won't have been pleased,’ Charlie said.
Sir Ewen was a fanatical sportsman.
‘He was cross enough to spit.
Nor were matters helped by the fact he has two very important business associates here whom he'd guaranteed an excellent day's shooting.
They didn't get a single bird between them.’
‘From the way Himself carried on you would think it was all our fault,’ Bob Merryfield grumbled.
Parkinson frowned at the chief ghillie.
‘Well, it's true!’ persisted Merryfield.
Parkinson agreed, but considered it disloyal of Merryfield to say so in front of outsiders.
‘Are you sure you can't do me more than eight brace?’
Maggie suggested, trying to cajole Parkinson.
‘I'm sorry.
Normally there's no problem filling all the orders I get from the Heymouth hotels and others in the area, with dozens of braces over and above that to send to Edinburgh, Glasgow and London.
But not this year.
The bag has been far and away the smallest in my lifetime.
And in fact, I overheard Sir Ewen say it's been the smallest for the past hundred years.’
‘Then I'll settle for the eight brace and be thankful,’ Maggie said, accepting defeat.
Parkinson reached into an inside pocket and brought out a leather bound silver flask.
‘How about a dram all round, eh?
I feel it's that sort of occasion where one is merited.’
‘You can count me in,’ said Merryfield, who made no bones about enjoying a drink.
Maggie held up a hand.
‘Not me, thank you.
But I'm sure my father will.’
Parkinson unscrewed the top of the flask and handed it to Charlie.
‘Here's hoping you have better luck with the grouse tomorrow,’ Charlie toasted.
‘That's good stuff,’ he acknowledged after he'd had a deep draught.
As Bob Merryfield was having his dram Charlie broached the subject of rabbits and Parkinson said he could have a pair, as a number had been shot the previous day.
Charlie could have as many as he wished, but Charlie replied that a pair would be sufficient.
‘I'll have to leave you now I'm afraid, I have matters to attend to,’ Parkinson said to Charlie and Maggie.
He then instructed Merryfield to see to their grouse and rabbits.
‘Only halfway through the afternoon and it's like night!’
Maggie  commented to Charlie when they were once more outside.
It was certainly a great deal darker than when they'd arrived.
Charlie loaded up the van, then climbed in.
‘Mr Lawler will be upset that I'm only bringing him eight brace, but I did my best,’ Maggie said as they pulled away.
She then literally jumped in her seat as a huge peal of thunder crashed directly overhead.
Charlie grinned.
‘That's set my ears ringing.
You?’
‘What?’
He raised his voice.
‘That's set my ears ringing.
Has it done the same to you?’
‘Ding dong,’ she replied, which made him laugh.
More thunder followed, while off in the far distance the small arrows of lightning, the silent celestial music, were still flickering.
It had been raining steadily, but suddenly the rain became torrential in its fierceness.
‘Has to be a cloud-burst,’ Charlie stated softly.
‘You all right?’
‘Why, do you want to drive?’
That was a jibe, her father couldn't.
‘What I meant was do you wish to pull in somewhere till this has eased a bit?’
She considered that.
‘I don't think so.
I'm fine.’
They drove on slowly because Maggie's visibility was limited.
All the traffic on the road was also crawling along.
‘Knowing our weather the sun will probably be cracking the skies tomorrow,’ Charlie joked as they started down Heymouth Brae.
‘No doubt.
Trust it to be like this though on my half-day!’
The deluge still hadn't abated when Maggie drew up outside their cottage.
‘You away in and I'll go on to the hotel by myself.
There's no point in the two of us getting drenched,’ she said.
He nodded.
That made sense.
‘I'll see your mum has a nice cup of tea waiting for you’
‘Thanks, Dad,’ she smiled.
‘I won't be long.’
Charlie got out of the van, took his rabbits from the rear and hurried indoors.
When Maggie reached The Haven she parked the van in its usual spot, collected the grouse and then went directly into the kitchens where she dumped the birds in front of Harry Harrison, the chef.
After exchanging a few words with him, she went in search of Lawler.
She found him in Reception talking on the telephone.
He was cradling the telephone and gave a long, heartfelt sigh.
‘You got the grouse?’
‘Only eight brace I'm afraid, Mr Lawler.’
His face clouded with irritation.
‘But I ordered thirty brace!
I told you Maggie, thirty brace.’
‘I know what you ordered, Mr Lawler.
There just wasn't thirty brace to be had!’
She repeated to Lawler what Parkinson had told her.
‘Blast!’
Lawler exclaimed.
He opened his mouth to say something else, but before he could, the lights went out.
‘Jesus Christ, what next?’
Lawler exploded.
‘They'll probably come on again right away,’ Maggie said.
But they didn't.
Lawler groped his way to the wall switch which he flicked up and down, to no avail.
‘Hello, what's happened?’ a female voice called out.
‘There seems to have been a power failure,’ a male voice replied.
‘Maggie?’
‘I'm here, Mr Lawler.’
Lawler moved away from the wall and immediately stubbed his toe against a heavy cast-iron ornament that had been placed out of the way while the small oval table it normally stood on in the lobby was being repaired.
He swore vehemently, causing Maggie to clamp a hand over her mouth to stop herself from laughing.
She crossed over to the wooden flap set in the counter where she bumped into Lawler.
‘Sorry, Mr Lawler,’ she apologized, thinking this whole thing was rapidly degenerating into a farce.
‘Must find Bryce,’ he muttered agitatedly.
‘Henry!’
Maggie recognized Mrs Lawler's voice.
‘Over here, my dear.’
‘What on earth has happened, Henry?’
‘I don't know yet dear, but I'm about to try and find out,’ Lawler replied.
‘It's a power failure,’ the same male voice as before repeated.
‘Is it just the hotel?’ a new female voice asked.
‘No,’ said the man, ‘Look outside.
The entire street's blacked out.’
‘He's right,’ said another man who was standing by a window.
‘We're going to have to get organized, Henry,’ Mrs Lawler said.
Alarm bells rang in Maggie's brain.
Time to get out of there before she was roped in to help, she thought, and sneaked out of the main doors into the deluge that was still cascading down.
‘Well, isn't this a to-do!’
Pet laughed as Maggie entered the kitchen.
The kitchen was filled with the soft cosy glow of candlelight, as there were two lit candles on the mantelpiece and another on the table.
‘All of Heymouth is out,’ Maggie stated.
‘I thought that was probable from the looks of things,’ Charlie said, and shook his head.
‘I think it's fun!’
Wee Charlie beamed.
You would,’ muttered April from the sink where she was peeling potatoes.
At least they could cook, as the stove was gas.
Maggie found a towel and began rubbing her hair.
‘Are these all the candles we've got?’ she asked her father.
‘No, I have a full packet if we need them.’
Thank goodness for that, Maggie thought.
It would be awful to sit around in pitch black.
‘I wonder how long this will last?’
Pet queried.
‘No telling,’ Charlie said, drawing on his pipe.
‘It could be one hour or ten.
It all depends what the problem is.’
‘This rain possibly.
It's still chucking it down,’ Maggie said.
‘I can hear it,’ Charlie nodded at her.
Promptly at quarter to six there was a knock on the outside door.
Wee Charlie let Susan in.
‘I came over as I said I would,’ Susan smiled at Maggie.
‘But the pictures won't be on if there isn't any electricity!’
Maggie replied.
‘My dad said the kinema might have its own generator.
Would you know about that, Mr Jordan?’
Charlie shook his head.
‘I've no idea, Susan.
But they could.
It's worth your trying anyway.
It would be a shame to miss the programme if it were actually on.’
‘That's what I thought,’ Susan said.
‘Well, you'll have to give me a few minutes to get myself ready.
I hadn't bothered, thinking we wouldn't be going,’ Maggie told Susan.
‘Hurry up then.
I don't want to miss the start of the big picture.’
Charlie pulled out his fob-watch and glanced at the time.
‘I'd better away and check Lucky Lady .’
‘Then it's a pint, I suppose?’
April said drily.
‘I did intend to have a couple.
You don't mind, do you?’
‘Glad to be rid of you for a while,’ she retorted.
‘When you're at home you just get under my feet.’
Maggie grinned at this exchange.
She didn't know of a more loving couple than her mum and dad.
They idolized one another.
‘If that's the case I'll stay out longer than I'd planned, and do you a favour!’
Charlie teased.
Their eyes met, and a look passed between them.
‘Ach, away with you, you big pudding!’
April said gruffly.
She knew what was going to happen later when they were in bed together.
It was something to look forward to while the hours ticked by.
She might have four children, but still thoroughly enjoyed that sort of thing.
She was only thirty-six after all!
It took Maggie ten minutes to get herself sorted out, then she and Susan were off, heading towards the kinema.
‘It's like fairyland,’ Susan commented referring to the candle light and the light from the storm lanterns that illuminated the various windows they passed.
Maggie agreed.
‘Just think, this is what Heymouth must have been like before electricity was discovered,’ she said.
‘Wait a minute,’ said Susan, and stopped.
She sniffed, then sniffed again.
‘That stink's gone,’ she declared.
Maggie realized that Susan meant the metallic smell.
It had gone.
All she could smell now was the clean salty tang of the sea.
‘And the rain's stopped at last,’ Maggie stated.
The earlier deluge had eventually given way to more normal rain, and now finally that too had passed.
‘I'm surprised Mr Lawler let you away at the end of your shift,’ Maggie said.
‘The Haven has been in a right uproar since the power failure, I can tell you.
When it was time I didn't tell Mr Lawler that I was going, I just left.
I'm sure he would have asked me to stay on if I had.’
‘A shrewd move on your part,’ Maggie nodded.
‘Oh, I'm not daft!
I know that Lawler through and through.
Mind you he's been worse than he usually is today.
First the water, then the electricity.
By the time I left he was quite demented.’
Eventually they arrived at the kinema, only to find it dark and locked.
There clearly wasn't going to be any Douglas Fairbanks Jnr that night.
‘Damn!’ muttered Susan.
‘No generator after all,’ Maggie said with a resigned smile.
‘So it appears.’
‘Well, as my dad said, it was worth the try.’
They turned on their heels and started back the way they'd come.
‘So, what do you fancy doing now?’
Susan queried.
‘I don't know.
You?’
I'm easy.
Open to suggestions.’
They were both thinking about it when they were hailed from across the street.
‘Hello there!
How are you?’
They stopped as two figures hurried over — Tom and Cyril, the lads from Northallerton.
‘Imagine bumping into you pair,’ Cyril said.
‘We've just come from the kinema.
It's shut,’ Susan informed him.
‘Well, what do you expect when there's a power cut!’
Tom jibed.
‘Don't be so clever,’ Maggie admonished him.
‘The kinema might just have had its own generator.’
‘We never thought of that,’ Cyril admitted.
‘Just shows you who's got the brains then,’ Susan said as a good-natured put-down.
‘Brains is it!
I'll let you know I've got stacks of brains,’ Tom retorted.
‘Aye, right where you sit,’ Maggie replied quick as a flash, which earned a laugh from Susan.
‘I'll ignore that,’ Tom told her, pretending to be piqued.
They stood for a few moments in shy silence, staring from one to another.
‘How about a drink in place of the pictures?’
Cyril suggested at last.
‘Maggie?’
Susan queried, trying not to look too eager.
‘A drink would be very nice.’
‘That's agreed then,’ said Tom, moving beside Maggie, staking his claim.
‘The Lobster Pot's nearby,’ Susan replied.
‘Sounds great,’ murmured Tom.
‘Let's go then,’ said Cyril, taking Susan by the arm.
Tom immediately did the same with Maggie.
Both the girls were under age for drinking, but knew they'd be served without any trouble.
Jack Smith and his wife Maisie were pets who'd known them all their lives.
The Lobster Pot had loads of candles stuck in bottles, littered about the pub.
As they went inside, Jack Smith was roaring with laughter, having just been told an extremely rude story by one of the regulars.
They chose a table in a corner.
As the girls were sitting down Tom asked them what they'd like to drink.
Maggie said she'd have a half of shandy, Susan ordered the same.
Susan giggled when the two lads were up at the bar.
‘We've fallen on our feet tonight, eh?’
Maggie nodded.
‘It was obviously fate we met up.
It must have been in the stars.’
‘Tosh!’
Maggie smiled.
‘In the stars I'm telling you.’
Susan shivered.
‘Just look at that Cyril's shoulders!
I could positively eat them’
‘Boiled or fried?’
Maggie joked, tongue in cheek.
‘You know what I mean!’
Tom glanced over at Maggie and winked.
‘Ooooohhhhh!’ murmured Susan quietly.
‘Ssshhh!’
Maggie scolded her.
Maisie Smith bustled into view, saw the girls and waved.
They both waved back.
‘Isn't this candlelight romantic,’ Susan said.
It was, Maggie thought.
She'd never known the Lobster Pot to have so much atmosphere.
‘All we need now is a gypsy violinist,’ she said, which made Susan giggle again.
Tom and Cyril returned with the drinks.
‘Now, tell us all about yourselves.
We know very little,’ Susan prompted, eyes wide and beguiling.
What a femme fatale!
Maggie laughed inwardly.
That sort of thing wasn't her style at all, but Susan was a past master at it.
From there on, they all relaxed and conversation flowed freely.
When last orders were called and they had to leave the pub, they went round to the fish and chip shop to see if it was open, but like the kinema, it too was closed.
‘I'll walk you home,’ Tom whispered in Maggie's ear.
She smiled at him.
She'd been hoping he'd offer.
She'd taken a shine to  Tom Rudge whom she now knew to be an apprentice fitter, as was Cyril, his mate.
‘I'll see you later,’ Tom said to Cyril.
‘And I'll see you tomorrow at work,’ Susan said to Maggie.
They exchanged a few further words of parting, then Maggie and Tom walked away, heading towards her house, while Cyril and Susan headed for Susan's.
‘Smashing night tonight,’ Tom said.
‘I enjoyed it too.’
‘It was great that we bumped into you.’
‘Yes.’
He took her hand and squeezed it.
‘I like Heymouth.
I'm glad we came here’
‘I'm glad you came too’
He laughed softly, and drew her closer to him.
Many of the candles and storm lanterns that had been lit when Maggie left the house were now out so it was a dark journey home, the pair of them stumbling more than once.
There weren't even any stars to help them.
Finally they arrived at Maggie's cottage and stopped outside the front door.
‘Thank you for the drinks and everything,’ she said.
‘Thank you .
He was suddenly awkward, shy again.
‘I was wondering…
How about tomorrow evening?
We could go and see that picture we missed tonight.’
‘You mean just you and I, or with Cyril and Susan?’
‘I'd prefer just you and I.’
So would she, she thought.
‘All right then.
The pictures tomorrow night.’
He edged even closer to her.
‘I'll look forward to that.’
‘So will I.’
‘There's no chance of seeing you through the day is there?’
‘I'm afraid not, Tom.
I'm completely tied up at the hotel.’
‘Pity.’
He was going to kiss her she thought.
Normally she would never have allowed such a thing on her own doorstep, but with the street lights out and only a few candles glimmering, no one would see.
Well come on! she urged him mentally when he hesitated.
Come on!
‘Maggie, I…’
Then his lips were on hers and she could taste his sweetness.
He pulled her tight against him, squashing her against his chest.
It was sheer heaven.
She stiffened as a hand crept up her side, knowing its intended destination.
It was time to go inside.
Reluctantly she pushed him from her.
‘I really must go, Tom.’
‘But, Maggie…’
‘I must,’ she insisted.
His face fell.
He would happily have stood there kissing her till the next morning.
She placed a finger across his lips.
‘Outside the kinema at six.’
‘I'll be there’
‘Till then,’ she breathed.
‘Till then.’
She twisted the door-knob, knowing the door would be unlocked, and went in.
She stood for a few moments catching her breath, then continued through to the kitchen.
Charlie glanced at her and smiled.
‘The pictures were open after all, eh?’
‘No, they weren't.’
She told her parents how she and Susan had bumped into the two lads from Northallerton and that they'd all gone together to the Lobster Pot for a drink.
‘I see,’ said April, laying aside the sock she'd just finished darning.
‘They're nice lads, Mum.
You'd approve.’
April wasn't worried on that score.
She knew Maggie was very sensible and that she wouldn't take up with any riff-raff, nor would she do anything she shouldn't.
‘Anyway, I'd better get off to bed.
I've got work in the morning,’ Maggie said.
‘We won't be long behind you, lass,’ Charlie stated.
Maggie kissed her mother on the cheek.
‘Goodnight then.’
‘It's obvious you enjoyed yourself.
Your eyes are sparkling.’
‘Are they?’
‘Like diamonds.’
Laughing, Maggie kissed her mother a second time, and then kissed her dad.
‘Now don't disturb Pet,’ Charlie warned.
‘I won't Dad.
I promise.’
He said that to her every night she went up behind Pet, and every night she promised she wouldn't.
‘See you in the morning then.’
She left them and went up the stairs which led to the bedroom she shared with Pet.
As she was undressing it began to rain again, and soon it was bucketing down.
Poor Tom she thought.
He must be caught in it as he couldn't possibly have had time to get back to where he was staying yet.
Lightning flashed, an enormous zigzag of it ripping across the sky, followed by a deep rumble of thunder.
She fell asleep with a smile on her face, and dreamt of Tom.
Maggie woke up imagining it to be morning, only to discover it was still dark.
Now what had wakened her she lazily wondered?
It was most unlike her to wake before it was time to get up.
The rain was still battering down she noted, and from the sound of it even heavier than when she'd got into bed.
She was about to close her eyes again when she heard a far-off roaring.
She sat up and frowned.
What in the world could it be?
She whimpered as the noise filled her ears.
It was now unbelievably loud.
Throwing back the covers she was about to get out of bed, when the far wall suddenly exploded inwards and a broiling mass of water burst into the room.
One moment the cottage was intact, with five people safely inside.
Seconds later it had disintegrated.
And the Jordan family with it.
CHAPTER TWO
Maggie was being sucked into a pit of water that seemed to go down forever.
This is it, she thought.
I am about to die.
Strangely she felt quite calm about it, which amazed her.
Perhaps it was all a dream.
She was still tucked up in bed and this was simply some horrible nightmare.
However, the pain in her chest confirmed that this was no nightmare, but grim reality.
Her head broke the surface and she gratefully gulped in air.
Water swirled her round till she started doggy-paddling, exercising some control over her movements.
Her previous calm gave away to terror that escalated until it threatened to overwhelm her.
‘Mum!
Dad!’ she called.
But there was no response.
She banged into something solid which she immediately grabbed hold of, imagining it was part of a house.
She couldn't decipher it in the pitch black.
Someone screamed, a high shrill piercing noise that caused her to break out in goose pimples.
She was freezing cold, she realized.
But then what else could she have expected as she was only clad in a thin night-gown.
The cold began to seep into her.
‘Help me someone!
Help me!’ a young female voice wailed only feet away.
Maggie lunged out an arm and hauled the girl towards her.
The girl started clawing at Maggie.
‘Careful, you'll pull us both back under!’
Maggie warned.
‘I'm drowning!
I'm drowning!’ the young girl yelled hysterically.
Maggie now recognized the voice of Faith Caskie who lived across the street.
She felt the front of her night-gown rip in Faith's clutch.
‘Get hold of this wall or whatever it is,’ Maggie instructed.
A searching, frantic hand savagely grasped Maggie's hip, and she yelped as sharp nails pierced her skin.
Somewhere close by there was an almighty splash, followed almost immediately by a large wave washing over them.
The wave had a great deal of undertow.
Faith cried out as she was carried off.
There was absolutely nothing Maggie could do.
Faith was gone.
There was a brief flash of white that could have been Faith, then nothing.
A large piece of wood hit the building Maggie was desperately clutching.
From the feel of it she thought it could be a telegraph pole.
Letting go of the masonry she dived under water and swam beneath the pole, emerging on its far side.
The first time she attempted to climb onto the pole she failed, but succeeded the second.
With her left foot she pushed herself and the pole away from the building.
The pole moved off with her straddling it, slowly to begin with, then faster as it was caught in a current.
Her fear was almost choking her, making it difficult to breathe.
She drew in a number of shallow breaths.
Driving rain pounded into her hunched back and shoulders.
Suddenly, a light appeared at a window and a terrified face peered out.
‘Jesus Christ and all the Angels!’ a male voice exclaimed.
A dog barked, and continued barking.
Maggie was listening to it when something nudged her leg.
Her groping hand made out the outlines of a fully-clothed man, who was floating face downwards.
The sea! she suddenly thought.
She and the pole must be being drawn towards the sea.
She must get off But where?
And onto what?
Hundreds of yards away a fire suddenly broke out, a bizarre sight in the midst of all this water.
From the shape of the building Maggie thought it might be Ralston's Fruitshop, but couldn't be sure.
Nearby, she heard a male and female talking together.
‘Hello!’ she called.
‘Who's that?’
‘Maggie Jordan.
Who's that?’
‘Rory and Harriet McPherson.
Where are you, Maggie?’
‘Sitting on what I think is a telegraph pole.
Where are you?’
The McPhersons lived close to The Haven.
‘Over here.’
‘I can hear you, but can't see a thing other than that fire.’
‘It looks to us like Ralston's Fruitshop,’ Harriet said.
‘That's what I thought’
A series of lightning flashes crackled overhead, briefly illuminating the scene.
Dreadful destruction and carnage was everywhere, reminding Maggie of pictures she'd seen of the Great War.
She also spied the McPhersons to her left standing on the roof of what she presumed to be their house.
Using her hands she began paddling in that direction.
‘Come on, Maggie!’
Rory urged, also having spotted her.
More lightning flashed overhead, followed by loud thunder.
Maggie sobbed with exertion as her hands dug repeatedly into the water.
But it was to no avail — she was no nearer the McPhersons than when she'd started.
‘I can't make it!’ she shouted.
‘Swim to us then!’
Rory suggested.
She was tempted by that suggestion but remembered what had happened to Faith.
At least she was relatively safe astride the telegraph pole.
She began to cry, thinking that if Wee Charlie was out in this he couldn't swim.
Pet could, but Wee Charlie…
Get a grip! she admonished herself, dashing her tears away.
A building collapsed.
She heard it give way and then plunge into the water.
‘Rory?
Harriet?’ she called out.
There was no reply.
‘Oh my God!’ she whispered.
‘Rory?
Harriet?
Are you still there?’
Again there was no reply.
She swallowed hard, thankful she hadn't made it to their house.
Then she heard a mysterious gurgling noise.
She was wondering what caused it when all of a sudden there was an enormous explosion.
For a moment she thought it must be gas, but there was no smell.
Gradually the bubbling and gurgling faded as she drifted away.
Suddenly, the pole thumped so hard into an unseen object it almost dislodged Maggie.
She hung on tightly as the pole veered violently round.
Under water what felt like gravel brushed against her legs and feet.
Then without warning a green flare exploded, which had to have been shot off by one of the fishermen.
In the light Maggie found herself staring directly at Bryce, the live-in general handyman at The Haven.
He was framed in a window less than a yard away.
Bryce threw up the sash window, leaned out, hooked Maggie under her arms, and dragged her inside.
‘Is this your house?’ she gasped.
‘No, The Haven.
You're in the hotel, lassie.’
She swept her sodden hair back from her face thinking she must look a proper sight.
Then she remembered her night-gown was torn down the front where Faith Caskie had ripped it.
‘Everyone is upstairs.
I've been on the mooch trying to see what I could find,’ Bryce explained.
‘In this dark!’
He clicked on a torch and a weak beam shone forth.
‘I've been using this, but conserving the batteries as much as possible as they're very low.
I'm hoping to lay my hands on some new batteries down here.’
Bryce now realized that Maggie was covering herself.
‘Sorry lass,’ he apologized, swinging the beam away from her.
Maggie gave a hollow laugh.
‘Ridiculous to be modest in the midst of all this!’
‘Aye,’ he agreed.
Then said, ‘Wait a minute.’
Going to a built-in wardrobe he opened it and flicked through the many articles of clothing hanging there.
‘Try these,’ he said returning with a dress and coat which he handed to her.
‘Which room are we in?’
Maggie questioned, now knowing that they were in one of the guest bedrooms.
‘Number twenty-three.’
‘So we're on the second floor.’
‘Aye, that's right.’
Twenty-three was en suite she remembered, which hopefully meant towels.
She'd dry herself and change in the bathroom.
‘Fine.
I'll wait for you out in the corridor,’ Bryce replied when she told him of her plan.
‘And you'd better take the torch with you.’
She appreciated that.
Maggie went into the bathroom where, to her delight, she found a large, unused towel.
She hurriedly rubbed herself dry, and then put on the dress Bryce had taken from the wardrobe.
Unfortunately it was a size too big, but that didn't matter.
It covered her and was warm.
In the corridor she gave Bryce back his torch and he then led the way.
A little further on he stopped before a cupboard door.
‘This is what I was looking for,’ he said, and opened it.
It was a cupboard used by the cleaners that contained a number of other odds and ends.
Bryce exclaimed when he found the box of batteries he'd come in search of.
‘I was sure these were in there,’ he said.
They stood in the darkness as he replaced the fading batteries.
Maggie had a sudden thought.
‘Bryce?’
‘Yes?’
‘If you knew the batteries were in this cupboard what were you mooching in the bedroom for?’
Bryce paused, and she could sense a sudden change in the atmosphere.
‘Why?’ he queried harshly.
‘Just wondering that's all’
There was a short hiatus, then he said unconvincingly, ‘I was checking all the rooms for food.
We don't have any upstairs.’
He's lying, she thought.
Whatever the reason he was in that room it wasn't for food.
And then she guessed.
He'd been stealing.
There must be jewellery, cash and all manner of valuables lying around the hotel.
‘And cigarettes,’ he added lamely.
‘I'm positively gasping.’
Pity he hadn't said that to begin with.
No, he'd been stealing.
But it was none of her business, especially not now.
The beam from the new batteries was strong and bright.
‘I'll guide you upstairs so you can be with the others,’ Bryce said.
Maggie was about to reply when she suddenly became aware that her feet were wet again.
‘Shine your torch onto the floor,’ she instructed.
There was about an inch of water covering the floor that she was certain hadn't been there when they'd stopped at the cupboard.
A little wave rippled over her feet, then another.
‘It's rising and rising fast,’ Bryce muttered.
‘Is Mr Lawler upstairs?
I mean he isn't…?’
‘He's upstairs, and safe.
So is Mrs Lawler.
There were folk on the ground floor who didn't make it though.’
Bryce shook his head in disbelief.
‘The whole thing happened so fast.’
‘But what ?
What happened?’
‘Flooding off the moor.
I can't think of any other explanation’
‘We've never had flooding in the past as catastrophic as this though,’ Maggie protested.
‘That's true enough.
But you know the old saying, there's always a first time for everything.’
When they reached the nearest stairs the water was over Maggie's ankles and still rising.
‘Maggie!’
Lawler exclaimed when he saw her.
‘I didn't know you were in the hotel’
With Lawler were his wife, members of staff and dozens of guests.
Candles had been lit which cast weird flickering shadows on the walls.
‘I wasn't,’ Maggie replied, and went on to tell them her tale.
Lawler gave a heartfelt sigh when she finally finished.
‘Both your parents and your brother and sister?’
It was as if a fist had punched her very hard in the stomach.
She felt a lump in her throat.
‘I don't know, Mr Lawler, I really don't.
They could be safe somewhere, just as I am here.
At least that's what I'm hoping, praying for’
‘The water's rising down below,’ Bryce said to Lawler.
At which point there was a massive crash which shook the entire building.
‘My God, what's that!’
Mrs Lawler exclaimed, her hand going to her mouth.
A second crash rapidly followed, and then a third.
Plaster dust floated down from the ceiling making some people choke and one little girl shriek that it had got into her eyes.
‘Let's have a look,’ said Lawler, marching to a window and opening it.
‘Your torch Bryce, he requested.
As Lawler shone the torch outside Maggie listened to the protesting groan of timbers and prayed the hotel wasn't going to suddenly collapse as the McPhersons' house had done.
‘Can't see a thing,’ Lawler stated agitatedly.
‘Shall I have a look, sir?’
Bryce offered.
‘I tell you there's nothing to be seen!’
Lawler snapped.
‘Yes, sir.
Very good, sir,’ Bryce replied obsequiously.
‘Oh, damn it!’ muttered Lawler, running a hand through his hair.
‘Yes, of course have a look.
Why not!’
‘Mummy!
Mummy!’ a toddler started to cry.
‘There, there, poppet,’ a female voice soothed.
There was another crash which shook the building.
Then the building began to rock on its foundations.
‘Holy Mary, Mother of God!’ a broad female Irish voice exclaimed.
‘Well, I can't see anything either,’ Bryce declared.
He was about to close the window when something made him pause.
Maggie's heart leapt.
It was the same roaring she'd heard just before she and the cottage were swept away.
‘Water!’ she whispered.
‘More water.’
Mrs Lawler took her husband by the hand and held it tight.
Then they were both knocked from their feet, as were many others, by the sudden impact.
Maggie found herself clutching a young man.
‘Sorry,’ she apologized.
He gave her a strained smile as she extricated herself.
‘A bit frightening, eh?’
‘A bit,’ she agreed.
‘There's nothing we can do but hang on here and wait for morning,’ Lawler said to his wife, helping her onto her feet.
‘I suppose not.
But I wish there was.
It's a long time till then,’ a distraught Mrs Lawler answered.
Maggie noticed the young man she'd been thrown against had a watch.
‘What time is it exactly?’ she asked.
He glanced at his watch, bringing it close to his face because of the poor light.
Eighteen minutes past three.’
Hours till dawn, she thought.
It seemed a lifetime since she'd gone to bed the night before.
As for being out with Susan, Tom and Cyril, that seemed like an eternity ago.
How were they? she wondered.
Were they all still alive?
Or were they dead as so many others clearly were.
‘Cigarette?’ the young man with the watch offered.
‘I don't smoke, thank you.’
He lit up.
‘I wish I could have a drink.
Do you think there might be any available?’
‘I've no idea.’
‘I could certainly use one.’
The hotel began to rock again on its foundations.
Maybe it had never stopped, Maggie wasn't at all sure.
Everything was so confused.
‘Excuse me,’ the young man said to her.
He turned away, gagged and vomited.
Mrs Docherty, a member of the hotel staff, came to his assistance.
After exchanging a few words with him, she led him off into a corner.
A blue funk, Maggie thought.
That was what that young man was in, a blue funk.
Not that she blamed him, she had every sympathy with him.
‘Cold!’ someone complained.
‘I'm absolutely freezing.’
Lawler looked at the person who'd spoken, then bit his lip.
‘Mr Lawler?’
‘Yes, Maggie?’
‘Would you like me to organize a small party to go downstairs and get what bed-coverings we can?’
‘Splendid idea, Maggie.’
She knew she'd be happier with a specific task to take her mind off things rather than just sitting about waiting for whatever might happen next, even if it was only the passing of time.
She wouldn't take Bryce though, recalling what had happened earlier.
In the end Maggie dragooned four Australian chaps, and a Cockney girl who'd volunteered as soon as she'd heard help was needed.
‘I'm Ethel from Aldgate, London.
Pleased to meet you,’ the Cockney girl said to one of the men as they went downstairs with Maggie.
She led the way holding a candle stuck on a saucer.
‘And I'm Casey from Brisbane, Queensland.
We're all from Queensland,’ the Australian replied.
‘Too right sport,’ another said.
Ethel giggled.
Suddenly this had become fun.
The top floor of the hotel, where they left Lawler and company, was mainly used as a loft.
It contained various bits of junk that had been stored there over the years, but nothing was even remotely useful in the present crisis.
The floor below that was the staff quarters, the rooms small, but with bed-clothes in them.
Maggie had every bed on that level stripped and the bed-clothes taken upstairs.
She and two of the Aussies then proceeded to the next floor where guest bedrooms were to be found.
Again beds were stripped and the bedclothes carried upstairs.
Food and drinking water, Maggie thought.
If only they could find either, preferably both.
But so far they'd drawn a blank in that direction.
She and Ethel were halfway down the next flight of stairs when they were suddenly joined by Bryce.
‘I thought I'd come along and lend a hand,’ he smiled at Maggie.
She wasn't pleased by that, but could hardly tell him to go away.
‘This is my room and I'm going to get changed!’
Ethel announced excitedly, and vanished inside.
Bryce opened another bedroom door, and went in.
Maggie quickly followed him.
‘This is what we need,’ Bryce said, picking up a carafe of water from the top of a chest of drawers.
‘Good,’ approved Maggie.
‘And there's a bar of milk chocolate.’
‘Stick that in your pocket.’
Bryce opened a drawer, laughed, and drew out a skimpy pair of silk knickers.
‘I wonder who these belong to?’
Maggie felt her face flaming.
‘Put them back,’ she instructed in a cool, disapproving voice.
He did, smirking as he closed the drawer again.
In another room they had a stroke of luck when they came across a large paper bag of fruit, a couple of packets of biscuits, a tin of shortbread, a jar of butterscotch and an unopened bottle of Johnnie Walker whisky.
Maggie asked two of the Australians to take these items, along with the carafe of water and chocolate bar, back upstairs.
‘How are we off for bed-clothes now?’
Maggie asked Ethel who'd just returned from the top level.
‘We can still use more.’
Right.
We'll go down to the next floor.
Maggie had just stepped onto that floor when there was a sudden miaow!
Blackie the hotel cat shot directly across her path.
She stopped and sucked in a breath.
‘Bad luck!’ commented Ethel.
Then, ‘Oh I am terribly sorry, perhaps I shouldn't have said that?’
‘It's all right, I'm not very superstitious,’ Maggie said.
On that floor they found a variety of soft drinks, and took some bottles of lemonade, soda water and Irn Bru, and also half a bottle of Gordon's gin.
They also found more fruit, and lots of dry bed-clothes.
‘I think that'll do us now.
Our little foray has been a success,’ Maggie announced.
‘Back we go then,’ Bryce said.
‘Everyone else can.
I want to check downstairs to see just how far the water has now risen,’ Maggie said.
Bryce frowned at her.
‘If anyone does that it should be me.
You're only a lassie, after all.’
She thought again of the incident in room twenty-three.
‘No, I'll go, Mr Bryce.
I may be only a lassie but I can assure you I'm quite capable.’
‘I never doubted that for a moment,’ he replied in an extremely charming, yet at the same time insolent, tone.
Maggie decided she didn't like Bryce.
He wanted to be alone down here so he could steal.
Well, not if she could help it.
‘I'm going,’ she declared.
‘It's my place to do so,’ he countered.
‘I'm going,’ she repeated with determination.
‘Then we'll go together, and that's that.’
She glared at the handyman.
Better he came with her than go off on his own to do his dirty work.
‘All right then,’ she conceded.
There was a splintering sound of wood snapping.
‘What's that?’ she queried.
‘Heaven alone knows.’
Ethel and the Australians had no sooner left Maggie and Bryce than the building began rocking again.
Maggie couldn't help but think she was in the middle of a death trap.
‘Wait a minute,’ said Bryce.
He produced a packet of cigarettes, and lit up.
‘I thought you didn't have any?’
Maggie queried.
He gave her a straight, no-nonsense look.
‘I borrowed this packet from one of the guests.’
She believed that as much as she believed the moon was made of green cheese.
‘Let's get on then,’ she said.
The next floor down was split level.
They were standing on the lower section, with a fire door leading onto a split-level landing.
This was closed with its bar lock on.
Maggie pushed on the bar lock but couldn't shift it.
‘Damn!’ she muttered in exasperation.
The door wasn't usually difficult to open.
‘Here, let me,’ offered Bryce.
He tried, and couldn't open it either.
‘That's odd,’ he frowned, and tried again.
This time he failed as well.
‘There's another door this way, we'll try that,’ said Bryce.
They were moving away from the fire door when there was a loud report, like a large cannon going off.
Seconds later they were engulfed in a seething torrent of water that appeared as though by magic.
The water rose incredibly quickly till it was touching the ceiling.
Maggie found herself submerged, and completely disorientated.
She swam in what she hoped was the direction of the stairs, only to come up against a wall.
She pulled herself along it thinking she might reach the stairs.
She jerked in surprise, bubbles streaming from her mouth, when a hand clamped onto her shoulder.
A beam of light flashed in front of her, the distorted face of Bryce behind the beam.
He let her go and beckoned her to follow him.
He propelled himself away, reached the bottom of the stairs and hauled himself up them.
Maggie gasped, then greedily gulped in air when her head broke through the surface.
‘I thought I'd lost you there,’ Bryce said, sitting on one of the stair treads.
‘That's the second time tonight I've nearly drowned.’
‘Ay well, there you are.
Your number just isn't up.
That's what we used a say during the war.
If your number was up there was absolutely nothing you could do about it.
If it wasn't you could walk through a hail of machine-gun fire and come out the other end without even a scratch.’
‘You were in the war, Mr Bryce?’
She hadn't appreciated that before.
He'd always struck her as too young.
‘I was lassie.
The last year of it.
Fought in France.’
He groped in a pocket and pulled out a now useless packet of cigarettes.
‘Buggeration!’ he swore, and tossed the packet onto the lapping water.
‘Thank goodness for that torch,’ said Maggie, rising to her feet.
‘Fortunately for us it's waterproof.
I'd never have got out of that without it.
Or found you again either.’
She swivelled on him.
‘Are you telling me you got out and then went back in again after me?’
‘I could hardly let you drown, could I!
What do you take me for’
A thief perhaps, but also a lot more than that.
‘I don't know if you saved my life earlier, but you certainly did now.
Thank you very much, Mr Bryce,’ she stated solemnly.
‘You're welcome!
I'm sure you'd have done the same if you'd been in my shoes.’
Would she?
She hoped she would have done.
‘I see you lost your coat,’ Bryce said, shining the torch at her.
So she had, she now realized.
‘Let's get back upstairs,’ she said En route Maggie hunted through several bedrooms until she found suitable dry clothes, while Bryce stopped off at his bedroom on the staff floor and also changed.
‘Good work you two,’ Lawler greeted them.
Maggie glanced about her.
People were sitting huddled in groups, many of them thoroughly dejected and miserable.
Ethel and the four Australians were the exceptions.
They appeared in buoyant spirits, and seemed to be telling each other jokes.
‘The water's risen two floors from where Bryce pulled me in off the telegraph pole,’ Maggie reported.
Lawler paled to hear that.
‘Which floor has it now reached then?’
‘The split level one.
And still rising.’
‘Dear God!’
Lawler whispered.
Then, desperation in his tone, ‘Surely we're safe this high up?’
Maggie remembered how the building had been rocking on its foundations.
If the hotel doesn't collapse under us, she told herself, but refrained from saying so out loud.
Who knew what would happen between then and the morning?
Each minute, each second, had to be played as it came.
Then she had another thought.
What if the outside world was unaware of what was happening at Heymouth?
That was possible if the telephones were down.
She'd been counting on rescue services arriving with the dawn, but maybe they wouldn't be coming after all.
Lawler glanced over to his wife, who was sitting wrapped in an eiderdown.
‘It's all so unbelievable,’ he choked.
Maggie couldn't have agreed more.
‘I think the rain might just have slackened,’ Bryce said.
Maggie stared out of the nearest window, but all she could see was.
Stygian darkness.
Her shoulders sagged, she felt completely drained.
Tiredness crept over her, making her eyelids droop.
Sleep.
She had to get some sleep.
She was utterly worn out.
Curling up beneath the window she sank into gorgeous oblivion.
She awoke stiff and sore, puzzled as to why that should be.
Then it all came flooding back.
She sat bolt upright, aches and pains quite forgotten.
Bryce, Lawler, Ethel, one of the Australians and a few others were standing at the windows gazing out.
‘Christalbloodymighty!’ the Australian breathed.
Maggie rose to her feet, and looked out of her window.
The scene that greeted her eyes was even worse than she'd expected.
It was horrific in the extreme.
‘The water's gone,’ someone said.
So it had, Maggie realized.
That meant they could leave the hotel by themselves.
Turning, she rushed to the stairs and started down to the ground floor.
The hotel below the line where the water had finally peaked was a complete mess.
The air was heavy with the stink of damp and foulness.
Slime and sludge covered the floors, everywhere wallpaper hung in tatters, while in places ceilings had come down.
With relief Maggie finally left the hotel, realizing that it now was a most unsafe place to be.
Outside the hotel's front doors were a pair of bent and twisted motor cars, one on top of the other.
The mangled remains of a bicycle were sticking out of the windscreen of the lower car.
All sorts of debris was scattered in profusion.
A multitude of household effects, iron bars, timbers, glass, bricks, a chimney stack, seemed to have been shaken by some giant hand and strewn any which way.
Maggie came upon a pile of massive boulders, which had been swept down off the hills.
When they were moving they must have demolished everything in their path.
‘Maggie Jordan?’
It was Mrs MacDonald who owned the post office.
She was wearing a coat over her night-dress.
‘Yes, Mrs MacDonald?’
‘Have you seen my Graeme?’
She was referring to Mr MacDonald.
‘I haven't I'm afraid’
‘He's around here somewhere.
I just know he is.’
Maggie glanced about, but saw no sign of Graeme MacDonald.
‘I just know he is,’ Mrs MacDonald repeated and then beat one hand ineffectually against the other.
‘Was he with you this morning?’
Maggie queried, beginning to realize the truth.
‘No.
I missed him some time during the night.
But he's around here somewhere.
I just know it.’
Mrs MacDonald went wandering off.
‘Graeme?
Graeme?
Where are you darling?
It's Janey calling.
Your Janey.’
When the demented Mrs MacDonald had disappeared, Maggie put a hand to her forehead and gently rubbed it.
She then became aware that she was shaking all over.
A little further on a surprisingly clean rag doll caught her eye, which she recognized.
Eileen Riddrie had proudly shown it to her the previous week, as she had been given it that very day for her birthday.
She next came upon the mud-covered carcass of a sheep, and another of a Friesian cow.
The cow was bloated and a swarm of flies were already buzzing round it.
Both animals, with many others, had come from the higher parts of the rivers.
The small Achray Hotel had vanished; all that remained was a foot of  brickwork where its base had been.
It reminded Maggie of a tooth broken off just above the gum.
The Pixie Tearooms were still intact.
But she was wrong.
The front and one side remained, the rear and other side had been swept away along with half the roof.
The North Hey itself was still well over its banks, and flowing like an express train.
When Maggie glanced out to the mouth of the river she was amazed.
The mouth of the river seemed ten times its normal width, while about half a mile out to sea hundreds of trees stood upright, supported by their enormous roots, just as they had been carried down in the flood.
As far as the eye could see, the water was a dirty mud colour.
Then Maggie came across her first human body.
She thought it was hideous, and turned quickly away.
Although horrified, she couldn't resist having another peek to see if she recognized who it was.
The face was unfamiliar.
A holiday-maker she decided.
She moved on, and into a quagmire of silt which she had to wade through, making obscene sucking noises every time she took a step.
She spotted other figures moving about, and from some place close by she heard agonized sobbing.
The stone bridge across the North Hey was no more.
She later discovered that eighteen bridges had been destroyed.
She became gradually aware of an awful stench.
It smelt not only of mud and rotting materials, but also the unmistakable odour of human waste.
She paused to stare at a wooden gate swinging crazily on its hinges.
The cottage the gate belonged to had disappeared, but perversely its gate had been left behind.
Further along she came upon an upturned Welsh dresser with a hand protruding out from underneath it.
The hand was caked in mud, the fingers hooked into a claw.
More boulders now barred her passage, and mixed with these, were trees and telegraph poles.
She worked her way round the obstruction, clambering over general debris as she went.
And then, the worst moment so far, she stumbled across Clarice McKechnie.
Clarice would never now marry her lad from Oban, or anyone else.
Clarice was dead, her clogged-up mouth oozing dribbles of mud Maggie put a thumb in her own mouth, and bit it so hard she drew blood.
Why only yesterday she'd waved across the street to Clarice.
And now…
She swallowed back bile and continued.
Where their street had been was a wasteland.
Not one solitary cottage had survived.
The entire area was so altered it took her several minutes to establish where their cottage had been.
She stood on what she judged to have been the centre of their cottage and, fearfully biting her lip, gazed about her.
‘Oh Mum!
Oh Dad!’ she whispered.
Pictures of her parents, memories, flashed through her mind bringing hot scalding tears to her eyes.
And with April and Charlie, Pet and Wee Charlie.
She mustn't give up hope she told herself.
There was no certainty they were dead.
They might have had a miraculous escape.
But somehow, she didn't believe that.
Deep within her she knew they were dead.
All four of them, most of her family, wiped out.
A screech made her look up.
A seagull flew overhead, followed by another.
They'd returned knowing danger was past.
Slowly she sank onto her knees, and tumbled forwards.
She was crying profusely now, tears dripping onto that awful mud.
She moved her right hand, and made contact with something which slid into her hand as though wanting to be there.
She held the object up, but it was impossible to make it out as it was coated in mud.
She scraped the mud away and revealed a piece of scrimshaw.
It was her dad's favourite piece that he'd always refused to sell and which had had pride of place on top of the mantelpiece in the parlour.
Emotion stronger than any she'd ever previously experienced welled up within her, and overwhelmed her.
And for a while time stood still.
‘Hello?’
Maggie dimly became aware that she was being spoken to.
‘Hello?
Are you all right?’
She gradually brought herself back from wherever she'd been.
Her eyes were puffy and still full of tears.
‘I'm fine, thank you,’ she eventually mumbled.
‘Would you like a cigarette?’
‘I don't smoke.’
She could make out the man now.
He was a member of the Salvation Army, the dear old Sally Ann.
‘This was my home,’ she said, gesturing vaguely about her.
‘This!’
‘You lived here with your husband?’ he queried, squatting beside her.
‘No, my mother and father, sister and brother.
The water came, and now they're all gone.’
‘There are many survivors Miss…?’
‘Jordan.
Maggie Jordan.’
‘There are many survivors Miss Jordan.
The homeless are being asked to gather at the Commonwealth Hall.
shall I take you there?’
He was about sixty years old, she thought, with a kind face that expressed a lot of spirituality.
Her father had always had a great deal of time for the Sally Ann.
The salt of the earth, he'd called them.
She tried to move, but found her legs had somehow stuck.
‘Can you give me a hand?’ she asked, which he did.
‘I'll walk you to the Commemorative Hall if you like?’
She shook her head.
‘There's no need to trouble yourself, but thank you all the same.
I'll find my own way.
There will be others who need you more than me.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Absolutely.’
She was about to move off when she had a sudden thought.
Turning back she said.
‘Tell me, I'm curious.
Having seen all this do you still believe in God?’
His features contorted, then relaxed.
‘God works in mysterious ways His wonders to perform.
Yes I do, in answer to your question.
Just because we don't always understand why doesn't mean there isn't a reason behind what He does.
Yes, I still believe in Him, and love Him,’ the Salvation Army man replied in a soft, gentle voice.
Maggie couldn't think of a suitable reply to that.
Maggie had developed a raging thirst and wondered if she could get a drink at the Commemorative Hall.
She wasn't in the least bit hungry though.
To have eaten at a time like this would have seemed all wrong.
‘Maggie!’
She stopped as Don Gillies came hurrying over.
He looked positively ghastly.
‘How are Charlie and April?’ he demanded.
She wondered if she looked as bad as he did.
What did it matter anyway?
Would anything ever matter again?
‘Our house got washed away.
The entire street did.’
Already a small man, Don appeared to shrink even further.
‘But you're alive?’
‘I'm alive,’ she nodded.
‘Though how is beyond me.
I should be dead like the rest of them’
He stared grimly at her.
‘Have you seen their bodies?’
‘No.’
‘Then you can't be certain lass.’
‘I suppose not,’ she replied, humouring him.
‘What about your family?’
‘We were very lucky.
Our first floor got flooded, but it never rose higher than that’
‘You were lucky,’ she acknowledged.
He opened his mouth to say something, clearly changed his mind and said instead, ‘The lighthouse has gone you know.’
‘No, I didn't.’
He made a sweeping gesture with the side of his hand.
‘Completely gone.
Two hundred years it's stood there.
And now, in a single night, gone!’
‘Along with half of Heymouth.
If not more than half,’ she added heavily.
A large camouflaged painted truck caught their attention.
‘The Army!
Thank the Lord for that,’ Don Gillies said.
A second truck appeared behind the first, and a third behind that.
‘They've come quickly,’ Don said.
‘I thought it might take some while for the outside world to learn of.
what had happened here as I presumed the telephone lines were down.
But apparently not,’ Maggie said.
‘Perhaps someone got through on a short-wave transmitter?’
Maggie had forgotten about them, but there were several — or had been several — in Heymouth, including one in the lighthouse.
The keeper on duty at the time might have got a message out before the lighthouse went.
Don spotted someone and swore.
‘My sister Morag!
I was on my way to see her.’
He waved frantically, and his sister did the same.
‘Will you excuse me, Maggie,’ he said, wetness in his eyes that hadn't been there a moment ago.
‘Of course, Mr Gillies.’
He flew into Morag's arms and the pair of them hugged one another.
Maggie met and talked to others she knew before finally arriving at the Commemorative Hall.
Going inside she found people milling aimlessly around, others sitting staring vacantly into space.
The Reverend Barr was sitting behind a table, flanked on either side by Mrs D'Arcy and Mrs Henry, both pillars of the church.
Maggie joined the short queue in front of him.
She had shuffled forward several places when two soldiers entered carrying a metal milk churn.
‘Fresh water!’ one of the soldiers cried out.
Instantly he and his companion were mobbed.
Stay in the queue or join those at the churn?
Two more soldiers entered with another churn of water.
That settled it, they wouldn't run out of water right away so she'd remain where she was.
‘Hello, Maggie,’ the Reverend Barr said when she reached him.
‘Hello, Reverend.
Ladies.’
‘We're making a list of the homeless.
That will also help eliminate-’
‘I understand,’ she cut in.
He wrote her name in the school jotter open in front of him.
‘And the exact address was again?’
She gave it to him.
‘We've been told your entire street has gone,’ he sighed.
‘That's correct.’
‘What about the rest of your family?’
She stared at him, then replied, ‘My surviving was a miracle.
They might also have survived, but that's highly unlikely.’
‘You mustn't be so negative, Maggie,’ Mrs Henry admonished.
Maggie glanced at the well-meaning woman.
She could easily have slapped her for that remark, which was silly really, but nonetheless that was how she felt.
‘Have your family all lived through last night?’ she queried instead.
‘Yes.
But then we're very protected where we are.’
Maggie focused on the Reverend Barr again.
‘Is there anything else, minister?’
‘I'm correct in believing you don't have any other relatives in Heymouth?’
She nodded.
‘Temporary beds will be made up here tonight.
We're also hoping to place others with those whose houses have remained intact.’
‘I understand.
Thank you’
‘The Army will be laying on food later.
Though how much later I've no idea’
Maggie wanted to say that the way she felt she doubted she'd ever want to eat again, but didn't.
‘Thank you, Maggie,’ the Reverend Barr said, dismissing her.
She left him and joined those at the milk churns.
Outside again she glanced up at the sky which was a pale shade of blue.
She recalled what her father had said about ‘knowing our weather the sun will probably be cracking the skies tomorrow’.
That brought fresh tears to her eyes.
It was hardly likely the sun would be cracking the skies, but it looked as if it would soon be out.
‘Oh Dad!’ she whispered to herself yet again, feeling sick.
She went down to the front, or what had been the front, and stared out to sea.
How many bodies were out there she wondered.
How bizarre those trees looked!
Sticking straight up out of the sea as if they'd grown there.
She knew that was one of many memories which would stay with her for the rest of her life.
Susan! she suddenly thought.
What had become of Susan?
She would go and try to find out.
Susan's house was still standing, its front door wide open.
‘Anyone home?’ she called out, sticking her head inside the door.
Mrs Lennox, Susan's mum, appeared from the rear of the house.
‘Maggie!
Come away in girl!
I'm afraid you haven't caught us at our best.
As you can…’
She broke off having taken in Maggie's expression and general demeanour.
‘How bad was it with you?’
Mrs Lennox's face drained to a pasty white as Maggie told her.
‘Oh lassie!’ she whispered, aghast, when she'd finished her tale.
Maggie took several deep breaths.
‘I don't know if it's actually fully penetrated yet.
I think it has, but I'm not sure.’
Mrs Lennox threw an arm around Maggie and drew her into the kitchen.
A few seconds later Susan came bursting in as she had been upstairs when she'd heard Maggie's voice.
With a shriek of delight she threw herself at Maggie, enveloping her in the warmest of embraces.
‘I was just about to come round and see you.
Wasn't I, Mum?’
‘Yes,’ Mrs Lennox said softly.
Susan looked from her mum to Maggie, and back again.
‘What is it?
What's happened?’
‘Maggie's lost her family.
Mother, father, sister and brother.
She's convinced they're dead.’
‘Oh!’
‘I'm certain of it,’ Maggie added.
‘I don't know what to say,’ Susan whispered.
Maggie nodded.
‘If I was in your shoes I wouldn't know what to say either.
But I know what's in your heart.’
Susan kissed her friend on the cheek, then embraced her again.
All three women were crying.
‘Where's Mr Lennox?’
Maggie asked when Susan had released her.
Gone to do the round of our relatives.
I only hope…
She trailed off, and bit her lip.
‘I've got the impression some parts of Heymouth were more badly hit than others.
So in many cases it's a matter of where you live’
‘What about The Haven?
Any news of that?’
Susan enquired.
Susan's eyes grew wide as Maggie told her about her ride on the telegraph pole, ending up at The Haven where she'd been rescued by Bryce.
‘Well I never!’
Susan exclaimed.
‘I'd make us a cup of tea if I had some clean water,’ Mrs Lennox said.
She'd lit the range earlier intending to cook later.
She had enough tins in the larder to see them through a few days at least.
‘There's clean water at the Commemorative Hall.
And the Army are bound to be establishing other water points.
If you've got something I can put the water in I'll go and see if I can get some for you,’ Maggie offered.
‘We'll both go,’ Susan declared.
Mrs Lennox found them a pail and a large enamel container.
They set off at once, everyone looking forward enormously to the proposed cup of tea.
The area immediately round Susan's house had suffered relatively little damage, but they soon left that behind to enter roads that were devastated.
Susan gaped at a fishing boat with a motor car embedded in its side, in what had been someone's front parlour.
They both jumped when, with a loud crash, a two-storey house suddenly caved in on itself.
‘It's dangerous out here,’ Susan said, swallowing hard.
‘Not as dangerous as it was last night, I can assure you.’
‘And the smell!’
Susan wrinkled her nose.
‘It's a lot worse here than where we are.’
‘The sewers are probably smashed to smithereens.
They're going to have to do something fast about that if they don't want an epidemic on their hands.’
‘Oohhh!’ exclaimed Susan, fist flying to her mouth.
The object of her alarm and disgust was a drowned collie dog.
‘There are plenty of dead animals about,’ Maggie said.
And humans too, she thought grimly.
A little further on they came across a parked Army vehicle around which a number of people were clustered listening to the vehicle's wireless.
Maggie and Susan joined the listeners, which included a lance-corporal and sergeant, the vehicle's drivers.
The radio was tuned to a report on Heymouth.
‘Mash flooding of the utmost severity…feared that many lives have  been lost…great damage to property…
Secretary of State for Scotland on his way to make a personal visit…
Prime Minister Baldwin keeping in hourly touch with events…telephone calls enquiring about friends and relatives jamming all local switchboards…medical and other assistance on its way…the Army already there (this raised a cheer from the lance-corporal)…specialized equipment being mobilized, equipment necessary for the enormous clear up that will have to take place…’
They both listened to the end of the report, then continued.
‘We're certainly national news,’ Susan commented.
‘We are that,’ Maggie agreed.
‘And you said that Mr and Mrs Lawler are safe?’
‘They were when I left them this morning’
They paused to watch as a stretcher was carried past, the person obviously a corpse as a blanket was covering its face.
Susan shivered.
‘I wonder if we knew them?’
‘It might be anybody,’ Maggie mused.
A sudden icy coldness ran through her.
It could indeed be anybody, including her mum, dad or sister Pet.
It wasn't Wee Charlie though, the body was far too big.
They followed the stretcher until they arrived at a large tent which had a hastily painted sign slung across its front.
The sign bore the chilling legend Temporary Mortuary.
I missed this when I came to your house,’ Maggie said quietly.
‘Do you want to go in and see if any of your family are there?’
Maggie thought, then shook her head.
‘Not yet.
Maybe later on.’
A woman in the uniform of the Women's Voluntary Service, approached them.
‘Are you girls lost?’
‘Hardly!’
Maggie snapped back.
‘We were both born and brought up in Heymouth.’
The woman's expression softened.
‘Sorry.
I'm only trying to help.
There are locals wandering around in a state of shock you know.
Some of them don't know which way is up.’
Maggie realized she'd been in the wrong.
‘It's me who should be sorry.
It just seemed such a stupid question that's all.
But now I understand you asked it.’
The woman glanced at their pail and enamel container.
‘Are you after water?’
Susan nodded.
‘The Army were dishing out some at the Commemorative Hall earlier,’ Maggie said.
‘No need to go that far.
There's a stand-pipe that's been erected two streets over that way,’ she said, pointing.
‘It should save your legs a bit.’
Maggie smiled her gratitude.
‘Thank you very much.
And again I'm sorry I was short with you.’
‘Think nothing of it.’
And with that the woman bustled off.
‘Right,’ said Susan.
‘Let's find this stand-pipe.
Before they reached the stand-pipe they came upon Tom and Cyril.
Subdued greetings were made all round.
‘We're returning to Northallerton on the first transport available,’ Cyril said.
‘The sooner the better,’ Tom added.
‘That's completely understandable,’ Maggie smiled.
When they'd been in The Lobster Pot, and afterwards, there had been a tremendous rapport between them.
But now, their budding relationship had been reduced to one set of strangers discussing events with another.
‘Our place was badly flooded.
We've lost all our clothes and gear,’ Cyril complained.
‘Cost a mint to replace,’ said Tom, sticking his hands in his pockets.
‘An absolute mint,’ Cyril agreed, gazing off into space.
‘Maggie lost her family,’ Susan stated levelly, suddenly angry with these two.
Tom blinked.
‘You mean…?’
‘Our entire street was washed away, and my family with it.
It was a chance in a million that I came through it all alive.’
‘Jesus Christ!’ swore Tom, trying to remember Maggie's street.
But all he could conjure up was darkness and the vague shape of houses.
‘That's tough,’ said Cyril.
Tough!
Maggie raged inwardly.
What sort of word was that to use.
And delivered with such aggression.
They didn't care, she suddenly realized.
All the pair of them were concerned about was getting back to Northallerton.
‘Goodbye, have a good trip,’ she said, forcing her voice to remain steady.
‘Try and keep your peckers up!’
Tom said in an attempt to be cheerful.
Susan grabbed Maggie's arm and marched her friend away.
‘What a couple of prats,’ she said.
‘It doesn't matter.
We hardly knew them.’
Maggie thought back to what the WVS woman had said about locals being in a state of shock.
Was she?
She wouldn't have been at all surprised if she were.
She was certainly far from her normal state of mind.
At times she was very subjective, at others quite detached as if floating outside her body.
And another thing, her hearing had gone peculiar.
Right now she was hearing as though from a long way off, the sounds somehow muffled.
A little earlier when they'd listened to the Army vehicle's wireless her hearing had been so acute that every syllable spoken sounded as if it were being shouted directly into her ear.
They found the stand-pipe, and joined the queue.
The water was supplied from an eight-wheeled tanker that had arrived in Heymouth only an hour before.
They filled their pail and container, and started the return journey.
En route they met a number of people they knew, hearing their stories and telling their own.
They also witnessed various nauseating sights including a car piled high with dead animals.
These, they gleaned, were being taken off to be burnt.
Mr Lennox was there when they arrived back.
‘Maggie, I'm so awfully sorry to hear your news,’ he said, taking her hands in his and squeezing them.
‘Thank you,’ she whispered.
‘You'll of course stay here for as long as you like.
I won't hear otherwise.’
She thanked him for that as well.
‘The wife has already made up a spare bed in Susan's room.
You can use that as long as necessary.
Till you get yourself sorted out like.’
‘What will you do?’
Susan asked.
It was something she'd been wondering about.
Maggie shook her head.
I've no idea.
To tell you the truth I haven't thought that far ahead.’
‘Plenty of time for that,’ said Mrs Lennox from the range where she was putting the kettle on.
She glanced down at the linoleum in despair.
It was quite ruined thanks to the filthy water that had covered it during the flood.
‘What about your relatives?’
Maggie asked Mr Lennox.
‘Old Auntie Mary, she's seventy-six you know, had a heart attack and Uncle George broke a leg getting her upstairs away from the flood water.
Now they're both being looked after, and our only casualties I'm happy to say.
‘Our family got off light altogether,’ Mrs Lennox said.
‘Aye, indeed,’ Mr Lennox agreed.
His wife's face clouded.
‘Do you know the McLeans in Fisherman's Wynd?
McLean won the big money prize in the draw last Christmas.’
‘I know them,’ Maggie nodded.
‘Their son Hector was a hero.
Apparently he saved a child from certain death, at the expense of his own’
‘His father saw him swept away,’ Mrs Lennox said heavily.
‘A hero,’ her husband repeated, and shook his head.
‘From accounts there were quite a few last night.
Or early this morning as it actually was.’
‘They say adversity always brings out the best in folk,’ Susan stated.
Maggie immediately thought of Bryce returning to the flooded corridor to save here.
It was certainly true in his respect.
The kettle was soon singing, and the tea made.
Mrs Lennox placed some sliced corned beef on the table along with some griddle scones she'd had in the larder wrapped in a cloth.
‘No bread I'm afraid,’ she apologized.
‘I normally get that first thing in the morning, which I didn't today.
So you'll have to make do with scones.’
Susan went up to the table.
‘Maggie?’
Maggie shook her head.
‘Not for me’
‘Are you sure, lass?’
Mrs Lennox queried.
‘Yes, thank you.
The tea's enough.’
Maggie held the cup clasped in her hands, letting its warmth s p into them.
The heat rose from her hands into her tired, battered body.
losing her eyes she felt the warmth spreading throughout her body, relaxing her.
‘Maggie?’
She started as Mr Lennox removed the cup from her grasp.
‘Would you like to lie down, lass?
You were just about to nod off there.’
She was tired, she thought.
She'd only had those few hours at The Haven.
‘Please, I could do with some sleep.’
‘Susan will take you up,’ Mrs Lennox said.
Maggie yawned.
Yes, sleep was what she needed.
To recoup her strength and escape all this…this horror for a while.
Upstairs Susan looked out a night-gown into which Maggie shrugged.
She would have given anything for a bath, but that was impossible.
‘I'll leave out some of my clothes to replace those,’ Susan said, gesturing towards the clothes Maggie had acquired at The Haven.
‘Thank you, Susan.’
She climbed into bed.
She would go to the mortuary when she woke up, she told herself.
And then there was her sister Laura, but she'd think of her later.
She smiled when Susan kissed her on the cheek.
‘I think I must have aged a dozen years today,’ she said.
Susan didn't reply, but stroked her friend's dirty and matted hair.
Within seconds Maggie was sleeping soundly.
She heard the roaring approaching and knew what to expect.
She had to warn the rest of the family!
She tried to get out of bed, but couldn't.
Every time she was about to put a foot on the floor she suddenly found herself tucked up under the bedclothes again.
Shout a warning, she thought.
But nothing emerged, not even a croak.
Dad!
Mum!
Watch out!
Run for your lives! she silently cried.
Pet!
Wee Charlie!
The roaring was stupendous now.
She clapped her hands over her ears waiting for the water that was almost upon them, aware of the damage it was going to cause.
Her mother appeared, a horrified expression on her face.
Wee Charlie was with her, clutched to her bosom.
‘We're all going to die!’
April said, and shook all over.
Wee Charlie started to cry, enormous tears running down his cheeks.
‘I don't want to die!
I don't want to die!’
Then, looking directly at her, ‘Save me, Maggie!
Please save me!
Now Pet was there, and her dad behind Pet.
‘Who would ever have thought it would end like this?’
Charlie said calmly.
‘But not for you!’
Pet stated, pointing an accusing finger at her.
‘Not you!
All of a sudden the far wall exploded inwards and a broiling mass of water burst into the room.
Maggie felt herself being sucked into a pit of water that seemed to go down forever.
‘I can't swim!’
Wee Charlie shrieked in fear.
‘I can't swim!’
She tried to call out to him, but again no words came.
She thrashed her arms, attempting to swim towards him.
But every stroke took her further and further away.
‘I can't swim!’
Wee Charlie shrieked a last time, and promptly vanished from view.
‘Goodbye, Maggie!’ said April, waving.
‘Goodbye!’
She watched her mother shatter into a million pieces.
From nowhere a swarm of fish appeared who promptly gobbled up the pieces.
Her father was choking for breath, clutching his throat as he fought for air.
His face got redder till finally, like a squeezed pimple, it suddenly burst sending his head's gory contents flying in all directions.
She was sobbing as the remains of her dad simply drifted away.
She twisted round and saw Pet up to her shoulders in ooze, sinking fast.
Pet writhed, which only succeeded in making her sink even quicker.
Pet's shoulders disappeared, then her neck was swallowed up.
Pet screamed, a horrendous scream which was abruptly cut off as her mouth vanished.
Maggie's gaze was locked onto her younger sister's agonized eyes, then the eyes too had gone.
‘No!’
She'd found her voice at last.
‘Nooo!!’
She sat bolt upright in bed.
She was covered in cold sweat, her chest heaving.
A nightmare! she realized.
She'd been having a nightmare.
But how excruciatingly real it had seemed.
The door opened and Mrs Lennox rushed in.
‘Are you all right, Maggie?’
‘just a nightmare, Mrs Lennox.
It's over now.’
Mrs Lennox sat on the bed beside Maggie.
‘You're bound to have a few of those.
It would only be natural after what you've been through.’
Maggie wiped the sweat from her forehead.
‘My imagination ran wild there for a bit.
It wasn't very pleasant.’
She didn't know how it happened, but she found herself in Mrs Lennox's  arms, who comforted her as though she were a child.
‘Was it your family you were dreaming about?’
Mrs Lennox shrewdly asked.
Maggie nodded.
‘I'm sure they felt no pain.
It would have been all over very quickly.’
She paused, then added softly, ‘If they are dead, that is.
That hasn't been proved yet.’
Maggie didn't argue with Mrs Lennox.
But she knew the truth.
‘If you get dressed and come down I'll give you another nice cup of tea,’ Mrs Lennox proposed.
‘Sounds grand.’
‘And a bite.
You must want one now.’
‘No, I couldn't.
I'm not in the least hungry.’
Mrs Lennox held Maggie at arms' length.
‘You have to eat, girl, you'll make yourself ill if you don't.
I can understand your not feeling hungry, but you must force yourself.
And I tell you this, that's the advice your own mother would give you.
So, for her sake you'll make an effort, eh?’
Maggie couldn't help but be won over by this appeal on her mother's behalf.
It was precisely the advice April would have given her.
‘A little something then,’ she smiled.
Mrs Lennox matched Maggie's smile.
‘I'll see if I can find you a treat.’
When Mrs Lennox had gone Maggie got out of bed and dressed in the clothes Susan had left out for her.
As she ate her treat she announced she would pay the mortuary a visit directly she'd finished her tea.
‘I'll come with you.
We need some more water,’ Susan said.
‘And I'll have to think about contacting my sister Laura in Glasgow,’ Maggie went on.
‘Though I don't know how I'll do that as she doesn't have a telephone.’
Mr Lennox paused.
He was ripping up the ruined linoleum.
‘Speak to the police.
They're bound to be able to help.’
Maggie thought that was a good idea.
‘And see if you can find out when the water and electricity are going to be back on?’
Mrs Lennox asked.
‘That could take days if not weeks,’ her husband told her.
When Maggie and Susan left the house they were carrying the same pail and enamel container that they'd used earlier.
As they walked along the street they heard the strident clang of a fire engine.
A little further on they caught sight of a rising column of smoke.
‘Wait a minute,’ Susan said shortly.
She went over to a man sitting on a front doorstep.
‘Mr Darling?’
Mr Darling looked up at Susan.
His eyes were red-rimmed with black bags underneath.
He stared uncomprehendingly at her.
‘It's Susan Lennox.
You know my dad.’
Recognition dawned.
‘Oh aye, of course.
How are you, Susan?’
‘Fine.
And yourself?’
‘I lost my Gladys.
She was at the rear of the house here when it was hit by something or other and knocked down.
I identified her at the mortuary not an hour since.’
Gladys had been his wife.
And it had only been the rear of the house that had been knocked down.
‘I'm so sorry,’ Susan said softly.
‘She was a good woman and wife,’ Mr Darling went on.
‘I'm going to miss her sorely.’
‘We're on our way to the mortuary ourselves,’ Susan explained.
‘Your mum or dad?’
‘No, Maggie's here.
Most of her family are missing.’
‘You have my every sympathy.
I know exactly what you must be going through,’ Mr Darling commiserated with Maggie.
She looked into his eyes and saw terrible pain and inconsolable grief.
She nodded her thanks and reciprocal sympathy, and then moved on.
Susan caught up with her after a few words with Mr Darling.
The encounter with him had left Maggie with an enormous lump in her throat.
‘Look!’
Maggie said.
She was pointing at a massive crane inching its way down Heymouth Brae.
Behind the crane was a bulldozer, tiny by comparison.
When they arrived at the temporary mortuary they halted outside.
‘Do you want me to come in with you?’
Susan queried.
Maggie thought about it.
‘Yes, I would.’
‘Right then.’
Susan couldn't think of anything she'd like to do less, but she would support Maggie.
After all she was her friend and she was in no doubt that had the positions been reversed Maggie would have done the same.
Maggie took a deep breath, and made for the tent entrance.
‘Can I help you?’ asked a man belonging to the Army Medical Corps.
Maggie explained the situation.
‘I see.’
The man then asked her some gentle questions.
‘Please come this way,’ he beckoned.
There were lines of double-banked trestle tables with bodies lying on top.
Each body was covered by a blanket.
The first body they passed had a piece of paper pinned to its blanket, Smith, Maisie.
The Lobster Pot, if still in existence, had lost its landlady.
They stopped by a body as yet unidentified.
‘From your description this could be your mother,’ said the man from the Army Medical Corps.
Maggie braced herself as he reached for the top of the blanket, which he then drew down to reveal a corpse's face.
The breath hissed from her when she saw it wasn't April.
‘No?’ the man asked.
Maggie shook her head.
‘No,’ she confirmed.
‘Any idea who she is?’
The woman was roughly her mother's age, the face rounder and fatter with hair on the upper lip which her mother didn't have.
The face was streaked with mud and had a gash on the left cheek.
‘I've never seen her before in my life.
Susan?’
‘Me neither?’
‘Must have been a holiday-maker,’ Maggie suggested.
The man replaced the blanket, and then moved on to another corpse.
Finally the ordeal was over and they could escape the tent.
Maggie had drawn a blank, none of the bodies were of those she was looking for.
But there were still a great many bodies to come in, the Army Medical Corps man had grimly told her.
They returned to the stand-pipe where they'd got water from earlier, to find the tanker gone.
They decided to try the Commemorative Hall.
There they found a tanker and stand-pipe, also a stall where bread was being doled out.
After filling the containers they queued up and were given two large plain loaves.
‘Have you been into the hall to let them have your particulars?’ queried the WVS woman running the stall.
‘I've reported to the minister if that's what you mean,’ Maggie replied.
The woman nodded.
‘And what about you?’ she asked Susan.
‘No, I'm afraid not’
‘Then you'd better.
The powers that be have decided that various lists have to be drawn up, including one of all those who survived.
They apparently need them for all manner of reasons.’
‘That makes sense,’ Maggie commented, and Susan agreed.
On leaving the stall they plunged into the hall which was bedlam, and far fuller than it had been that morning.
The minister was still there, but now Mrs D'Arcy, Mrs Henry and a Mr Ker had tables of their own.
While Maggie was waiting for Susan, Mr Crosland, one of the town councillors, appeared out of the mêlée to pin a sheet of paper onto a wall.
Curious, she went over to see what the paper said.
It was a list of all bodies that had been positively identified to date.
It made sad reading, with five entire families from her street numbered among the dead.
The Caskies, including Faith, were one of the five.
A band of children were careering about, playing tig.
How resilient children could be Maggie thought.
The children all looked as if they didn't have a care in the world, that this was just another ordinary day, and what was taking place within the hall some sort of social occasion.
Her reverie was broken by the sound of a loudhailer coming from the street.
She went out to listen and discovered it was a policeman in a car.
I here were other police present, and after the announcement she spoke to one of them about her sister Laura.
‘We're home!’ shouted Susan, and went through to the kitchen leaving Maggie to close the front door.
Susan placed the pail of water on the table.
‘We're being evacuated, starting tomorrow,’ she declared.
‘Evacuated?’
Mrs Lennox queried with a frown.
‘Those in authority are worried about the spread of disease, plus the sheer danger of remaining in Heymouth.
Everyone is to be evacuated until it's safe to return.’
‘Well, I'm not going,’ Mr Lennox stated defiantly.
‘You won't have any choice, Dad.
You're not being asked to go, you're being told’
‘Where to though?’
Mrs Lennox demanded.
‘There's a camp being put together right now on the moor at the top of the brae,’ Maggie explained.
‘What sort of camp?’
‘Tents and caravans the police said.
Facilities will be provided, lavatories and bathing, that sort of thing.’
‘What about eating?’
Mrs Lennox queried, eyeing the loaves Maggie had laid beside the water containers.
‘There are to be mobile canteens,’ Susan said.
Mr Lennox grumbled and glowered.
Stay in a tent or caravan!
The idea was appalling.
They might be ideal for daft holiday-makers, but certainly not for him.
He liked the comfort of his own bed.
‘Those who still have homes have to take no more than a suitcase each.
Those of us who lost everything will be given clothes and other necessities,’ Maggie informed the older Lennoxes.
‘What about the house while we're out of it?’
Mrs Lennox asked anxiously.
‘It'll be safe, you don't have to worry about that,’ Susan assured her.
Maggie sat at the table, thinking that she didn't know about the proposed camp but couldn't wait to get at the promised bathing facilities.
She didn't care whether it was a bath or a shower just as long as there was lots of hot water and soap.
‘We stopped by The Haven and saw the Lawlers,’ Susan said.
‘How are they?’
‘Beside themselves,’ Maggie answered.
‘The hotel has been condemned and is to be pulled down within the next couple of days.’
‘Surely it's insured though?’
Mr Lennox chipped in.
‘Mrs Lawler did mention that it was, so at least they've got some safeguards,’ Susan replied.
‘It's still a terrible blow to them,’ Maggie said.
‘They loved that hotel, it was their pride and joy.’
Mr Lennox gave a thin smile.
‘At least hotels can be rebuilt, dead people can't be brought back to life.’
Maggie dropped her head.
‘I'm sorry lass, I wasn't thinking,’ he said quickly.
‘How eh…?’
He glanced at Susan, who shook her head.
‘I'll go back to the mortuary again tomorrow,’ Maggie stated heavily.
‘And what about once we're in this camp?’
Mrs Lennox demanded.
I'll be able to come and go to the mortuary.
Those with a reason will be allowed access to Heymouth.
The police were quite definite about that.’
Mrs Lennox crossed over and picked up one of the loaves.
‘You managed to find some bread I see.’
They chatted for a while longer, then Mrs Lennox and Susan set about packing, getting ready for the next day's evacuation.
Mr Lawler never mentioned again that he'd refuse to go, aware now that was a stance he'd have to back down from when the time came.
Besides, he knew in his heart of hearts evacuating Heymouth was the right thing to do.
But he was still going to miss his own bed!
They were having dinner the following day when there was a loud knocking on the front door.
‘I'll get it!’ said Susan, jumping to her feet.
She opened the door to reveal an Army officer, who promptly saluted her.
He then consulted a notebook.
‘Is this the Lennox household?’
‘It is.’
‘Therefore you must be…’
He peered at his book.
‘Miss Susan Lennox?’
‘I am.’
He was quite dishy she thought.
He cleared his throat.
‘Have you heard about the intended evacuation?’
‘Yes.
Would you like to come inside?’
He smiled.
‘Sorry, I've a lot to do.’
‘We've just made a pot of tea.’
‘Sorry, Miss Lennox.
I really can't.’
Pity, she thought.
He went on.
‘I have to inform you that this street will be evacuated this afternoon between nineteen and twenty hundred hours.
That's seven and eight p.m.
Transport will be provided, and each person is limited to…’
‘One suitcase each,’ she interjected playfully.
‘That's correct, miss.
One suitcase each.’
‘Will you be with the transport, colonel?’
‘Captain ,’ he blushed.
‘I'm only a captain.
And yes, I will be.
I shall be in command of the convoy.’
‘We'll be ready in time,’ she promised.
‘Please.
It will make matters so much easier all round if everyone is.’
Very, very dishy, she thought.
He saluted her again.
‘Till later, Miss Lennox.’
‘Till later.’
He moved away, and she shut the door.
She went through to tell the others about the arrangement.
Susan had no sooner sat down than there was another knocking at the door.
‘I'll get it!’ she said, jumping up, thinking it was the captain again.
But it wasn't.
It was Maggie's older sister, Laura McNair.
‘Laura!’
Maggie exclaimed when she saw her sister framed in the kitchen doorway.
‘The police told me you were here.
I hurried over as quickly as I could.’
Maggie rushed over to her sister, and they fell into one another 's arms.
Laura began to cry and, despite herself, Maggie did the same.
Mrs Lennox crossed to a cupboard and took out another cup and saucer for Laura.
‘So just what do you know?’
Maggie demanded when the emotional embrace was over.
‘The wireless and newspapers have been full of the flood.
I tried to ring the emergency telephone lines all day yesterday from a public phone box, but could never get through.
Then last night the police called to tell me that Mum, Dad, Pet and Wee Charlie were missing, but that you were safe.
Have they been found yet?’
Mrs Lennox filled Laura's cup and placed it on the table.
She then signed to her husband and Susan to leave the room.
It was best that Maggie and Laura were left alone for a while.
When the Lennoxes were gone Maggie asked, ‘Have you been home or talked to anyone else since arriving in Heymouth?’
Laura shook her head.
‘The police directed me straight here, and apart from them I haven't spoken to anyone.’
‘Then you'd better sit down and I'll tell you all about it right from the beginning’
Laura was rigid with shock when Maggie finally finished her story.
‘You're certain they're dead?’ she queried in a strange, hollow voice.
‘I can't be that until their bodies are found.
But within myself I am.’
‘I thought…
I don't know what I thought!
I knew lots of people had died, but couldn't bring myself to…’
She stared up at Maggie, eyes glistening with tears.
‘I kept telling myself it would be all right.
That when I got here they wouldn't be missing anymore.
That they'd be among the lucky ones.
I just couldn't conceive that…that…’
She broke off to bite her lip.
‘Drink some of this tea,’ Maggie urged, handing it to Laura.
Laura took several sips.
Her face was screwed up with grief.
‘Is John looking after Margaret and Rose?’
John was Laura's husband, Margaret and Rose their two-year-old twins.
‘He offered.
But he's so useless with them, typical man!
I thought it best I leave them with a neighbour.
She'll keep them till I get back’
A few silent seconds ticked by, then Laura said, awe in her voice, ‘The whole street washed away?’
‘All of it.
Every last house.
I'll take you there later and you can see it.’
Maggie glanced at the table.
She didn't want any more to eat herself, and it wasn't fair that the Lennoxes were kept from what remained of their dinner.
‘Would you like to come to the mortuary with me?
I intended heading there after I'd finished eating’
Laura nodded.
‘I suppose so.’
She wasn't at all enthusiastic.
‘Right then’
Laura groped in her coat pocket for a scrap of hanky, and used it to dab at her eyes.
When the Lennoxes returned, their faces were filled with sympathy and concern.
‘Are you all right?’
Mrs Lennox asked gently.
‘Yes, thanks.
I'll manage.’
What a business!
Mrs Lennox thought.
What an awful business.
Outside in the street Maggie linked arms with Laura.
They held each other close, deriving comfort from one another, being sisters in a time of crisis.
‘I saw the pictures in the newspapers, but they didn't give the overall extent of the damage,’ Laura said as they walked along.
‘I was expecting it to be bad, but nothing prepared me for this!’
They paused to stare at a cistern hanging on the wall next to a wash basin, the rest of the house having disappeared.
‘The place is full of sights like that,’ Maggie commented.
A little further on they had to skirt an area where a gang of workmen were shovelling rubble onto a lorry.
Work was in progress everywhere, cellars were being cleared and pumped free of foul water, men salvaging goods and destroying perishable stores, windows being boarded up, and, the most urgent job of all, lashings of disinfectant being applied in all manner of places.
When they arrived at the temporary mortuary they halted outside.
As one, they each took a deep breath.
‘You know I've never seen a dead body before,’ Laura murmured.
Well, she was going to now, Maggie thought.
‘Come on, let's get this over with,’ Maggie replied, and pulled Laura into the tent.
It was the same Army Medical Corps man as the day before, except now he looked positively haggard.
‘Miss Jordan, wasn't it?’ he said, recognizing Maggie.
‘Yes.
And this is my sister from Glasgow.
We'll go round together if you don't mind?’
‘Not in the least.
If you could just give me those descriptions again to refresh my memory?’
As Maggie described her family, she gazed about her.
There were more trestle tables and more corpses than before.
‘If you'll come this way please,’ the man said when Maggie had finished.
McPherson, Rory Finlay Gordon stated a piece of paper which caught Maggie's eye.
The same Rory she'd been talking to just before he and his wife Harriet died.
If she had managed to join them as they'd urged her to do, she would also be lying there.
They stopped at a body which hadn't been identified.
‘Ready?’ the man asked.
Maggie glanced at Laura, then nodded.
When he drew down the top of the blanket Laura gave a cry, staggering where she stood.
‘That's our mother,’ Maggie said in a choked voice.
She was holding Laura up, because if she'd let Laura go she would have slumped to the ground.
‘There's whisky if you'd like a drop?’ the man proposed.
We could both certainly use something, Maggie thought.
‘Please,’ she replied.
The man hurried off.
Maggie stared at her mother through a haze of tears.
How much older April looked in death, and somehow so much smaller.
‘Thank you,’ Maggie said when he returned with two thimble glasses of whisky.
She accepted hers, and Laura did the same.
Laura threw the fiery liquid down her throat, and grimaced.
‘Do you know where she was found, and under what circumstances?’
Maggie asked.
‘I'm sorry.
I don't’
Maggie sipped her whisky, which helped steady her.
‘I have more bodies for you to see,’ the man murmur d 
‘Just a minute,’ Laura, partially recovered, went to April and placed a hand on her mother.
She swallowed hard as tears ran down her cheeks.
Maggie finished her whisky and laid the glass aside.
‘Let's move on,’ she said.
Laura rejoined Maggie, and they linked arms again.
They viewed two bodies of young girls, neither of whom was Pet.
Then they were asked to look at a young boy.
It was Wee Charlie.
When Maggie and Laura emerged from the mortuary tent they were both severely shaken, but Maggie less so than Laura.
‘I don't think I could have done that on my own,’ Laura confessed.
‘Oh, you would have done if you'd had to.’
‘No,’ insisted Laura, shaking her head.
Maggie glanced at Laura, realizing for the first time in her life that she was stronger than her sister.
It was quite a revelation.
In the past, probably because she was four years older, Laura had always seemed the more dominant figure.
But now, the boot was on the other foot.
‘Do you want to go and sit down some place?’
Maggie asked.
‘No, I'd prefer to keep walking.’
‘We could go to where the cottage was then.’
‘You were right about them being dead,’ Laura said after a while.
‘I just knew it somehow.
No doubt they'll find Dad and Pet before long.
If they are to be found, that is.’
Laura frowned.
‘How do you mean?’
‘Folk must have been swept out to sea.
Some of those will never be seen again.’
Laura gripped Maggie even more tightly.
Maggie went on.
‘You know how it was always said that Wee Charlie was the spit of me?
Looking at him I saw myself stretched out in his place.
It was an eerie feeling’
They didn't speak again until they neared the Commemorative Hall where they came across a mobile canteen manned by the Sally Ann.
It was doing brisk trade.
‘Fancy a cup of tea?’
Maggie suggested.
‘That would go down a treat.’
They queued up, and eventually got two cups of strong steaming hot tea.
‘How's John?’
Maggie asked.
‘Fit as a flea.
Gets irritated by the children, mind, but I suppose that's natural in a man.
He adores them really and is certainly very proud of them’
Maggie thought of John McNair whom Laura had met in Glasgow when she'd gone to work there, when she'd decided she wanted to leave home and broaden her horizons.
She liked John; he had a sunny disposition and was always fun to be with.
‘He has every right to be proud of them, they're bonny children.’
‘Aye,’ agreed Laura, a smile brightening her face.
It was the first smile Maggie had seen since Laura's arrival in Heymouth.
When they'd finished their tea, they returned their cups to the mobile canteen and continued on their way.
‘God Almighty!’ whispered Laura when they arrived at where the Jordan's street had been.
‘No wonder you were convinced everyone else was dead.’
Then, in a lower tone as she gazed about her, ‘No wonder!’
‘Faith Caskie also survived the initial impact, but drowned shortly afterwards.
I would have died too if it hadn't been for that telegraph pole.’
Laura stooped and picked up a gym shoe half buried in the mud.
D McKay was written inside.
David McKay had lived three cottages up and had been friends with their Pet.
They both started when an explosion went off.
‘From over that way I think,’ said Laura, pointing.
‘Someone's blasting.
Army engineers probably.’
‘Unless it's gas?’
Maggie considered that.
‘I don't think so.
It sounded too controlled.’
They remained there for over twenty minutes, occasionally exchanging comments, but mainly gazing about in silence, each deep in thought and memory.
Finally Maggie said, ‘Shall we get back to Susan's?’
Laura sighed.
‘I suppose so.
If we stay here I know I'll only become more maudlin.’
Maggie felt exactly the same.
They linked arms again, and retraced their steps.
‘I hate to go,’ Laura said to Maggie.
‘It's best you don't leave the twins for too long.
And anyway, you can't stay, what with the evacuation and all!’
The two of them were at the bottom of Heymouth Brae where official transport was ferrying people up and down, and to and from the railway station.
The station buildings had been damaged in the flood, but the railway itself, after some minor repair, remained functional.
‘Now you've got the number of our newsagent.
You can leave a message there for me anytime,’ Laura went on.
‘I'll let you know if and when they find Pet and Dad.’
‘I'll be back to see the bodies if they do.’
‘Time to leave!’ the Army driver called out.
Maggie and Laura warmly embraced.
Then Laura was on board the single-decker coach, its door clicking closed.
Maggie waved, till it was pointless waving any more.
Turning, she hurried away to Susan's where the Lennoxes, and the rest of their street, was waiting to be evacuated.
An hour later she followed Laura up Heymouth Brae.
The metal ball swung in a ponderous arc to go crashing into the front of The Haven.
A large section of the building immediately collapsed inwards.
Maggie glanced over at the Lawlers who were about a dozen feet from her.
They'd come from the camp to witness the demise of their hotel.
That wasn't the reason she'd come to Heymouth.
She'd paid the mortuary another visit, and this time was able to identify Pet's body.
Her father's body was still missing.
Another chunk of wall collapsed, sending up a billowing cloud of dust.
Before long all that would remain of The Haven would be yet another pile of rubble.
Maggie turned away.
She didn't want to see any more.
All she wanted was to be alone.
She found herself wandering, thinking about Pet.
The worst thing about Pet's body was that it had been badly crushed below the waist.
She consoled herself with the thought that Pet would have been dead before it happened.
Her aimless meandering eventually brought her to the top of Heymouth, directly underneath the towering cliffs.
She stared up at them, bitterness and pain welling within her.
‘I can't imagine it either,’ a male voice said.
She turned to gaze at the man who'd approached silently and stood a little behind her on her left.
‘I beg your pardon?’
He gestured at the cliffs.
‘I said I can't imagine it either.
The force of the water must have been incredible.’
‘It was,’ she stated simply.
Something she didn't recognize flashed in his eyes.
‘You're one of the survivors?’
A ghoul!
She suddenly thought.
How horrible!
She swept away.
He caught up with her, placing a restraining hand on her shoulder.
‘I'm terribly sorry.
Was it something I said?’
An American ghoul to boot, she now realized, as she registered his accent.
‘Please take your hand off me,’ she snapped.
He did so promptly.
‘Look!
I am sorry.
I didn't mean to upset you.
Honest I didn't!’
Tall and slim with a strong, handsome face, he didn't look like a ghoul.
How old?
Mid-twenties she decided.
With exceptional warm, light green eyes.
It was these that made her carry on the conversation.
‘What are you doing here?’ she asked.
He removed his brown felt hat.
‘Allow me to introduce myself.
I'm Howard Taft on special assignment for The New York Times .’
‘A journalist!’
‘Yeah, all the way from the States to cover the Heymouth tragedy.
I flew in yesterday, travelled up last night and this morning came straight to the scene.’
‘Scene?’ she questioned.
‘Scene of the tragedy,’ he explained.
She gave a soft laugh.
‘What a funny way to express yourself.
The scene!
Sort of shorthand.’
‘Exactly,’ he smiled.
‘And you've come all the way from America to write about Heymouth?’
‘I surely have.
What happened here has touched heartstrings all over the world.’
That took her aback.
‘I knew we were headlines throughout Britain, but hadn't realized we were worldwide.’
‘Your story is of enormous interest to the American people.
Hell!
Quite a number of Americans have been here you know, and many of them wrote to us after we printed what came across the wire services.
It's because of that interest, and those letters, that I've been sent to do a special report.’
She blushed.
‘I eh…
I must apologize.
I thought you were some sort of ghoul come to…come to do what ghouls do.’
‘Holy Harry, do I look like one of those!’ he replied, genuinely shocked.
‘Not in the least now that I've had a chance to study you him.
‘It was just that you seemed so interested in my being one of the survivors that I got quite the wrong initial impression.’
Relief flooded his face.
‘I'm glad to hear that.
You had me worried there for a moment, I can tell you.’
He laughed.
‘A ghoul!
Jeesus!’
‘Now it's my turn to say sorry.’
He gave her a mock bow.
‘Apology accepted, Miss…?’
‘Jordan.
Maggie Jordan’
‘And you live in Heymouth?’
Her expression became grim.
‘I did, with my family.’
‘Did?’
He was gently probing.
‘I've just come from identifying my sister in the temporary mortuary.
Several days ago I identified my mother and little brother in the same place.
They haven't found my father yet.’
‘He's dead too?’
‘Has to be.
I'd have known long before now if he wasn't.’
Taft took out a packet of Camel cigarettes.
Maggie shook her head when he offered her one.
‘Would you care to sit down?’ he asked.
‘Where?’
He glanced about.
‘There are some rocks over there.
We could sit on those.’
The rocks referred to were boulders that had come down off the moor in the flood.
When Maggie had perched herself on one she said, Does this mean I'm being interviewed?’
‘Do you mind?’
She thought about that.
‘No, not really.’
‘The job I do can be somewhat intrusive at times.
I guess this is one of those times.’
She appreciated that.
For someone who worked in what she believed to be such a hard-nosed profession he retained a sensitive streak.
She approved, and liked him for it.
‘I'm told that nine inches of rain fell during the twenty-four hours prior to the flood, and that five of those inches were in one single hour,’ he said.
‘I haven't heard those figures.’
‘Yeah, nine inches in twenty-four hours apparently.
More than you'd normally get here in three months.’
‘There was certainly a lot of rain.
Most of that day it simply bucketed down.’
‘Bucketed down?’ he repeated, smiling thinly.
‘English expression, eh?’
‘I don't know about England but we do use it here in Scotland .’
The thin smile turned into a grin.
‘Do I get the impression I just made a boo-boo?’
‘We Scots are a very independent race, and totally different to our English neighbours.
Their background is Teutonic, ours Celtic, of the Gael.
Two entirely different fish.’
‘I take your point,’ he nodded.
He paused, then went on mischievously.
‘Of course it could be that when I said ‘English expression’ I meant expression in the English language.
Which is what we're talking, right?’
‘An Englishman might not agree with that,’ she countered.
‘But basically it's true,’ he persisted.
Basically ,’ she agreed, and they laughed.
‘Laughing suits you,’ he said.
‘I just hope you don't think it's disrespectful of me saying so in the circumstances.’
She shook her head.
‘It's good for me to laugh.
It makes me feel better.’
‘How old are you?’
Howard Taft asked suddenly.
‘Seventeen.
And you?’
The swiftness with which she'd put the same question surprised him.
Quick-witted and intelligent he thought.
There was none of the country bumpkin about this young miss.
‘Twenty-four.’
‘The New York Times must think highly of you to send you abroad at your age,’ she stated disarmingly.
He shrugged.
‘I guess they do.’
That pleased her for some unknown reason.
‘Maggie, is it OK if I call you that?’
She nodded.
‘And you'll call me Howard.’
‘All right, Howard’
‘Or Howie if you prefer?’
‘No, Howard.
Howie is too juvenile.
Or…’
Careful! she warned herself.
She didn't want to insult him.
‘Or what?’ he prompted.
‘Nothing,Howard .’
Howard reached inside his brown leather jacket and pulled out a note-pad and pencil.
‘I'd like to take notes.
Would you mind?’
‘Go ahead’
He opened his pad and stared at it, obviously thinking.
The atmosphere between them changed and became serious.
‘Precisely what do you know so far?’
Maggie asked.
He glanced up at her.
‘Statistics, such as the nine inches of rain.
I'll give you another, it's reckoned that ninety million tons of water, I'll repeat that, ninety million tons of water, sufficient to supply the needs of this immediate area for over a hundred years, cascaded down off the moor that morning.
The water converged on Heymouth, having dropped hundreds of feet in its half-mile race to the sea, at a velocity of over twenty miles per hour.
Water that had started ten miles away at the far end of the moor and then fallen fifteen hundred feet overall.
The wall of water that finally hit Heymouth is believed to have been over forty feet high.
You know what happened next.’
‘A wall of water over forty feet high,’ she repeated, recalling the roaring which had made her ears ache, and had grown unbelievably loud just before the wall hit her home.
‘Statistics are all very well and good, but what I want is the human angle.
To hear from those directly involved.
That's why I've come over from the States,’ Howard said.
‘I understand,’ she replied softly.
‘So, when were you first aware you were in danger?
Let's start there.’
Maggie began to speak, recounting what had happened during that early morning of the flood.
The only thing she omitted was her suspicion of Bryce the handyman.
After a while Howard stopped scribbling, and just listened.
I he funeral took place on 19 August, six days after the flood.
The weather was bright and sunny, as the procession slowly wound its way to the cemetery nestling beneath the cliffs, within sound of the sea.
Maggie, dressed in black, walked between Laura and John McNair.
The twins had been left behind in Glasgow.
The procession was one of sombre colours, khaki and air force blue predominating.
All who had gone to help the stricken townsfolk mixed with those who had lived through the disaster, and were present to mourn and pay a last tribute to their relatives, friends and neighbours, whose coffins, borne by men of the Fire Service, they now followed.
As she walked Maggie thought of her father whose body had been one of the last recovered.
A diver had found it out at sea trapped beneath the underground storage container from a petrol station, the container having been ripped right out of the ground.
Laura sobbed, and dropped her head.
A hand holding a scrap of hanky pressed on her veil where her mouth was.
John glanced at his wife.
He should have placed himself in the middle between Laura and Maggie he thought.
as if reading his mind Maggie tugged him across in front of her so that he could comfort his wife.
His arm supportively slipped round Laura.
Inside the cemetery, Maggie couldn't imagine a more peaceful setting.
When the whole procession finally had arrived, and everyone was in place, the Moderator of the Church of Scotland began the service.
Many fine words were spoken, and sentiments expressed.
In the middle of Reverend Barr's address a woman Maggie didn't recognize completely broke down and had to be led away.
Mr Baldwin, the Prime Minister, who was there, also gave a speech.
At the conclusion of the service the deep silence was broken by the mournful and pathetic notes of ‘Land of the Leal’ and ‘Flowers of the Forest’, by a lone piper of the Argyle and Sutherland Highlanders.
‘Aye,’ said John when at last it was all over, and the final notes had faded away.
People began to talk among themselves, others to drift off.
Laura had composed herself now.
‘It went well I thought,’ she said, lifting back her veil.
Maggie agreed with her.
There was a brief pause, and then John prompted his wife.
‘Laura’
Laura grasped Maggie by the arm.
‘There's nothing left for you here.
The house and your job have gone.
Come and live in Glasgow with us.
John and I have talked it through, and if you'd like to come we'd love having you living with us.’
It was true, Maggie thought.
There wasn't anything left in Heymouth for her.
Why not make a completely fresh start some place else?
The idea appealed.
‘Are you sure I wouldn't be in the way?’ she said hesitantly.
‘We wouldn't have suggested it if we'd thought you would,’ comforted John.
Maggie put a hand in her coat pocket, and with the tips of her fingers touched the piece of scrimshaw she'd found in the mud where their house had once stood.
A new start was exactly what she needed she told herself.
She'd be daft to turn down this opportunity.
‘When would you want me to move in?’ she asked.
‘Today, come back with us.
There's no time like the present,’ Laura replied.
So soon!
But there again, why not?
‘I'll have to get my things from the camp, and say goodbye to the Lennoxes and a few others.’
Early that evening when John and Laura boarded the train to take them home to Glasgow, Maggie was with them.
CHAPTER THREE
The moment the alarm clock went off Maggie was up and out of the cavity bed she slept in.
She had a big day ahead.
She switched off the alarm clock, then lit the fire that had been laid the night before.
As the fire was crackling into life she headed for the small lavatory in the hall.
When she was finished there she hurried back to the kitchen where she washed herself at the sink.
That done she got dressed.
She was in the middle of making the porridge when Laura, a thick dressing-gown covering her night-clothes, put in an appearance.
‘Sleep well?’
Laura smiled.
‘Tossed and turned a bit.’
Laura's smile widened in sympathy.
‘A little nervousness is only to be expected when you're starting a new job’
Maggie's new job was at Templeton's carpet factory in Tullis Street.
She'd tried to get another position in hotel work, but nothing suitable been available.
Then she'd contacted Templeton's, at John's suggestion, and struck lucky.
She was to be employed as a cop winder, whatever that meant.
Training would be given, she'd been assured.
‘Let's have a look at you then,’ said Laura.
Maggie stopped what she was doing to face Laura.
Her dress was one she'd bought specifically for work in the factory.
‘You'll do,’ Laura nodded.
‘Let's hope they think that.’
Laura laughed.
‘I'm sure they will.’
Maggie was nervous.
Life was terribly hectic in the city, she thought, all hustle and bustle.
Quite the opposite to the calm peacefulness that had existed in Heymouth prior to the flood.
It was a month now since she'd left Heymouth, and she'd read in the newspapers that a great deal had been accomplished there.
People had moved back into their own homes though the camp was still in existence.
Maggie got on with making the breakfast.
It was part of the morning  routine she'd adopted, a routine that had her up and dressed before John came through.
Having to rise first for the privacy that afforded was one of the penalties of living in a two-roomed house where the kitchen also doubled as a bedroom.
Her cavity bed was built into the wall, like some ancient Roman grave.
Laura took a large plain loaf from the bread bin, and began slicing it.
When she'd cut sufficient slices she buttered them.
‘I bought some chocolate biscuits as a treat,’ Laura said.
‘For breakfast?’
‘No, you ninny, for your dinner piece.
Don't expect them every day mind, we don't run to such luxury in this house.’
Maggie was touched by the gesture.
Typical Laura!
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘Don't mention it.
Now what about your piece, I'm giving John tomatoes and lemon curd.
That suit you, too?’
‘Not in the same piece I hope?’
Maggie joked.
A piece was a sandwich, or collectively sandwiches in this case.
Laura pulled a face.
‘Just think what that would taste like, yuch!’
‘What would taste like yuch?’
John asked, coming into the room.
He was wearing trousers but his chest was bare.
His braces hung down the outside of either leg.
‘Tomatoes and lemon curd in the same piece,’ Laura explained.
‘Oh, I don't know, could be quite nice’
‘He's teasing,’ Laura said to Maggie.
‘Ignore the bugger.’
John yawned, and scratched his stomach.
While he was doing this Maggie took a pan of boiling water from the cooker and laid it by the side of the sink.
This was John's shaving water.
They could get hot water, but only after the fire had been going for a while and the back boiler had heated up.
‘Today's the day then, eh?’
John grinned at Maggie.
‘It is.’
‘Don't worry.
This time next week it'll be as though you'd been there all your life.
It's always the same.’
Maggie stared at John's bare back, his creamy white skin punctuated by large freckles both fascinated and repelled her.
He poured his boiling water into the enamel basin, then started to strop his razor on the leather strap that hung by the side of the sink.
‘You're looking a bit tired,’ Maggie commented to Laura as she gave the porridge another stir.
It was ready now, waiting for John to sit at the table.
‘Rose woke me up several times during the night,’ Laura explained.
‘Teeth?’
‘No, upset tummy.
I'm surprised you didn't hear her.
Particularly as you were restless yourself.’
Maggie shook her head.
‘Never heard a thing.’
‘Well, I damned well did,’ John grumbled, dragging his razor down one cheek.
Laura glanced at John, and Maggie sensed friction between husband and wife.
But it quickly vanished as they got on with the morning's proceedings.
‘Good porridge that.
The sort that sticks to a man's ribs,’ John said, pushing his bowl away from him.
He glanced at the wag-at-the-wall clock.
‘We'd better be getting a move on.
I'll walk you to the tram stop, Maggie.
It's on my way.’
That was kind of him, she thought.
Several minutes later, each clutching their dinner piece wrapped in waxed paper, they kissed Laura goodbye and went off downstairs.
‘Good luck!’
Laura called after Maggie.
Outside the closemouth they crossed the street, and walked down the hill to the nearest tramstop.
From here, they had a marvellous view over Dennistoun and beyond.
There was a keen nip in the air, winter only just round the corner Maggie thought.
She hoped it was going to be reasonably warm in Templeton's.
They stopped when they reached the tramstop.
‘You'll be all right now?
You know where you're going?’
Of course I do.
Don't worry about me, I'll be fine,’ Maggie smiled in reply.
‘Right then, see you the night’
Maggie was turning away from John when, in a sudden daring movement, he kissed her on the cheek which made her start because it was so  expected .
‘Ta-ra then!’ he cried to her as he hurried off.
Wasn't that nice of him, she thought.
John was proving to be a good friend as well as brother-in-law.
When her tram clanked to a halt in front of her Maggie climbed aboard and went upstairs.
She adored the upstairs in Glasgow trams, the only drawback being that it was where the smokers went.
Sometimes, particularly at night, the fug could be so thick you could hardly see from one end of the tram to the other.
The tram schoogled away again, and Maggie gazed eagerly out at the passing scene.
How dirty Glasgow was, Maggie thought, and yet, despite that, it had tremendous charm.
Like the Glaswegians themselves, hard and uncompromising on one side, charming and friendly on the other.
When she reached her stop Maggie got off and paused to stare out over Glasgow Green, spotting the People s Palace in the distance.
She d heard about the People's Palace, a museum concerned with Glasgow and its past, and promised herself she'd pay it a visit in the near future.
As she walked up Tullis Street, Templeton's came into view, and she headed for the entrance that would take her to the offices where she d been told to report.
Her heart was hammering as she went up the narrow, cheerless stairs she'd last climbed before her interview.
The girl she spoke to was as nice as pie.
She was told she'd soon be attended to, and instructed to take a chair.
‘Miss Jordan?’
A thin, middle-aged man addressed her, sporting a walrus moustache.
His expression was severe and disapproving as if he'd just been sucking on a slice of lemon.
Maggie quickly rose to her feet.
‘Yes, I'm Miss Jordan.’
‘I'm Mr Kerly, your supervisor.
If you'll follow me I'll take you down and introduce you to your department.’
He walked so fast she almost had to run to keep up.
They went through a series of corridors until they reached the factory floor.
It spread before Maggie, and she'd never heard such a din.
No doubt she'd soon get used to it she told herself as she followed Kerly down a metal spiral staircase.
There must have been hundreds of men and women at work there, but they all looked happy enough which cheered her.
It would be awful to work in a place where everyone was miserable.
Something hissed — steam escaping, from the sound of it.
But she couldn't see what or where.
They left that area behind and entered a partitioned, quieter section.
Here there were long benches with various lengths of carpet on top of them.
A man was on his knee next to a woman, and for one wild insane moment Maggie thought he was proposing.
Then she realized he was examining a small rectangle of carpet.
‘Everything as it should be, Singleton?’
Kerly asked.
‘Yes, sir.
Everything's quite in order.’
Kerly harumphed, and moved off again, walking just as fast as before.
The walls were lined with wooden pigeon holes.
Many of them contained pieces of carpet and what appeared to be spindles of thread.
A number of the people smiled at her as she went by — she liked that.
They plunged from that area into another.
She heard that steam sound again.
She glimpsed a man busy at a cylinder, and again there was a hiss! verifying that the cylinder was the source of the noise.
They stopped alongside a bench at which a fat, cross-eyed girl was working.
‘Miss McGinley, this is Miss Jordan.
I want you to explain the factory to her, and then teach her your job.
Report to me when you consider she is proficient enough to manage on her own,’ Kerly said.
‘Yes, Mr Kerly.’
Maggie had thought there might be a sign of deference in the fat girl's voice when she replied to the somewhat intimidating supervisor, but there wasn't.
The girl stared boldly at Kerly waiting further instructions.
‘Right then,’ said Kerly, giving the fat girl a curt nod.
He addressed Maggie, ‘Miss McGinley will show you the ropes and answer any general questions you might have.
Before I leave you, is there anything you want to ask me personally?’
Maggie couldn't think of a thing.
‘No, Mr Kerly.’
He harumphed again, then strode quickly away.
‘Don't be put off by his manner, he's a sweetie really,’ the fat girl said to Maggie sticking out her hand.
‘I'm Natasha.’
‘And I'm Maggie’
They shook hands.
‘Unusual name, Natasha, I've never heard it before,’ Maggie commented.
‘It's Russian.
My da's a great admirer of Marx and Lenin.
I've got two other sisters and they're called Polena and Anya.’
Maggie had never heard of those names either.
‘Have you ever worked in a carpet factory before?’
Natasha asked.
Maggie shook her head.
‘I've been working in a hotel since I left school — up until the flood that was.
I've recently moved here from Heymouth’
Natasha's cross-eyes opened wide.
‘Heymouth!
You were in that terrible flood?’
There was a sudden tightness in Maggie's chest.
‘Yes, I lost my mother, father, sister and little brother.’
‘Oh, I am sorry,’ Natasha muttered, not knowing what else to say.
‘Well it's over and done with.
I've just got to carry on as best I can’
‘Is that your dinner piece?’ queried Natasha, pointing at the waxed paper parcel Maggie was holding.
‘Yes.’
‘Put it in here.
This is where I keep mine.’
Natasha opened a cupboard built into the bench and Maggie popped it in.
‘So, who are you staying with in Glasgow then?’
Natasha asked.
Maggie explained that she lived with her sister and brother-in-law, and how all this was a new start for her.
‘You've certainly landed on your feet getting a job at Templeton's.
Everyone loves it here.’
She lowered her voice.
‘Hard graft, mind, but at least they're decent to you, aye, and fair too which goes a long way.’
‘Everyone seems happy enough.
I noticed that right off.’
‘Believe me, they are.
Now back to business.
You'll be taking over my job as cop winder, and when you do I'll be promoted to the looms, just as you'll be in time.’
A female squealed, and then came up to them rubbing her backside.
‘That sod McAvoy got me again.
Talk about wandering hands!’
Natasha laughed.
‘You should be so lucky.
With a face like mine I never get my bum pinched or felt!
So don't complain!’
Maggie's heart instantly went out to the fat, cross-eyed girl.
She really was ugly.
‘Agnes, this is Maggie Jordan who's starting today and will be doing my job in future.
Maggie, this is Agnes Mitchell who works in the sample room.’
‘Please to meet you, Maggie,’ said Agnes, extending a hand.
‘And to meet you,’ Maggie replied as they shook hands.
Agnes looked Maggie admiringly up and down.
‘I'll warn you now, the wandering hands will be after you.
just don't take offence that's all, it's all meant in good part.’
‘Right, we'd better get rid of your coat before I show you round,’ Natasha said to Maggie.
‘See you about,’ Agnes smiled at Maggie, and continued on her way.
‘I could tell you tales about that one which would make your hair curl,’ Natasha whispered to Maggie in a conspiratorial tone, and winked.
‘What sort of tales?’
Maggie was intrigued.
‘Tales about married men, some of them not all that far away from here either.’
‘Oh, really?’
‘Really ,’ Natasha confirmed.
‘You wouldn't believe some of the things that go on in here.
Absolutely in…credible!’
Maggie laughed.
The way Natasha had said incredible was hysterical to hear.
Long and drawn out, it positively oozed insinuation.
She had a right character here, Maggie thought.
‘Come on then, let's hang up your coat and go from there,’ Natasha proposed.
They spoke to several people en route to the cloakroom, all of whom Natasha introduced Maggie to, explaining who the person was and what they did.
Without exception all were friendly.
The cloakroom was a sparse wood-panelled room with a legion of metal pegs screwed into the walls.
It reminded Maggie of the cloakroom at her primary school.
‘First things first,’ Natasha declared as they emerged from the cloakroom.
‘We make chenille carpet here, which is different from other carpets.
Do you know what chenille means?’
Maggie shook her head.
‘It's French for caterpillar.
So there you are.’
‘Caterpillar!’
Maggie found that delightful.
‘What makes chenille different from other carpets is that it's the product of two distinct processes, the formation of the chenille fur, and the weaving of that fur, which is the weft, into a carpet.’
‘Weft,’ Maggie repeated.
‘As opposed to the warp.
But we'll come to that.’
Natasha went on to describe the difference between chenille and other carpets.
She paused mid-flow, and smiled.
‘Don't look so worried, it's not that difficult.
I picked it up in no time, and I'm a dummy.’
Maggie doubted that.
Natasha was far too articulate to be stupid.
Natasha continued, explaining the weaving process in precise detail.
‘Do you follow that?’
Maggie nodded.
‘Repeat it to me then.’
Maggie did, to be corrected on several minor points she'd got slightly wrong.
‘Good,’ said Natasha, beaming approval.
‘So what is a cop, and a cop winder?’
‘A cop is what a single woollen thread is wound onto, which in turn fits inside the shuttles for the weft looms.
Cops can also be wound with skeins of fur, which are chopped up and steam treated, forming strips of cloth from the first process.
We use these in the setting looms.
Understand?’
Maggie nodded again.
‘When making weft cloth, before starting to weave the weaver needs a supply of cops of all the colours required in the carpet.
The weaver works from a paper design which shows the full size, the pattern repeats, in the colours that are to be used.
The design is cut up horizontally into strips two squares wide, and the weaver works this paper strip, inserting and changing the shuttles which carry yarns of the various colours.’
Natasha laughed at Maggie's bewildered expression.
‘We'll go and watch what I've just explained on machine, which should make it easier for you to understand.
At least that's the way it is with me, if I can see something in operation I can understand it far more quickly than when someone tries to describe it’
They'd only taken a few steps when a man gave an appreciative wolf whistle.
‘Who's your friend then, Natasha?’
She's new here, Eddy Boyd, and far too good for the likes of you!
‘What do you say, darling?’
Maggie blushed, aware that quite a few men were looking at her now.
Or leering at her, to be more precise, but in a good-humoured way.
‘Ignore him,’ said Natasha, taking Maggie by the arm and pulling her on.
‘What's your name, hen?’
Eddy Boyd shouted after Maggie.
Then, when he got no reply, he said to his pals.
‘I'll just call her ‘gorgeous’’ That earned him a laugh.
‘Cathy Henderson better not hear him on like that,’ Natasha said.
‘Who's Cathy Henderson?’
‘Only his fian céee !’
Again Maggie had to laugh at Natasha's exaggerated pronunciation.
Some while later they stopped at a large setting loom, manned by five men ‘beating up’, as Natasha explained, the chenille fur.
The young man at the far end of the loom glanced at Maggie, and for an instant their eyes locked.
Then, blushing, he addressed himself once more to what he was doing.
Nice, Maggie thought.
‘Now this is important,’ Natasha went on.
Maggie quickly brought her attention back to the cross-eyed girl and forgot all about the young man.
Maggie arrived home to find John already there, but then his firm was closer to Dennistoun than Templeton s.
‘So, how did it go?’
Laura asked eagerly, wiping her hands on a towel.
‘My head's buzzing.
There's so much to learn!’
‘As bad as that!’
John said, teasing her.
‘Worse.
I don't know whether I'm coming or going.
Do you know what chenille means?’
She looked at Laura, who shook her head, then at John who did likewise.
‘Caterpillar,’ she stated.
‘It's French for caterpillar.’
‘Never!’ exclaimed Laura.
‘It is apparently.’
She stared at her sister, positively glowing with excitement.
‘What's the talent like?’
Laura asked, eyes twinkling.
‘Can't say I noticed.’
‘Fibber!’
John sat back in his chair and made a pyramid with his hands in front of his face.
His lips were twisted into a peculiar lop-sided smile.
‘Come on, what's it like?’
Laura cajoled.
‘Lot's of men, a great many of them single, I believe.’
‘Any possible clicks?’
‘How should I know, Laura!
I've only been there five minutes,’ Maggie protested.
‘Shouldn't be surprised if there were.
What do you say, John?’
The lop-sided smile didn't leave his face.
‘There's bound to be.
But what about the work itself, Maggie?
Tell us about that.’
‘Well, I've learned what a weft and a warp are.
And what a cop winder does.’
‘We'll hear about it over tea.
I've made a special one for you because this was your first day at work,’ Laura said.
‘Oh, Laura!
That's lovely of you.’
‘It is an occasion after all.’
Maggie glanced over at where Margaret and Rose were playing.
‘How about the twins?’
‘They've been fed so we don't have to worry about them.
John, you sit in and Maggie will help me dish up.’
John slowly rose and sat at the table where he was soon joined by the two women.
Throughout the meal Maggie, continually prompted by talked about Templeton's, describing who she'd met, what she'd learned and what conditions there were like.
Laura and John listened attentively.
‘This Natasha sounds quite a case,’ Laura commented when Maggie had finally finished.
‘She is that.
But great fun.’
‘And cross-eyed,’ said John, crossing his own.
Maggie giggled at the sight of him, he looked utterly ridiculous.
‘You shouldn't judge a book by its covers.
Natasha is an extremely nice person,’ she scolded.
‘Oh, I'm sure!’ he replied in such a way it made Maggie giggle again.
‘That was a fabulous tea, Laura, thank you very much,’ Maggie said when the meal was over.
‘Don't mention it.
I'm just pleased today went well for you.’
‘It certainly did.’
John rose, and stretched.
‘I think a walk down to the pub for a pint is in order.
That all right, Laura?’
‘Of course,’ his wife answered, starting to pick up the dirty dishes.
John paused in the kitchen doorway.
‘I'll tell you what, Maggie, to further celebrate your first day, why don't you come with me and I'll buy you a drink?’
She wasn't tempted in the least, as she was far too tired.
All she wanted was to sit down and maybe read a book.
‘If you don't mind I'd rather stay in.
But listen, why don't you take Laura?
I'm sure she'd like a wee turn out and it's no problem for me to look after the twins.’
John's face creased into what was almost a scowl.
‘I'd like that.
It's ages since we've been out for a drink together,’ Laura enthused.
‘Then on you go.
Get your coat.
I'll see to those dishes.’
The black look vanished.
‘Then Laura and I it is.
And I only hope you're bringing some money with you.’
‘You're paying!’
Laura replied, wagging a finger at him.
‘You would have paid for Maggie, wouldn't you!’
John didn't reply.
When they'd gone Maggie gathered up the rest of the dishes and piled them in the sink.
She was going to enjoy working at Templeton's, she told herself.
She was going to enjoy it a lot.
Maggie arrived at Charing Cross to find Natasha already waiting for her.
The two of them were bound for Templeton's Christmas dance which was being held in the St Andrew's Halls.
‘God, it's cold enough to freeze the proverbials off a brass monkey!’
Natasha greeted Maggie, clapping her gloved hands together.
Maggie winced as an icy blast swirled up the bottom of her dress and coat.
‘It's bitter, right enough,’ she agreed.
‘Don't let anyone ever tell you that fat folk don't feel the cold just as much as you skinny ones.
I can assure you we do!’
They fell into step, heading for the pub where they'd arranged to meet some of the other girls prior to going on to the dance.
‘What are the Templeton dances like?’
Maggie asked.
‘Oh, a good laugh, if nothing else.
And in my case it's always nothing else.’
‘Perhaps your luck will change tonight and Prince Charming will be there to whisk you off your feet,’ Maggie said.
Natasha knew her friend was only being kind and that there was no dig behind the remark.
‘Aye sure!
And maybe he'll be a millionaire as well!’ she replied sarcastically.
‘Stranger things have happened’
‘To you maybe, but not me.’
She sighed.
‘I'm destined to die an old  maid, so I am.
I know that as certain as I know no one will ask me onto the floor tonight.’
Poor Natasha, Maggie thought.
If only she could have waved a magic wand to turn the fat girl into a raving beauty.
They arrived at the State Bar in Holland Street, and hurried in.
‘That's better,’ said Maggie as the heat enveloped her.
As they went down into the cellar bar they were given a loud hello! by Mary Mauchline, one of their party.
Pleasantries were exchanged then Natasha said to Maggie, ‘I'll get them in.
What would you like?’
‘I don't know.
What are you having?’
‘My favourite, gin and orange.
Very pooosh!’
She pronounced the o as in po.
‘The same for me then’
‘I'll make them doubles, we need them after that weather out there.’
Maggie sat with the others and Natasha made for the bar where Muriel, an orange-haired dragon somewhere in her seventies, held sway as chief barmaid.
‘We're telling dirty jokes,’ Mary Mauchline announced to Maggie.
‘Do you know any?’
Maggie shook her head.
‘Sorry.’
She did actually, but was far too shy to tell them, even in all-female company.
That sort of thing embarrassed her dreadfully.
But then she was different from the vast majority of girls at Templeton's, being of a more refined, though certainly not prissy, nature.
‘Have you heard the one about the three-legged sailor?’ piped Bunty Abercrombie.
Three legs, oh aye! smirked Moira Law, giving them a coy wink.
Big lad was he?’
They all guffawed at that, with the exception of Maggie who nevertheless found it funny.
The punchline actually brought tears to her eyes and caused Isa Peebles to laugh so hard she almost fell off her stool.
‘Here, get that down you,’ Natasha said to Maggie, handing her a drink.
‘So what's the hilarity?’
This remark was addressed to the table in general.
Mary Mauchline explained again that they were telling dirty jokes.
‘Is that a fact!
Well, have you heard the one about?’
Maggie smiled to herself.
Trust Natasha!
Her joke proved to be the dirtiest yet.
‘Well, look what the cat's dragged in,’ Moira Law said a little later, gesturing to the bottom of the stairs.
Maggie recognized a group of chaps from Templeton's.
Some she knew to speak to, others she didn't know at all.
Mary waggled an almost empty glass at them.
We re open to offers?
‘Away and rattle your can!’
Andy Ramsay replied.
‘Charming!’ said Mary sarcastically, and plonked her glass on the table.
Maggie found herself staring directly into the eyes of the young man she'd noticed at a setting loom on her first day.
He smiled tentatively, and she smiled in return.
He smiled at her again later when she was up at the bar ordering a second round for her and Natasha, as he and his friends were standing further along the bar.
She, naturally enough, smiled back.
Maggie had never been to the St Andrew's Halls, and was looking forward to it.
The exterior was grand and imposing, though black from the ravages and continual onslaught of grime, smoke and soot, like so many buildings in the centre of Glasgow.
Inside was something of a disappointment.
She'd expected it to be more sumptuous than it was.
Faded was the word that sprang to mind — everything had a rather tired quality about it.
A man in uniform directed them to the hall booked by Templeton's.
Before they went in, they left their coats in a cloakroom nearby and changed into their dancing shoes.
Maggie, Natasha and the rest of the girls went into the hall together and immediately Moira was asked to dance.
The band, dressed in evening wear and sitting on a raised dais, were at the far end of the hall.
They were playing a schottische.
‘There's Kerly with his wife,’ hissed Natasha, nudging Maggie in the ribs, and then discreetly pointing with a finger.
Mrs Kerly wasn't at all what Maggie would have expected.
For a start she was a lot younger than her husband, and extremely attractive.
‘Are you sure that's her and not his daughter?’
Maggie said in disbelief.
‘Of course I'm sure!’
Natasha smiled wickedly.
‘He must have hidden talents, eh?’
Sandy Roughead, a maintenance engineer, came striding in their direction.
‘One of us is up,’ Mary Mauchline said in a low voice.
It was Maggie he was after.
‘Delighted,’ she replied, and followed him onto the floor.
As she went into his arms, she saw Natasha give her the thumbs up.
‘Quite a do, eh!’
Sandy said.
‘Quite a do,’ she agreed.
All the nobs are here.
Every last one.
‘I've seen a few already’
And with that Sandy ran out of conservation.
At the end of the dance Maggie thanked him and beat a hasty retreat back to Natasha.
‘If I hadn't known he was wearing shoes I'd have sworn he had clogs on,’ Maggie said.
Natasha sniggered.
‘Don't be cruel!’
‘I'm not.
Just stating a fact.’
Who's for the punch bowl?’
Bunty Abercrombie asked.
They all were, so they went over en masse.
As they queued Natasha said to Maggie.
‘It's chilly in here but no doubt it'll soon warm up.’
Maggie was about to reply when she spotted the young man from the pub heading towards her.
‘Miss Jordan, would you care to dance?’
The speaker was Mr Fairley, one of the nobs Sandy Roughead had mentioned.
Maggie didn't know exactly what his position was, but he was high up on the management side.
‘Why, thank you,’ Maggie replied, and hooked an arm around the one extended to her.
She saw the young man hesitate, then veer away.
‘And how are you settling in at Templeton's?’
Fairley asked politely as they took the floor.
‘Very well, thank you.’
An hour later it was steaming hot inside the hall and sweat was running down Maggie's back and front.
She'd been on the floor for nearly every dance, and was having a whale of a time.
‘Have a sip of that,’ said Natasha when Maggie joined her yet again.
She handed her a glass that had original fly contained punch.
Maggie studied the amber liquid in the glass, then sniffed it.
‘Whisky?’ she asked.
‘A lot of the lads are carrying half-bottles.
I scrounged that off Tom McAskill who owes me a favour’
Maggie gave the glass back to Natasha.
‘Not for me, thanks.
You have it all yourself.’
‘Don't you like whisky?’
Natasha queried.
To be truthful, I'm not much of a drinker.
Those gins were more than enough for me.’
Natasha swallowed the whisky, and smiled.
‘Rare!’
Maggie glanced over at the punch bowl thinking she wouldn't mind some.
The punch was non-alcoholic; there was no alcohol available, other than what was secretly brought in.
‘Excuse me.’
Maggie turned round to find herself staring into the eyes she'd stared into in the pub.
It was the young man.
‘Would you like to dance?’
There was something about his voice that moved her, made her go weak at the knees.
A man's voice had never had such an effect on her before.
‘Please,’ she replied, her own voice quavering slightly.
‘I'm not very good, I'm afraid,’ he said when they were on the floor waiting for the band to strike up.
‘Neither am I.’
‘Oh, but you are!
I saw you earlier with Mr Fairley and thought you were terrific.’
‘Why, thank you,’ she smiled.
‘My name's Nevil, by the way.
Nevil Sanderson.’
7474 ‘I'm Maggie Jordan’
‘I know.
I've seen you around.
You're a cop winder’
‘And you operate a setting loom.
But not one of those I service.’
‘Hello Nevil.
All right!’
The chap who'd called out was the one in the pub who'd told Mary Mauchline to go and rattle her can, the same Mary Mauchline he now held in his arms.
‘All right, Andy!’
Nevil answered.
To Maggie he explained, ‘That's Andy Ramsay.
He and I live in the same street.
We went to school together and now both work at Templeton's.’
‘Your best pal?’
Nevil gave a soft laugh.
‘You could say that.
We're as thick as thieves, the pair of us.’
She looked over again at Andy Ramsay.
A handsome fellow, but not nearly as handsome as Nevil.
She found herself blushing.
‘What is it?’ he asked.
‘Nothing’
‘But you've gone all red.’
‘The heat,’ she lied, and prayed for the band to start playing, which it promptly did, this time a waltz.
She could feel and sense the strength in him, not merely physical.
She liked it.
‘I warned you, two left feet, I'm afraid,’ Nevil murmured.
‘You're doing fine.
Stop worrying about it and just relax.’
He tried.
All too soon as far as Maggie was concerned the waltz was over and they were clapping the band.
She continued clapping as long as she could, hoping he'd asked her to stay.
She was on the point of thanking him and leaving the floor when he asked.
‘Why not?’ she smiled.
And then immediately wondered if she should have given a more positive reply.
‘How long have you been at Templeton's?’
‘Since leaving school at fourteen, which was s; years ago.
How, eh…’
He broke off apologetically.
‘It's rude to ask a lady her age, isn't it?’
A lady!
That was lovely.
‘I'm seventeen.’
He nodded.
‘That was what I guessed’
He looked older than twenty, she thought.
But didn't say so.
Perhaps that was because he was very dark round the chin and lower cheeks.
His eyebrows were thick and bushy.
The next dance was another waltz, which pleased them both as a waltz was more intimate than some of the other dances.
It also gave them more of an opportunity to chat.
A number of dances later when the two of them were quite relaxed and thoroughly enjoying themselves, Nevil said, ‘Why don't we take a breather?
And you can meet the lads I'm with.’
‘Fine.’
She thought he might take her hand as they left the floor, but he didn't.
‘Andy, say hello to Maggie Jordan.
Maggie, Andy Ramsay.’
‘I was beginning to think you pair were dancing for the duration,’ Andy joked as he shook hands with Maggie.
‘I'm dying for some punch.
My throat's like sandpaper,’ Maggie said.
‘I could use some too,’ said Mary Mauchline who was standing beside Andy.
‘How about a dram instead?’
Andy offered, patting the inside pocket of his jacket.
‘A dram in the punch,’ suggested Mary coyly.
‘Just the punch for me,’ Maggie stated.
‘Right then,’ said Nevil.
‘Who's doing the honours?’
He glanced about the assembled company.
‘I'll go,’ volunteered a fair-haired chap.
‘I'm parched myself’
‘Thank you, Bob.
Maggie, this is Bob Kinloch.
He doesn't work for Templeton's but a firm producing sheet metal.
That right, Bob?’
Bob nodded.
‘So it's two fruit punches for the girls, and one for myself?’
Neil seemed to be the leader among this lot, Maggie thought, which bore out the strength she'd felt and sensed in him.
Natural charisma was what he had, she realized.
He stood out from the pack.
She was then introduced to the other chaps from work she didn't know already, and to the girls a few of them were with.
She only knew one of these girls, who operated a weft loom she serviced.
Bob was soon back with her punch for which she thanked him gratefully.
When she'd drunk that, Nevil proposed they danced again, and she agreed.
Now she knew beyond any doubt that they were going to spend the rest of the evening together.
‘Whheeccchhhh!’ shouted a female voice as the band robustly played the Gay Gordons, announced as the last dance.
‘She's having a good time,’ Nevil laughed.
‘Whheeecchh!’ another female voice yelled.
‘She's not the only one,’ Maggie replied.
And then, with a final drum roll, it was all over.
Maggie's heart was suddenly thumping as they slowly left the floor.
Would he or wouldn't he?
‘Where's Natasha?’ she wondered aloud, just for something to say.
She spotted Andy and Mary Mauchline heading for the door together.
Come on! she thought, glancing sideways at Nevil.
Come on!
‘Where do you live?’ he asked.
‘Dennistoun.’
She named the street.
‘That's not all that far from me.’
‘Oh?’
She tried not to sound excited.
‘Would you like me to walk you home?’
She acted surprised, as if the idea had never crossed her mind.
‘Walk me home?
You mean in case the bogeyman gets me?’ she teased.
He smiled.
‘Maybe I'm the bogeyman’
Maybe you are, she thought.
But if he were she was all in favour of bogeymen.
‘That would be nice,’ she replied, her tone earnest.
His brows twitched.
Then he put a hand on her elbow to guide her to the door.
It had started to snow, huge flakes swirling in the cold evening.
Visibility had been reduced to no more than a few yards.
‘Steep hill this,’ Nevil commented as they trudged upwards.
‘It's certainly easier to go down than come up.’
He laughed.
‘Aren't all hills?
Except for the electric brae, that is.’
‘Electric brae?’
‘I read about it somewhere, the Sunday Post , I think.
Apparently when you imagine you're going up you're actually coming down, and vice versa.
Therefore, you can get on a bicycle and freewheel uphill !
It's all some sort of optical illusion.’
‘Fancy that,’ she mused.
‘It's in Scotland, but I can't recall where.’
He shivered, his coat being a thin one.
‘I'm going to look like a snowman when I get in.’
‘You already do,’ Maggie told him.
His black hair was now white, as were his shoulders and the front of his coat.
She looked much the same herself.
Silence fell between them for a few steps, then he said, his tone slightly different, ‘I've heard on the grapevine that you came to Glasgow from Heymouth, and that you were involved in the disaster there last August.’
‘Yes,’ she answered softly, a sadness falling over her.
‘I presume you don't like talking about it?’
‘I don't mind.’
She gave him a weak smile.
‘What do you want to know?’
‘Nothing in particular.
I just wanted to say it must have been awful.’
‘It was.
I lost my father, mother, sister and wee brother, you know.’
‘Aye.
That's what I heard.
I'm sorry.’
Four months, she thought.
That was all it was, four months.
And yet it felt like four years.
Timewise, the period of the flood and directly afterwards had become completely distorted in her mind.
‘I read about it in the newspapers, a terrible tragedy,’ Nevil sympathized.
She nodded in agreement.
‘But tell me about you and your family.’
‘Nothing much to tell really.
My da works in a foundry; I have a brother who's an apprentice electrician, and then there's my ma.
That's about it.’
‘What's your brother called?’
‘Jimmy.
He's not a bad sort, for a brother if you know what I mean’
She smiled knowingly.
Hadn't she felt precisely the same about her sister Pet?
‘Here we are,’ she said when they arrived at her close.
She moved just inside the close, but he remained outside.
‘It was kind of you to walk me home,’ she smiled.
‘As I said, it's not that far out my way.’
‘Still kind of you’
She could see his face quite clearly, as it was lit by the gas street lamp  just a few feet behind him.
The close mouth itself was shadowy, lit by the gas mantle further back along the close.
‘It was a good night,’ he said.
‘Very good.’
‘A lot better than last year's dance’
Get on with it, come and kiss me, she thought.
‘I wouldn't know about that.’
‘No.
Something had come between them.
A barrier had risen where no barrier had been before.
Come on! she mentally urged, stop hanging back.
She was damned if she was going to make the first move.
He shuffled his feet in the snow creating patterns on the pavement.
‘Right then, I'll see you at work’
She smiled again, but this smile was strained.
‘I suppose so.’
‘Thanks for the dances.’
‘And thanks again for walking me home.’
He gave her a curt wave.
‘Bye!’
And with that he started off, crossing the road and going back down the hill.
She stared after him in disbelief, filled with disappointment and a growing anger.
She'd been certain he'd take her into the darkness and privacy of the back close.
And she'd been blind positive he'd ask her out.
But he'd done neither!
She silently swore and for good measure swore again.
Then she stamped up the stairs.
To hell with you, Nevil Sanderson! she thought as she inserted her key into the keyhole.
Your arse in parsley!
She laughed at that expression which she hadn't heard in years.
Your arse in parsley!
How utterly ridiculous.
‘You look as though you've enjoyed yourself,’ Laura said when she went into the kitchen.
Laura was ironing at the kitchen table, John sitting at the other end of the table with a bottle and glass in front of him.
His glazed eyes and silly expression told her he was half-cut.
‘I did, thank you very much,’ she replied, going to the fire to warm himself.
Laura stopped what she was doing.
‘Here, catch this!’ she instructed, throwing Maggie a towel which she deftly caught.
Maggie wiped her face, and then ran the towel over her hair.
‘Snowing, is it?’
John asked, lips drawn back in a sarcastic sneer.
‘No, it's a gorgeous summer's evening, what do you think?’ she jibed in return.
He waved a finger at her.
‘Now don't you be cheeky with your elders, young woman.’
She'd been wrong, she realized.
He wasn't half-cut, but completely so.
She'd never seen John drunk before, and didn't particularly like it.
‘John!’
Laura scolded in a disapproving tone.
‘Only a joke!’ he protested.
Maggie pulled a chair up close to the fire.
She was frozen through.
‘Did you meet anyone nice?’
Laura queried, dying to know.
John poured himself another drink without taking his eyes off Maggie.
‘There were lots of nice people there,’ Maggie prevaricated.
‘You know what I mean!’
Maggie picked up the poker and jabbed the fire with it, rearranging the coals so that even more heat was thrown out.
‘Well?’
Laura insisted.
There was a chap there I danced with a great deal.
He s one of our weavers.’
‘Did he walk you home?’
Maggie glanced at Laura, then John who was studying her intently.
‘He did actually,’ she confessed.
John had a mouthful of whisky, and another.
‘The back close was it, eh?’ he leered.
Maggie didn't answer that.
‘No doubt it was.
Slap and tickle.
Or did you not bother with the slap because you were enjoying the tickling so much?’
‘John!’
Laura exclaimed.
‘Oh, don't you act so shocked.
You were hardly the innocent when you were in the back close with me.
My God, you weren't!’ he retorted and laughed nastily.
Laura had gone white.
‘John?’ she pleaded.
John winked at Maggie.
‘She was a right goer, I can tell you.
Some nights I could hardly keep up.’
Maggie would have left at that point, but as her bed was in the kitchen she couldn't get into it until after he'd left the room.
She stared back at him.
This was a new side to John, and a very unpleasant one.
‘Not another word.
You're drunk,’ Laura said tight-lipped.
‘As a lord!
Oh aye, you can bet on that.
As an effing lord!’
‘I'm sorry, Maggie.
He wasn't like this before you came in.’
‘But I was, woman, you just never noticed.’
He turned his attention again to Maggie.
‘How about a drink?’
She shook her head.
‘Aw go on, just a wee one?’
‘No, thank you, John.
I really don't want a drink.’
John grunted, and topped up his glass once more.
‘So what's he like, this Don Juan you went into the back close with?
Did he get his hand up your skirt?’
‘That is enough!’
Laura said, banging down the iron.
John laughed.
‘I haven't seen you so passionate in a long time.
And I mean a long time!’
Laura glared at her husband.
She was now seething.
John addressed Maggie again.
‘She used to be passionate, you know.
But then I just told you that.
In our courting days she was red hot.
She fair sizzled!’
He paused, then said very softly, ‘You remind me of her, Maggie.
Only you're far more attractive than she ever was.’
Maggie could have slapped him for being so cruel.
What an absolute pig he was this evening.
And she wished he wouldn't stare at her — it made her feel unclean.
Laura placed her iron by the sink to cool off.
‘Bedtime for us, John,’ she stated firmly.
‘It's early yet.
And I want to hear more about the kissing and canoodling.’
He smiled lecherously at Maggie.
‘We didn't go into the back close if you must know.’
He raised an eyebrow.
‘Oh?’
‘And in case you don't believe me I wouldn't still have been covered in snow when I came in if I had’
‘That's true enough,’ he acknowledged.
‘Now, can we change the conversation please?’
Laura crossed to the doorway.
There was a glisten of tears in her eyes.
She felt humiliated.
‘John?’
‘Aw I…’
‘John!’ she snapped.
For several moments it seemed as if he might refuse to go with her, then he decided that he would.
He threw what remained in his glass down his throat, and lurched to his feet.
‘Goodnight Maggie,’ he slurred, swaying on the spot.
‘Goodnight John.’
‘Don't be upset now.’
He glanced sideways at Laura.
‘There was no harm meant.’
‘No offence taken,’ she lied.
He belched, scratched his stomach, and then stumbled from the room.
‘I am sorry, Maggie,’ Laura apologized.
‘Just the drink talking.
He'll have forgotten all about it in the morning,’
Maggie smiled in reply.
‘I can't think what suddenly got into him.
He's not usually…well like that.
He can normally hold his drink’
Maggie went to Laura and kissed her sister tenderly on the cheek.
‘Away with you now.
Nothing further needs to be said’
‘Marriage!’
Laura sighed.
‘It's not all you imagine when you're single.
Remember that.’
‘I will,’ Maggie said, smiling again.
Laura wiped tears from her eyes.
‘Goodnight then.’
‘Goodnight.’
Maggie closed the door behind Laura, and leant against it.
What an evening!
It had begun so well.
Then suddenly, right out of the blue, it had gone straight down the drain.
She'd thought Nevil fancied her, but perhaps he didn't!
That would certainly explain why he hadn't taken her into the back close, or asked her out.
There again, he might just be shy?
No, he wasn't that — tentative possibly, but not shy.
So what had gone wrong?
She was damned if she knew.
One thing she did know however was that she wasn't running after him.
If he was at all interested it was up to him to make the first move.
She frowned as her thoughts shifted to John.
How awful he'd been to Laura, how unforgivable.
You just didn't say those sort of things, or divulge such secrets, about your wife.
Poor Laura must be mortified.
She suddenly giggled.
So Laura had fair sizzled, as John had put it, in her courting days.
She couldn't imagine it, Laura had never seemed the sizzling type.
But then did you ever really see your own sister objectively?
She doubted it.
That night she dreamt again about the flood, and this time Nevil was one of those who drowned.
Maggie was sitting reading a magazine when Laura came into the kitchen having just got the twins off to sleep.
John was out at the dog racing with a couple of his pals.
‘They take it out of you those two,’ Laura said, falling into a chair.
‘They're certainly hard work.’
‘But worth every moment of it, don't you think?’
‘They're gorgeous,’ Maggie smiled.
Laura leaned forward, clasping her hands in her lap.
‘I've been wanting to speak to you about that business the other night’
‘I told you, there's no need to say anything else on the matter,’ Maggie replied.
‘But I want to.
Simply to explain a bit, I suppose.’
Laura stared down at her clasped hands.
‘Things haven't been quite the same between John and I since I had the twins.
It was a difficult birth if you remember’
‘I was never given the details, but Mum did remark that you hadn't had an easy time.’
Laura held out one of her hands.
‘Look at that, skinny as anything.
Same goes for the rest of me.
Thin as a rake.’
‘You appear to eat properly?’
‘I do.
But my weight's still down.
It's the continual tiredness, you see.
The twins are a constant drain on me.
Morning, noon and night, demand, demand, demand!
And then there's John…’
She broke off to bite her lip.
‘What about John?’
Maggie prompted.
‘He just can't seem to understand that it's different now.
That I don't always feel up to…the way I used to.
I'm not unreasonable, mind!
And it's not as if I've gone off it within myself.
It's simply the tiredness that makes me so unresponsive on many occasions.’
Maggie considered that.
‘Have you spoken to the doctor?’
‘He put me on an iron tonic which bucked me a little.
He told me that the way I felt was quite normal for someone in my situation’
‘You said difficult birth?’
Maggie probed.
‘Does that mean you've had after-effects?
I mean physical ones.’
‘It's very tender where it wasn't before.’
‘You mean painful?’
‘It can be,’ Laura admitted.
Maggie took a deep breath.
‘It seems to me that John is the one who's being unreasonable.’
‘He doesn't think so.
God knows what he really does think, but he certainly doesn't think that.
I've explained the situation to him again and again, but he refuses to accept it.’
Maggie had a sudden thought.
‘Is my being here making matters even worse for you?
If so I could go into digs.’
‘No, no, on the contrary!
It's easier with you about.
You're a big help.’
‘Are you sure about that?’
‘Positive.
You take a considerable load off my shoulders.’
Maggie was relieved to hear it.
She would have been appalled to think she'd added to her sister's problems.
‘Anyway!’ exclaimed Laura, coming to her feet, ‘I suppose I've said what I wanted to.
How about a nice cup of tea?’
‘Only if you let me make it.’
‘I'm already up.’
‘Then sit down again.
This cup of tea is being made by me .
And that's an order.’
Laughing, Laura did as she was told.
Maggie and Natasha were having their dinnertime piece, and a right old gossip, when Natasha suddenly whispered, ‘I think you're about to have a visitor.’
Maggie glanced up, and there was Nevil Sanderson bearing down on her.
It was now the second week in January and she hadn't spoken to him since the night of the Christmas dance.
‘I'll take a powder,’ said Natasha and, picking up what remained of her piece, rose and strolled away.
‘Hello, how are you?’
Nevil smiled at Maggie.
‘Fine.
And yourself?’
‘In a way glad all the festivities are over.
They become too much of a good thing after a while.’
‘I know what you mean,’ she agreed.
‘Do you mind if I join you?’
He indicated Natasha's stool.
‘Help yourself.’
‘What's in your piece?’ he asked after he'd sat down.
‘Dates.
What did you have in yours?’
‘Some sort of mayonnaise spread that tasted like chopped up cardboard with bits in it.
I'd have much preferred dates.’
She was about to offer him one of her sandwiches, then decided not to.
‘So to what do I owe this honour?’ she asked instead.
‘I was wondering if you'd like to go out with me?’
She felt a flush rise up her neck.
Don't appear too eager! she warned herself.
‘Oh?’
‘To the pictures, I thought.
Or we can go some place else if you want?’
He'd caught her completely off-guard.
When she hadn't heard from him she'd presumed he wasn't keen.
‘Why?’ she queried.
He blinked.
‘Why what?’
‘Why has it taken you so long?’
‘You mean to ask you out?’
She nodded.
‘Well, I was going to that night of the dance and then I thought it was a bad time with it being Christmas and the New Year coming right afterwards.
Folk are always so tied up round about then’
It was a reasonable explanation, except his voice lacked conviction.
He was lying, or covering up something.
Another female?
‘I see,’ she smiled, and watched him relax.
‘But is that all?’
Instantly he was on his guard.
‘I don't understand.’
‘Is there more to why you didn't ask me out that night?’
‘Why should there be more?’
She was right, she told herself.
He'd gone all defensive.
‘I just think there might be’
‘Oh well, if you don't want to go out with me!’
‘I didn't say that, Nevil.
I didn't say that at all’
He frowned at her.
‘You're intelligent, aren't you?
But then that's part of it.’
‘Par of what?’ she probed.
He glanced around, ensuring they weren't being overheard.
‘You're different to the other lassies.
Brighter for a start, and you speak nicer.’
She was delighted.
‘Are you telling me I put you off?’
He squirmed and looked uncomfortable.
‘You didn't put me off exactly.
I liked you tremendously.
It's just…
Well, if you want the truth, I wasn't certain we would hit it off together on a regular basis.’
‘In other words you thought I might be better than you?’ she said softly.
‘I know you're only a cop winder, but you're not from round here.
And you have…a certain way with you!’
‘I'll take that as a compliment’
‘It's certainly meant as one.
You're class, Maggie.
That was the first thing that struck me when I asked you to dance.
You're class through and through.
She couldn't have been more touched.
Now was he trying to butter her up, he meant every word he said.
‘The nicest thing is that you consider me intelligent.
I appreciate that most of all,’ she replied.
He stared full into her face, and she stared back.
‘What's your answer then?’ he asked in a slightly husky voice.
‘I'd love to go to the pictures with you.’
They agreed a time and place to meet.
Maggie gazed anxiously up at the sky as she and Nevil emerged from the Sauchiehall Street picture house that he'd taken her to.
It had been lashing down when they'd gone in.
‘Thank God, it's stopped raining,’ Maggie said as they stepped onto the pavement.
Judging from the smell of the air and the large pools of water on the street it had only recently finished.
Nevil grunted.
‘I thought the big film was marvellous,’ Maggie enthused.
She was referring to The Glass key starring Edward Arnold, George Raft and Claire Dodd.
‘Hmmh!’
She rounded on Nevil.
‘Didn't you like it then?’
‘It was all right,’ he replied vaguely.
‘I thought it a lot more than that!’
‘It was the News that caught my interest.’
‘The Movietone News?’
He turned to her, eyes positively glowing.
‘The bit about the forthcoming election in Spain.
It would be a disaster for Spain and the rest of Europe if the Fascists came to power.’
‘I must say I didn't pay much attention to that,’ Maggie confessed.
He linked arms with her.
‘The Fascists at the moment are gaining ground throughout Europe while democracy and Socialism are in disarray.
That's why it's so important that Spain chooses the right, by which I mean Republican, government to lead it.’
‘You're interested in politics then?’
He burst out laughing.
‘Of course I am!
I'm a Glaswegian, aren't I?
We're brought up to live and breathe politics.’
She decided to tease him a little.
‘What if I told you that I was a Conservative?’
He stopped in his tracks, his expression a combination of horror and contempt.
‘You're not, are you?’
She didn't reply.
‘Jesus bloody Christ!
I never dreamt…’
He let go of her arm.
‘That serious, eh?’
‘It's more than serious, it's…shattering!’
His voice pleaded, ‘You're not really, are you, Maggie?
Tell me you're only pulling my leg!’
‘Does this mean you won't take me out again?’
‘I can't go out with a Tory!’ he virtually wailed.
He was so beside himself she had to laugh.
‘Don't worry, I'm Labour.
I was only pulling your leg’
His face collapsed with relief, and then he took her arm again.
‘You gave me the fright of my life there.
Nevil Sanderson going out with a female Tory, ye Gods and little fishes!’
She would have liked to have kissed him then, but couldn't because they were in the street.
She drew close to him instead.
‘Can we have some fish and chips before we go home?
I'll pay,’ she said.
‘You'll do nothing of the sort.
When you're with me, I'll pay.
‘I can afford it, Nevil.
I'm a working girl, don't forget’
‘It's got nothing to do with whether you're working or not.
It's a matter of principle.’
The fish and chips he did buy were simply scrumptious.
This time there was no hanging back on his part.
When they arrived at her close he took her inside, along past the stairs to where it was dark and they couldn't be seen by the rest of the close.
‘Maggie!’ he whispered as his eager lips sought hers.
Nothing had ever felt quite so right as finding herself in Nevil's arms and being kissed by him.
They belonged to each other.
When she finally left him to go upstairs her heart was overflowing, and she was beaming from ear to ear.
Nevil caught up with Maggie as she was leaving Templeton's.
‘What are you doing tomorrow night?’ he asked, falling into step beside her.
‘Nothing special.
Why?’
‘I've just heard that Harry Pollitt is addressing a meeting in Parkhead and I wondered if you'd fancy coming with me?’
Who's Harry Pollitt? she questioned.
‘General Secretary of the Communist Party of Great Britain.
Do you honestly mean you've never heard of Harry Pollitt?’
Nevil's expression was one of complete amazement.
‘Never,’ she confirmed.
‘Why, the man's an institution!’
‘He might be.
But I've still never heard of him.’
Nevil shook his head in disbelief.
‘Incredible!’
‘Is he a good speaker?’
‘Tremendous.
He can really fire the blood.
So will you come with me?’
‘You know I will.’
He smiled at that.
Arm-in-arm they continued on their way.
Harry Pollitt was a fine speaker, Maggie thought.
And yes, Nevil was right, he did fire the blood.
He'd certainly succeeded in firing hers.
She glanced sideways at Nevil who was sitting entranced.
He might have been listening to Moses when he came down from the mountain.
She brought her attention back to Pollitt, who was sitting beside Willie Gallacher, a Communist MP and one of Glasgow's most famous and well-loved sons.
Pollitt thundered on about Italy's invasion of Abyssinia which he and his party roundly condemned.
‘What did you think of that then?’
Nevil demanded as they left the meeting.
‘It was all right’
‘Only all right.’
he exclaimed, scandalized.
‘It was utterly brilliant.’
He took his politics so seriously, she thought, smiling to herself.
But there again, as she knew he would have argued, politics were a serious matter.
‘I thought your Harry Pollitt spoke extremely well,’ she relented.
‘He had me on the edge of my seat a couple of times.’
‘Aye, gripping stuff.
And Gallacher was good too.
The only Communist in Parliament, you know.
I have heard, though I can't say whether or not it's true, that Winston Churchill is an admirer of his.’
‘Churchill?’
‘Apparently so.
Funny that, eh?’
A nearby clock tower chimed the hour.
It was still early.
‘How about a drink before we catch the tram home?’
Nevil suggested.
‘Are the pubs round here safe?’
Maggie asked.
She'd learned that many Glasgow pubs were far from desirable.
‘Oh aye!
Safe as houses.
Anyway, they'd never bother a couple’
A couple!
It thrilled her that he'd called them that.
They weren't just Maggie and Nevil any more, but a couple .
To her it was indicative of how he'd come to view their relationship.
The bell rang announcing dinnertime.
Maggie laid down the job in hand and wiped her forehead.
She had a slight headache from the noise of the factory which, for some reason, seemed worse than usual.
She was opening the cupboard containing her piece when she saw Nevil hurrying over.
‘Have you heard the news?’ he demanded eagerly.
She immediately presumed it was something to do with Templeton's, but she was wrong.
‘No.
What?’
‘The Spanish have elected the Popular Front to government.
Isn't that fabulous?’
‘It certainly is.’
‘The news broke on the wireless just a short while ago.
Hopefully all the details will be in this evening's newspapers.’
‘One in the eye for Hitler and that lot, eh?’
‘It'll sicken him, right enough.
He's probably jumping up and down with fury.
Him and the entire Nazi party.’
‘Good news,’ said Maggie, nodding.
She was extremely pleased.
‘Couldn't be better,’ Nevil agreed.
He was so excited he seemed to vibrate with it.
Maggie opened up the cupboard and took out h; r piece and the thermos flask she now brought to work with her.
‘How about a cup of coffee?’
‘I couldn't eat or drink at the moment.
Besides, there are a few other people I want to tell about this.
But I wanted you to be the first I told.’
She put her lips together and blew him the tiniest of kisses.
‘Thank you.’
He was about to move when he remembered something.
‘My ma has suggested I ask you home to tea.
She and the old fella are dying to meet you.’
She was also keen to meet them.
‘When do you have in mind?’
‘What about this Saturday?
Then we could go on to a dance in our local Labour Hall?
Andy Ramsay is going with Mary Mauchline, so they'll be there.’
‘Tea and dance it is then,’ she agreed.
She watched Nevil walk away, thinking how much, in such a short while, he'd come to mean to her.
And she believed it was the same with him.
Maggie woke up to hear the sound of voices, one of which was raised in anger, John's, she now realized.
He and Laura were arguing.
Maggie glanced at her alarm clock, but couldn't make out the time.
She still felt dreadfully tired so couldn't have been asleep all that long.
‘No!’
Laura said quite distinctly.
That told Maggie what her sister and brother-in-law were arguing about.
Laura was denying him.
Laying her head on the pillow she closed her eyes and tried to get back to sleep.
What was that?
It could have been a slap.
Had Laura hit John?
Or…
Maggie sat up in bed.
Had John hit Laura?
In their bedroom something crashed to the floor, which immediately woke one of the twins who began to howl.
Recriminations followed.
Although Maggie couldn't make out the exact words, she knew they were from both sides.
And then the other twin started crying.
Should she go through, knock on their door and offer to help?
Don't be stupid, she berated herself.
That was the last thing she should do, for a number of reasons.
She curled up again and closed her eyes.
The next thing she knew her alarm was ringing and it was time to get up.
The atmosphere was strained during breakfast.
But it altered when John took her down the hill to her tramstop.
He couldn't have been more chatty and pleasant.
The street Nevil lived in wasn't nearly as nice as the McNairs'.
The tenement was very old, the stairs concave from constant use.
She noticed outside lavatories on the first landing — thank goodness she didn't have to put up with that.
The idea of a shared lavatory appalled her.
Nevil opened his door, smiled at her and ushered her in.
The smell of wax polish hit her as she walked through the hall.
The linoleum beneath her feet shone and sparkled.
‘We're here!’
Nevil called out loudly.
The Sandersons were gathered in the kitchen, Mr Sanderson and Jimmy standing as though at attention.
They were just as nervous as she, Maggie realized.
‘Ma, Da, this is Maggie Jordan.’
Mrs Sanderson was a slender woman with pepper-and-salt hair pulled back into an old-fashioned bun.
Her face beamed welcome.
‘How are you, Maggie?
Nevil has told us so much about you,’ Mrs Sanderson said as she shook her hand.
Maggie wasn't quite sure how to reply to that.
‘I've been looking forward to meeting you too,’ she answered, which was true.
‘And this is Father.’
Mr Sanderson stepped forward to shake Maggie's hand.
His own was hard and calloused, the hand of a manual worker.
‘Nevil said you were pretty, but he didn't do you justice.’
Maggie blushed.
‘Thank you very much.
That's kind of you.’
‘Not kind, lassie, just the truth.’
‘And this is my brother, Jimmy.’
Jimmy was about her own age, maybe a little younger.
He was as fair as Nevil was dark.
‘The apprentice electrician,’ Maggie grinned as she shook Jimmy's hand.
‘I'd have preferred to be a jockey.
But as you can see I'm far too big and heavy for that,’ he replied.
‘You like horses then?’
‘I love them.
And the countryside.
Some day I'll live in the countryside, I've promised myself that.’
‘Then I hope you manage it.’
‘Have a seat, Maggie,’ Mrs Sanderson said, pointing to an armchair by the fire whose back was covered with an anti-macassar.
The anti-macassar was boiled as white as newly fallen snow.
Maggie sat down, and Mr Sanderson cleared his throat.
‘I thought a wee something might be in order before tea.
Would you like some sherry, Maggie?’
Maggie could tell from the expression on Mr Sanderson's face that much thought had gone into this.
She really would have preferred a cup of tea, but couldn't refuse when they'd gone to so much trouble.
‘Some sherry would be lovely, thank you,’ she replied.
‘And you, Grace?’
‘Please,’ his wife answered.
As Mr Sanderson was pouring the drinks Maggie had time to quickly glance about her.
The range, similar to that they'd had in Heymouth, was black-leaded, the brass parts gleaming.
There was yellow distemper on the walls, and the ceiling was a mushroom colour.
All the wood in the room had recently been polished, and the ornaments and various knick-knacks dusted.
Was this all for her benefit?
No, Maggie thought.
Mrs Sanderson was an excellent housewife.
‘Thank you,’ she said when Mr Sanderson handed her a glass of sherry.
A whisky glass, she noticed, and immediately chided herself for being unkind.
She had had the benefit of having worked in an hotel after all.
‘I hope that's to your liking,’ Mr Sanderson said to her.
‘I'm sure it will be’
He hovered, waiting for her to taste it.
Surprisingly, the sherry was an excellent one and had certainly cost a shilling or two.
He'd probably asked for the best sherry available, she rightly guessed.
‘Very nice indeed,’ she acknowledged, which clearly delighted him.
‘Something smells good,’ Maggie commented as Mr Sanderson poured out whisky for himself, Nevil and Jimmy.
‘Steak-and-kidney pudding, a speciality of mine,’ Mrs Sanderson replied.
Then, with a sudden frown, ‘I hope you like steak-and-kidney pudding?’
‘I love it.
My own mother…’
She trailed off, and sipped her sherry hurriedly.
‘Nevil told us about your family.
A terrible, terrible thing,’ Mrs Sanderson said softly.
‘Yes.’
Maggie paused, then went on, ‘As I was saying, my own mother used to make steak-and-kidney pudding.
It was a great favourite of ours too, particularly mine’
‘And mine,’ piped up Jimmy.
‘Everything's a favourite of yours, gannet.
The way you eat no wonder you're far too large to be a jockey,’ Nevil jibed.
‘It was my heavy bones that did for me, as you well know!’
Jimmy retorted hotly.
Maggie smiled to herself.
It could easily have been her and Pet having a go at one another.
Silence settled on the little group.
‘I understand you went with Nevil to hear Harry Pollitt,’ Mr Sanderson said to Maggie after a while.
‘That's right.’
‘Marvellous, isn't he!’
‘He certainly spoke well.
He fires the blood.’
‘So does this stuff,’ muttered Nevil, knocking back his whisky.
Jimmy laughed.
‘Too true!’
Mr Sanderson glared at his sons, then turned back to Maggie.
‘Tell me then, lass, what stance do you take on rearmament?’
Mrs Sanderson groaned.
‘Not politics, please, Hector!
This is supposed to be a social occasion.’
‘'here's nothing wrong with talking politics during a social occasion.
Is there, Maggie?’
‘I'm not taking sides!’ she smiled.
‘Does talking politics bore you then, lass?’
‘Far from it.’
As long as that's not the only topic of conversation, she might have added, but didn't.
‘There!’ exclaimed Mr Sanderson triumphantly to his wife.
‘Well, it bores me,’ Mrs Sanderson retorted.
Her husband ignored that.
‘So what is your stance on rearmament?’ he asked Maggie again.
‘I'm against it myself.
It will lead to nothing but trouble, you mark my words.’
‘And I'm for it,’ Nevil stated.
‘Attlee's against it,’ Mr Sanderson said to his son.
‘Attlee might be, but Bevin and Dalton are for it,’ Nevil countered.
‘The unions are against it,’ Mr Sanderson said.
‘Oh no, they're not.
The unions are divided on the subject.
So don't tell fibs.’
Mr Sanderson harumphed.
‘Maggie?’
Nevil prompted.
She didn't reply at once, but then said, ‘There are pros and cons to both sides of the argument.
But I do believe, which is maybe an unfeminine view, that history shows that the weak always lose.
They are always dominated by the strong.
I'd say, whenever possible, you should always try to be in a position of strength.’
‘Aha!’ exclaimed Nevil.
‘Good for you, Maggie.’
‘You might adopt a different view when you become a mother,’ Mrs Sanderson chipped in quietly.
Maggie knew what the older woman was driving at.
‘I might, but I doubt it, Mrs Sanderson.
If only we humans were less ambitious, and more tolerant of one another, then there wouldn't be a need for arms at all , and every mother's child would be safe.
At least from war, that is.
But unfortunately people are what they are, and because of that I agree with rearmament as a safety measure.’
‘Give a man a weapon and he'll use it,’ Mr Sanderson argued.
‘But will he if the person facing him has the same weapon?
He would certainly think twice where he wouldn't have done before,’ Maggie replied.
‘The bullies must be stood up to,’ Nevil said.
‘That's something you learn early on.
Give a bully an inch and he'll end up walking all over you.’
‘At least you'd still be alive,’ Mrs Sanderson said.
Nevil smiled.
‘Would you?
Perhaps and perhaps not, depending on the circumstances.
But I for one am never going to let anyone walk over me.’
‘Me neither!’
Jimmy declared.
Mr Sanderson shook his head.
‘Rearmament is a mistake, I tell you.
Look what happened the last time Europe armed, millions dead on both sides.
And for what?
Nothing in the end, nothing at all.
It was all debit and no credit.’
‘You can blame Kaiser Bill for the Great War.
The man was a lunatic,’ Nevil said.
‘And now there's this Herr Hitler.
Folk laugh at him and his funny wee moustache, Mrs Sanderson said, but I don't find him funny at all.
Quite the contrary, he scares the living daylights out of me.’
‘Aye, another lunatic,’ Jimmy agreed.
‘God save us from another war,’ Mrs Sanderson murmured, a glance taking in her two sons.
‘Amen,’ Maggie whispered.
The steak-and-kidney pudding turned out to be absolutely delicious, even nicer than her mother used to make.
She asked for, and was given, the recipe before going home.
Maggie and Nevil walked hand-in-hand through a pine wood.
It was a Sunday afternoon and they were out for a stroll in the park.
She smiled at him, and he smiled back.
‘It's a gorgeous day,’ she said.
‘Not nearly as gorgeous as you.’
‘Flatterer!’
‘I'm told that flattery will get me everywhere.’
‘Not with me it won't’
‘Are you quite sure about that?’
‘No,’ she laughed, thoroughly enjoying herself.
With a startled squawk a rook flew from one tree to another where it perched complaining loudly.
‘It's very lucky to see a solitary rook on a Sunday,’ Nevil said.
‘Is it?
I didn't know that.’
‘Neither did I till now.
I just made it up.’
‘Fool!’
She kissed him on the cheek.
‘How about more of the same?’
This time he kissed her on the lips.
‘Hmmh!’ she murmured when it was over.
She was gloriously content.
She didn't need a mirror to know her face was glowing with happiness.
They wandered down a small incline where they stopped on a bridge and stared down into the browny green water.
Maggie suddenly shuddered, and twisted away, her happy expression replaced by one of painful memories.
Nevil drew her towards him.
‘What is it?’ he whispered.
‘The water.
It just…for a moment there…’
She broke off and bit her lip.
‘Heymouth?’
‘Yes,’ she mumbled in a tiny voice.
He put both arms round her and held her tight to his chest.
He could feel her thudding heart.
‘Oh Maggie!’ he whispered, and tenderly kissed her neck.
She looked up at him and they kissed on the lips, this time not frivolously, but full of heat and passion.
‘You know I've fallen for you, don't you?’ he murmured finally.
Those were words she'd so desperately wanted to hear.
‘Have you?’
‘Head over heels.’
‘In love?’
‘In love,’ he confirmed.
‘I feel the same about you.’
‘In love?’
‘In love,’ she stated.
They were about to kiss each other again when they both heard another Sunday afternoon walker approaching.
Laughing, hand-in-hand, they continued on their way.
‘That's them off,’ declared Maggie, coming back into the kitchen.
She and Nevil were looking after Margaret and Rose as John and Laura had gone out to the theatre for the evening.
Nevil glanced at his watch.
It was a quarter past eight.
‘I'll make a cup of tea,’ Maggie said.
As she was filling the kettle, Nevil crept up behind her, and slid his hands round to cup her breasts.
She caught her breath, then closed her eyes as he gently rubbed and caressed.
He pressed against her, and she could feel him hard against her.
‘Do you know this is the first time you and I have been alone together,’ he whispered.
‘What about the back close?’
‘I mean in a house’
She'd known perfectly well what he meant.
She put the kettle down and turned to face him.
She desperately wanted to touch him.
‘This room has one serious drawback,’ he said.
‘Which is?’
‘It doesn't have a couch.
Only chairs and…’
He paused before adding, ‘a bed.’
‘Are you suggesting we go and lie on that?’
He nodded.
‘I'd crease my clothes.’
‘Then take them off.
I'll do the same.’
The twins were fast asleep, and it would be hours before John and Laura returned.
They would be quite safe, she told herself.
‘Well?’ he prompted.
‘I'm a virgin, Nevil.
I want you to know that.’
‘Then that's two of us.’
That pleased her enormously.
Previously she hadn't been able to work out whether he was or not.
‘We'll have to be careful,’ she said.
‘I don't want to get pregnant.’
‘Don't worry.
I have the necessary with me.’
‘Prepared, were you?’ she teased.
‘I've been hoping you'd agree for some time.
Do you think less of me for that?’
She could hear a quiver in his voice.
He was nervous, but then so was she.
‘Tell me again.’
she asked.
‘That I love you?’
She nodded.
‘I love you.’
Her lips curved into a small smile.
How marvellous it was to hear him say that.
She could have stood there all day listening to him repeat it over and over again.
She crossed to the fireplace, and put some more coal on the fire.
Standing up she began undressing.
When she was completely naked she turned to stare at him.
She'd never seen anyone so transfixed, but then he'd never seen a naked woman before.
‘You can put your clothes on the other chair,’ she said, and went over to the cavity bed.
She threw back the covers, and climbed in.
Luckily she'd changed the sheets several days before and they were good Egyptian cotton sheets, a pair of Laura's best.
She watched him undress just as he'd watched.
His body was a fine one.
Young, hard and well muscled.
His buttocks were clenched as he moved towards her.
She wriggled over to make room for him.
How strange, yet exciting, it was to have him there with her, she thought.
After a while their nervousness vanished and was replaced by the glory and wonder of each other.
‘All right?’ he asked.
They were both lying on their backs staring at the top of the cavity.
‘Yes.’
‘Was it…
I mean…’
She twisted slightly, and kissed his upper arm.
Of course, silly.
It was beautiful.’
‘For me too, Maggie.’
She didn't feel any different.
She'd always imagined she would somehow, but she didn't.
‘Maggie?’
‘Hmmh?’
‘Wouldn't it be fabulous if we could do this every night?’
‘Fabulous,’ she agreed.
‘We could, you know.’
She pulled herself up onto an elbow to gaze at him.
He looked totally vulnerable, and for once far younger than his years.
‘How?’
‘You know as well as I do’
She went very still, and literally stopped breathing.
She waited for him to go on
‘Will you marry me?’
‘Is that a proposal?’
‘That's what it sounded like to me.’
Her eyes welled up with tears of joy.
‘Then I accept.’
They began talking about the future, and later made love once more.
The second time was even better than the first.
‘That's them now,’ said Maggie hearing scuffling at the front door.
A final glance at the cavity bed reassured her that it looked just as it should.
No one could tell she and Nevil had been in it.
She flicked back a stray lock of hair as Laura and John breezed into the kitchen.
‘You two appear to have had a good time,’ Maggie said with a smile.
‘Terrific!
Absolutely terrific,’ Laura enthused.
‘Wasn't it a great night out, John?’
‘A great night.
I can't remember the last time I enjoyed myself as much.
Or laughed so hard.
They had a comic on the bill who had me in stitches.’
‘How were the twins?’
Laura asked.
‘Not a peep out of them since shortly after eight.
They couldn't have been better.’
‘Good,’ said Laura, nodding.
‘I'll go and have a look at them.
I want to go through there anyway.’
And with that Laura hurried from the room.
John entertained Maggie and Nevil with tales of the show until Laura returned, and then Maggie said, ‘I have some news.
Or I should say, Nevil and I have some news.’
Laura guessed immediately what it was, and put a hand to her mouth.
‘What is it?’
John asked.
‘Nevil and I have decided to get married.’
Laura gave a delighted squeal and flew at her sister.
‘Oh congratulations!
I know you're both going to be happy together.
You're just made for one another’
Laura kissed Maggie on the cheek, and hugged her.
Then she did the same to Nevil.
John was standing rooted to the spot, his expression stony.
‘Well, John, aren't you going to say something?’
Laura urged.
He took a deep breath, and managed to smiled.
‘Congratulations.
All the very best.’
He may have been smiling, but his tone didn't match the smile.
It had a brittle edge to it.
Laura began to pump Maggie for details.
When was it going to be?
Would it be in church or at a registry office Where would the reception take place?
She'd be matron of honour, of course!
John produced the remains of a bottle of whisky and they all had a dram to celebrate.