

Even before he was fully awake he felt the oppression of unpleasant memory, the threat of worse to come, although he couldn't remember exactly what it was that he remembered.
And then he turned over and saw the empty crumpled pillow beside him, and it hit him in a great wave.
Last night.
He'd upset her thoroughly, and obviously she was still sulking, because she would never have got up before him otherwise.
She was going to use the sainted patience ploy, the one he found most difficult to handle.
He would have much preferred the hysterical crying, the accusations of lack of love for her to that.
But he'd had that last night — or rather, in the small hours of the morning.
And now she was going to pile it on thick and heavy.
And with a short night's sleep behind him and a miserable hour ahead of him before he could get away to the hospital, the day would be spoiled before it started.
He almost groaned as he got out of bed.
As he came out of the lavatory, Ian slammed the bathroom door behind him and went past in a wave of Old Spice.
‘Morning, prof!’ he said with a loud cheerfulness.
‘Late this morning, aren't you?’
And not waiting for an answer, he went into his room, moving jauntily.
So they'd been talking about it already.
Ian knew perfectly well that his father loathed being called prof, disliked intensely the way the boy went between the bathroom and his room with his towel flung over his shoulder so that he could flaunt his nakedness.
That he had done both this morning made it perfectly clear that he knew George had upset her again.
As he shaved, he tried to organize his thinking.
Apologize and promise her that he'd make it up somehow — take her out to dinner?
But that wouldn't do.
With the amount of work that was to be dealt with during the coming months his chances of getting away from the hospital much before eight or nine any evening were very slight.
It would only mean he might let her down again, and that would be asking for it.
Try again to get her to understand the implications of what he was doing, the possibility of a Nobel, and all that could mean?
But she hadn't the patience for that.
If he hadn't managed to convince her during the past eighteen years, he was unlikely to succeed this morning.
She was fully dressed, even wearing shoes rather than slippers.
Her red hair was carefully arranged and her face made up, and she was grilling sausages and frying potatoes.
Oh, God, he thought as he closed the kitchen door behind him.
It's worse than I thought.
‘You look nice,’ he said carefully.
‘Do I, George?
I'm glad.’
And she gave him a bleak little smile and put a plate of hot rolls on the table.
‘I hope these are all right.
They were left over from last night.’
‘Oh, God, I'm sorry, Marjorie!
All I can say is I'm sorry.
I know you think I did it deliberately, but I assure you I did not.
The project just —’
‘Matters more than anything else.
I know.
I should be used to it by now.
I'm sorry I'm not, and I know I'm at fault.
How many sausages can you eat?
Four?’
‘You are not at fault.
You have every right to be angry.
I let you down in front of your friends, and I'm sorry.
Please don't punish me any more!’
And he tried to keep the impatience out of his voice.
‘Punish you?’ she raised one eyebrow at him as she put a plate of food at his place at the table.
‘How am I punishing you?
If I were sending you off without a decent breakfast you could say that, but as it is…’
And I only get this sort of breakfast when you're angry, he thought.
‘Which I can't eat while you're still upset.’
‘Oh, I'm over it now.
I can't deny that last night I was…very hurt.
I know you don't much like them, that I should have asked a couple of the hospital people as well as people who share my interests —’
‘Marjorie, please, will you accept what I tell you?
It wouldn't have mattered who was here last night — and I don't dislike them in the least.
They're very interesting.
It's just that I got so involved with what was going on that I completely forgot!
If I hadn't been so snowed under I'd have phoned myself, and you could have reminded me.
And you could have told the girl on switchboard to remind me — she'd have given me the message, I assure you.’
‘And let her know that you cared so little for me that you had to be reminded?
Oh, no, George.
Bad enough the entire drama group will be gossiping this morning; I don't want all your people laughing at me too.’
‘No one will be laughing at you!’
He began to eat his breakfast, not enjoying it in the least.
But then, she knew he wouldn't.
It was all part of his punishment, to give him food he liked when it couldn't be appreciated.
‘Surely people have better things to do than make a great song and dance about missing a dinner party.’
‘I am not making a great song and dance about it,’ she said in a softly dangerous voice and, with a hint of ostentation in her movements, stirred a saccharin tablet into a cup of black coffee.
‘You ought to eat a proper breakfast.’
He responded obediently to the black coffee.
Why did every bloody argument have to follow such a pattern?
Didn't she realise that he saw through every trick  she used.
‘And I didn't mean to imply you were making a song and dance.
Only that intelligent people can surely accept that a man who has a job like mine can accidentally forget that his wife is giving a dinner party without immediately assuming his lapse is due to lack of concern for her.’
‘Oh, I know my friends aren't on a high intellectual plane like yours!
They're only interested in theater, and music, and art, and things like that!
A very dingy lot compared with the great minds you spend your time with’ Her voice rose shrilly.
‘Oh, for Christ's sake!
Do we have to go through all that again!’
He dropped his knife and fork with a clatter and leaned hack in his chair.
‘I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry!
What more can I do than apologize?
I do not despise your interests.
I do care about you.
I did not intend to embarrass you deliberately, and I will do all I can to insure it doesn't happen again.
What more do you want!’
‘To he important to you.’
Now she was using her pathetic pleading little voice, the one that still could affect him even though he knew she was performing, using all the tricks she used to keep her place as the most important member of her bloody drama group.
Yet, obvious a performance though it was, behind it lay a real anguish and he knew it, and knew he couldn't help it.
‘You are important to me,’ he said helplessly.
‘Last night, I thought you could have told from last night —’
‘You use sex the way I use makeup,’ she said with a sudden abandonment of her act.
‘To cover up the blemishes.
Don't you think I can see through that!
Making love and loving aren't the same thing.’
‘They are for me.’
‘No, they aren't.
The only thing you love is the workings of your own mind.
I'm here to be made love to when you need to, or when you think I need to, just to cover up.
Like makeup.
Oh, what's the use?’
She stood up and began to clear dishes from the table.
‘I take second place to your work, and I'll have to settle for that, I suppose.’
‘Why does this present project matter so much more?’
‘More?
More than what?’
‘More than it's ever mattered before.
I've been in research of one kind or another all our married life.
Haven't I?
Yet now you mind more.
The time it takes, the inevitable abstraction I show when I'm involved with something big…’
For the first time she was really listening, not going through the motions of an argument.
He felt suddenly a brief return of the closeness they had used to enjoy when the children were small and she still felt important to them and minded less his involvement with his work.
He put out his hand toward her.
She looked at it and then shrugged and turned away, and the brief light that had illuminated him spluttered and died.
‘It's always mattered.
You just never noticed, that's all.
I ought to be used to it, but I'm not.
That's all there is to it.’
‘No —’ and then the door swung open, and Ian came in, ostentatiously noisy, making sure his father knew that he, Ian, was aware there was an argument going on.
‘Will I do, Rusty, my own?’
She turned and looked at him, and her face lit up joyously, and George looked at Ian and tried to keep his own face expressionless.
‘You look splendid!’ she cried.
‘If they don't cast you, it'll be because they're blind as well as stupid.
I know you'll get it, darling.
It's meant!
Just you remember that, and you'll get it.
Can't you see it?
Ian Briant, up in lights!’
And then they were both looking at George, and he stretched his neck in his collar, tortoiselike, and said, a little gruffly, ‘Where are you going?’
‘I'm auditioning for a new show.’
Ian's voice was slightly defiant, and he dropped his head and with a careful casualness flicked away some nonexistent dust from his high-buttoned silver jacket.
George looked with distaste at the rest of his outfit — at the indecently tight green trousers, the silver-shot green scarf in the neck of the jacket, and the way the boy's flaming red hair curled against it.
‘I see.
And these — garments — are the sort to impress?’
Ian laughed loudly.
‘What would be more impressive would be nothing at all, since they're casting another protest show.
Most of the cast'll be starkers for the second half.’
He slid his eyes at his mother, and then said a little maliciously, ‘How much will you object if I am cast?’
‘As long as I don't have to see it, not in the least,’ George said dryly.
‘But if a willingness to display nakedness is an essential part of the…job’— he couldn't help letting some of his scorn show —‘it was hardly worth spending money on such clothes, was it?’
‘Oh, don't worry about that!’
Marjorie said, and her voice was high and brittle.
‘We couldn't have afforded to buy them anyway.
They're borrowed from the costume store.
My drama group people may be rather dim, but they're generous.
But take care of them, darling.
I hate to think what we'd do if they had to be replaced.
Scrag end of mutton for weeks.’
She kissed Ian warmly.
‘You'll get the job, darling — I'm sure you will.
But I wish you'd have some breakfast before you go.’
‘No, thanks, dolly-chops,’ Ian said and rumpled her hair.
‘But pop a poulet in the pot for me, and I'll be back for lunch.
And keep your chin up.
I'll be here by one, I promise.’
And he raised his own chin at George and went out, slamming the door behind him.
There was silence for a moment after the front door too slammed, and then George said carefully, ‘I would prefer you not to discuss our disagreements with the children.
You know that.’
‘I didn't discuss.
I simply mentioned it.
Anyway, I don't see why I shouldn't talk to my own son if I choose.
I have to talk to someone.
And we're very close.’
And she placed the emphasis delicately but unmistakably.
But this was no time to complicate things by being sidetracked by Ian.
George looked swiftly at his wristwatch as she turned away, and then leaned back in his chair.
‘Marjorie, you were about to tell me why this project annoys you more than any other project ever has.
I'd like to know.’
I've got to know, he thought.
The adoption shouldn't affect her, they shouldn't take her into account, but Kegan thinks they might want her token agreement, so I've got to handle this right.
Oh, God, why did I have to forget her wretched dinner party last night of all times?
‘I told you.
It doesn't.’
‘But I suspect it does.
And that makes me rather unhappy.’
‘Why?’
She shot a sharp look at him.
‘Maybe I should be asking what's so extra important about it to you.’
How can a woman who is so intelligent be so often stupid?
George thought suddenly.
Or is it intelligence?
Is there such a thing as intuition?
I've never believed it, but sometimes she makes such leaps of comprehension…
He pulled his mind back.
‘You know why.
Because it will be my definitive work.
Because if I find the answers I'm seeking, it should be worth — oh, an inestimable amount.
Its application could — I think I can say it might revolutionize life by the end of this century.
You know that.’
‘And it might get you your Nobel, you'll take your place in scientific history alongside the Curies and Rutherford and the rest of them.
I've heard all that before!
But is that all?’
‘It's a pretty big all.’
‘It's a pretty big might.
When I used to get all excited about the projects you got involved with years ago, you used to slap me down with that.
Told me I was jumping to conclusions and weaving fantasies and all the rest of it.
And now you're doing it.
Now I wonder why?’
She seemed to have completely forgotten her anger over the dinner party, which was one comfort.
But she was being a little too shrewd for real comfort.
If he didn't get this across to her properly and she chose to be obstructive she could make so many complications that the very project could be damaged.
He spoke particularly carefully.
‘This time I'm onto a…a big thing.
I've been working towards it from the start.
I can see that now, even though I had no idea at the beginning where it might all lead me.
This one is — it involves so many factors, you see.’
He stopped, a little helplessly.
‘I hardly know where to begin.
I've told you something of the plan —‘
‘As much as you thought I could cope with.
Not a lot.’
‘It was nothing to do with whether you could cope or not.
It was just that I dislike going off half-cocked, talking too much about a project before I can see where it's leading.’
‘Yet now, all of a sudden, you want to know why I think it's so important.
That's what you mean when you say it annoys me, isn't it?
You think the things that are important to you annoy me the way the things that matter to me annoy you.
You're — what's the word?— extrapolating.
That's it.
You're extrapolating from your own feelings to mine.
If I needed any proof that I bore you, that you don't care about me —’
‘No!’
He almost shouted it.
‘That isn't just, and you bloody well know it!
I just want to know if your anger is because of the way the project has absorbed me lately, or if it's simply the ill-mannered forgetfulness I showed last night — which I don't deny, and for which I again apologize.’
‘Wasn't it enough?
And I've accepted your apology.
I've had to.’
‘Not completely.
And it isn't only last night I'm talking about.
You've been edgy for months.’
‘Have I?
I hadn't noticed particularly.
Of course, I've been worried about Ian, and the way you and he —’
‘Please, not that.
Not now.’
‘— and I've not been well.
Or hadn't you noticed?’
‘Of course I have!
And it's worried me.
But I suspected you were — well, feeling the way you did because of the way I've been wrapped up in work, rather than because of any change in your condition.’
She produced a smile of pure triumph.
‘I knew you hadn't noticed.
How all occasions do inform against you, George!
Sir Peter says he wants to do another pyelogram soon.
He's been talking again about the possibility of dialysis.’
‘What?’
George stared at her.
‘But I saw him only yesterday!
He said nothing to me!’
She smiled sweetly.
‘I told him not to.
Insisted that he respect my confidence as a patient.
He knows how busy you are, of course, and quite understood.’
‘Marjorie!
Why do you do this to me?
You say I shut you out of my work, but you shut me out…
If you're ill again, I've got to know!’
‘Oh, it's not as bad as that,’ she said, clearly enjoying herself.
‘Not really.
You know what an old woman Apthorp can be.
Forget it.
There's nothing really new.
I've got a bit puffed up again, had a few headaches.
Nothing very much.
And I suppose you could be right.’
‘How do you mean?’
She sat down opposite him and propped her chin on her hands and gave him the look of limpid honesty at which she was particularly gifted.
‘I have been — well, a little more resentful of this project than any others.
Two years now, isn't it?
And you've retreated further and further into it, and I've been jealous.
I can't deny it.’
She's done it again.
She's made me angry with her anger, and then turned it around so that I'm eaten up with guilt because she's been ill and I haven't noticed, and now she's taking the blame on herself and making me feel worse than ever.
Oh, God, how convoluted can a woman's mind be?
George stared at her and suddenly ached to get away, to take his coat and his briefcase and get into the car and escape to the haven of the Unit and work and the baby and…which brought him back to the reason for his starting to probe her feelings about the project.
Complication on complication, Pelion on Ossa!
And then he said it aloud: ‘Pelion on Ossa.’
‘What?’
‘I should join your drama group.
I'm thinking in quotations.’
‘Why Pelion on Ossa?
What's piling on what?’
I'll have to plunge now, he thought.
I'll have to, and risk it.
‘Complications.
I'm going to need your help with the project.’
She stared at him, her mouth slightly open so that her rather small even teeth gleamed in the thin October sunshine that was now filling the kitchen.
‘My help?’ she said slowly.
‘Mine ?’
‘Yes.
Well, perhaps cooperation would be a better word.’
She closed her eyes for a moment, and when she opened them he was puzzled by the blankness in them.
‘Oh.
For one mad moment I thought — well, never mind.
What  sort of cooperation?
Do you want to move into the hospital altogether, and get me to put up with losing the little of your company I do get?
Or are you going to start getting even less money than you do now, and want me to take a cut in the housekeeping?
Which is it?’
‘It's just a matter of giving your token consent to something that —’
The telephone buzzed sharply, and he turned his head quickly.
‘What's the time?
Nine?
Who the hell can…the infant…’
And he moved rapidly toward the door, anxiety welling up in him.
When he came back his face was grim, and she looked at him with surprise.
‘What's happened?
Is there something wrong?’
‘It's a bloody nuisance!
Are the papers here?’
‘Ian took the Echo.
There's just the Times .
Why?’
‘It's in the Echo.
Nowhere else apparently.
They've found out about the baby.’
‘Is that bad?
You'll be publishing anyway, won't you?’
‘But not yet.
Oh, God, this is a nuisance.
Kegan says they're driving him mad already and he wants me there right away to talk to some bloody newspaper people.
And I won't.
But I'll have to go.’
He looked at her appealingly.
‘Marjorie, I've got to talk to you about this business, but I can't do it now.
Not properly.
Please.
Am I forgiven for last night?’
Her eyes filled with tears suddenly and she nodded.
‘Thank you.
I really am sorry, you know.
And this other thing — look, what are you doing today?’
‘I promised to help make costumes for the next production.
Why?’
‘Somehow, I'll have to get away in time.
I'll have to.
We'll go out for dinner.’
‘I can't do that.
Ian's got some friends tonight.
I promised I'd cook for them.’
‘Oh.’
The chill that had gone for these brief seconds settled again.
‘Yes.
Of course.
Then it'll have to wait, I suppose.
But it's important, Marjorie.
Try not to brood about last night, so that you're angry again by the time I can talk to you.’
‘I'm not that petty,’ she said and turned away from him.
‘I should have known it was only because of something to do with work that you were so anxious to be with me.
I'll never learn, will I?
Oh, go, will you?
I'll be here when you get back, the way I always am, and I'll cooperate with whatever it is that's so important to you.
I suppose it's something to be grateful for that I can do anything useful for you, so stop worrying.
It might interfere with your work if you worry, and that would never do.’
Which leaves us just where we started, he thought drearily as he turned and went.
If Kegan had waited another few minutes I could have got it settled.
Now I'll have to start all over again.
And as he climbed into the car and started the chilled engine, he had to make a very strong effort indeed to close the door on the compartment of his mind where Marjorie belonged and open wide the door to careful logical thinking about the project and this newest complication.
But before he could banish the memory of the expression on Marjorie's face as she stood in the thinly sunlit kitchen, one thought slid through to settle painfully into his consciousness.
I wish I could love her as little as I like her.
‘And suppose I refuse?’
Briant said.
‘What then?
They'll give up and leave us to get on with some work I imagine.
So I refuse.
End of problem.’
‘Not quite,’ Kegan said.
‘In fact, far from it.’
He was trying to keep his voice as dry as Briant's, to be as coldly objective, but it was difficult.
Remarkable how emotionally involved one became with a situation like this — on the one hand wanting to keep the hospital's backwater unrippled, on the other finding the stir and the fuss and the questioning exciting, even rather agreeably so.
He walked over to the window and looked out at the courtyard below, busy with ambulances and patients clutching appointment cards as they peered hesitatingly at signs pointing the way to Casualty and X-ray and Outpatients, with the birdlike figures of caped nurses changing shifts, and the white coats of housemen hustling importantly from ward block to ward block.
Behind him, Briant sat calmly, legs outstretched, his hands thrust into the pockets of his near-white coat, his eyes fixed on the toes of his highly polished shoes as he rocked his crossed ankles in a slow rhythm.
Matron, sitting tidily in the chair on the far side of him, allowed herself a barely audible sigh of impatience and looked pointedly at her watch, and Briant slid his eyes sideways at her and smiled slightly, raising his eyebrows at Kegan's back view.
Matron preferred not to accept his invitation to join in a professional contemptuousness of a fusspot hospital secretary and looked blankly back.
‘Look here, Dr. Briant,’ Kegan said, ‘there are — what?— fifty, sixty people down there?
And I can promise you that more than one of them has no right to be there.
Newspaper people — they don't take no for an answer, you know.
If they don't get cooperation from us, they'll do without it.
And God knows what sort of a mishmash they'll make of it.
I can assure you, from some very solid experience, it's asking for trouble to be obstructive.’
‘Who's being obstructive?
If anyone is, they are.
Obstructing me in the course of my work.
Obstructing you and everyone else in the place, come to that.
You're behaving as though they have a right to come nosing where they aren't wanted.’
Kegan came back to his desk and sat down again, looking across at Briant with an attempt to appear as calmly reasonable as he did.
But he felt irritation rising in him.
Bloody man!
Bloody arrogant dried-up man.
Really, doctors were, by and large, a hateful species.
‘I am not sure they haven't,’ he said carefully.
‘News is news, and newspaper people would argue that they have every right to report it.
The point is, they'll report it one way or the other.
I am simply trying to suggest that we do our best to ensure they report it accurately.
If we — you — cooperate, then they'll be satisfied and, as you say, leave you to get on with your work.
I can assure you, I hold no brief for these wretched people, but as I said, I have had some experience —’
‘Yes, I know.’
Briant for the first time allowed some of his own initiation to show.
‘When James Torquay died here, and everyone  carried on as though he were God incarnate instead of the superannuated useless politician he was.
I've heard you on the subject before.’
‘It wasn't easy,’ Kegan said, nettled.
‘We were besieged here for weeks, and life was very complicated for everyone.
I don't want it to happen again.’
‘Nor I, Dr. Briant,’ Matron said unexpectedly.
‘I really don't think we could cope with another such situation.
And this would be worse.
Already, Sister Field is almost at her wits' end.
The Maternity phone never stops.
Reporters have been ringing there since eight this morning.
And three times since breakfast she found unauthorized people prowling around — one of them in the labor room, no less!
I must say I agree with Mr. Kegan —’
‘I'd like to know how the hell they got onto it,’ Briant said with a sudden cold fury.
‘I've been working on this project for two years — two full years with God knows how many people involved.
And not a hint got out, not one damned hint.
Yet the minute we have to use a hospital ward, newspapers start buzzing.
I would have thought you could control your staff's tongues rather more efficiently, Matron.’
‘My staff have nothing whatsoever to do with this, Dr. Briant!’
Matron stood up, thrusting her head forward so that the starched bows under her chin disappeared into folds of flesh.
‘For one thing, not one of my nurses knew anything about the project; you've kept them almost completely in the dark!
Of course, there may well have been conjecture when so many people invaded Maternity when the infant was delivered, but that was something you permitted.’
‘I understand from the Echo man that it was your paper in Nature that put him onto the track,’ Kegan said maliciously.
‘He's a specialist journalist, you know — B. Sc.
and all that.
He seems to have a considerable amount of information about what your work implies.’
‘That paper was merely a preliminary one and was published months ago!’
Briant snapped.
‘And no journalist, B.Sc. or not, could have picked up anything from it.
This is an internal leak, and that's all about it.
So whoever is responsible for the leak can clean  up the mess it's made.
I'm damned if I will.
I've wasted quite enough time this morning already.
You deal with it, Kegan.
Or you, Matron.
I told you, I refuse.’
And he stood up and stretched his neck with his characteristic tortoiselike movement and turned toward the door.
‘There is another point, Dr. Briant,’ Kegan said hastily, regretting the self-indulgence that had allowed him the dig at Briant.
‘Money.’
‘What about money?’
Briant stood still, his hand on the doorknob.
‘You'll need a considerable sum yet to complete this project.
Your application for a further grant from our endowment funds comes to committee next month, as you know, and as I told you when you first mooted it, the chances are — well, chancy.’
He looked at Briant under his lashes and, pleased with the expression on the other man's face, went on smoothly.
‘I'll do my best of course, as I promised — canvassing a few people — but if the hospital's in an unnecessary turmoil over this, it won't be easy.’
‘That's blackmail,’ Briant said after a moment.
‘Is that what you're trying to do?
Blackmail me?’
He let go of the doorknob and thrust his hands back into his pockets.
‘Christ, isn't it bad enough that I have to scrape for every bloody penny to do a piece of vital research, without being forced to turn my project into a circus for a lot of gawping idiots who won't have the least comprehension of what I'm trying to do?
Have I got to jump through hoops, ride bareback in spangles, before I'm allowed to do my job?’
With Briant really showing some emotion at last, Kegan felt much better, much more in control.
‘Not at all, Dr. Briant,’ he said kindly.
‘Not at all.
I'm just pointing out cold facts.
And as for the gawping idiots — haven't you thought how useful a little judicious publicity could be?
Get public sympathy and you'll be in a much stronger position altogether — outside the hospital more than in.
Even if the committee agree to a grant, it can't be more than a couple of thousand — not enough to keep you going for a few months.
But with public interest high, you can go to the big foundations in a far from cap-in-hand way.
And they've got hundreds of thousands in their gift, remember.’
There was a silence in the big carpeted room with its heavy polished desk and tasteful reproductions of Van Gogh on its lemon-colored walls, as Matron, still looking slightly ruffled, and Kegan, a ludicrously hopeful expression on his face, stared at Briant's bent head as he stood rocking gently on his heels.
‘That is an aspect that had not occurred to me,’ Briant said, and the angry color that had blotched his narrow cheeks receded.
‘You may well indeed be right.
And of course there are the individual philanthropists.
There are a number of men only too anxious to buy themselves a knighthood who might be most attracted to a project that catches the public sympathy.’
He produced one of his rare smiles and came back to his chair.
‘I am a practical man, Kegan.
A scientist.
When you produce an argument that makes practical sense, then of course I'm prepared to listen.
Had you said this first instead of producing emotional gush about the hospital's welfare, we could have saved a good deal of time.
So, what precisely do you want to do?
I'll cooperate as far as I can, on the understanding of course that I remain in control — full control — of anything to do with my project.
I want no pompous official tours of my unit, you understand?
And there will be no access to either the infant or the mother.
That must be quite clear at the outset.’
‘Of course,’ Kegan said and reached for the intercom on his desk.
‘Matron, do sit down and be comfortable.
I'll send for some coffee and we can plan this.
Miss Bassett, coffee for three, if you please.’
He snapped off the machine and settled back in his chair as Matron with a soft rustle of starch rearranged herself in hers.
‘I suggest an immediate preliminary press release.
I'll write it if you wish, Dr. Briant, and you can vet it.
Then a press conference.
In the board room.
You can appoint one of your own people to act as press liaison officer after that, or I'll lay on someone for the job.
That's up to you.’
Briant frowned sharply.
‘You expect more press interest even after the conference?
If so, what's the point of having the conference at all?
If we're still to be bombarded by these people —’
‘There may be some follow-up interest, that's all,’ Kegan said soothingly.
‘But it shouldn't last more than a week or so.
The press  conference will satisfy the newspaper people to start with, but there are the weekly and monthly magazines, foreign press agencies, television people, and so on.
We need a plan for them.
As I said, I've had some experience.
Ah, coffee.
Thank you, Miss Bassett.
Now, Dr. Briant, suppose we plan the conference for — say tomorrow at ten?
That will satisfy the evening papers.
Otherwise they'll go on nagging today.’
Briant nodded, resigned.
‘Ten o'clock.
I must be away by eleven at the latest, though.
We do the daily rundown tests then, and I must be there.
There are one or two feeding problems with the infant, and I can't delegate until they're ironed out.’
‘By all means,’ Kegan said.
‘Ten it is.
Now I can at least get the pressure off a little.
Excuse me.’
He clicked the intercom again and said, ‘Miss Bassett, all calls regarding the Briant project are to he switched to me from here on in.
Tell switchboard, will you?
And we'd better clear all Maternity calls through here as well.
I'll get Matron to handle them’— he looked up at her, and she nodded —‘and tell all press callers that a press conference will be held here in the board room at ten A.M. tomorrow.’
It had been raining heavily since dawn, water sluicing the gutters of the courtyard, creating rainbows of the patches of oil on the tarmac of the consultants' car park.
The people filling the board room steamed gently as they sat huddled together on the rows of chairs arranged neatly in front of the big desk.
Sitting in a heavily carved chair to the right of it, George Briant took a sardonic pleasure in the manifest discomfort of the men and women in front of him who moved uneasily in their damp coats and tried to find dry patches on their laps on which to rest their notebooks.
Serve them right, he thought vindictively and then, imitated at his own childishness, turned his head to look at the other people arranged alongside him, the desk's shining expanse of polished wood reflecting their faces as twisted white blobs.
Immediately beside him Kegan was fussing with sheets of paper, arranging and rearranging them into neat aligned squares.
He had taken a lot of trouble with his appearance this morning, Briant  noticed, his heavy gray hair carefully slicked across his head, his knitted red tie carefully arranged against the collar of his pink shirt.
Vain idiot, Briant thought, suddenly conscious of the obvious age of his own gray suit and the shabbiness of his faded blue shirt.
It never failed to anger him — the clearly apparent greater affluence of hospital administrators as compared to his own lack of money.
He knew beyond any shadow of doubt that his own contribution to the hospital was worth infinitely more than that of a hundred Kegans.
He genuinely had little concern with making money for its own sake, but he could not fail to be infected by Marjorie's martyred attitude to their shortage of cash, and he resented being reminded of it by Kegan's sleekness.
But this was no time to be thinking about Marjorie again and her nagging about their poverty; the morning would be complicated enough, God knew, without allowing Marjorie to invade his mind.
So he looked at Matron, tight-faced and armored in starch, at Miss Guttner sitting lumpishly beyond her, her glasses shining blankly as they picked up the overhead light that filled the room with a necessary illumination against the heaviness of the sky pressing grayly against the windows.
Dismal woman, Briant thought and dismissed her too from his mind, turning his head again to look at the people in front of him.
Considering the amount of pressure they had been exerting, there should, Briant felt, be a different atmosphere about them.
They should seem eager, anxiously expectant, but they merely sat waiting, apparently more concerned with their private conversations than with the people they had come to hear.
Even Michael Bridges, the Echo man (Kegan had leaned over to Briant and pointed him out as soon as he came in), sat sprawled in seeming boredom in his chair at the end of the front row.
I'll have to watch him, Briant thought.
He had made a point of reading some of his articles last night, and the man knew what he was writing about.
He spoke Briant's own language.
And suddenly Briant felt better.
These people were professionals, like himself.
They had a job to do and did it well.
Briant might despise the job, despise the way they presented facts to the gawping idiot public, but he could recognize ability when he saw it.
And  these people had it; their very casualness, their absence of wide-eyed eagerness showed that.
Beside him, Kegan moved, stood up and coughed self-importantly.
‘I think we can commence, ladies and gentlemen,’ he said.
He coughed again and spoke a little more loudly.
‘Your time is as precious as ours.
And Dr. Briant’— he bowed slightly in Briant's general direction —‘must leave at eleven sharp.
Now…’
He took a deep breath, coughed yet again, and picked up one of the sheets of paper before him.
‘Dr. Briant wishes me to make clear at the outset that he is not entirely happy that this matter should have become a subject of public discussion.
He would point out that scientific projects need a great deal of time to come to fruition, and premature publication of, er, data can damage progress.
What appear to be facts at an early stage may well be disproved before the work is completed.
However, since some information about his project seems to have leaked out, Dr. Briant has kindly consented to give some of his valuable time to an explanation of the work he is doing.’
Kegan looked up from the paper he had been reading and looked a little hopefully at the faces in front of him.
‘It would be…well, interesting to know just how you came to hear about the infant's birth, and why you felt this birth was…well, interesting.
We, er, we're naturally concerned to know whether there are, er, people working here who have a direct contact with the newspaper that first reported the child's birth and linked it with Dr. Briant's work.’
He was looking directly at Bridges, but Bridges looked imperturbably back, and after a few moments of heavy silence Kegan coughed and returned to the paper in his hand.
‘Dr. Briant proposes to read a short account of his project to you and will then be available for questioning.
In order to cooperate with you fully, we have prepared copies of his statement and some brief notes about Dr. Briant himself, which we trust will be of assistance to you.’
Again he looked up from the paper and smiled conciliatingly at his audience.
‘To be quite honest, ladies and gentlemen, we hope that by offering you all the assistance we can that you will respond  by being sympathetic to our, er, request for — shall we say, unsensational coverage?
As I said, premature, er, excitement about new scientific facts can damage progress.’
Again they sat and looked silently back at him, and again he coughed and turned his head and said a little gruffly, ‘Dr. George Briant,’ and sat down.
Briant put his hand in his inside jacket pocket and pulled out the folded sheet of paper that carried his statement, and, a little startled at the sudden wave of apprehension that swept over him, he stood up.
Immediately, the cameramen who had been standing at the sides of the rows of chairs moved, and the flash of lights and the clicks of their equipment bewildered him slightly.
He stood blinking against the effect of the lights on his eyes and felt the apprehension disappear under a new wave of feeling — anger.
They had made him both look and feel foolish, and that was infuriating.
But he was glad of it.
He knew that he always operated at full efficiency when driven by anger; from now on, he was suddenly sure, he was in control of this bloody conference.
‘This is my statement,’ he said dryly and bent his head to read.
‘As a biologist, my main interest has for some years been human genetics, the study of the way in which various characteristics are passed from parent to offspring.
Much investigation has been made by myself and others into the patterns of physical inheritance: body build, eye and hair color, and so on.
We know a good deal now about the way in which the genes act.’
He looked up and stared at his audience with the slightly accusing look he used for classes of students.
‘I had better recapitulate for you.
Human body cells contain chromosomes, forty-six in each cell.
And each chromosome carries some fifty thousand genes, which are the structures that carry inheritance information from parent to offspring.
I trust that is quite clear?’
Without waiting for a response, he returned to the paper in his hand.
‘The research results of the people who defined the structure of DNA — deoxyribonucleic acid — and others working in related fields suggested to me that it might be possible to identify specific  genetic details in a newly fertilized human egg cell, since DNA is the substance of which genes are made.
Since there are some fifty thousand genes in each chromosome, you can imagine the difficulty inherent in recognizing differences in such microscopic structures.
I cannot possibly explain to a lay audience the techniques I used to study these genes — although I can tell you they involved the use of a type of radio microscope, and considerable extremely complex computer work — the programming alone involved almost a year's work.
Anyway, in the course of these preliminary studies I succeeded in identifying certain exceedingly small but specific bodies in genes.
Those of you who have read my papers in Nature may know that these are now known as Briant Bodies, and fall into four distinct groups, which I have labeled Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta.
Briant Bodies Alpha and Beta carry physical characteristics including hair, skin and eye color, and body build.
Briant Bodies Gamma and Delta — the most interesting in my estimation — carry certain personality traits, including intelligence, aggression, equanimity and emotional stress tolerance.
‘In other words, it became technically possible for me, some three years ago, to make certain accurate predictions about a human individual by studying the structure of a newly fertilized female reproductive cell, in conjunction with detailed investigation of the adults who produced the ovum and the spermatozoon that fertilized it.’
‘Dr. Briant?’
Briant looked up, frowning at the interruption.
Michael Bridges was still sprawled in his chair, but his face was alert.
‘Could you clarify that point, please?’ he said.
‘You are saying that if it were possible to remove a fertilized egg cell from a woman after she had conceived, you could examine it and say what the resulting child would be like?’
‘Precisely.’
‘But what's the point of that?’
The man sitting next to Bridges leaned forward.
‘I mean, if you remove the cells, then they can't develop into a baby, can they?
You've done an abortion.’
‘If you can contain your impatience,’ Briant said dryly, ‘these  points will be explained.
You will have ample time for questions when I have completed the reading of this statement.’
He returned to his paper .
‘We also now have a technique that makes it possible to control the production of female ova — egg cells.
If we give a woman controlled quantities of a substance called human gonadotrophin, we can make her produce ova to order, as it were.
Researchers working with this substance set about trying to remove a fertilized ovum from a woman during the few days that elapse between actual conception and the implantation of the cell into the uterus — where it must be to develop into an infant — and then replacing it.
They succeeded, thus making it possible for me to make predictions which could afterwards be verified.
‘Now, as a biologist, I have long been somewhat suspicious of the assumptions about human behavior and motivation made by psychologists and sociologists.
These, er, workers’— his voice took on a faint sneer as he said the word —‘these workers suggest that most human behavior is learned, that we are controlled in our actions not by our inheritance but by what happens to us after birth.
They feel nurture is of infinitely greater importance than nature.
As I say, I doubt these assumptions, and some interesting studies have confirmed my doubts.
For example, babies born carrying a particular extra chromosome are mongols, individuals with well-recognized facial characteristics, lowered intelligence, and an affectionate disposition.
Also, it has been noted that men who carry another extra chromosome — in this case a Y chromosome, which is the one that determines maleness — are unusually tall and display aggressive antisocial behavior.
In other words, these men are born criminals.
‘This knowledge has been of great use.
Some researchers working on the removal and examination of fertilized cells have been able to reject those which were clearly mongoloid, only replacing those known to be able to produce normal infants.
‘With all this background work on which to draw, I decided two years ago to mount an experimental project which would define the difference between nature and nurture.
I would select potential parents and investigate their genetic structure in detail, and then arrange for a conception to take place.
I would then investigate the cell structure of this conception, predict the individual, and implant the fertilized cell into the uterus to develop to a full-term infant.
‘Thereafter, the child would be reared in a carefully controlled environment, constantly observed and monitored.
When he reached maturity, we would be in a position to know precisely which of his behavioral patterns he had inherited and which he had learned.
‘The practical uses of such an investigation would be considerable, I thought.
For example, if aggressiveness can be undoubtedly shown to be an inherited trait rather than a learned response — as it is in those men with the extra male chromosome — we would be in a position to reject all conceptions which would produce an excessively aggressive individual.
We could eventually remove from human life all the characteristics which make for human distress — criminality, war-making, and the like.’
He looked up and let his eyes move across the rows of faces before him.
The blankness had gone from them, he noticed with satisfaction.
They were sitting and staring at him in complete absorption.
Aware of the complete control he had over them, and enjoying it, he went on with more deliberation.
‘I selected potential parents from university students.
Much genetic data was collected from some two thousand young men and women, and using the computer services of two cooperating universities, I eventually selected six potential mothers.
I will not now detail the reasons for failure with the first three women — we lost some seven selected conceptions — but go straight to the one with whom we succeeded.
‘She is a young woman of considerable intelligence and physical health — a splendid specimen of humanity.
She cooperated fully in the project in a most commendable spirit of scientific interest.
After several months of trials with human gonadotrophin and conceptions which were made in vitro— the mother of course never met the donor of the sperm which fertilized her ovum — a conception was selected and detailed predictions made —’
‘Dr. Briant, would you permit another interruption?’
Michael Bridges' voice cut across.
‘It would help if you would define the term ‘in vitro,’ I think.’
‘What?
Oh.’
Briant allowed himself a small sigh of irritation.
‘Very well.
Recent work, notably in Cambridge as well as in the United States, has demonstrated the feasibility of exposing a female ovum to spermatozoa outside the human body — in which such exposure normally takes place — in a special medium.
Fertilization can then take place and the first cell divisions can occur.
Thereafter, the zygote — the name given to the resultant collection of cells — can be implanted in the uterus.
This process is called inovulation, and can be likened to artificial insemination, in that the egg cell is deliberately removed from the woman's body, and reinserted after fertilization.
Does that answer your needs?’
‘In other words, a test-tube baby?’
‘In your words, perhaps.
Not a term I would use myself, since I do not find it particularly felicitous.
If you cannot use the terms I have offered you, the choice of another is up to you.
May I now proceed?
Thank you.
‘Very well.
After a series of trials, a conception made in vitro was selected, predictions were made about it, and it was implanted in the uterus of our volunteer mother.
We could have used a different host mother — using ova from one woman, and allowing another to act as the incubator for the conception — but we preferred to use the donor of the egg cell as the incubator, mainly to avoid any risk of rejection.
We thought it possible that we might get an auto-immune reaction otherwise — similar to that which occurs when a patient rejects a heart or kidney transplant.
So, the selected conception was implanted, and the pregnancy went to full term.
The infant, which was incidentally precisely what we predicted he would be in physical makeup, sex, coloring, and so on, was born here seven days ago.
It is this fact that…leaked — and causes your presence here today.
‘From now on, the infant will be reared as I explained, and not for at least twenty years will we be able to report in much detail on the results of our investigations, although preliminary papers will be published in the professional press from time to time .
I must  here point out to you that any attempts on the part of people outside the project to have any contact with the child will be vigorously rejected.
Such contact may seriously invalidate an experiment into which a great deal of work and effort has already been put.
I trust you will therefore treat this matter with…responsibility.’
He sat down and, thrusting his hands into his trouser pockets, stared coolly at the audience which sat in complete silence before him.
But then a wave of movement rustled across them, and several people jumped up waving notebooks.
It was a woman who got the first question in, her voice rising shrilly above the others.
‘Dr. Briant!
Are we to understand you have made a test-tube baby?
That you are going to bring him up in a…in a laboratory ?
A human baby is a guinea pig?’
The horror in her voice was almost ludicrous, and Briant raised his eyebrows slightly.
‘As I have said, ‘test-tube baby’ is not a term I would ever use.
What I have described to you is a controlled conception.
As for rearing the child in a laboratory, the unit prepared for him is not equipped with bunsen burners and retorts and animal cages.
He will have every comfort and care, I assure you — probably in excess of that provided for any human infant ever.’
‘But what about his parents?
Where do they come into it?
Have they agreed to let their baby be treated in this fashion?
What sort of parents can they be, to give up their baby like this?’
Only a momentary tightening of the jaw showed Briant's irritation.
Emotional idiot! he thought, but tried not to let his contempt show in his voice.
‘You appear to have misunderstood what I have told you.
The father is known only to myself and the computer, and none of the young men who cooperated in giving us specimens of their sperm knew for what purpose it was given.
The child's natural father has no idea that he is a father.’
He smiled thinly.
‘Not, perhaps, an unusual experience for virile young men.’
‘But the mother !’
The woman reporter almost wailed the words.
‘She knows she has a baby — is she giving him up just like that?
Doesn't she care ?’
‘I told you she entered into the project in a spirit of most admirable scientific curiosity.
I must point out that she was selected with considerable care.
She is not a woman with an interest in maternity.
She at no time had an emotional link with the father of the infant — she never met him, as I must again repeat — or an emotional involvement with the pregnancy.
She saw her role as purely an incubatory one, and will now return to her own work as a biologist — although not of course on this project — having made her most valuable contribution to my work.
She will no doubt maintain her interest in the progress of the project, but not in the child in any possessive sense.
She's too intelligent for that.’
And this time he let the contempt enter his voice.
‘What's intelligence got to do with it?’
This came from a man standing behind the shrill woman.
‘What about good old-fashioned mother love?
Don't tell me intelligent women don't love their children!
My wife's got a degree in mathematics, but she loves her kids!’
‘No doubt.
But mother love is a compound of involvement with the father and care of the infant.
We know of course that this mother has the normal strong biological drive to care for her offspring, and if she did handle him would no doubt develop an emotional involvement.
But, as a scientist, she was and is prepared to tolerate this drive while it lasts without satisfying it.
We have done our best to protect her; we ensured she would not see the baby at birth, removing him from the Maternity Unit as soon as he was delivered.
It is already apparent to us that she has no emotional link with the child; she is indeed now only anxious to return to her own work, which she will do in about ten days' time.’
‘Hence the kidnaping story,’ Bridges said, and Briant looked at him sharply.
‘What was that?’
‘We…heard that the child had been kidnaped with the full collusion of the hospital staff,’ Bridges said blandly.
‘Who told you that?’
Briant snapped.
‘Ah, I'm sorry, Dr. Briant.
Must protect my sources, you know.’
Another journalist cut in then.
‘Dr. Briant, this mother never saw the father either?’
‘I keep saying that!’
‘Christ!
A virgin birth, no less!’
‘Hardly,’ Briant said sharply.
‘And may I suggest that this is precisely the kind of overheated sensational attitude I would most strongly deplore.
This woman may be technically a virgin in that she has never experienced intercourse, either with the father of this infant or anyone else.
It was necessary to the experiment that we select a sexually mature but inexperienced woman.
previous intercourse may have in some way altered her — set up antibodies of an unknown kind.
We do not yet know whether this can happen, but we could not risk invalidating the experiment by using a sexually experienced woman.
Also, if a woman at twenty-six is still a virgin it suggests she is not an overemotional type.
That is, she would be in part protected by her own nature from the complications of emotional involvement.’
‘But the knowledge derived from psychological studies into the human personality suggests that sexually frigid women are just as liable to emotional involvement as anyone else,’ Bridges cut in.
‘Maybe she's the chilly type you describe because of psychological problems.
Couldn't that damage your baby?’
‘I have little faith in the unsubstantiated assertions of psychologists,’ Briant said dryly.
‘I can assure you this woman is what she appears — an intelligent scientist untrammeled by the usual preoccupations of women.’
‘You sound like a misogynist, Dr. Briant!’
Bridges said.
‘That isn't really relevant, I suppose, though it would be interesting to know whether you inherited the trait.’
He looked at Briant a little wickedly and rode smoothly over his attempts to retort.
‘But to return to the baby.
His mother may, as you suggest, have no need to love him.
But hasn't he a need to be loved by her ?
Might I remind you of the work of Dr. Bowlby, who pointed out the effects of mother deprivation on children?
Of course, he is perhaps more a sociologist and psychologist than a biologist, but still…’
Anger was getting close to being out of control, Briant suddenly realized, and he made a conscious effort to push it down.
‘I am fully aware of the infant's need for a permanent mother figure, and this has been taken into account.
The child is receiving  his direct physical care from a carefully selected woman who will be his nurse-cum-mother for the next few years.
And you may like to know that we have not neglected the infant's biological need to suckle.
This woman, although not recently delivered, once bore a child, and so we have been able, by the use of selected hormone therapy, to establish lactation again.’
‘A wet nurse!
Back to the Middle Ages!’
Briant ignored that and looked instead at a man waving his notebook eagerly from the back row.
‘What about the legality of this, Dr. Briant?’ he called.
‘Can you rear this child this way?
Whatever the mother's feelings, she's got rights, hasn't she?’
‘Of course she has.
And she has assigned them to me.
In other words, I will in due course adopt the child.
As his legal guardian, I am then legally able to decide his care.’
‘But it's so cruel !’ the shrill woman cried.
‘There'll be an outcry, bring up a human baby as though he were some sort of experimental animal!
The authorities surely can't allow it!’
‘Cruel?’
Briant stared at her as though she were demented.
‘Madam, I do not intend to beat, starve or in any way maltreat this child.
He will have every possible care, has an inheritance that ensures perfect physical health, high intelligence, an even disposition, and an inquiring mind.
I can assure you that any busybody would be hard put to it to prove maltreatment!
If you are so concerned with the kindly nurture of infants, I suggest you turn your journalistic —conscience — to those children begotten by inadequate stupid parents being reared in appalling conditions in slums all over the country.
A newspaper campaign to prevent breeding by some of the substandard individuals with whom society is saddled would be much more to the point than vapid maunderings about the welfare of a child who has been endowed with an almost perfect inheritance, and is being given the best possible care!’
He suddenly became aware of Kegan beside him, sharply tugging at the edge of his jacket, and turned to stare at him, blotches of anger flaming in his cheeks.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ Kegan said loudly, ‘I am sure you will understand Dr. Briant's…distress at the imputation of cruelty.
I must give you my personal assurances that this infant is receiving perfect care.
The unit in which he will live is within the hospital grounds, and was most carefully prepared and equipped.
As well as by Dr. Briant, he is supervised by our Dr. Saxby, a most eminent paediatrician — child-care specialist.
We have assigned considerable staff to cooperate in his care — dietitians, physiotherapists, all sorts.
You really need not fear that Dr. Briant will be anything other than an excellent father to this child.
After all, he is a father himself!
He has a daughter of sixteen, a son of seventeen, both charming and most happy young people!
It is natural that any suggestion of lack of…of affection for this child should so upset a man who is of the highest integrity —’
‘Thank you, Mr. Kegan,’ Briant said sharply.
It was infuriating to have let anger steal his tongue as it had.
He had been pushed into this bloody situation by the need to attract public sympathy, and yet had been stupid enough to let the manifest idiocy of his questioners drive him to make a most unsympathetic exhibition of himself.
And it didn't help to have that idiot Kegan see what he bad done and try to extricate him.
Remember what you're here for, he told himself and turned back to his audience.
‘I must indeed apologize for my…irritation,’ he said and produced his most disarming smile.
‘My feelings were hurt.
Will you forgive me, madam?’
And he looked directly at the woman who had been the origin of his biting anger and smiled again.
She reddened and bobbed her head and sat down a little awkwardly.
Bridges' voice came clearly again.
‘Dr. Briant, why are you doing this work?’
‘I thought I'd explained that!’
‘Oh, yes, you explained about what you want to find out.
All very interesting.
And that it may have practical applications.
But why?
Do you want to make it possible to rear a race of supermen?
Bit…well, Hitlerish, isn't it?’
Careful.
Careful, Briant thought, and he paused a moment before speaking.
‘I can assure you that I have no political motives whatsoever.
Politics bore me, frankly.
But I am a biologist, a scientist.
And that  means I'm a realist.
We surely have all faced the fact that the world is in real danger of overpopulation?’
He looked around at the rest of the journalists.
‘That the time must inevitably come when we will have to control the right to reproduce?
How it will be done is outside my brief at the moment.
I…well, I want to find a way to ensure that we have a method that will help us produce only the best and happiest of individuals, so that when the time comes for control to be applied, it can be done gainfully.
How much better it will be to say to people, ‘We can ensure that the children you have will be the best possible children, the ones with the best inheritance, the ones who will make the world a really good place to live in instead of the misery it so often is.’
I've got them! he thought with sudden joyousness.
I've got them.
‘You can't really want the handicapped, the mentally dull, the physically frail to reproduce themselves ad infinitum?
In the early days of man's evolution natural forces ensured that these individuals were weeded out of the human race and could not reproduce, but science has altered all that, made it possible to rear such frail specimens.
Survival of the fittest was a superb natural mechanism which we damaged.
Now, as a scientist, I am trying to repair that damage.
Isn't that a laudable aim?’
‘Oh, undoubtedly,’ Bridges murmured, and he was clearly heard, for Briant's oration seemed to have completely flattened the other listeners.
‘Although I can't help wondering whether you may be creating a tool which could be dangerously used.
Do you never fear the possible misapplication of your work?’
‘A scientist cannot be swayed by such fears and still remain time to science.’
Briant paused, seeking the words which would explain what he meant without antagonizing this man.
He was no longer aware of the other people present, only of the lanky figure in the front row.
‘Take Rutherford.
Had he worried about the possibility of atomic warfare when he was attempting to split the atom, he would never have gone on; and we would have lost the many benefits nuclear physics has given us, such as freely available power and treatment of disease.
No, Mr. Bridges.
In the search for knowledge  what matters is the truth that is knowledge.
How it is used becomes the responsibility of others, not the searchers.
And anyway, my search for knowledge about human behavior — surely it can't be dangerous?
To help people to be better people, happier people, how can that be dangerous?’
There was a short silence, and then from the back of the room a very young man stood up.
‘Now you know how to select these perfect babies, Dr. Briant, will the treatment be available on the National Health Service?’
And suddenly the room shook with laughter.
The prosaic simplicity of the question seemed to release and dissipate their suppressed anxiety and resentment, and the young man went scarlet with shame.
But Briant was grateful to him.
‘A most reasonable question!’ he said loudly above the noise.
‘Most reasonable.’
The laughter subsided.
‘It will be some time before the results of the experiment can be applied; not until the child reaches maturity can we evaluate our findings.
And as for the National Health Service, well, it isn't financing my work now!
I have to seek such support from charity.
And unless more charity comes my way, the whole project may founder.’
Leave it at that, leave it at that, he thought.
Don't shout too hard for money, but leave it at that.
It's enough.
The shrill woman stood up again.
‘Dr. Briant!
Can you tell us what the baby's name is?’
For one brief moment Briant was nonplused.
He had frankly given no thought whatsoever to the child's name; he had not yet thought of him as an identity anyway.
perhaps that was why.
But to say as much to this sentimental woman's-magazine lady would be asking for trouble, undoing all the efforts he had made to assure them all of his true warm humanity — emotional lot!
And it would be a picture of his true warm humanity that would bring the money in for the project.
He had then one of his occasional flashes of utter brilliance.
‘Why,’ he said, smiling kindly at her, ‘George Briant, of course.
He is, after all, to be as a son to me.’
He left them just before eleven, well satisfied with his morning's work.
He'd made mistakes, but he had salvaged them.
They had seemed quite satisfied with his answers to their further questions, piddling little questions about the baby's weight and hair and eye color, about the progress of the birth.
He'd handed those to Miss Guttner, as the obstetrician involved, and she had confused them considerably with talk about the obstetric details, which pleased Briant a good deal.
While she was ponderously explaining what an LOA presentation was, they couldn't probe at him.
He had deeply resented the questions about himself as a personality, but had accepted Kegan's whispered warning about antagonizing them again, and had submitted with the best grace he could muster.
Yes, he was medically qualified, as well as being a biologist.
Yes, he was a professor — an associate, not the holder of a chair, and did teach, but preferred to be referred to as Dr. Briant rather than professor.
No, his son was not at present intending to follow his  father into a scientific career, although his daughter was (and these questions he found particularly intrusive, but then thoughts of Ian and his activities always were an intrusion anyway).
And no, he could not discuss the question of his wife's involvement with the infant at this stage.
She was of course interested in his progress, but as he had already told them, a mother substitute had been appointed to give the child his direct physical care.
He frowned sharply as he thought again about those particular questions.
He had still not been able to talk to  Majorie about the adoption.
When he had reached home the previous evening, she had gone to bed.
‘Feeling ill, poor darling,’ Ian had told him with a hint of malice underlying his display of concern.
‘She cooked dinner for us — she always keeps her promises, doesn't she, no matter how she's feeling?— but now she's bushed.’
And George had found her apparently asleep, and had slept uneasily himself, impatient to get the whole matter properly thrashed out, hoping to discuss it in the morning.
But she had woken with one of her banging headaches, so that was that.
Perhaps tonight I'll get a chance, he thought now, with a lift of optimism.
With a successful press conference behind him, he felt a new confidence in his ability to handle Marjorie, even though she was clearly well launched into one of her periods of being thoroughly tiresome.
That she was being merely tiresome was undoubted.
He had talked to Apthorp about her the previous afternoon, and it was clear she had exaggerated his anxiety about her health.
There had been no new developments at all.
Yes, he'd deal with  Majorie tonight, and he'd get her to agree to make her token agreement to the adoption.
But he was glad he'd been able to fend off too many probing journalistic questions about her; he didn't want them publishing any comments about her at this stage, that was sure.
Such premature publicity could make her positively obstructive instead of merely difficult.
Indeed, he told himself as he walked briskly across the courtyard toward the covered way that led past Pathology and Pharmacy to the rear of the hospital and his own unit, it was not quite as bad as it might have been, taking it all around.
And now at least he'd be left in peace to get on with some real work.
The thought of work brought its familiar comfort, and as he pushed open the door of his unit he switched his mind tidily from the press conference to the tests waiting to be done.
He had an enjoyable job of work waiting for him, and asked for no more than that.
And he had six people to work with who wouldn't waste time on stupid questions about the baby's emotional welfare, who saw as clearly as he did the greater fascination in the sheaves of data they had already collected on the child since his birth.
At seven days, we may be able to get some sense out of the graph on the effects of vacuum decompression during the pregnancy, he told himself happily and walked into his crowded office with a spring in his step.
Isobel moved softly as she carried the pile of fresh disposable diapers to the cupboard.
He was a good baby, didn't startle and wake at the least noise, like some did, but there was a pleasure in being gentle and slow about things.
And the least I can do is make sure he has some peace and quiet while he can, poor little scrap, she thought.
She stacked the diapers neatly on the top shelf, checked the gowns and vests, and then closed the cupboard and turned to look approvingly around the room.
All tidy and comfortable, though she would have preferred to see a little color about the place.
All that buff paint — it was so unbabylike; a nursery should have some pink and blue and lemon in it, like sugared almonds.
But when she had asked if they couldn't warm the place up a bit with some pretty colors, Dr. Briant had said sharply that they had to avoid confusing their color appreciation tests later, and she'd have all the color she wanted then.
She moved over to the cot and looked down at the baby.
He really is a dear little thing, she thought, rubbing a little at her right breast.
It was sore.
She had told Dr. Saxby, and he'd said he'd mention it to Dr. Briant; it could be she was having a bit too high a dose of the red capsules.
She certainly had a lot of milk.
She thought herself it was because he was such a hungry baby — suckled so vigorously she felt sometimes as though he was pulling out her middle.
Not that she had said that to Dr. Saxby.
They had warned  her at the start there would be complicated things going on, and not to try to understand them, that her job was looking after the baby.
So, obediently she kept her own counsel.
She wasn't going to risk annoying them as she had about the color of the paint.
The baby moved his head, and she winced slightly as she looked at him.
Those things strapped to his poor little scalp — they must hurt him, no matter what they said.
But he didn't wake, even though he was lying right on two of them, so maybe they were right.
Electrodes, that's what they were; she had seen them used on the baby in the next cot to Jenny in the hospital, just a few days before she had died.
Strange how she could think about Jenny now without feeling so sick.
For a long time after she had died, she hadn't been able to think about her at all, it had been so awful, but now she could.
And in this last week, ever since she had started the job properly, it had got even easier.
The baby had helped a lot.
She sat down in the chair at the head of the cot and very carefully slid her forefinger into the baby's hand.
His grasp tightened around it automatically, and she found herself smiling.
Dear little thing he was, just like Jenny had been at his age.
She felt a sudden stab of guilt, comparing him with Jenny.
No matter what they had said to her at the hospital, it had been her fault she had died.
She should have known she was ill, got a doctor to see her earlier, not waited until the bronchitis had turned to pneumonia, so that none of their injections and treatment had been any good.
But she had been so ashamed.
They had advised her to have the baby adopted, told her she'd not be able to earn a living for them both, but she'd been willful and gone her own way.
And when Jenny had got ill, she had been willful again, told herself she could manage to get her better without having the doctor to see her.
And she knew now the reason she hadn't wanted the doctor, knew it was because she was afraid they'd take Jenny away from her because she wasn't fit to look after her.
So it was her fault Jenny had died.
She would carry the knowledge of that all her life.
Yet who'd have thought I'd be given another chance like this? she thought.
When she had decided to go after a job with children, the best she had hoped for was a mother's-help place; she wasn't trained as a nanny or anything like that.
Yet she'd walked right into this marvelous chance, with no mother who would get jealous of her with the baby, only this bunch of doctors to deal with.
It was like having a baby of her own again.
It really went to show that God was good; when you'd paid for the things you did and you were really sorry, He gave you something good to make it up to you.
And He knew she'd paid sorely for having Jenny, paid in her own shame at being caught by a married man at her age, paid in being the cause of her death.
The baby moved again, opened his eyes, and puckered his face as he pulled his hands up toward his mouth; and Isobel smiled again as he mouthed at his fingers.
He really was a baby and a half, this one!
He'd taken a full seven ounces at ten, and in just ten minutes on each breast too.
Even Miss Hervey had remarked on it when she did the test weigh; seven days old, and taking so much already.
And now he was curling his mouth and going for his fingers as though he could start all over again, not two hours later!
Really, a baby and a half.
Her nipples tingled a little as she looked at him.
She oughtn't to want him to wake properly, but she did.
And she couldn't ring for them unless he was really awake.
They'd told her, on no account was he to be allowed to cry for a feed, but that at the same time he wasn't to be put to the breast unless he really wanted to.
She'd soon develop a judgment about it, they'd said, and she was beginning to.
He moved again, and gladly she leaned over and pressed the bell on the wall beside the cot and got up to get the breast tray.
By the time Dr. Briant and Miss Hervey came in she was ready.
‘He's hungry, sir, I think,’ she said as Dr. Briant walked over to the crib.
‘Though he took a lot at the ten o'clock feed.’
‘Splendid!’
Dr. Briant said.
‘Splendid!
Look, Barbara.
Really a most well-defined rooting reflex, isn't it?’
He touched the baby's cheek with his forefinger, and Isobel could see even from her chair between the cameras that the baby's lip curled at once toward it.
‘I've rerun the film twice,’ Miss Hervey said.
‘It's a little early  to be sure, but there certainly seems to be a pattern to it.
The time lag in the nocturnal response is quite marked — averages point nine plus of a second greater.
Most interesting.
And it seems undoubtedly to be more rapid when he's put to the breast.
You'll see when we see today's film run that this response won't have been nearly as rapid as the one he'll show when Miss Quinn takes him.’
‘Which suggests a considerable ability to modify a reflex with learned behavior,’ Dr. Briant said.
‘'It's really very gratifying to have such early confirmation of one of our projections.’
And they nodded at each other, for all the world, Isobel thought, like a pair of well-fed penguins.
The idea pleased her suddenly.
Comparing them with such stupid birds made them less alarming, somehow less powerful.
‘Well, come along, come along, Miss Quinn,’ Dr. Briant said, using the bright rallying voice he always did when speaking to her, and obediently she picked up the baby and carried him to the scales.
Miss Hervey took the reading and entered it, and Isobel settled herself in the chair, the baby on her lap, and unbuttoned her blouse.
It was funny how quickly she had got used to it, sitting there with them watching her while she swabbed her nipple and lifted the baby close to her so that he could reach it.
Even knowing the cameras were always working, filming every single thing she and the baby did, didn't bother her any more.
At first it had been like being spied on, but now she forgot them most of the time, except when she wanted to do something she shouldn't.
Like now, wanting to hold her breast and guide it to the baby's mouth, but they wouldn't let her.
Dr. Briant had said, when they taught her how to handle him at the beginning, ‘He must never be coerced — coaxed — to do anything.
Nor helped, particularly when he is feeding.
We have to see exactly what he is doing by himself, and what he learns by himself — not what you teach him, do you understand?’
Well, she didn't really see what difference it could make, but she was obedient.
It was too good a job to risk doing otherwise, and besides, the cameras were always there, so she had to.
And he was already so bright, anyway.
He turned his head, mouthing eagerly, and found the nipple so fast you'd think it was made of iron and he was a magnet.
As he fed, and she sat looking down at his absorbed face and regularly pumping jaws, his eyes tight closed and his clenched fist resting lightly on her skin, she slid into the blissfully familiar peace of it, even enjoying the faint sense of shame that came with the pleasure.
It was a good thing the cameras couldn't take pictures of the way she felt, she thought, and smiled inside herself.
That would be embarrassing!
And when he'd finished and been weighed again and she'd changed his diaper and put it in the special container to go away for the chemical analysis — And a nasty old job that must be to do!
Isobel thought — and he was back sleeping in his cot, it was gone twelve and time for the daily briefing.
Then it would be her lunchtime, and probably another feed, and after that they'd send her for her afternoon rest, and then collect the specimens and the data from him for the next day's test session.
But Isobel didn't want to think about that.
The briefing was the same as it had been every day since he was born.
They talked together about the tests (and Isobel thanked God she understood so little of it; it all sounded so complicated and unfriendly), and she watched the baby on the monitor screen high on the wall and the patterns on the machines, the ones linked up to the cot with its attachments for measuring his heartbeats and his breathing and his body temperature.
And then they turned to her and reminded her again how she was to handle him, no trying to make him do as she wanted, only to do as he wanted.
But there was something different today, and it pleased her.
‘You are to start talking to him, Miss Quinn.
Just the way any woman talks to a baby, you understand?
It doesn't matter what you say — not at this stage.
Later on we will modify the program — give you a list of specific sounds we want you to make — but at present you are quite free to talk as you wish.
There is just one thing.
I want you to wear this.’
He picked up a small square object from his desk, with wires leading from it.
‘It's simply a tape recorder.
You'll wear the box strapped to your back, and these little microphones will rest against your throat.
I'm sure you'll soon get used to it — because we need to have an accurate recording of the sounds you make to the baby, you see?’
He looked closely at her and spoke in a slightly louder voice and more slowly.
Just as though I were a bit daft, Isobel thought with sudden resentment.
‘A child learns to speak by imitation, you see, Miss Quinn.
And we need to know precisely what sort of sounds are most rapidly learned.
We've already recorded all the sounds he's heard since he's been in the unit, of course, but this little gadget will help us to have an even more detailed record.
You see?’
‘Yes, sir,’ Isobel said in her usual colorless voice.
‘I see.’
as if it matters that much, she thought as she stared back at him.
Scientists!
Everyone knows babies learn by copying, so why all this performance to prove it?
‘Well, thank you, Miss Quinn.
You go and have your lunch now, and your rest.
Oh, and I've changed the dosage of the red capsules.
Dr. Saxby tells me you're having some discomfort, and a smaller dosage will help.
You really are a most efficient milk-making machine!’
She reddened, and Briant thought, Oh, damn.
I've embarrassed her, and looked away, feeling surprisingly embarrassed himself.
He had chosen this woman specifically because she was the sort she was — a simple type, immediately responsive to the baby, no outside involvements, so she was free to give her entire time to him, willing to do without time off while the baby was still on the breast, and not expecting the massive salary most women would want for a job like this.
But her very virtues carried their own faults, and not the least of them was the possibility of her being upset by matters she could not understand.
A woman as passive and yet responsive as she was could well suffer emotional distress which she would not overtly express.
And that might affect her milk, which would be a nuisance, to put it mildly.
He would have to watch more carefully the way he spoke to her.
But she seemed to have got over her momentary embarrassment, so he smiled at her as warmly as he could, and she went away to eat  her solitary lunch in the small bed-sitting-room alongside the nursery, which was the only part of the Unit that wasn't monitored with cameras and tape recorders.
He had indeed upset her, but not in the way he thought.
Isobel found nothing odd any more in public discussion of her breasts and the milk and the way the baby acted during feeding.
But she didn't like being called a machine, even an efficient one.
No one would, she told herself, no one with any feelings.
If he had any, he'd know that.
And the small seed of anger against him knotted itself inside her into a hard little core of resentment.
‘Have you enough data yet to offer any sort of evaluation of your early projections?’
Miriam asked.
‘This is good coffee.
The stuff they've been giving me in the ward was like a milk soup.
I've been longing for something with a bit of bite to it.’
She laughed then, a little awkwardly.
‘I'm sorry.
That's a habit I seemed to have got into during the pregnancy.
I'm only just realizing that I did.’
‘Habit?’
‘Asking a question, saying something, and then veering off onto a completely different tangent.
It's maddening.
All that folklore about women operating on a different intellectual level because of their hormone differences would appear to have some basis in fact.
I'm certainly forced to admit I've noticed it in myself — my thinking hasn't been nearly as controlled as it used to be.
I imagine it's a temporary change.
I certainly hope so!
Grim if producing an infant damages one's thinking processes for good and all.’
‘I'm sure it doesn't!’
Briant said.
‘I can think of several women who did excellent post-maternity work.
Marie Curie, for example.
As for going off at tangents, my dear, I do it myself, hormone balance notwithstanding.
And it is good coffee, and the stuff they provide on Maternity is revolting!’
She laughed again and shook her head.
‘Stop humoring me.
If you start that, then I'll know I'm beyond redemption.
It would mean you see me as a woman who happens to be in science, and  not as a scientist.
And that would be depressing, to say the least.’
‘You're a scientist,’ he said.
‘No doubt about that.
No one who can be as objective about her own thinking processes as you are could be otherwise.
You're quite entitled to be…well, a bit off center at the moment.
Anyone can experience alterations in their thought patterns under stress; I know I do.
When I have problems with my wife or one of the children, I have to make considerable effort to keep my mind on work, I assure you.’
He paused, a little surprised at himself.
‘Do you know something?
I've never said that to anyone — admitted I have family problems on occasions, that is.
The psychoanalysts might suggest that your own temporary alteration of intellectual function has been projected on to me.’
‘Analysts!’ she said with a fine scorn.
‘Sympathetic magicians would be a better label.’
‘Good girl!
I couldn't agree more.
Though you know that.’
‘I'll be honest with you.
It was as much to disprove some of their absurd assumptions as to help you prove your own theories that I agreed to come in on this project.
They annoy me so much!
A somewhat unscientific approach, perhaps —’
‘Not at all!
The desire to disprove a false idea is as valid a basis for a piece of research as the desire to establish the truth of a new set of ideas.
Better in some ways.
There's a greater danger of reaching a false conclusion when you're hell-bent on proving your own thinking.
When you're trying to demolish a false promise, I suspect you are less likely to close your eyes to unacceptable facts.’
‘Oh, surely not!
Remember Jefferson — that very bright man in my year?
When he did his thesis on the portal shunt in rats, he completely ignored the work Peders had done, because it proved conclusively what he was trying to discredit.
He made a complete idiot of himself over that, and I swear it wasn't done deliberately.
He just managed to close his mind to what he didn't want to know, because it spoiled his beautiful graphs.’
‘A bad scientist, Jefferson.’
She nodded and looked at him a little wickedly.
‘Maybe that's why he got such a lucrative job.
I've always suspected industry prefers bad scientists.’
‘Cynic!
But you're probably right.
And how's all this for a tangent?
I've quite forgotten what it was you asked.’
‘What?
Oh, yes.
I just wondered what progress you'd made so far.
Or is it still too young for you to make any evaluations apart from tentative ones?’
He frowned sharply at her bent head as she poured another cup of coffee for both of them.
‘That's odd,’ he said.
‘What is?’
She looked up, startled at the change in his voice.
‘That you should refer to the child in the neuter.
It, rather than he.’
She reddened slightly and opened her mouth to speak, but they were interrupted.
The medical staff dining room was almost empty, and the last group of people were just leaving.
Dr. Saxby detached himself as he passed their table and put his hand on Briant's shoulder.
‘Do you want to spend some time on those ECG tracings this afternoon, George?
My registrar can take my clinic — it's a small one — so I could be with you from three until four-thirty if you like.’
‘Three?
Yes, I think so.
I should have the blood work through by then, and that would help.
Fine.
You'll come to the Unit?’
‘By all means.
Hello, Miss Lawton!
Good to see you about again.
Miss Guttner tells me you're progressing well.’
‘Very well, thank you.
I'm returning to work next week.’
‘Good!
No therapy like it, is there?
And you can be pleased with yourself.
That's a splendid infant you produced.
Splendid.’
‘It was a team job,’ she said in a colorless voice.
‘Oh, of course.
But they couldn't have got far without you, could they?’
Saxby produced his big comfortable laugh.
‘We haven't reached Huxley's Brave New World yet!
It'll be a long time before the word ‘mother’ becomes as dirty a word as he suggested it would.
Though the way you lot are going, George, it mayn't be that long.
Well, I've a ward round to get through before I can come over to your unit, George, so I'd better get moving.
At three then.’
And nodding cheerfully at them both, he went away.
There was a short silence as they both drank coffee, and then  Miriam said sharply, ‘Why should it be odd to refer to the infant in the neuter?
It's not as though the gender were all that relevant to the work you're doing.’
He moved a little uneasily.
‘'I'm not sure.
It just struck me as…well, odd.
Perhaps I've been infected by those damned journalists.’
‘Journalists?’
‘Oh, I had to hold a bloody press conference this morning.
You know it got out — the birth?
And Kegan was old-womaning around until he drove me to agreeing to talk to the wretched people.
We won't know till tomorrow what sort of dog's breakfast they'll dish up out of it, but they were waffling on about the poor little guinea-pig baby.
You can imagine the sort of thing.
What does he look like?
What does he weigh?
What will his name be?
It was like bathing in hot syrup.’
‘Perhaps you should have concerned yourself as much about avoiding emotional involvement yourself as about protecting me,’ she said, and her voice was still sharp.
‘In using the neuter term rather than the particular I display clearly my own lack of involvement, and you find it odd!
Forgive me if I find that odd?’
‘Touché!’ he said and smiled awkwardly.
‘You're right, of course.
My apologies.’
‘Not needed.
And forget the question I asked.
If you can be as…affected as you seem to have been by answering journalists' questions, perhaps I'd be wiser to wait for publication of results, like everyone else.
Anyway, there's something else I'd like to talk about.
I have an idea for a piece of work that might possibly provide a theme for my doctorate thesis.
I'd like your guidance, if you can spare another few minutes.’
‘Of course,’ he said.
‘I'd be glad to.
You need a strong piece of work.
What have you thought of?’
‘It's this interesting effect of hormone balance on thinking processes.
Would it be possible to mount a research project into that, do you suppose?
I could have access to the female population of the university, both pre and post maternity.
There are plenty of students with children, after all…’
She lay on the narrow white bed, staring out of the window at the gray-white clouds moving heavily across the October sky, and tried to organize her thinking.
She had been so pleased when Dr. Briant had suggested she lunch with him in the medical staff dining room, aching as she was to get away for a while at least from the uncomfortable atmosphere of the Maternity Ward.
The staff talked only banalities at her, until she could have screamed with irritation, and try as she might to ignore it, there was no doubt in her mind that they disliked her, these crisp women in their crisp uniforms.
Well, dislike wasn't the word perhaps, disapproval was really what she felt coming from them.
And the infuriating thing was that their disapproval mattered to her.
It shouldn't; she had never been a woman to give a damn about other people's opinions.
She went her own way, made her own successes and failures, and cared for no opinion but her own, apart from that of people she knew to be her intellectual equals or superiors.
People like Briant.
So why should she care what these half-witted women thought?
Because I'm a woman, and my hormone balance is disturbed by the pregnancy — makes me respond emotionally to my biological state?
An interesting hypothesis, that.
She tiled the thought for later use.
Or is it because in a way I share their disapproval?
She swung her legs over the edge of the bed and went over to the window to look down at the courtyard.
Is that it? she thought.
Am I really just like every other woman down there?
Do I share their prejudices and feel somewhere deep in my psyche that a woman ought to care about a baby she produces, even if she produces it under highly unnatural conditions?
Do I feel anger at myself because I don't care?
But you do care.
It was as though a voice had actually said the words aloud, and she moved sharply and leaned against the window to stare blankly at the room.
You're having to make a conscious effort to be detached, aren't you?
That's why Briant found it odd you should refer to the baby as ‘it’; it wasn't the use of a  neuter term, but the way you sounded when you said it.
Strained.
Self-conscious.
‘I don't care,’ she said aloud.
I really don't, not in that sense.
Of course I care that the project should be valid, produce worthwhile results.
I don't want to think I've wasted almost a year of my working life on an abort.
My caring is scientific.
No more and no less.
I care the way Jefferson cared about his rats and their portal shunts.
That's all.
He didn't love his rats, and I don't love this baby.
How could I?
Across the hall, someone opened the door to the nursery, and the thin wail of a baby cut across her thinking, and she raised her head sharply, feeling a sudden surge of anxiety.
And then anger took its place, and she moved sharply across to her bed and rang the bell.
When the nurse came, she said crisply, ‘Will you ask Sister Field if I could speak to her please?
As soon as possible — before Miss Guttner comes over for her ward round.’
She would insist on leaving the Maternity Ward today.
There was no point in staying for the next three days; her physical progress was excellent, and the proximity of these midwives and mothers and babies was having a most unfortunate effect on her.
There would be much more point in spending the rest of the week working in the library, planning a project of her own.
It was high time she got down to serious thought about her doctorate.
At six-thirty Kegan passed her taxi as it swung out across the courtyard.
He was walking purposefully toward Dr. Briant's unit, two newspapers held firmly under his arm, and his face was set in hard lines of anger.
He'd warned the man, no one could say he hadn't warned him.
If it had only been possible to hold the conference without him!
But that had been out of the question, of course.
It was ridiculous, really it was.
To have had to practically beg the man to cooperate with him, and now be faced with the God-awful mess he'd made of it.
And these were only the London evenings.
Heaven help them all when the dailies came out the next day.
And as for the Sundays!
He felt sick as he thought about them.
And that reminded him.
He'd better warn Matron to keep a  special watch on the Maternity people.
The Sundays would be baying after the Lawton girl in no uncertain terms, now the evenings had led the way.
Though maybe they'd turn in the other direction, looking for a different angle?
It was a possibility.
He was a very confused as well as a very angry man as he pushed open the doors of Briant's unit, and hurried down the corridor toward the office.
Mike filed his copy at quarter past four and went back to his desk and plastic beaker of stewed tea feeling well satisfied.
Four good folios there, the whole story put across clean and clear, solid with fact and not a smell of an opinion.
The sort of job that pleased him most, this one.
A piece of real science, worth reporting, and because of its human angle small danger of the copy being spiked in favor of something with half its intrinsic interest.
And since he'd opened it up in the first place — and he definitely owed David Dennis a drink for putting him onto it — every chance of a couple of TV spots on the strength of it.
If they were the right spots, and he handled them properly, he might manage to get his foot well into that door.
He let his mind play with that again, the idea of making it on the box.
It had been with him a long time, long before McLuhanism had arrived to make a lot of people cry into their beer at El Vino's and go haring after every tin-pot producer in the business.
But he wasn't going to make that mistake.
With a specialty like his, he could afford to wait until a really worthwhile chance came up.
Like a regular place on the probe team.
They didn't use a full-time science man, only that wet psychiatrist with a profile that he displayed to a damned sight better advantage than his puny little mind.
Now that was an idea.
Call J. J. Gerrard direct and see if he could set up a spot on Briant for tonight's edition?
He was more than the anchor man, everyone knew that, and if he wanted to put a regular science spot in the program, the producer wouldn't agree.
And if Mike could set it up for tonight, and it went well, a drink with J. J. in the club afterward could pay big dividends.
He reached for his desk phone and then swore as it rang before he could pick it up.
‘Mike Bridges,’ he said irritably.
‘What?
Oh, yes, Graham.
It's gone to the sub's desk.
Yes, I'm glad you agree.
I think it's a good story too.
What?…
Why?…
Oh, all right.
I'll come up.’
Now why all of a sudden should Graham want him in his office?
He'd liked the story well enough, admittedly, given a fairly good display to his half-dozen column inches yesterday; but when Mike had told him the press conference to which Briant had agreed could make a much better story, he hadn't seemed to think much of it.
Told him not to let his report run to more than it absolutely had to, and on no account to make a feature piece out of it.
Straight news was what he wanted and nothing more.
And now he had sounded — how had he sounded?
Irritable but excited, as though he were only just able to hold something important under control.
Odd, that, Mike thought as he went up to the third floor in the rattling old lift.
Graham wasn't the sort of editor to get excited easily.
Maybe, just for once, he'd understood what a science story was all about?
If he has, Mike thought with a familiar bitterness, the bloody millennium's arrived.
Graham was standing by his window, staring out over the roof of the Comet Building across the street, and when Mike saw who was sitting at Graham's desk, he had to make a strong effort not to show his surprise.
The Old Man!
Now what the hell was up?
‘Ah, Mr. Bridges!
Nice to see you!’
Sir Daniel Sefton stood up  and extended his hand across the desk, smiling the warm friendly smile that was virtually his trademark.
Phony old bastard!
Mike thought and shook hands with him.
About as genuinely friendly as a boa constrictor, and a damned sight more dangerous.
Beware him most when he smiles his widest, he told himself.
‘This is quite a story you've uncovered, my boy!
Mr. Moloney, can we find a drink for Mr. Bridges — for Mike?’
Mike almost grinned as Graham moved to his desk and flicked the intercom switch.
It must be killing him to have the Old Man expecting him to play barman to me!
He keeps his liquor just on the other side of the room, but catch him actually dishing it out himself.
There was a brief flurry as Graham's secretary came in and dispensed drinks, while the Old Man teased her kindly, and she giggled, and then they were all sitting looking at one another in silence.
After a moment the Old Man put his glass on the desk and looked at Graham, switching on his let's-get-down-to-real-business look.
‘Now, Mr. Moloney — Graham.
Shall I kick this one off, or would you prefer to?’
‘It's up to you, Sir Daniel.’
Graham looked as though he would gladly kick the Old Man, Mike thought, beginning to enjoy himself.
Whatever this is about, there'll be a great deal of pleasure to be got out of telling the tale around afterward.
‘Right, then, Mr. Bridges.
Mike.
I think we can be informal, don't you?
It's just this.
You've uncovered a great story — a great story.’
He looked at Mike owlishly, and Mike murmured a swift ‘thank you’ into his glass.
‘And clearly it's going to develop.
Have you seen the evenings?’
‘Not yet.
I've been doing my own story all afternoon, and I had to cover the opening of a new computerized diagnosis unit out at Barnet on my way back from the Sillick Memorial.’
Mike was embarrassed.
He should have made a point of looking at the evening coverage before doing his own piece; but he'd seen the people they'd sent to the press conference at the hospital, dismissed them as unlikely to do a decent job on it, and promptly  forgotten them.
Blast it!
Just the sort of thing the Old Man would pick on.
But Sir Daniel was magnanimous.
‘Not to worry.
I know you're under pressure.
The Echo's science man has to be, hmm?
And there was nothing in the early editions, anyway.
But they did a very rapid rejig, obviously, for the later editions.
These went on the streets only half an hour ago.
Take a look at them, will you?
Then you'll be au fait with our…problem.’
And he glanced at Graham as he pushed copies of the two London evening papers across the desk.
Each of them had a ten-to twelve-column-inch splash on the front page, with a picture of Dr. Briant standing glowering at the desk in the board room, and each of them carried leaders about Briant and his project.
One was headed ‘Science Goes Too Far!’ and Mike skimmed swiftly through the heavy black print.
‘In its search to reveal secrets of human existence,’ it trumpeted, ‘science has brought us undoubted gifts.
It has, by pushing back the boundaries of human knowledge, given us much that has enriched our lives.
But when science proposes to manipulate the life of a human baby, the time has come to call a halt….’
It went on in the same tone for several excited paragraphs and ended in an even heavier and blacker print.
We say that Dr. George Briant has been misguided in his attempt to delve into the mystery of human existence in the way he has.
We say that he has done enough damage in bringing about the birth of this child, in giving him a father who does not know he is his father, a mother who is so ice-cold a scientist that she willingly abandons her own child to the researcher in the laboratory, where he will inevitably be regarded in the same light as any other laboratory animal.
But it is not too late to undo that damage.
Dr. Briant must abandon his project and restore to this unhappy baby his birthright, the chance to grow up in a real home, with real parents who will love him as he deserves to be loved.
As a human being, and not as a guinea pig.
The leader in the second paper, headed ‘An Affront to Human Dignity,’ was on much the same lines, ending with a demand for a  Royal Commission to look into the ‘hidden and possibly evil secrets of the laboratories of Britain's universities’and an appeal to ‘right-thinking people’to raise their voices against this outrageous treatment of a helpless baby.
Mike pushed the papers back across the desk and looked at the Old Man, who raised his eyebrows questioningly.
‘Well?’
What do you think of those leaders?’
Sir Daniel asked.
‘Not unexpected, I suppose,’ Mike said carefully.
‘With no other big news breaking, it makes a good lead item.’
‘Oh, come, Mike!
Even if there had been another big story, it would have to be very big indeed to be bigger than this one!’
Mike couldn't resist it.
‘I'm not used to science stories making all that much of a splash,’ he said, carefully not looking at Graham sitting silently beside him.
‘Unless there's a big human story wrapped up in it — like the heart transplant bit — it doesn't seem to have the interest it might.’
‘But where's your nose, boy, where's your nose?’
Sir Daniel was getting irritable.
‘How much more of a human angle can there be?
A baby, a newborn baby, conceived in a test tube, born in a laboratory, created to be researched like a guinea pig in a cage — how much more human than that can you get?’
‘But without access to the infant, it's a dead angle,’ Mike said.
‘And I can assure you there isn't a hope in hell of getting access.
I've tried, believe me.
I've got as good a nose as any other man on the paper, even if I do specialize in science.
But I've got the sense to know what I can't do.
And I can't see anyone getting past Briant to this baby, or to its mother.
He's a pretty formidable man, and he's got the support of his hospital.
Which is why I saw no real point in pushing the human poor-little-baby bit.’
He stopped then and after a pause said deliberately, ‘Even if I held that point of view.’
‘Ah!’
Sir Daniel leaned forward.
‘You don't, I take it?’
Mike looked back at him, trying to calculate the odds, and then with a mental shrug took the risk of alienating the other man.
It was a considerable risk; he knew perfectly well that Graham Moloney would certainly disagree with him with some violence.
‘No, I don't.
I was trained as a scientist, and there are times  when science matters more than the individual.
What Briant is trying to do is…important.
More important than this baby.
What he's doing might be considered unfortunate for the baby — though I'm not sure it is — but it could be of immense value to humanity as a whole.’
And how does that grab you, chum? he thought with childish venom.
Do I start tomorrow looking for a new paper, because the Echo can't be doing with a man who lacks the bloody human touch?
But Sir Daniel was looking at him with a satisfied expression on his face.
‘I'm happy to hear it, my boy.’
And his voice oozed geniality.
‘Because it is very relevant to the dilemma in which I find myself.
Now you know — everyone on the paper knows — I'm not the sort of proprietor who meddles with editorial policy.’
Like hell you don't, thought Mike viciously.
‘I hire — employ — the best brains and leave them to do their job.
But sometimes — rarely, thank God — sometimes, I feel I have a moral duty to involve myself.’
He seemed to savor the phrase.
‘Yes.
A moral duty.
And here is a case in point.
Briant's work throws up considerable ethical problems that must be explored.
Explored in the most public manner.’
He's beginning to address us, Mike thought.
I feel like a public meeting.
‘The public at large must give grave consideration to a…a grave matter.
And as a prime factor in public discussion, the Echo must make a decision about its own views.’
He flicked a finger at the newspaper lying on the desk.
‘These papers have clearly made their decision.
The obvious one, in my opinion.
And I have no doubt that their stalemates will come out in the same vein tomorrow morning, together with the rest of them.
Now, here is our dilemma —my dilemma.
I feel the Echo should not be obvious.
That we should take a more dispassionate view and consider the long-term effects of Briant's work.
And here, I am sad to say, Mr. Moloney and I part company — in terms of points of view, that is.’
He smiled at Moloney, who had not moved.
‘Not, of course, literally!
Of course not!’
Well, well, Mike thought.
So that's the way it's going! poor old  Graham!
He felt himself warm toward the sullenly controlled man as he never had in the three years he had been on the paper.
He had many times been reduced to helpless rage by Graham's attitude to his subjects, by his refusal to give science stories the importance Mike believed they had, but at least he was consistent in his attitudes.
If he was prepared to fight the Old Man on it as well as one of his juniors, then there was muscle in the man he had never before recognized.
Good for Graham.
To risk his job — and Sir Daniel had made it very clear that he did risk it — was a courageous thing to do when you considered how few editors' chairs there were on the Street.
Graham stirred and spoke with a careful lack of emphasis.
‘I would be prepared to write a leader on this project, but I would find it difficult to take the opposing point of view to that given in those two leaders.
I've read Mike's copy carefully, and as he tells the story of Briant's explanation of what he's doing, I can't see any other way to treat it.
He is using a human child as research material, removing him from what everybody — our readers — must regard as a normal human life.
And that…that is not good.
And quite apart from my own views, I think we are in real danger of losing readership if we don't reflect what I am convinced will be the general tenor of public opinion.
And I am not here to lose you readers.’
Oh, well played, Graham, Mike thought.
That'll get him where he lives.
‘I take your points, and they do you credit,’ Sir Daniel said smoothly.
‘But we don't only reflect public opinion, you know.
We guide it.
And anyway, there will be enough public opinion in line with mine and Mike's here’— he threw a brilliant smile at Mike —‘to protect us from too great a loss of circulation.
Especially if we are the only paper to reflect the other side of the question.
And if we project this other point of view with enough…skill, we may indeed build our figures.’
A nice volley shot, Mike applauded silently.
I'm enjoying this.
Over to you, Graham.
But Sir Daniel was speaking again.
‘I would not, quite frankly, have involved you in this policy disagreement between us, Mike, had it been possible to avoid doing so.
But I have put to Graham a way round our dilemma which does involve you.
He has accepted it in principle, which does him great credit.
A man of lesser integrity and lesser…care for the welfare of this paper might have been stubborn and even resigned because of so divergent a set of opinions between himself and his proprietor.
But Graham is a better man than that, and can recognize an acceptable compromise when he sees one.’
Oh, you bastard, Mike thought, staring at Sir Daniel's sleek expression.
The sooner I get off this Street and onto the box the better.
He glanced for a brief moment at Graham's heavy body and closed face, and looked away, feeling a little sick.
Graham, well past fifty, with three children still at school, and younger men baying at his heels, pushed into a comer like this.
it was obscene.
‘What we would suggest is this, Mike,’ Sir Daniel went on.
‘We will use the leader column tomorrow to discuss the question of financing scientific research in this country.
I understand Briant has problems in this area, and it will be perfectly possible for Graham to prepare a strong piece on this shocking insufficiency of government support for science, without discussing the pros and cons of this particular piece of science.
And you’— he paused, looked at Mike with great solemnity, and then went on weightily —‘you will write a feature article which will put the point of view you so fortunately genuinely hold, that the legitimate demands of science must sometimes supersede the welfare of the individual.
And I know you will give us an excellent piece.’
I ought to throw it in his teeth.
I ought to stand up and shout, My editor, right or wrong, and sod you.
Graham sitting there waiting for me to kick him in the teeth.
I ought to tell him what to do with his feature article.
Mike rubbed the back of his neck, and the silence dropped clammily on him as he tried to think it through properly.
The Old Man's right, of course.
The others will come out tomorrow shrieking for Briant's blood, just as these two have this evening.
And I  know what Briant is doing, and why, and though I don't go all the way with him, I go far enough to want to come in on his side.
And there is the money angle, of course.
If Graham can write something solid about the lousy deal research gets in this country, it can do nothing but good.
And Christ, but it's an opportunity!
A big lead feature with a strong by-line — if that doesn't get J. J. Gerrard and Probe for me, nothing will.
Oh, Christ, why did I ever get into this business?
Even teaching Boyle's Law to snotty kids in a secondary modern would be better than this.
Wouldn't it?
‘Well?’
Sir Daniel's voice carried a faint rasp of impatience, a hint of warning that Mike heard very clearly, and he raised his head and looked at Graham.
‘You're quite sure that's the way you want it, Graham?
You could square it with yourself?’
Graham looked back at him, and for a moment they sat and stared at each other.
Then Graham said, ‘It's all right.
I can live with it.
As long as I don't have to use my leader column to support Briant, and any Echo support for him goes out under your by-line — now and in the future — I can live with it.’
He looked then at Sir Daniel.
‘But I must stick at that.
It's my right as an editor.
You have yours as a proprietor, but I have mine too.
As long as you leave me my leader column, I…
I'll be happy enough.’
‘Splendid!’
Sir Daniel stood up and looked at his watch with some ostentation.
‘I'm delighted that we've settled the matter.
For the present.’
Was he still threatening Graham?
Mike, beginning to feel some exhilaration as he thought about the piece he would now have to write, and write bloody fast, pushed the thought away.
If he does lean on Graham again after tomorrow, then I'll stand up and be counted.
After tomorrow.
If necessary.
‘I'm late for a meeting at the House now, Mike, so I can't wait to see your copy.
Send it round to me, will you?
I'm dining at Stone's.’
‘There won't be time, sir.’
Graham's voice sounded very loud, contrasting sharply with the heaviness it had held all through the  conversation so far.
‘I'll have to lock up the pages before seven, and I doubt Mike will be able to do more than meet the deadline.
Will you?’
‘What?
Oh, Lord, I doubt it.
A big feature — no.
I'm sorry, I'll need every minute I've got.’
It was something to be able to make this much of a gesture of loyalty.
Sir Daniel was already at the door, shrugging into his heavy black overcoat with its expensive sheen and elegantly cut lines, and he looked at them both with only the faintest narrowing of his eyes altering his expression of bland good will.
‘Oh.
Yes.
I see.
Well, so be it.
I am sure I can rely on you both to carry out my instructions — my wishes.
I shall look forward to seeing the first edition, then.
You'll send a copy round by hand to Eaton Square, Moloney?
I'll be home by midnight and eager to see what you produce for me.
Good evening, gentlemen — oh, and get your secretary to tell the doorman to make sure my car is waiting, will you?
I have to stop off in personnel on my way down.
I'll be ready in five minutes.’
And he went, the door swinging behind him, leaving an embarrassed silence between the two men.
Then Graham switched on his intercom and snapped, ‘Tell Sam Sir Daniel's on his way down, wants his car at the front,’ before sitting down heavily and sweeping the two newspapers on his blotter into the wastepaper basket beside his desk.
‘Look, Graham, I'm bloody sorry,’ Mike said awkwardly.
Graham didn't look up.
‘Whether that's an apology or an expression of sympathy, I don't want it.
And you'd better get moving if you're going to meet the deadline.
I want your copy up here by six-thirty at the latest.
You can have five ten-inch sticks, and no more, understand?
Now get the hell out of here.’
Mike shrugged and moved to the door, and then Graham's voice pulled him back.
‘And keep your mouth shut about this, do you understand?
It's my business and no one else's.
Not even yours.
Just remember that.’
Mike looked at him silently, and Graham raised his head and stared back.
His expression was harsh and defiant, but Mike recognized the appeal the older man was making, and he nodded.
‘Sure,’ he said and ran down the stairs, back to the newsroom and his desk.
The thought of getting into the small shaky enclosure of plaited metal strips which was the lift was suddenly more than he could contemplate.
Isobel stood quietly in front of the cupboard door, her hands clasped on her beige overall, almost melting into her background of buff paint.
There was no readable expression on her face, but Marjorie felt an unease as she looked at her, as though the woman were watching her through narrowed lids.
Which was a curious sensation, since in fact her eyes were downcast, apparently studying the vinyl squares of the floor.
‘Hello!
I'm Mrs. Briant.
You must be Miss Quinn?’
Marjorie said, with all the warm friendliness she could project.
‘It's a foul morning, isn't it?
I'm drenched, just running from the car to the door!’
Isobel looked up, and her glance slid across  Majorie to the window.
‘How do you do, Mrs. Briant,’ she said in a voice as neutral as her appearance.
‘Yes, it is raining a lot.’
‘Now, let me see.’
Marjorie cocked her head to one side and  smiled with a brightness she didn't feel.
It was most odd the way this woman had immediately made her feel as though she had to be conciliating.
It was like interviewing someone who had answered one of her frequent advertisements for a daily maid, trying to create a spurious atmosphere of equality and friendship that would compensate for the low pay she had to offer.
‘You're from…
Scotland!
But you had an Irish mother or father.
Am I right?’
She produced a tinkly little laugh.
‘I do rather a lot of amateur acting, you know, and I'm supposed to be rather good at accents.’
‘I was born in Liverpool.’
‘Oh!
Oh, dear.
Not so good after all, then!
Though I don't know.
There is a strong Irish and Scottish element in the city, isn't there?
Whatever it is, it's left a pretty burr in your voice.’
‘It's nice of you to say so, Mrs. Briant.’
Still Isobel gave back no warmth at all, and Marjorie felt a stab of irritation.
She was doing her best to be friendly, damn it, and she didn't have to.
‘Well, now, where's the baby?
I —’
The door opened, and George followed Barbara Hervey into the room.
Marjorie turned to them with relief.
‘Good morning, Barbara!
How nice to see you again.
Are you keeping well?’
‘Very well, thank you, Mrs. Briant.
And you?’
‘Oh, I rub along, you know!
It doesn't do to worry about oneself, does it?
Well, George?
Do I have to put on a special overall or something?
You all look so…well,hospitally , in those coats of yours!
I feel the complete outsider!’
‘There's no need,’ George said.
‘We don't particularly want to protect him from infection.
In fact, it's quite useful to expose him to people from outside the Unit, within reason.
He has to build his own resistance to infections and he can't do that if he never meets them.
But take your coat off, Marjorie.
It's warm in the nursery, and you'll be uncomfortable.
And it's damp too, I imagine.’
‘What's this room for, George?’
Marjorie turned her back to him so that he could help her out of her coat.
‘It all looks very intriguing!
This is the first time I've come into the Unit, you know, Barbara!
I feel rather like a visitor to a Stately Home who's been  allowed to peep into the Duke's private apartments.’
And she looked over her shoulder at her husband.
But he was hanging up her coat and appeared not to notice the edge on her voice.
Barbara became suddenly animated.
‘Oh, you should have come before, Mrs. Briant.
We're really very lucky in our equipment.
George had to coax and nag and beg and borrow and almost steal to get most of it!
He really has had to struggle to get this project under way.
Though, of course, you know that as well as I do!
Well, this is the main monitoring system.
These screens are linked to the cot, which has a series of receptor units built into it.
They pick up the infant's heartbeat, respiration rate, body temperature, and so on.
And this one is for the electroencephalogram, which records his brain impulses.
The electrodes for that are only linked up at intervals, of course, since they have to be directly attached to his scalp.
It was simpler to leave those in situ , as you'll see.
And this screen here, you see?
This one links to the TV cameras.
They're really splendid.
George got those from a commercial company, you know, in Germany.
There wasn't a single British company that would cooperate.
They're the last word in this sort of equipment.
The screen's dead at the moment, but the cameras are still operating, of course.
But they're taking a video tape — rather like a film, you know.
We can rerun them whenever we want to.
We only have this screen operating when we're all in here and want to observe him directly —’
‘Oh, my dear, stop!’
Marjorie shuddered delicately.
‘It's all too much for me to take in! it's like one of those awful science-fiction films they do on television, too complicated for words.
You've got everything but those great bubbling glass things they always have for the mad scientist!’
‘We do all the chemical work in another part of the Unit,’ Barbara said.
‘Not that we've got any retorts of that sort there!
They're not true at all, you know, those absurd laboratories you see in popular films.
But it isn't all that complicated, you know, really.
Not like the computer unit we use at the university.’
She seemed a little hurt suddenly.
‘I thought you wanted the equipment explained —’
‘Well, I thought I did too, but I'm just not bright enough to cope with it, am I, George? poor George gave up trying to explain to me years ago!
I'm just too simple a soul altogether, really.
I'm interested in the baby , of course, but then, what woman wouldn't be?’
Barbara pushed her hands into her overall pocket and flushed slightly, and Marjorie smiled kindly at her and turned to George again.
‘I've already introduced myself to Miss Quinn, George.
If you're too busy with all your equipment, I'm sure she can take me to see the baby.
And she won't bewilder me with all sorts of complicated science.
I'm sure —’
‘I want to come up anyway.
I see him every morning,’ George said.
‘Not that Miss Quinn couldn't take you, of course.
I've explained why you're here this morning, Marjorie.’
‘Oh, have you?’
Marjorie turned back to Isobel.
‘I'm really quite privileged, aren't I, Miss Quinn?
After all the fuss in the papers this morning, I feel positively part of this project!
To be the legal mother of so important a baby — it'll be quite something, don't you think?’
‘Yes, Mrs. Briant,’ Isobel said, and again Marjorie felt the chill of the rejection in her voice.
‘I'll start the collation of yesterday's material, George,’ Barbara said.
‘Mr. Kegan phoned over at nine to say he wanted to talk to you as soon as possible, and you won't have time to do it yourself before he comes.’
‘Mmm?
Oh, yes.
Get Peter in from Histology to help you.
He should have finished matching the chromosome analyses with the projections by now.
And Davis can help too.
He finished the metabolism checks early yesterday evening.
Elsa and Vernon can get on with checking the endocrine levels this morning, and that will leave young Isaacs to monitor today's stuff.
Can you all cope without me?
With all this flap going on, it's very unlikely I'll get much peace to do any real work today.’
Barbara's rather narrow cheeks reddened with pleasure.
‘Of course, George.
And I hope it won't be too grim.’
‘So do I, but I'm not very sanguine.
It'll probably be God-awful.’
Marjorie moved edgily.
That's the worst thing about being so perceptive, she thought.
It makes me a good actress, but I'm too sensitive to atmosphere.
That dried-up Hervey creature throwing her brain at George the way any other woman worth her salt'd throw her looks, and this Quinn woman glowering.
What the hell have I done to upset her?
She's sending out great waves of nastiness.
I wonder if Ian's heard yet?
He said they'd call at eleven if they were going to call him at all.
I want to get home.
‘Shall we go, then, George?’ she said and opened the door.
‘Yes, yes.
And thank you, Barbara.’
They went up the stairs in a little procession, Marjorie following George, very aware of Isobel behind her.
She moves very lightly for someone of her size, Marjorie thought.
What have I done to make her so chilly?
Or is it that she's like Barbara Hervey?
I swear that woman has a tendre for George, not that she'd know it, bloodless creature.
And not that George would know it either.
I almost wish he would.
I'd know what I was dealing with then.
Oh, God, I wish —‘This way, Marjorie.’
George pushed a door open and stood back, and she walked into the room and stood in the center of it looking around with curiosity.
‘How odd!
I suppose I thought it would be like a hospital ward, but it's quite like an ordinary nursery, really, except it's so dull.
I'll have a look in the loft, shall I, for those little Kate Greenaway pictures that used to be in Hilary's room?
Or are they too girlish?
Ian had some rather nice animal ones —’
‘We don't want to provide anything of that sort just yet.
We have to take great care to select the visual environment so that its effect can be measured.
Thank you for thinking of it, though —’
‘Oh, dear! poor little scrap.’
Marjorie made a moue at Isobel, who had walked over to the cot in the far comer of the room and was standing in the same apparently relaxed but watchful posture she had displayed downstairs.
‘Isn't that just like a man?’
And for the first time, she got a response, for Isobel bobbed her head slightly and then looked down at the infant in the cot.
Marjorie went over too and stood looking at the baby.
He was asleep, lying on his front with his head turned to one side.
She frowned sharply.
‘What are those things on his head?’
‘Electrodes.
For the electroencephalograms.’
‘But don't they hurt him?
They look as though they're…embedded in his scalp!’
‘They are.
But they don't perturb him in the least.’
George had come to stand beside her, also looking down at the baby.
‘As you can see, he is sleeping perfectly well.’
Marjorie shuddered slightly.
‘All the same, they look — I don't know.
If I really were his mother, I'd hate to see them there.
How long must they stay there?’
‘We haven't yet decided.’
George sounded irritable suddenly.
‘Really, Marjorie, you mustn't let yourself be infected by the hysterical nonsense in this morning's papers.
He is not being treated in any way that need worry you.
We are simply observing him, which is a very different thing from actually doing anything to him.
He lives and feeds and is handled just like any other baby.
Such specimens as we collect are obtained without bothering him in the slightest — smears for chromosome checks, the occasional blood sample, and so on, that's all.
There's no element of vivisection in the work, no matter what those overemotional reports may suggest.’
Marjorie looked up at Isobel and, surprisingly, she nodded.
‘He's a very good baby, Mrs. Briant,’ she said.
‘He takes his feeds very well, not like a fretful one would.’
‘Ian was a very fretful baby.’
Marjorie looked at the sleeping infant again.
‘I had a frightful time with him.
Not like Hilary.
She was very placid.’
She shrugged then.
‘Well, I've seen him.
Will that satisfy these various people on the adoption question?
I told you last night, George, I can't do more than merely agree.
I've done my share of baby care.
I really can't start again.
Not at my age.’
And she looked at Isobel, almost defiantly.
‘It's not that I don't care.
I was devoted to my own two, you know.
But they were my own.
I'm not really cut out for adoption.
I'm past forty, after all.’
She laughed a little tinkling laugh again.
‘Even if I do play girls in their twenties, and just about get away with it.’
‘Your age has nothing to do with it,’ George said, and then remembered to add, ‘Not that you look it.’
‘Maybe, but I haven't the patience any more.
Besides, I couldn't cope with all this…science.’.
She waved her hand comprehensively, as though to take in the room downstairs with its monitor screens, as well as the cameras built unobtrusively into the walls around them.
‘Well, the question doesn't arise.
All we need from you is your token consent to the legalities.
Miss Quinn is here to look after him.
Which she is doing very well indeed.’
‘I'm sure she is.’
Marjorie smiled again at the other woman.
‘It's a big job you've taken on, isn't it?
Looking after someone else's child can't be easy.’
‘I never think about it,’ Isobel said.
‘A baby is a baby.
And he's very easy.’
‘All the same, sooner you than me!
Though he's a nice baby, to look at, I mean.
So often very young babies are perfectly hideous, aren't they?
I know Ian was!
He looks very handsome now.
He's an actor, you know.’
‘His eyes are a very nice color,’ Isobel said, still staring at the sleeping baby.
‘A real blue.’
‘They will lighten, of course,’ George said.
‘As his hair will.
By the end of his first year he'll be light-haired, but it will change again so that in maturity he'll be quite definitely dark.
We have an artist's projection made on the basis of our early work, and from the results we've had so far, I have every reason to hope we've pulled it off.
We could have been very mistaken in our early extrapolations, you know.
Working on so small a piece of basic material, it was remarkably difficult to be sure we had correctly identified the genes.
I'm beginning to be quite confident that we were right, though it will be some years before we can be really certain we've made the breakthrough.
If you'd care to see some of the early results, Marjorie, I could explain them.’
‘Would there be much point?’
‘What?
Oh.
Well, perhaps…it is complex material, of course.’
The sudden surge of enthusiasm which had given his words a clipped speed subsided, and he turned toward the door.
‘And time is pressing.
Kegan will be waiting for me downstairs.
Miss Quinn, Miss Hervey will deal with all today's work.’
‘Yes, Dr. Briant.’
‘And I must hurry too.
Ian will be waiting for me,’ Marjorie said.
‘He's waiting to hear whether or not he's been cast, and he'll be feeling like a caged bear, poor darling.
I'd like to take the car, George.’
At the door Marjorie looked back over her shoulder at Isobel.
‘Goodbye, Miss Quinn.
Thank you.
I hope he'll go on being easy.’
And for the first time, Isobel smiled at her.
‘Goodbye Mrs. Briant.
I expect he will.
Dr. Briant says he was born to have a nice way with him.’
As they went downstairs, Marjorie said thoughtfully, ‘I think I know why, now.’
‘What?’
‘Why she seemed to dislike me the moment she set eyes on me.
‘Who?
Miss Quinn?
Oh, really, Marjorie!
How can you say that?
Was she impertinent?’
‘No, of course not.
But she did dislike me, really she did.
And it was because you told her I was to be the baby's legal mother when the adoption went through.’
He stopped at the foot of the stairs and stared at her.
‘What possible reason would that be for disliking you?
Really, Marjorie, you do take great leaps when you jump to your conclusions.’
‘So you always say.
But I'm right,’ she said insistently.
‘She was scared I'd interfere with her baby.
And once she was sure I wouldn't — because I did make it clear, you know, that I had no intention of doing more than agreeing to the legal business — she felt safe again.’
‘Marjorie, you must stop seeing things in terms of— like a play!
Such subtleties are hardly within her grasp.
She was selected most carefully, you know.
Most carefully indeed.
She has a job to do, and she's doing it quite well.
And that's as far as it goes.’
I wouldn't be too sure.
The job consists of giving him loving care, doesn't it?
And she loves him, I promise you.
She was like a threatened mother bear up there.’
‘If the child were a little older, you might have a point.
But he's only just over a week, remember.
But I'll talk to Saxby.
There may be a case for replacing her with someone else later, having a series of nurses rather than a permanent one, in case she becomes overemotionally involved.
As long as that doesn't disturb him.
But I needn't worry about it yet, I'm quite sure.’
‘Well, it's up to you.
If you're sure.
But I'm glad to have worked out why she was so —’ She gave a little shrug of distaste.
‘I know it's vanity, but I need to know why people react to me in different ways.
I need to be liked.
Not that you'd know about that sort of feeling, would you?
You never have it.’
‘Marjorie, I really must go.’
He looked at his watch.
‘I hope to get home at a reasonable time tonight, but it rather depends on what Kegan wants.
More newspaper problems, I imagine, which are a bloody nuisance, but I'll have to deal with him.
You want the car, you say?’
‘Yes, please.
And I'll expect you when I see you.
As usual.
May I have my coat?’
He went into the monitoring room, and as the door swung open she could see Mr. Kegan and Miss Hervey talking over the banks of monitor screens, and she stepped back out of their sight.
She wasn't in the mood to cope with Kegan's heavy playfulness, the sort of labored gallantry he produced whenever they met at official hospital functions.
And as for Barbara Hervey — she was a bore of the first water.
George came back with her coat, and as she put it on, grimacing at the discomfort of its dampness, he said a little awkwardly, ‘Anyway, thank you, Marjorie.
You can see now how important your cooperation is on this adoption question?
Without control of the baby, the whole Unit is wasted.
And it took a great deal of effort to set up, a lot of work already done.
I…
I really don't think I could tolerate the loss of it all.’
‘It was the least I could do, I suppose.
I could hardly refuse, could I?
Though I wish you'd given him a different name.
I suppose it's too late to alter that now.’
‘It was worth doing, or so I thought at the time.
I'd hoped to gain sympathy from those idiotic journalists.
They go in for the emotional point of view, and I thought it would help them see me in a fatherly light, giving him my own name.
Anyway, he's got to be called something.’
‘Yes.
But all those reports about Baby George Briant — they made me feel, oh, I don't know.
I didn't like it.
But I'll get used to it.
One gets used to everything sooner or later.’
He kissed her cheek and put one arm around her shoulders and hugged her.
‘You'd better hurry home and out of that damp coat.
Goodbye, my dear, and thank you again.
Do you mind seeing yourself out?
The keys are in the ignition.’
And he went, the door swinging behind him, leaving her pulling on her gloves in the narrow hallway.
‘Television?
Tonight?
Oh, for Christ's sake, Kegan, leave me alone, will you?
You got your press conference, and much good it's done!
You have seen this morning's papers, I imagine?’
‘I told you last night when I brought the evenings over how it would be.
And you'll have to admit you…well, you lost your temper, and you put their backs up.
I can't be blamed for that.
All I know is that I'm almost at my wits' ends trying to cope with the demands for access to you — the television people, radio, and there's all the foreign press agency people too.
I've done nothing but deal with the Briant project for days, it seems to me!
And I have a responsibility to the Committee, you know, and they have to the Regional Board, even though you're working in a section of the hospital that's outside the NHS establishment, and not using Ministry money.
Because you are using some hospital staff, remember.’
He moved agitatedly across the room and then turned and came back to stand over Briant's chair.
‘Look, Dr. Briant, I've been with you on this from the word go, you know I have.
Who first got the use of this building for you?
Who soothed the finance people when you annexed the equipment you needed?
Who keeps on trying to  raise money for you, got you your first grant?
I know I wasn't the only one who saw your work was important enough to be worth backing, but you must admit you owe me something!
And all I'm asking of you now is your cooperation in dealing with all this publicity, that's all.’
‘My dear Kegan, you know as well as I do that you came in on my side of the fence not out of some great disinterested love of science — you don't know what science is all about!— but because you saw a hope of personal glory in it!
And something more, I suspect.
I haven't forgotten the way you talked about taking out patents on some of the techniques I developed here.
That was an obscenity, if you like.
Oh, no, Kegan.
Don't try the gratitude line with me.
Whatever you've done you've done for science and not for me personally, whether you see it that way or not.
I owe nothing to anybody, not gratitude or anything else, do you understand me?
I'm a scientist, a scientist , God damn it all!
Do you have any conception of what that means?
Science is entitled to all the support it can get, to all it needs.
It demands , it doesn't come cap in hand asking for favors and groveling its gratitude!’
He stood up and in his turn moved sharply from one side of the room to the other.
His face was red, and his shoulders hunched over his chest as he marched, hands in pockets.
‘When will you get it into your head that this project is what matters, not me, not you, not the bloody hospital, or the newspapers, or your bleating television people!
The project and nothing else!’
‘And when will you get it into your head that it's the project I'm trying to keep in mind?
Though you're doing your best to make me forget it!
I've got some power in this place, Dr. Briant, even though I'm not a doctor or a great scientist!
And if you push me much harder, I'll wash my hands of the whole thing and tell the Committee I can't cope, and make it clear I want you out — out, do you understand?
And out you'll go, take it from me, especially after the fiasco you made of the press conference and the results of it spread all over the papers this morning!’
Kegan breathed deeply, suddenly aware that he was shouting, and went on more quietly.
‘You may see science as the great God we've all got to worship, but if we don't see it that way, and not  many do, take it from me, you'll have nothing to do your worshiping with.
I don't understand you, I really don't.
You say this project is the only thing that matters, and yet you do your best to scuttle it by refusing to cooperate with what is necessary to keep it going!’
Briant stood still, staring at him from under his brows, and Kegan stared back, his heavy face gleaming slightly with sweat.
‘George.’
Barbara Hervey stirred nervously.
‘George, may I?’
‘What?’
He turned to look at her.
She took a deep and slightly tremulous breath.
‘Look, I know it isn't really my business, but I know what you mean.
Better than anyone else could.
I'm your senior assistant, and I do understand, you know?
But he's right.
He really is.’
She leaned forward on her elbows and looked up at Briant with an expression of almost ludicrous earnestness on her face.
‘people outside our field, they can't understand.
They haven't the training, the intellectual equipment.
And it's all been thrown at them so suddenly, hasn't it?
I mean, we've been working towards all this for years, you know?
Haven't we?
So we're accustomed to the idea of what we're doing.
But the newspaper people — and the people who read them, which is pretty well everybody — they've had no chance to think the thing through.
All they see is a baby, a newborn baby, a symbol of all people care about.
And he's in a special unit, you know, had a very unusual start to his life.
It's perfectly reasonable that they can't understand.’
‘It's a valid point,’ Briant said after a moment.
‘I suppose it's a valid point.
But what can I do about it?
Ever since…since before Galileo scientists have had to accept that the idiot mass doesn't comprehend, can't see what good science can do.
So they vilify it.
And I'm no politician, Barbara — no politician!
I've got vital work to do, absolutely vital work to do, and I know it if they don't.
I tried to explain at that press conference and the only one who understood was Bridges, the only one.
He wrote the only intelligent thing that appeared this morning.
All I ask is to be left to get on with my work, and enough support to make it possible.
Is it so much to ask?’
‘No, of course it isn't.
But you've got to convince everybody, not  just me and people like Bridges, people who've had a scientific training.
You're preaching to the converted in us, but you've got to get at everyone else.
So Mr. Kegan is right.
You'll have to cooperate and answer their questions and explain.
Even if it wastes your time.
It won't really be wasting it, you know.
And I can hold things here, really I can.
The work will get done, even if you miss the doing of it.
And I know that's miserable for you, but what else can you do?’
‘I seem to have been here so often before,’ Briant said heavily and moved wearily back to his chair.
‘First trying to convince you, Kegan, and then those journalists, and Marjorie — and now again.
And you beat me every time, don't you, you and all the people like you, Kegan?
The blind ones.’
He rubbed his face then.
‘Oh, God, I'm sorry.
That was bloody offensive, and I didn't mean it to be.
But you are blind, you know.’
‘You certainly make me feel so,’ Kegan said, and anger was still simmering in him.
‘And stupid into the bargain.
And I know I'm not stupid, any more than the next person is.
I care about what you're doing, even if I'm not as head over ears in love with it as you are.
But you do your best to make me stop caring.
I'll tell you something, Dr. Briant, I don't know why I put up with you and your arrogant ways, that I don't!
It says a lot for me, it really does.’
‘Yes.
Yes.
I'm sorry, Kegan.
You're right, of course.
I was abominably ill-mannered, and I apologize.
I've had — it hasn't been easy, this past week.
And the papers this morning — I say I don't care, but I suppose I do.
It stung, that eruption of uncomprehending idiocy.
It shouldn't, but —’
‘Of course it stung!’
Barbara said and leaned over to rest a hand on Briant's aim.
‘It hurt me, I know that!
I could have wept this morning when I opened the papers, I really could.
But you can make it different, George, if you'll only cooperate with this television thing.
It's an important program, you know.
Virtually everyone watches Probe and that Gerrard man — even I do!
You could make them see it so clearly if only you'd try.’
‘And manage to avoid losing your temper,’ Kegan said.
‘If you can.
Because I promise you, if you do that, on a live transmission  like this has to be, you really will scupper yourself.
And then I'll be past caring.
It's up to you now.
I'm certainly not going to say another word about it.
Just make up your mind, one way or the other, and let me know your decision.
And within the next half-hour, because I can't and won't hold these people off any longer than that.
You'll find me in my office, trying to get on with my job, when you're ready to talk.
Good morning!’
And the door slammed behind him.
‘In many ways, I remain a child at heart, Graham,’ Sir Daniel said.
‘No, not whisky.
A most uncivilized drink at this hour.
Brandy, if you have it?
Thank you.
Yes, indeed, a child at heart.
I still find the ability of television to enter the minds of millions a remarkable thing.
What?
Oh.
Let me see the label.
Hmm.
Yes, perhaps a little soda would be as well.
Yes, millions.
With the Eurovision linkup, and the satellite feeding the United States and Canada, the mind boggles.
And J. J. told me there will be tape recordings of the program going out in Australia and New Zealand.
Quite a remarkable degree of coverage, remarkable.
Indeed a pervasive medium.’
He drank some brandy and then added sharply, ‘I take it young Bridges has been well briefed?’
‘He'll mention the Echo as often as he possibly can,’ Graham said dryly, and defiantly filled his glass with whisky for the second time.
‘Of course, if you'd accepted the invitation to take part yourself —’
‘Oh, no, no, my dear chap, no.
I'm only a proprietor, after all.
people know that the real power in a newspaper lies with the editorial staff.
I would have had no value at all.
None at all.
No, no more brandy, thank you.
I try to be a reasonably abstemious individual.
Perhaps you had better switch the set on?
It's almost nine o'clock, and I don't think we should miss any of the program.
And the other members of the staff who are joining us had better put in an appearance soon, don't you think?’
‘Most of them preferred to see it at home.
With their families.’
‘Really!
How little interest people take in their jobs these days.
One would have thought discussion with one's working colleagues, alter so important a transmission, would have superseded all else, wouldn't one?’
‘Yes.
One would,’ Graham said savagely.
‘But it all depends on the pressures, doesn't it?’
And he switched on the set and went back to his desk, putting as much physical space as possible between himself and his employer.
Bodily discomfort, added to the anger that still bubbled unpleasantly inside him, had the effect of clarifying his mind, just as it had on the day of the press conference.
What right had they to make a panel discussion out of this?
And what a panel!
A journalist and an MP, as well as J. J. Gerrard himself, and what was he?
Just another bloody journalist, a dilettante with a ragbag mind, who thought that because he had a smattering of scientific language, which he produced with a glib assurance that made George want to choke him, he was qualified to question him , a serious scientist with an intellectual grasp that Gerrard could never understand, let alone achieve.
And this physical discomfort!
Did they have to use these foul lights that blistered the back of his neck with heat and almost blinded him, making his eyes water with their stabbing?
Did they have to sit him in a swivel chair that swung sideways with every movement of his body?
Did they have to have so tight-packed an audience, with the front row so close to the dais on which he was sitting that he could positively feel their stupid gawping eyes on him?
And the place smelled too, of hot bodies, hot electrical equipment, and the fumes of whisky; not surprising that, considering the amount of the stuff they swallowed during the half-hour he had spent in that crowded room full of people who talked to one another in an incomprehensible private language, and at him as though he were a stupid child when they explained how the program would run.
He should never have agreed to take part in this charade, should have adhered to his first decision to refuse.
Bloody Kegan.
He sat and thought somberly about Kegan, keeping his chin tucked into his neck and his eyes on the toes of his outstretched feet, as people clutching clipboards bustled about, and men wearing earphones and pulling the attached wires behind them moved importantly from place to place and shouted at the invisible listeners who spoke to them through the earphones.
And then, suddenly, the big studio hushed expectantly as one of the earphoned men shouted, ‘All right, studio, a minute from the top.
Counting now.
Audience, remember, start your applause when I signal.
Forty-five.
Ready on opening captions.
Thirty.
Camera three, clear that shot on J. J.'s entrance.
Twenty.
fifteen.
OK, start your applause, now.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five…’
The applause, scattered at first, thickened, took on a note of real enthusiasm, and tinny music could be heard threading through it, and then J. J. Gerrard was coming through the wide entrance at the back of the dais, his rather fat face heavily serious over his pink shirt, walking purposefully to the chair in the center.
George felt rather than saw the swing of the camera that was aiming over his own left shoulder at Gerrard, felt it move backward, and then a great surge of apprehension came up into his chest, drying his mouth and clogging his throat.
Christ!
What was he doing sitting here?
He ought to get up and go, just like that, and to hell with the lot of them.
‘…a matter which concerns all of us, very deeply,’ Gerrard was saying.
‘That, for all its surface appearance of mysterious and complex scientific endeavor beyond the ordinary man's comprehension, carries implications which must affect all of us, now and in the future.
A matter with which I believe everyone, the studio  audience here, the millions watching tonight in this country and all over the world, should be fully aware.
And that is why we are here.
Michael Bridges, the scientific journalist who first revealed to the public at large that this project existed — and we all owe him a great debt…’
A camera on the far side moved, swung in to stare at Michael Bridges, sitting on George's right, and came so close that George could see inside its Cyclops eye to the movement of the focusing mechanism.
‘Kenneth Gurney, MP, a backbencher with no governmental or party axe to grind, but a keen awareness of the rights of the man in the street, here to ask questions on behalf of the watching millions….’
George looked with distaste at the man sitting on Gerrard's other side, at the shining dapper head, the pin-striped suit with a white carnation in the buttonhole, and the sleek self-satisfied smirk on his face, and thought, He's enjoying this, pompous bastard.
‘And of course, the man who knows most about it, the scientist who designed this project, set it up, launched it on an unknowing world.
Dr. George Briant…’
The camera swung again, but this time George looked above it, to a monitor screen hung on a metal rafter above the audience, to see his own face in close-up, the eyes staring upward in a way that gave him an absurdly soulful look.
Immediately he looked away and stared instead at J. J. Gerrard, not caring whether or not he showed his dislike for the situation he was in.
‘Dr. Briant, let me tell you here and now that we are not here to make judgments.
We are all’— he swung his hand comprehensively, to take in the audience, the studio staff, somehow implying he took in the watching millions too —‘we are all worried by what we have heard of your work.
We can't deny that.
But we are not going to condemn merely because we don't understand.
It is because we need to understand that we have asked you to come here tonight.
I for one am making a disinterested search for information.
No more and no less.
You would agree that we have a right to seek this information?’
‘If you feel you need it,’ George said dryly.
‘Indeed, we do!
So far all we know is what has appeared in the newspapers, that you have, shall we say, brought into life a baby — a human baby just like any one of the infants sleeping in their mothers' arms all over the world — in a way that is to say the least unusual.
That you propose to keep this baby in your laboratories and investigate him —’
‘Not in a laboratory, if you use the word to mean a place full of test tubes and retorts and animals in cages.
In a well-equipped nursery where he can be observed with no distress to himself — that is all.’
‘Ah!
Thank you for the definition.
Very well, in a special nursery where he can be observed.
As we understand it, he will live what you must admit is an…unnatural life? until he reaches maturity.
And we want to know the hows and whys, the purposes of this project.
Why you should feel it reasonable to subject a human baby to this distasteful experience —’
George moved sharply.
‘For someone who started out by stating he was not here to make judgments, you would appear to have a few already to hand,’ he said acidly.
‘Unnatural, distasteful — all words that apply to value judgments, wouldn't you say?’
‘I stand rebuked,’ J. J. Gerrard said smoothly and swung his chair to face the audience.
‘Not for the first time, hmm?’
And the audience responded with a soft wave of laughter, approving his modest admission of fallibility.
He turned back to George.
‘I apologize.
But let us go on.
And just to sketch in the background, could you recapitulate for us?
For the benefit of those who have somehow failed to read the widespread newspaper accounts?’
George inclined his head and took from his pocket the folded paper that carried the statement he had read at his press conference.
‘I can only repeat what I have already said to other journalists,’ he said and began to read.
When he reached the end and put the paper back in his pocket, the audience shifted and swayed slightly, making him realize just how raptly they had listened to him.
After a momentary pause, Gerrard swung his chair again and  said to the audience, ‘I hope you all understood all that.
I can't deny a lot of it was way over my head.’
And the audience laughed, with relief rather than humor, and from somewhere at the back someone clapped loudly, making the laughter rise again before it subsided into silence.
But by then Gerrard was facing George again, an expression of great seriousness replacing the wry look he had produced for the audience.
‘Clearly, we need a little more detail, Dr. Briant, if we are fully to understand.
Could you tell us more about these extrapolations — or predictions — you were able to make from your study of the newly fertilized egg cell?
And then can you give us an account of how far they have proved accurate?
And a brief account of the investigations you have made since the child's birth?’
‘It'll have to be brief,’ George said dryly.
‘You've asked enough to keep me talking for a month.
All right.
The extrapolations.
On the basis of the work done by other researchers on the structure of DNA strands, and my own identification of Briant Bodies Alpha and Beta, I was able to choose a conception that would produce certain clearly defined physical characteristics.
Sex, hair, eye and skin color, physique.
These were very easily identifiable.
Less easy to identify were personality traits which I believe are carried by Briant Bodies Gamma and Delta.
As you may know, there has been much scientific argument about the ways such traits appear.
Are they inborn, or are they created by the action of environmental influences?’
As he warmed to his theme, George forgot he was talking to one individual, and through him to a huge lay audience.
It was as though he were dictating material for a paper in one of the journals or addressing a class of senior students.
‘I believe the importance of genetic influences has been diminished in the amount of work that has been done on environmental influences.
Some sociologists and to a lesser degree some psychoanalysts seem to assume they are working on pieces of wax, that a baby takes on all its imprints from outside.
Yet in all logic, how can this be so?
No amount of stimulation from the environment can, for example, increase the intelligence quotient of a known mongol.
I don't deny that very often a potential for intelligence is underdeveloped because the environment lacks sufficient stimuli; but however much the environment is manipulated, unless the genetic material is good, there is a point beyond which such manipulation cannot have an effect.’
‘Do you mean that your researches will actually be able to define exactly what the full intelligence potential of the individual is?’
Gerrard cut in.
‘I thought the idea of a fixed IQ rating was out of date now, that the latest reports from educationists say you can't measure it exactly.’
George frowned sharply, irritated at being stopped just as he was getting well into his stride.
‘Educationists, as you call them, can't measure the full potential because they have such primitive tools and methods of assessment.
What I am trying to do is identify genetic potential long before the birth of the infant, and therefore long before he has been affected by his environment.
And if you will be good enough to let me go on, you will see how I am monitoring the environment of the infant in order to see precisely what effect it has.
May I therefore continue?’
Gerrard blinked and then folded his arms and leaned back in his chair.
‘By all means,’ he said, a little stiffly.
‘Thank you.
Now, as I said, my own investigation of DNA strands revealed what I believe to be specific intelligence and personality factors in Briant Bodies Gamma and Delta.
I started by looking at the chromosome patterns, of course— remember the men who are born with an extra Y chromosome, who show aggressive behavior and antisocial tendencies.
It would take far too long to tell you in detail how I identified the specific genetic patterns of these chromosomes; you'll have to accept my assurance that I believe I did identify them.’
‘Ah!
That sounds very —’ Gerrard leaned forward again.
‘Mr. Gerrard!’
George stood up so sharply that his swivel chair swung half around.
‘Did you or did you not say that the purpose of my presence here this evening was to give you information about my work?’
‘What?
Well, of course, Dr. Briant!
But —’
‘Then will you be good enough to permit me to do just that?
If you persist in interrupting me, it is unlikely in the extreme that I will have sufficient time to give you the complete picture which you say you are so anxious to get!
I am a logical man, Mr. Gerrard, accustomed to presenting material in a concise, ordered and intelligible manner.
Ordered .
And that means that all these questions you are jumping in with will be answered as part of the statement I am here to make.
If you will contain yourself in reasonable patience, and permit me to do what I came here to do, we will all be better off!
Do I make myself clear?’
There was a rustle from the audience as George sat down again, but he ignored it.
Let them think him high-handed; he was damned if he was going to let this greasy television pundit push him about.
Gerrard was looking at him with his eyebrows slightly raised.
‘Indeed you do!
But may I point out to you, Dr. Briant, that I for one — and I think it likely that the audience feels much as I do — find the material you are giving us in so admirably concise and ordered a manner is not as intelligible as it might be, since we are ordinary simple souls?
The language you speak is somewhat above our heads.
So while I take your point that you are prepared to give us all the information we seek, may I reserve the right to interrupt when it is absolutely necessary to do so?
For example, to ask for definitions of some of the words you use?’
He turned to the audience.
‘That is fair enough, wouldn't you say?’
A murmur of assent went up as the audience shifted and rustled again, and Gerrard turned back to Briant.
‘Will you accept the need for this much interruption, Dr. Briant?’
‘For definitions of terms, by all means.
But I insist, no more of these attempts to anticipate.
At the end, if there are any gaps, then by all means.
But now, may I continue?’
Gerrard inclined his head with exaggerated courtesy, and George leaned back and went on.
‘Where was I, then?
Ah, yes.
I was able to identify specific gene factors which carry personality traits.
And I chose a conception that promised me a child of certain defined personality characteristics as well as physical ones.
If our predictions are correct, he was  born with an even temperament, high intelligence, a low aggression response.
And we have in fact been able to demonstrate already that this is so.
His responses to his environment have been measured in detail from his birth.
Oh, and incidentally, I must tell you at this point that his pre-birth environment was most carefully handled.
The mother was as perfect a physical specimen as we could find.
Throughout the pregnancy, we used vacuum decompression to ensure that the infant's blood and therefore oxygen and food supplies were maximal.’
‘Vacuum decompression?’
Gerrard asked quickly, wrinkling his brows with a neatly sketched-in expression of intelligent inquiry.
‘An acceptable question,’ George said dryly.
‘Very well.
This is a device we used that created a vacuum over the mother's abdomen for regular periods during the pregnancy.
It was derived from an ordinary domestic vacuum cleaner.
She sat in an envelope from which air was removed.
This lifted the atmospheric pressure — fifteen pounds per square inch, as you may know — from the walls of the uterus and thus allowed the maximum free passage of blood through the maternal and infant blood vessels.
So, we could be sure the unborn child was given a full and more than adequate food and oxygen supply throughout.
‘Now, where was I?
Oh, yes.
The investigations we have made.
Well, we have measured the child's responses from birth.
His high intelligence has been early manifested.
He has modified his inherent reflexes according to the type of stimuli he gets.
For example, all babies turn the head and the mouth towards a touch on the cheek, seeking the nipple.
This ‘rooting’ reflex is quite outside the infant's conscious control.
Now, when I touch his cheek with my finger, he responds normally, but not as quickly as he responds when he is held to the breast.
Within this first week he has learned the difference between the touch of a finger and the touch of his nurse's body.
I must tell you, if you don't already know from the newspapers, that he is cared for by a most responsive nurse who has been enabled by hormone therapy to breast feed him.
‘He has also responded with increasing rapidity to other stimuli, particularly sound.
When I speak to him he responds; but not with  the same speed with which he responds to his nurse, from whom of course he obtains satisfaction of his physical needs.
We know too that he more than normally rapidly recognizes differences in temperature as well as differences in individual voices.
All this points to a higher than usual intelligence quotient.’
For the first time Michael Bridges stirred, and George looked at him over his shoulder, momentarily surprised.
‘There is one point, Dr. Briant,’ he said.
‘Controls.
You can't measure any response without something against which to measure it.
You've got to have a yardstick of some sort —’
‘Oh, I know!
That was one of my greatest initial problems,’ George said approvingly.
‘You clearly see the importance of this point.
It does you credit.
But I couldn't set up an ideal control system.
I had considered selecting a twinning conception, and using the other infant as a control.
But this would have been difficult because of the problem of creating the ideal pre-birth environment.
Twins have a lesser chance of good pre-birth life since they must share the available food and oxygen supplies.
And anyway, if I monitored two babies, I would be creating the same environment for both of them, wouldn't I?
No, I got over this problem by collecting data on a large series of babies to whom I had access during the preliminary work on this project.
A paediatrician at my hospital — the same one now supervising the infant's general health — gave me enormous help, enormous.
I have a great deal of essential data on infant behavior that I am using as control material.
And there is no doubt in my mind that this infant is of higher than average intelligence.
‘Now, this infant has been put in a perfect environment.
He is being so carefully nurtured that never yet has he suffered any frustration.
In normal situations, babies experience frequent frustration from birth.
They want food, and the only way they can express their desire for it is to cry.
This is their signaling method.
But the moment a baby cries for food he is frustrated in his desire.
He cannot understand that he is waiting only a matter of moments before his desire will be satisfied.
He just feels the desperation of hunger that is not being dealt with.
And one thing we do know  from the work of really scientific psychologists — those of the behaviorist school — is that frustration creates an aggressive response, anger.
‘We have trained the nurse caring for this infant to recognize the first signs of desire for food.
He has never — never since his birth — cried to be fed.
As soon as he shows the slight movements that herald developing hunger, he is put to the breast.
Similarly, as soon as he shows the smallest sign of being too cold, or too warm, his environment is manipulated to create the conditions of maximum comfort.
I must tell you that this infant has never cried at all apart from at the moment of birth when he took his first breath — and that must be accepted as an unavoidable demand for satisfaction of an impossible desire.
He could not be returned, as he would have wished, to his pre-birth environment, but he was put into a close facsimile of it immediately.
He lies in a cot equipped with a special mattress which is filled with liquid; he lies on so resilient a surface that it is very close to actually lying in liquid, as of course the unborn infant does.
His cot pulses gently too with a rhythm matched to that of his mother's average pulse rate during pregnancy.
‘He has never suffered discomfort or pain, either.
When blood tests are taken, we use local anesthesia, sprayed on the skin.
The electrodes permanently attached to his scalp — we need those to take the frequent and essential measurements of electric impulses produced by his brain — are also imperceptible to him, since the resilience of his mattress ensures he feels no pressure from them at all.
‘So, as I say, this child has been given the most perfect environment possible.
And already he has shown some most interesting behavior, apart from the signs of his intelligence I have already described for you.
For example, he has a waking and sleeping pattern that follows closely the one regarded as normal — sleeps most at night, feeds at four regular intervals during the day even though he is so young.
Which suggests that the life patterns imposed on infants in fact derive from biological need.
The difference with this baby is that he himself has selected the time at which he will display the pattern, rather than having it imposed on him by a  mother's pattern of giving care.
That completes my statement.
You may now question and comment if you choose.’
There was another brief silence, and then Bridges said softly, ‘A baby who never cries, because he never needs to.’
He raised his head and looked very directly at J. J. Gerrard.
‘He sounds a most fortunate baby,’ he said loudly.
‘How many infants can be as free from distress as that?
I've always thought babies have a pretty rotten life, completely under the control of people who don't have any idea of what goes on inside a baby's mind —’
‘A fair point, and a very reassuring one,’ Gerrard said with a fine judicial air.
‘All right.
The baby, despite the fact that he has been denied his birthright of the care of deeply loving parents who created him in love, is as well cared for —’
‘Now, let's stop right there,’ George said sharply, and his voice was louder than he meant it to be.
‘Let's get this business of birthrights and loving parents in some sort of perspective.
You labor under the idea that the best people to care for a child are the people who conceived and bore him.
Human society has always operated this way.
And in my opinion the results of this method of child rearing show what an inefficient method it is.
We live in a world that operates on greed, on aggression, on violence and cruelty.
We are faced with one of the unhappiest young generations we have ever had — antisocial, with juvenile delinquency causing immense distress, not least to the young themselves.
And on the physical health side, enormous numbers of children are badly fed, physically neglected, by the loving parents who bore them!
Is that the system you want to maintain?
Do you want to see humanity kill itself off because of its inability to rear improved generations to follow on?’
‘Is that what you're trying to do then?
Take our kids away from us because you reckon you know what's good for them better than what we do?
You're no better than a Hitler.’
Startled, George turned his head to stare at a woman who was standing up somewhere in the middle of the tight-packed rows of the audience.
Her face was red with emotion and she was standing with her head poked angrily forward.
‘Who do you think you are, you scientists?’ she cried shrilly.
‘Didn't you have a mother that loved you?
And haven't you got kids of your own?
Would you let someone take your kids away?
Or is it all right for you to keep your own kids, but the likes of us, ordinary people, who've got to give up —’
‘Madam, I wish you would listen instead of jumping to ridiculous conclusions!’
George shouted above her voice.
‘I have not for a moment suggested that children should be removed from the care of their parents.
And I have no political motives!
If you will wait with reasonable patience, I will explain —’
‘You'll get your chance in a moment,’ Gerrard called, equally loudly.
‘We must give Dr. Briant a fair hearing first, please, but since the point has been raised — Dr. Briant?’
Unwillingly the woman sat down, and George said acidly, ‘Thank you.
Very well.
I do not propose that children be removed from their parents' care.
I do propose to seek information that will help them to make a better job of rearing those children.
Love sounds like an important word, but it is shapeless, it can't be defined.
And it can't replace knowledge.
However deeply you care for your children, without knowledge of how they develop, how their experiences affect their personalities, you can't give them this…this birthright you talk about so glibly.
It is precisely because I care about the future of humanity that I am undertaking this work.’
‘All right, Dr. Briant.’
For the first time the man on Gerrard's other side spoke, and his voice was smooth and the accent very carefully cultured.
‘If we accept this — that you can give us information that will help us to rear better offspring — how do you propose this information be used?’
‘How do you mean, be used?
How is any information used?
We have information about methods of curing disease, for example, and apply them.
It's as simple as that.’
‘Is it?
I'm not so sure.
It seems to me that you propose to tell us, on the basis of your researches, the right way to create super children, and then the right way to bring them up.
But how is it to be done?
Will the whole population have to submit itself to tests of their suitability to have children?
And if you had to seek through two thousand people to find your pair of suitable parents, does that  mean that — let me see — only point naught naught one of the population will be considered tit for parenthood?
And once they are permitted to produce their babies, will they have to accept constant control over the way they care for them?
I'm not afraid to make judgments, Mr. Gerrard.
And I tell you here and now, I find this whole idea utterly revolting.’
Immediately a great roar of applause broke out, and Gurney looked at the audience, and this time his self-satisfied smirk seemed to be so obvious, to George at any rate, that he could not understand how the audience too could fail to see it.
But clearly they didn't.
Their approval was so strong it was almost tangible, filling the big cluttered studio with sound.
Gerrard was waving his hands from side to side, and gradually the noise diminished, and he turned to George and raised his eyebrows.
‘Well, Dr. Briant?
Can you answer that?’
‘I can answer it only as any other scientist would,’ George said, and anger clipped his words.
‘By asking you for the answer.
My goals are clear-cut.
I must seek knowledge, the truth that derives from knowledge.
I am trying to give you hard facts, tell you how the traits of human personality are carried from parents to offspring, tell you accurately how the environment modifies inherited characteristics.
When this child involved in my project reaches maturity, I will have amassed a body of immensely valuable knowledge, but what you, what humanity as a whole does with it, is out of my hands.
I must repeat, I have no political motives, I'm not in the least interested in the dismal machinations of politicians.
It is you who must concern yourself with the…the ethical problems involved.
You who must decide whether you are prepared to go on allowing dangerous aggression to mar life for all of us.
If you are happy to go on living under the constant threat of war, if you are prepared to see the discoveries of science perverted by inadequate people to the creation of foul weapons, what can I do?
What can any scientist do?
I know perfectly well that certain of my colleagues have made some attempt to concern themselves with these questions.
No doubt you have heard of the Pugwash conferences.
But they concern themselves primarily with discussing the application  of nuclear physics, and I cannot see that the work of a biologist could profitably be discussed at such a conference, and certainly not by me.
I can only repeat, I have no involvement with political ideas or so-called social ethics.
I can only give you a tool for good.
It is up to you whether you use it or not.’
‘You say it is a good tool, sir!’
This time the interruption came from a man in the front row of the audience, a tall man who was leaning forward, and George looked at him, feeling less hostility than the woman who had shouted at him earlier had created; and then he realized it was because he spoke in an educated voice.
‘But as you so clearly realize, scientists have many times created tools that can be used for good, but which have then been perverted to evil use.
Now tell me the answers to two points.
One, is there not a way in which your good tool could be perverted, and two, since this tool must inevitably be given into the hands of the people you despise for their aggressiveness and bad inheritance and rearing, how do you expect them to use it?
Isn't this a self-defeating exercise upon which you are engaged?’
George leaned back and stared consideringly at the questioner.
He had been right in his snap judgment — indeed an intelligent, educated individual.
‘I'd like to discuss that first point, if I may, Dr. Briant,’ Gerrard cut in.
‘Because although I don't entirely share with you your view of the essential rottenness of all humanity as it exists today, I can see there are sections of it that are dangerous —’
‘I have not suggested for a moment that I regard all humanity as rotten,’ George said icily.
‘That is a most unjust and…and…absurd generalization.’
He had nearly said stupid and stopped himself in time.
No need, in so public a setting, to show his true opinion of the man's shallowness.
He had already diminished the man in his audience's eyes by refusing to accept his interruptions.
No need for more.
‘All right, but to return to the point.
I can see how your good tool, as you call it, could be used.
I will accept that you are designing it to enable humanity to select and rear a future generation that is peaceful and creative rather than aggressive and destructive, that your personal motives are good.
But can't you see that there is  an obverse to everything?
That just as you are making it possible to select conceptions that will result in the right sort of people, as you define them, and reject the potentially bad ones, so it would be possible to reject the good and retain the bad.
I can see a situation in which a government made up of aggressive men, their minds set on world domination achieved through war, could seize on your researches to create the most warlike and dangerous nation that has ever existed, which links with this gentleman's second point.’
He whirled and pointed at the man in the front row.
‘In you, sir, we hear the voice of cool reason, of the natural fears of good men.’
He turned back to George.
‘We are afraid you are taking upon yourself the creation of a tool that has an even greater potential for evil than for good.
And we have a right to ask you, as the creator of the tool, not only whether the way you are forging it is acceptable to the dignity of man, but whether the results can be safely presented to the world.’
‘And there's something else too!’
Now several people in the audience were on their feet and waving in an attempt to attract the attention of Gerrard, who left the dais and walked up the narrow central aisle, holding a hand microphone high in the air.
It was a man wearing an overcoat pulled high around his neck who succeeded in getting the chance to speak as Gerrard thrust the microphone at him.
‘Something else too!’ the man repeated.
‘All this talk about bodies and minds — what about man's soul, sir!
His soul!
We are more than mere animals, remember!
God created us for His own purposes, gave us free will to decide between good and evil, but retained unto Himself the ultimate decisions about the creation of life.
To do as you are doing, to take to yourself the right to decide who shall and who shall not be born, is to set yourself up above God —’
‘And God shall not be mocked!’
A woman sitting beside him leapt to her feet and seized the microphone from Gerrard's hand.
‘You're evil, you scientists, evil, that's what you are!
Mocking God, stealing babies from their mothers.
You're a Herod, a wicked, evil —’
‘Thank you.
And someone else now.’
Skillfully, Gerrard  maneuvered the microphone away from her and moved quickly up the aisle to the back of the audience; and the camera, pushed by a sweating man in a stained white shirt, followed him.
‘You, the lady at the end there.
You look very anxious to say something.’
‘I am, oh, I am!
I've got a baby.
He's three months old and I love him and I wouldn't do a thing to harm him.
And it's wicked, wicked what you're doing to this poor little baby you've got locked up in your laboratory!
I'm not all that religious, I reckon you can be good without goin' to Church, and that, but I know wickedness when I see it, and it ought to be put a stop to.’
‘And who's going to put a stop to it?
That's what I want to know!’
A man behind the young mother reached for the microphone, but this time Gerrard held on firmly.
‘You've got an MP up there.
What does he say is to be done about it?
Eh?
If we all want it put a stop to, will the government do something about it, or will it be like you said, Mr. Gerrard?
Will they see they can use this…this science for their own political ideas?
Eh?
What do you say to that?’
By now, other men with microphones were moving among the audience, and so many people were shouting to be heard that George could no longer identify individual speakers as words overleaped one another and blended together into a great cry of confused and frightened protest.
‘…and the next thing, you'll be choosing only the types you want, and breeding out the minority groups you and your like have always hated.
You'll carry on where Hitler left off, if they let you, getting rid of Jews and Gypsies and colored people and…’‘…what about the people who won't do what you scientists tell them and get pregnant anyway.
Will the next thing be abortions for people who don't want them, and forced sterilization for them afterwards, and…’‘…you and all your fancy long words.
It's a bloody con, that's what it is.
You're trying to blind us with all your scientific talk, so that we don't see what you're getting at, and leave you alone till it's too late…’‘…you're a wicked, evil man, like that other woman said, flying in the face of Nature and God…’‘…and what about Einstein?
They said he was mentally deficient, and if people like you get your way, they'll kill off children like he was, and then…’‘…you're trying to make science into the new religion, that's what you're doing, and it's a…’‘…and who's paying for your filthy experiments?
That's what I'd like to know.
It's coming out of our taxes, that's where, and we ought to put a stop to it.
It's our money, that's what you lot ought to remember, and we ought to have a say in…’‘…all your rubbishing talk about the future of mankind — it's a load of crap — like this nonsense about the population explosion.
There's plenty of food for the world however many people there are in it, because no one 's started farming the seas yet, have they?
That's what you scientists ought to be doing, improving food production, and finding ways to colonize the planets and the moon, instead of messing about with people and the children they have.
Mankind is a dominant species because it's adaptable, and you're trying to stop the natural methods of evolution for your own rotten reasons and…’
Above the uproar, Gerrard signaled furiously at the men with the microphones, and they fell back to the sides of the studio, pulling the microphones away from eagerly reaching hands, and Gerrard began to walk backward toward the dais, looking from side to side as he went.
‘All right, all right !’ he shouted, and the audience began gradually to quieten.
‘All right!
We're not getting anywhere like this.
Let's get a majority opinion on this.
Let's have a show of hands.
How many people think this project ought to be stopped right now before it goes any further?’
Immediately a sea of hands shot up, waving, and Gerrard nodded and cried, ‘And let's get the other side.
Anyone think it's a good thing?’
And this time other hands went up, and Gerrard craned to see.
‘So it's not unanimous!
Right.
Let's hear the other side.
You, sir, what reason do you have for seeing this project as worth following through?’
A young man wearing a brightly colored college scarf pushed his  way to the end of the row to get within reach of the microphone.
‘Look, this opposition is to be expected.’
He spoke in a surprisingly deep voice.
‘people are always scared of what they don't understand, but you can't stop progress, can you?
We'd still be living in caves like the half-apes we sprang from if the frightened little people had their way.
Dr. Briant is right.
He can give us a wonderful tool, a wonderful one.
We, the people who'll have the next generation of children, we want a better world than the one we've got from all of you!
None of this will affect you, anyway.
It's us who'll have the next lot of babies, not you.
You've had your chance and made a rotten mess of it.
And you can't stop science from helping us to make a better job of things.
people with education won't misuse what Dr. Briant discovers.
And we're the best-educated generation ever —’
‘You kids think you know it all,’ a woman shouted from the front of the now thoroughly stirred-up audience.
‘Wait until they try to take your babies off you, then you'll change your tune, you —‘Now, madam, let's give both sides a fair hearing,’ Gerrard called.
‘Anyone else with this young man?’
‘Yes!
He's right!
All this stupid talk about God and men's souls — what we need is real education, not the prejudices of superstitious religion mongers like that man up the front,’ a voice called.
And then, quite suddenly, there was uproar again, with the audience almost entirely on its feet and shouting and milling about, completely out of Gerrard's control.
Above his head, George saw the monitor black out, and then a few words faded in.
‘Normal service will be resumed.’
And he looked away at the crowd so near to him and felt a stab of real fear.
These people were dangerous in their fury, and for a brief moment he knew the terror of the threat of physical attack, and he looked over his shoulder for an escape route.
But already the noise was diminishing, the violence of the anger subsiding as rapidly as it had built up, and he looked back at the audience to see people taking their places again, Gerrard and the earphoned men in shirtsleeves moving quickly and purposefully among them, urging them into seats.
Gerrard came back to the dais and held his hands up for silence, and though there was still a good deal of noise he made himself heard above it.
‘Now, come on, come on.
Where's your sense, all of you?
This program is being seen all over the world!
Do you want the rest of the world to say the British are so aggressive that they need the sort of controls we've been talking about?
Come on now, cool it, cool it.’
‘Nothing like a little chauvinism, is there?’
George turned and looked in surprise at the source of the murmured comment; and he saw Michael Bridges close beside him, surprised because he'd forgotten he was there.
‘If ever there were an indictment of uncontrolled human responses, here it is,’ George said bitterly.
‘I can't imagine even the most rabid antiscience apes not seeing that—’
‘Can't you?’
Bridges grinned and then laughed equally bitterly.
‘For a brilliant man, you can be very naïve, Dr. Briant.
Don't make the fatal mistake of assuming other people think as logically as you do, or even hear what's said to them.
No matter how often you tell 'em you haven't got this infant in a laboratory cage, for example, they'll still believe that's where he is, with a chain round his neck very likely.
You've frightened them sick —’
‘All right, Julian, back on camera four,’ Gerrard was shouting, and then the monitor lit up again, and Gerrard said smoothly, ‘Well, sorry for that momentary interruption, ladies and gentlemen.
Due to factors beyond our control, and all that!
Now, let's see where we were.
Dr. Briant has told us how his project is operating, and what he expects to discover from it.
Mr. Gurney has voiced the fears of many in his questions on the way Dr. Briant's discoveries may be used.
Mr. Bridges has asked a couple of pertinent scientific questions — but let's hear more from him before, perhaps, returning to the audience here in the studio for some more of their opinion.’
Mike leaned forward obediently.
‘My function, Mr. Gerrard, is to report facts as I find them.
I believe — as my paper, the Echo, believes — that the greatest danger to mankind is not science and its discoveries, but ignorance.
For this reason we support Dr. Briant in his efforts to combat ignorance, by reporting every piece of information  about his work that we can.
I'm not sure newspapers should do more than this — inform and then reflect public opinion.
Whether we ought to set ourselves up as molders of it is another question.’
He stopped, seeming to collect himself.
Careful, careful, he was thinking.
Don't go on too long about the paper, or you'll put your foot right in it with Sefton, one way or another.
Speak for yourself now.
He looked at the audience and bit his lip.
‘Look,’ he said, a little awkwardly.
‘I'm like the rest of you.
I don't know where the work of people like Dr. Briant is leading us.
Maybe it'll be a better world we'll have, maybe not.
But I have enough scientific training myself to know what a hell of a dilemma he's in.
Science has got to go on looking for knowledge.
That's what it's all about.
It's above — no, not above — beyond politics, beyond such things as ideas about religion, and the uses to which its discoveries are put.
If scientists had to think always about what might happen politically or socially because of their work, they'd never get the work done.
There wouldn't be any ethical problems to worry about, because as that young man in the audience said, we'd still be living in caves or the trees.
‘I tell you flatly, the sort of scientists you should be frightened of aren't the ones like Dr. Briant, who…well, opt out of the ethical questions.
The really dangerous scientists are those who do have political and moral ideas and set out to use their science to further their own ideological ends.
Can't you see that?
Dr. Briant is doing the right thing — doing his own job to the best of his ability and leaving the rest of it to the people he's doing it for — you.’
He stopped, and there was a pause, and then someone started to clap at the back of the studio, and George, who had been sitting with his chin on his chest, impassively listening, looked up.
The solitary applauder was the young man in the scarf, but even as George looked at him, another man joined in, then a woman, and gradually the sound built up until several hands were clapping, but not loudly enough to drown the boos and shouts other members of the audience were producing.
Gerrard raised his hands again, and this time his control over  them was so complete that the applause stopped and there was silence.
‘A very reasonable argument, Mr. Bridges, very reasonable.
It makes some sense to me, and clearly to some of the audience here tonight.
But not enough sense.
You say — and so does Dr. Briant — that the ‘safe ’ scientists are the ones who don't concern themselves with ideological issues.
Are you sure?
Look, who should be the leaders, the individuals who make the decisions that affect the lives of ordinary people?
Shouldn't it be the thinkers, the creators of ideas?
Shouldn't it be the people who have as their driving force the desire to reveal truths about human life?
Of course it should.
But they won't.
They discover things that because they have a power for good have an equal power for bad — one can't exist without the other — and then say, ‘Here it is, do what you like with it.
It's none of our business.
We're too busy looking for more truths.’
And what happens?
Their dangerous truths are left in the hands of politicians, some of them people who are driven by little things, like the desire for personal power, and who don't understand the explosive possibilities of what they have been given; or if they understand, don't care.
The scientists and philosophers — and I think it's significant that scientific study used to be called natural philosophy — they think in a big way, about yesterday and tomorrow, about the whole great sweep of mankind in the world.
But politicians don't.
By definition, they are concerned only with the here and now.
They don't think in any sort of…of historical context.
That's why I worry about Dr. Briant and his work.’
He whirled in his chair and looked at the audience.
‘I said I wasn't here to make moral judgments, that all we wanted was to understand what this project was all about and where it is leading.
Well, I'm going to break my word.
I am going to make moral judgments.
I'm going to say what I believe, and what I'm convinced the vast majority of caring people believe.
That science can be dangerous because people are imperfect and can't be trusted with the weapons science creates.
That there is a power beyond mankind itself — and I'm not ashamed to say I trust in the existence and loving-kindness of God — that should be accepted, just as our own imperfections should be accepted.
That when someone — one  man like Dr. Briant — starts to meddle with the functions of the power that is God, disaster stares us in the face.
That our instinctive loathing for the way Dr. Briant is manipulating human life, is using a human child as a lever to open the box that holds God's secrets about life, our response, I say, is not reactionary, not the stupid fears of little men, but is born of our awareness of the dangers of knowing too much, is a God-given warning, if you like.
There must come a point at which man must stop trying to decide his own destiny, and I believe that point has come now, in our time.
But I am not saying that Dr. Briant should necessarily be stopped from making his scientific searches, for his ability to do so is as God-given as that warning.
But I do say that we, the ordinary man, must either insist he takes responsibility for what he discovers, and does concern himself with the ethics of its methods and application, or accept the responsibility to ourselves, and make our own decisions about how science is used.
We dare not shrug our shoulders and leave a great chasm into which cynical politicians might leap, and take us all to perdition with them.’
He stopped, quite sharply, staring at the audience, which stared back in dumfounded silence.
Then he rubbed his sweating face and said huskily, ‘I'm sorry.
I am here to act as a…a chairman, an impartial chairman, and I've let myself be carried away.
I'm sorry.’
And then the applause leapt into existence like a great roaring animal as people jumped up, shouting, clapping, screaming their agreement and their opposition, moving in a heaving mass.
And above their heads the monitors showed captions rolling, and the faint tinny music entwined itself into the noise, and the screens blacked.
Through the uproar Briant moved toward Gerrard and touched his shoulder, and Gerrard turned his fat gleaming face toward him.
‘Gerrard,’ George shouted above the din.
‘You're wrong, you couldn't be more wrong, but you said that with so much…with such intelligence that I must both apologize to you and compliment you.
I thought you were a…a shallow man, incapable of producing a logical argument.
But you are a thinker, even if a wrong-headed one, and I compliment you because…’
Gerrard had been looking at him with a gradually spreading grin on his face, and now he thumped George on the back with great bonhomie and beamed with immense satisfaction.
‘That's very big of you, old man, considering I made mincemeat of you.
And it was bloody good television, wasn't it?
Christ, if that doesn't keep 'em watching, nothing will.’
And he turned and moved across the dais and out of the studio, followed by his cohort of technicians and production assistants, who thumped him on the back and shouted their own compliments into his receptive ears.
And George stepped back and stared after him, feeling as though he had been slapped, and behind him Mike murmured, ‘I told you, Dr. Briant.
For a brilliant man, you can be very naïve.
J. J. has just shown you his one real skill — the way he can judge the mood of an audience and play it like a violin.
And if you, an intelligent man who can think, can be swept away by him, how do you think they've been affected?
I tell you, Dr. Briant, you've unleashed a hell of a lot more than you realize with this project of yours.
A hell of a lot more.’