

Part One THE GATHERING STORM
THE INVISIBLE TOUCH
1
ON TUESDAY 8 October 1957, a physicist was working on the No.1 ‘pile’ at the Windscale atomic energy establishment in Cumberland.
This was a crude nuclear reactor whose job was simply to produce plutonium for the manufacture of atomic bombs.
Dressed in the plant's uniform of white overalls and cap, he was conducting an exercise to release the excess energy that had built up in the honeycomb matrix of graphite blocks which surrounded the uranium nuclear fuel.
To do this, the graphite was allowed to heat up naturally without the normal flow of cooling air.
It was a procedure that had been carried out, albeit with some difficulty, on a number of previous occasions.
This time, however, the physicist could see from his instruments that it had not been totally successful.
He decided to repeat the heating exercise in an attempt to force out the energy from the graphite.
Unfortunately, the lack of any proper operating manual and the inadequate instrumentation meant that he allowed the reaction to go too far.
From that point on, the temperature inside the reactor began to rise steadily.
For most of the following day, the team of operators waited patiently for the temperature to drop.
When it didn't, they pumped air through the pile in an attempt to cool it.
Still the temperature rose.
Early the next morning, meters set on top of the 400-foot chimney, which stretched high above the reactor, recorded a dramatic rise in the level of radioactivity.
Something was clearly going wrong.
There was no way to see inside the reactor by remote observation because a scanning device had jammed.
Instead, two technicians put on special protective clothing, removed a plug and looked inside the pile.
What they saw was a blazing inferno.
The temperature had risen so high that the uranium fuel, and the graphite surrounding it, was literally burning.
‘It was so horrifying that one just went numb,’ one of them said later.
Attempts were made to push out the burning fuel with scaffolding poles.
The poles became red hot and impossible to handle.
Over the night of Thursday 10 October, the fire reached a temperature of 1,300°C and was threatening the structure of the reactor.
When pumping in carbon dioxide failed to have any effect on the blaze, a site emergency was called.
In the end, it was the fire brigade, as at Chernobyl, who were called in.
Even though there was a serious risk that its reaction with the hot burning metal would cause a hydrogen explosion, thousands of gallons of water at the highest pressure possible were pumped through the channels which held the burning fuel.
Fortunately, there was no explosion, and by Friday afternoon the fire gradually began to subside.
A total catastrophe had been averted.
Although workers had already been told to keep themselves and their  families indoors, no warning was given to people in nearby villages.
The first official announcement to the public was made on the lunchtime BBC news on the Friday.
It made no mention of a fire, and referred only to ‘overheating’.
As far as danger to the local population was concerned, it said that a ‘North East wind is blowing across the Windscale factory and is taking any radioactive dust or vapour out to sea’.
Two days later, however, there was a more serious reaction.
It was announced that milk consumption would be banned from all farms within 200 square miles around the plant.
This was said to be because of the risk of radioactive iodine emitted during the fire getting into people's thyroid glands.
Newsreel pictures showed churns full of milk being poured down the drain.
Even so, the event was treated by the mass media with an almost cavalier disregard for the real dangers.
When photos were published of one of the workers who fought the blaze, he was described half jokingly as ‘Atomic Stan’, and ‘the most radioactive man in Britain’.
It has in fact taken over thirty years for the truth about the 1957 Windscale fire to emerge, bit by bit, into the public domain.
Some of the details were withheld because of the military use of the reactor, others because of the shroud of secrecy with which the nuclear establishment, mistrustful of a prying public, has always liked to enclose its activities.
The official report of a government investigation into the fire was not even published in full until 1988.
Publication of an internal inquiry was also suppressed by the government; one board member of the Atomic Energy Authority, which ran Windscale, had warned that it would ‘inevitably provide ammunition for all those who had doubts of one kind or another about the development and the future of nuclear power’.
What is now clear is that the fire posed a serious hazard to the health of people not just in Cumberland but throughout the path of a radioactive cloud which swept south-east from Windscale across England towards Europe.
The National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) which advises the government on radiation hazards, now estimates that up to a hundred people will have died from the fallout.
Many more will have suffered from cancers brought on by one of the radioactive substances released.
Some of the deaths are blamed on polonium, an element whose presence during the accident was deliberately kept secret at the time because of its military sensitivity.
Others set the death toll higher, at up to 1,000 fatalities.
Since it is impossible to positively identify such victims, the variations reflect different hypotheses on the relationship between radiation exposure and health risk.
The risk was undoubtedly greatest for those living closest to the plant, particularly in the village of Seascale only a mile away.
As the fire shed its microscopic radioactive dust over their houses and gardens, they continued to walk about, blissfully unaware.
One Windscale worker who  lived in Seascale at the time said he recorded radioactive contamination on his son's shoes which was almost six times the level used to signify a hazard inside his laboratory.
As we shall see later, the ongoing health of children in Seascale has become a critical issue for the nuclear industry.
But what is equally incredible is that the inhabitants of Seascale had been suffering from the Windscale piles for several years before the fire.
Unknown even to the operators, some of the rods of uranium fuel which were supposed to fall from the back of the reactor into a storage pond had instead tumbled into the channel which led up to the tall chimney.
Their leaking radioactivity was being swept upwards by the air current and, because of gaps in the filters at the top of the stacks, out into the atmosphere.
Tiny particles of uranium oxide, containing radioactive isotopes of caesium, strontium and plutonium, had been scattered in their millions over the surrounding countryside.
It was only when two alert Windscale scientists found hot spots of radioactivity in their gardens that the authorities were made aware of the problem.
A report by the Medical Research Council concluded that the levels were not a hazard, however, and the pair were warned to keep their mouths shut.
Inquisitive journalists were told that any contamination was so negligible that it couldn't be measured, a clear piece of disinformation.
At the plant itself, there was enough concern for a special protective suit to be designed.
Wearing this, workers could be allowed inside to retrieve the leaking fuel rods.
But even after this exercise the contamination continued, only to be superseded by the climactic fire.
It is now estimated that about twenty kilograms of uranium escaped through the pile chimneys, posing a risk even greater than that from the short-lived 1957 accident.
Looking back, this extraordinary sequence of events carries all the hallmarks of the institutional deception which has fuelled mistrust of the nuclear industry.
The impetus of the scientific imperative was followed by technical mistakes, followed by a disastrous failure, followed by official reassurances — and only eventually concluded by official backtracking in the face of outside scepticism.
But at the time, none of this truth was known.
The significance of the Windscale fire was quickly lost in the euphoria surrounding the development of the exciting new source of energy that nuclear power had become.
The white heat of nuclear technology promised to bring cheap, clean electricity into the nation's homes at the flick of a switch.
Why worry about a bit of radiation?
2
The operation of a nuclear power station to produce electricity is in fact deceptively straightforward.
Its basis is the naturally occurring substance  uranium, an element which under certain circumstances can be made to become so unstable as to produce an explosive force.
This is the essence of an atomic bomb.
In a nuclear reactor this force is controlled to generate heat instead.
To achieve this, uranium-based fuel is packed into vertical channels inside a cylindrical ‘core’.
A large nuclear reactor will contain hundreds, if not thousands of rods filled with uranium fuel.
Surrounding the fuel is a ‘moderator’— in some reactors a solid substance, like graphite, in others, purified water.
This moderates the nuclear reaction by literally slowing it down.
The result is that the uranium's instability is controlled within a ‘chain reaction’ in order to release a steady supply of intense heat.
The reaction can be ‘shut down’ completely by inserting special control rods through identified channels into the core.
The heat produced in the reactor is removed continuously during its operation by the mechanical flow of a gas or liquid through the area of the core.
Piped from the core to a heat exchanger, the high temperature of this ‘coolant’— over 600°C in some British reactors — is directly transferred to tubes carrying water, turning the water to steam.
The steam produced by this process is in turn used to drive large turbines which generate electricity in exactly the same way as in any other conventional power station.
The most important by-product of generating electricity by this method is ionizing radiation.
As the uranium reacts its radioactivity produces unstable atoms.
These in turn can destabilize living organisms, damaging their cell structure.
It is a process which can be measured and monitored, but not seen.
To protect power station workers from this invisible threat the reactor core has to be encased behind many metres of thick concrete.
However, some radiation will still find its way around even these substantial barriers, increasing the exposure to the workforce above what they would expect from the ‘natural’ radiation given off by the sun or the earth.
Harmful quantities of radiation are also released both before and after the uranium fuel enters the power station.
In the uranium mines, workers breathe in radioactive dust as they dig out the metal ore which contains the valuable element.
Radiation is released during the handling and treatment of radioactive materials and as they are transported to and from nuclear sites.
And when the used rods of uranium are put through a chemical process designed to separate unpleasant waste from still usable fuel, as happens at the Sellafield plant in Cumbria, a whole range of radioactive pollutants is generated.
As at every power station, some of the less radioactive of these are officially allowed to be discharged into the atmosphere and the sea.
The constant risk from this radiation means that a complex system of  precautions has to be maintained around every nuclear power site.
In the immediate vicinity, sensitive monitors relay readings back to the central control room.
Further afield, special collectors which look like old-fashioned lampshades on poles are used to filter dust out of the atmosphere.
Regular checks have to be made on milk from local dairy farms, as well as grass and crops, even fish and seaweed if the station is situated by the sea.
Samples are collected and analysed in a laboratory.
The workers themselves wear badges which indicate the exposure level.
A large proportion of the people who work at a nuclear plant — a total of several hundred for each reactor — are concerned with ‘health physics’, the official description for radiation protection.
At the extreme, nuclear power poses the risk that if the reaction inside the core should get out of control, or even if there was just the failure of a vital pipe or valve, even larger quantities of radiation would enter the human environment.
It is this ultimate danger which, probably more than anything else, has surrounded the nuclear industry with its following of fearful spectators.
In fact, the precise effect that radiation has when it comes into contact with the environment in general, and the human body in particular , has been the subject of intense scientific investigation.
To start with, there is no one single way in which it operates.
Radiation comes in three main forms — gamma, beta and alpha.
Gamma rays are the least powerful but can penetrate through even thick concrete.
Beta particles can penetrate the skin but can be stopped by metal.
Alpha particles, the strongest of the three, would be stopped by a barrier of paper, but could be dangerous if ingested in food or dust.
It is known biologically that radiation of all types changes the structure of cells.
The results can include cancer and genetic damage to a developing foetus.
But what part of the body is affected can depend on which radioactive element the person is exposed to, and also which ‘isotope’— a specific atomic configuration of that element.
Each isotope is given a different number.
Caesium 137, for example, which was released by the Chernobyl explosion, emits both gamma and beta rays and concentrates in muscles and the reproductive organs.
Iodine 131, also a gamma and beta emitter, is particularly hazardous to the thyroid gland.
Plutonium 239, an alpha emitter, affects the bone structure.
Each isotope also has a ‘half life’— an indication of how fast its radioactivity will decay.
These range from a matter of hours to thirty years for Caesium 137 and 24,000 years for Plutonium 239.
Much of the data on the health effects of radiation has come from studying the surviving victims of the 1945 Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs, where the Japanese people's exposure to radiation was of an extremely large dose in a matter of seconds.
This is quite different from  the lengthy exposure to much lower levels which people receive from the nuclear industry.
Experts continue to disagree about how to extrapolate from one to the other, although it is generally accepted that even the smallest dose carries a health risk.
It was the discovery by Dr Alice Stewart, for example, that the radiation from hospital X-rays given to pregnant women could increase the risk of leukaemia in their babies which contributed to severe limits being placed on their usage.
It is also true that the growing body of scientific evidence has had one effect in that the agreed levels of exposure to both people who work in the industry or who live in the vicinity of power stations have become steadily more stringent since the early days when it was thought unnecessary to warn military personnel that there was any risk in their presence a matter of miles from an atomic test explosion.
Uncertainty and scientific dispute is compounded by the fact that radioactive contamination is different from many other types of pollution.
You can see the smoke from a factory chimney or the oil slick menacing your favourite beach.
You can smell the fumes from the traffic or the leaking gas pipe.
But you cannot sense radiation in any other way than by measuring it with a sensitive instrument.
This is one reason why the crackling sound of the geiger counter has become such a potent symbol of the dangers.
What is beyond doubt is that just as much as the nuclear scientists have tried to point to a superficially clean industrial process, symbolized by the white Windscale coats, so the public's fear has centred on the insidious threat of its invisible touch.
3
For over twenty years from the development of the first military reactors at the end of the Second World War, the nuclear industry continued to experiment and expand against a background of general public approval.
Concern about radiation focused on the fallout from atomic bomb tests, not the development of ‘Atoms for Peace’.
Although expansion in Britain was slowed by indecision, American enthusiasm for nuclear construction reached a peak in the 1960s.
In the space of just four years — 1965 to 1968 — seventy-four nuclear plants were ordered by companies and state electrical authorities around the United States.
Their total potential capacity was 62,000 megawatts (MW) of electricity, as much as the entire present output of every power station in Britain.
By 1970, eleven countries around the world had joined the prestigious nuclear power race.
Three years later the tally had risen to seventeen countries, between them operating 167 nuclear reactors.
With more and more reactors coming on stream every year, it was inevitable that problems would begin to occur.
There are failures and  mistakes in every industrial process.
The trouble was, as the Windscale fire had shown, once the nuclear reaction had got out of control, then those problems could become extremely serious indeed.
The first major accident in an American nuclear reactor occurred at a small prototype military plant in Idaho in 1961.
Three young soldiers were killed instantly when an explosion inside the reactor forced it literally through the roof of its housing.
One of the men was pinned to the ceiling of the building by an ejected control rod.
The radioactivity to which they were exposed was so powerful that the dead men's bodies were themselves a radiation hazard.
They had to be transported from the plant in lead-lined coffins and buried under thick concrete.
Fourteen other workers involved in the subsequent clean-up operation also received extremely high radiation doses.
Like Windscale, this was a design prompted by the urgency of military demands, and there were other incidents in experimental plants.
It wasn't until the 1970s, however, that accidents began to occur in reactors designed on a production line basis to provide a major source of electricity.
On 22 March 1975 two electricians were checking for air leaks beside electricity cable ducts in the Browns Ferry power station in Alabama — then the world's largest operating nuclear plant.
Such leaks were important because they could allow radiation to escape.
Having sealed one hole with foam plastic, one of the electricians decided to see whether there was still any draught coming through.
He used a familiar and homely test — a lighted candle.
Unfortunately, the candle had untoward consequences: it ignited the plastic and started a small fire in the electrical circuits.
Worse, although carbon dioxide was used to extinguish the initial blaze, the fire had by that time spread into the adjacent reactor building.
The effect of the burning power cables was to send much of the instrumentation around the reactor into confusion.
Cooling water pumps were incapacitated, and even though the twin reactors were shut down, it took many hours for the operators to successfully control the residual heat in their cores.
Later investigation showed that over 1,600 cables had been damaged, a third of them concerned with safety.
News of such accidents, although they received considerably less attention that they would now, still began to alarm both official and unofficial watchdog organizations.
In the United States, prompted by new legal rights to challenge developments on environmental grounds, critics of nuclear power had already begun to object to the licensing of new reactors.
When this failed, they took their cases to the courts.
Sixty nuclear opposition groups from all over the country supported the Union of Concerned Scientists when it presented evidence at official hearings about weaknesses in the emergency cooling systems designed to stop a reactor overheating.
Then, in 1977, came the first example of mass direct action in America.
Two thousand people occupied the site of a proposed nuclear power station at Seabrook on the New Hampshire coast.
They called themselves the Clamshell Alliance after the local clam fishers, who had been particularly upset by the plan.
Over 1,400 of the occupiers were arrested by the National Guard, and kept in prison for two weeks, treatment which in itself won them considerable sympathy.
The Clamshell style of demonstration — carefully planned, non-violent protest with a deliberate avoidance of confrontation with the authorities — was quickly followed at other reactor sites.
There were soon Catfish, Abalone and Conch Shell Alliances pursuing the marine life tag.
In Europe the protesters had also started taking to the streets or, more often than not, the fields and forests.
The first power station in the dramatic expansion of nuclear power in France (starting from a 1969 decision to construct American water-cooled reactors rather than the French gas-cooled design) was built at Fessenheim in Alsace, close to the border with West Germany.
But it wasn't until 1975, when the German authorities announced their intention to build their own nuclear plant on the opposite side of the river Rhine, near the town of Wyhl, that people from both sides of the border came together to protest.
Over several weeks of confrontation between thousands of demonstrators and police, who were backed by armoured cars with water cannons, the site was occupied, reclaimed by the police and then reoccupied.
A Friendship House was constructed in the middle of the woods and a ‘free university’ opened.
The occupation lasted nine months.
In 1976, after hearing from experts on both sides, a court in Freiburg decided that the Wyhl plant should not be built because of the risk of a serious accident.
In the following two years there were violent confrontations at prospective nuclear sites throughout Europe.
Tear gas was used against demonstrators at Brokdorf and Grohnde in West Germany; at Kalkar a moat was dug to keep out an army of protesters.
One man was killed when tens of thousands of people gathered at Creys-Malville in France, the site of a new design of ‘fast breeder’ reactor (see Chapter Three).
Even larger numbers opposed an American-style ‘light water’ reactor being built at Lemoniz in Spain.
One of the most effective mobilizations of public opinion was in Denmark.
As soon as nuclear power was first suggested as part of the country's Energy Plan in 1976, a massive publicity campaign was launched to influence the government.
Spearheaded by the OOA (Organization for Information about Nuclear Power), 800,000 newspapers were distributed and 170,000 petition signatures collected calling for a postponement of the decision.
The campaign was also backed by  Denmark's equivalent of the Daily Mirror .
Since then, OOA has continued to press the anti-nuclear case, including the mass production of its famous ‘smiling sun’ badges with the slogan ‘Nuclear Power, No Thanks’, now translated into dozens of different languages.
There is still no nuclear power in Denmark.
In Britain, the beginnings of protest were quieter.
Plans to expand the Windscale site with a major new development led to the first setpiece confrontation between the burgeoning antinuclear movement and the nuclear industry across the polite tables of a public inquiry.
The hearings ran for a hundred days during the summer and autumn of 1977.
I shall return to the issues which they raised in Chapter Two.
But it was the failure of the Windscale Inquiry to represent adequately the protesters' arguments which encouraged the first example of direct action in this country.
This centred on the ambitious proposal by the South of Scotland Electricity Board to build up to four nuclear power stations on a stretch of farmland outside the town of Dunbar, thirty miles east of Edinburgh.
The site was called Torness Point.
These were the first nuclear stations to be built anywhere in the United Kingdom for some time, and they attracted special attention.
The first major demonstration at Torness, in 1978, was organized by the fledgling Scottish Campaign to Resist the Atomic Menace(SCRAM), whose name was a clever play on nuclear jargon for an emergency shutdown.
About 4,000 people marched along the twisting country road to the site, led by a traditional pipe band in full regalia.
The Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior shadowed the march from the sea, unloading a wind turbine to join a display of alternative energy equipment set up amid a cluster of marquees and caravans on what was then a rolling green field.
The only disturbance came when people tried to stop the police arresting a protester for smoking dope, ironically whilst the training session in ‘nonviolent direct action’ was still in full swing on the beach.
‘We felt we were creating the antinuclear movement from scratch, says Pete Roche, now an editor of SCRAM's bi-monthly Safe Energy Journal , first published at the time and an invaluable guide to the growth of opposition.
The somewhat carefree atmosphere of this event was dampened a few months later when the Electricity Board's contractors prepared to start work on levelling the ground for the new power station.
Supporters of the Torness Alliance, committed to frustrating the building plans, had occupied and refurbished a derelict cottage on the edge of the site and renamed it after the local Half Moon Bay.
Their symbolic action was swiftly curtailed when the occupants were given ten minutes to leave and, despite their bravest efforts, watched the waiting bulldozers push the building over a cliff into the sea.
The following week, several hundred people arrived to obstruct the continuing work of the bulldozers by sitting down in front of them, climbing into the buckets of mechanical diggers and occupying the hole they had begun to excavate.
Dunbar police cells were quickly filled with those arrested.
But when a policeman directing traffic on the adjacent main A1 road was badly injured by a passing lorry, it was decided to call off the action.
In typically British style, it was a protester who was on hand to give the man immediate first aid treatment.
Against this background, a ‘Torness Declaration’ was prepared to unite all opponents of the scheme.
This summed up the feelings behind the protest.
‘Nuclear power threatens all living creatures and their natural environment,’ it read.
‘It concentrates power in the hands of a few, necessitates a military-style secrecy and undermines the principles of human liberty.
A nuclear power station at Torness would be another irrevocable step towards a future of which we want no part.’
It was clear from this that people's anger was not just directed at the dangers of the technology, but at the centralized military-industrial complex which had imposed it.
An even larger protest was held the following year when 10,000 people gathered, many of them climbing a staircase of straw bales built over the ten-foot high barbed wire fence around the site.
Copies of an ‘Occupiers Handbook’ had been distributed in advance, with advice on peaceful protest and songs to sing.
Inside, some oil was set on fire and equipment damaged, prompting an argument about nonviolence.
The French cellist Paul Tortellier was among those who symbolically scaled the fence.
He later played a benefit concert in aid of the protest.
However, work on building Torness power station still continued.
SCRAM found itself caught in the middle between those who felt nonviolent protest was the only way and those who really wanted to see the whole place go up in smoke.
The organization withdrew to more conventional protesting.
Pete Roche now believes that if the Scottish Miners Union leader Mick McGahey — a communist who supported the then official party policy of ‘nuclear power with copper-bottomed safety’— had encouraged greater trade union involvement, a more substantial opposition could have been mounted.
Such dramatic attempts at direct action were not the only ways in which people had begun to protest at the development of nuclear power.
There were an increasing number of scientists, engineers, doctors, economists and statisticians who were prepared to challenge the industry on its own terms.
Some of them even came from within the nuclear fold, concerned that the truth should be told from the inside out.
They gave evidence and opinions at the public inquiries and official investigations which were held into specific projects and general policy, the first of which in Britain  was the 1977 Windscale event.
Their analyses provided vital ammunition to the antinuclear campaigners.
There were also the nascent nationally organized environmental pressure groups which have since played such an important role in influencing the political agenda.
Friends of the Earth, originally an American organization, opened its London office in 1970.
Within a few years it had 200 local groups, had organized the first London rally against nuclear power (in 1977), and had effectively intervened in the debate about British nuclear policy.
Greenpeace also had American origins, and a different philosophy of direct intervention to stop abuses of the environment.
It developed a fleet of ships, headed by the Rainbow Warrior , from which it could play the much-publicized role of unarmed protector of the world's defenceless ecology.
In 1977 it launched a British arm and began to campaign against everything from seal culling to nuclear weapons testing.
But against the almost universal acceptance within the established political networks that nuclear energy was ‘safe and sound’, there was a sense of powerlessness which inevitably drove people to the barricades.
Those who got involved in the growing protest movement across Europe and America were not conventional political activists.
They were a mix of people who had taken on board the new concern about the environment — from middle class professionals to peace activists to students to local residents.
There was also particularly strong support from women, one writer in a protest magazine of the period describing nuclear power as ‘the ultimate tyranny of male technology’.
But the most common motive for protest was a mixture of worry about the dangers, mistrust of uncontrolled technological advance, and anger at the way the authorities were ignoring public opinion.
As SCRAM's magazine put it in 1978:
‘It is no surprise that people are disillusioned with democracy and very angry.
It is no surprise that people are prepared to risk their lives before the bulldozers.
There are no conventional channels left.
All that is open to the responsible and concerned citizen is direct action aimed at preventing the work from going ahead.’
This growing undercurrent of public protest was to prove a critical factor in the crisis which eventually engulfed the nuclear power developers.
The invasion of the Torness site was therefore a landmark in British opposition to nuclear power, the first serious example of civil disobedience.
Yet it wasn't a success.
The beast was still very much alive and kicking.
But the 1970s also saw another issue begin to emerge on the agenda of the expanding British nuclear industry.
This was the question of what would happen to the material left over when the uranium rods had finished producing their electricity, when the exciting part of the process was over.
Here, it proved much less easy to bulldoze the problem aside.
THE WASTE LEGACY
1
EVERY YEAR in midsummer, a 300-foot cargo ship had left Sharpness Docks in Gloucestershire.
Apart from a few policemen patrolling the quayside, the event was unremarkable.
But instead of the usual payload of gravel or iron ore, its hold was this time packed with several thousand colour-coded oil drums.
Its destination was not another port, but the deep Atlantic Ocean.
Once it reached a designated zone about 500 miles off Land's End, the ship hove to and special tipping platforms were assembled along one side.
One by one, the concrete weighted drums were winched up and then sent crashing into the sea.
They were expected to take about twenty minutes to sink to the bottom.
The operation took several days to complete.
Inside each drum was a designated quantity of radioactive waste.
According to the nuclear industry, the two-mile depth of the ocean at that point and the sheer volume of water surrounding the drums would be enough to dilute their contents to meaningless radiation levels even if, as was expected, the drums eventually burst open.
To others, creating a radioactive graveyard on the ocean floor was irresponsible pollution of the environment.
Until the late 1970s, this annual event occurred with a minimum of publicity.
Britain was one of a number of European countries to take part in the annual sea dumping, which included the disposal of radioactive materials used in hospitals and research laboratories as well as waste from nuclear power.
Although there had been some dissenters, international approval was given through the London Dumping Convention, an annually reviewed agreement signed by forty-six countries.
In 1978, however, the peace of the routine trip out from Sharpness was rudely shattered.
Greenpeace, the environmental pressure group which had already made a name for itself by chasing whalers on the high seas, sent its own vessel, the Rainbow Warrior , to shadow the nuclear ship out  into the Atlantic.
As the crew began to unload the waste drums, inflatable dinghies were deliberately positioned underneath.
This was a particularly hazardous venture.
With the nuclear ship constantly manoeuvring to avoid the dinghies, the crew refused to stop dropping the drums over the side.
Often they would hit the water perilously close to the tiny boats.
‘It was frightening,’ says Peter Wilkinson, then the Greenpeace organizer of anti-nuclear campaigns.
‘You've got this notion that there's a drum weighing three tonnes above you and it could suddenly fall.
But there's so much happening, with water spray and people shouting and screaming, that you don't think about it.
At times the drums were missing us by inches, and there's this man on board running up and down shouting, ‘It's your funeral’.
We really thought someone was going to get killed.’
Fortunately nobody was, and the Greenpeace boat returned in successive years to play the same dangerous game of cat and mouse on the ocean waves.
Meanwhile, Sharpness Docks themselves became an annual security zone after the dockside cranes had been occupied by opponents of the dumping.
Dispute about the safety of the operation led to dockers being asked to volunteer for the work of loading the ship.
Police divers were sent down to check the vessel's hull for possible sabotage.
In 1980 the protesters even took the daring step of erecting a scaffolding tower across the path of the train carrying waste barrels on their way to the docks.
The diesel locomotive came to a halt a matter of feet from the structure; eight people were fined £2,500 and spent a week in prison.
Greenpeace and others also publicized what they saw as the insanity of dumping radioactive material on the sea-bed where it could readily enter the human food chain through fish or other marine organisms.
Research into a disused waste dump off the Californian coast had shown that the artificial habitat created by the drums had actually attracted fish to the area.
One specimen was found to have 5,000 times the expected concentration of plutonium in its flesh.
Although the Atlantic dump site was supposed to be of low fishing interest, the Rainbow Warrior had regularly seen fishing boats in the area.
The underwater explorer Jacques Cousteau was among those who lent his name to the protest.
‘It is time to stop considering the sea as the universal garbage can,’ he announced.
During my own research into sea dumping at the time, I was told that in 1976 a team from the Atomic Energy Authority had been called in to decontaminate the Topaz , a ship used to dump Belgian waste, after the wrong type of drum container had been used.
One drum had burst open on impact with the water, leaving plastic bottles of waste floating on the surface.
Even the small boat used to collect up the bottles had to be destroyed.
On another occasion the captain in charge of the British dump  had actually lost his way, dropping the drums in shallow water off the French coast by mistake.
None of this added to confidence in the authorities, reassurances about safety.
But the battle over the sea dumping of nuclear waste, dramatic as it became, represented only a small fraction of a much larger problem.
For whilst other industries could relatively easily dispose of their waste materials, this was out of the question for most of the nuclear industry's leftovers.
Strict regulations surrounded their handling, treatment and movement.
At the extreme, some nuclear waste was so intensely radioactive that it had to be kept isolated from the human environment for thousands of years.
The idea that an industry could leave behind a polluting aftermath for longer than civilization has been in existence has made the waste issue one of the strongest strands in the antinuclear case.
In more recent years, as the first nuclear stations near the end of their working lives, attention has focused on the waste created when a nuclear power station is shut down for good, the process called decommissioning (see Chapter Six).
But, in fact, nuclear waste is produced the whole way through the ‘nuclear fuel cycle’, even when the reactors are still operating at full power.
According to its radioactive content, it is designated by the industry as either low, intermediate or high level.
Low-level waste includes such things as clothing, paper or building materials which have become contaminated by radioactivity during their use at a nuclear plant.
Its danger to people handling it is relatively low, but it still needs careful and secure storage.
It was mostly material like this which was being dumped in the mid-Atlantic.
Intermediate-level waste covers disposable parts of the plant's insides, such as filters used to clean routine discharges into the air or sea, ‘glove boxes’ where materials are handled from behind glass by remote control, or the metal canisters which surround the uranium fuel.
Some of this can be 1,000 times more radioactive than low-level waste, and its activity will last centuries rather than decades.
The most intensely radioactive is high-level waste — typically a thousand times more potent than the intermediate level.
This comes from the cocktail of radioactive isotopes produced when the uranium fuel is ‘irradiated’ inside the reactor.
Among them is the heavily toxic plutonium.
In Britain, this used fuel with its lethal inventory is either carefully stored or sent for ‘reprocessing’ at the Sellafield plant in Cumbria, a procedure I shall describe in more detail later.
But the liquid form in which the high-level waste is currently maintained at Sellafield also has another unique feature: as its radioactive components decay, they constantly generate heat.
The sixteen giant stainless steel tanks in which this waste is kept have to be constantly agitated and cooled to stop the liquid either precipitating or becoming too hot.
Some scientists have argued that these  tanks in themselves present as great a risk of a catastrophic accident as any nuclear reactor.
In 1957 just such an accident did in fact occur at a high-level nuclear waste dump at Kyshtym, in the Ural Mountains, when the cooling system failed in a concrete vessel containing eighty tonnes of highly active liquid waste.
Although it was known that something serious had occurred, the details were kept secret for decades.
In 1989, the Soviet authorities finally admitted that 15,000 square kilometres of land had been contaminated and more than 10,000 people evacuated.
The ultimate question, however, was what would happen to the steadily accumulating stockpiles of nuclear waste in the long term.
Because Britain had been producing nuclear power longer than most other countries, this was a particularly acute problem.
The industry itself has estimated that 1.75 million cubic metres of low- and intermediate-level wastes will have been produced in this country by the year 2030.
About two-thirds of this will have come from nuclear power, the rest from research and medical uses.
By the late 1970s only two dumping methods had been devised.
The lowest-level wastes could either be sent for sea disposal or dumped on land at a special site at Drigg, near Sellafield.
But the sea dump was facing regular obstruction, and the Drigg site was approaching its potential capacity.
Where would the future wastes go, and especially the most dangerously radioactive?
As Willie McRae, a prominent Scottish antinuclear campaigner, once remarked with unpleasant directness: ‘Ye dinnae keep pigs until ye ken where tae pit the shit.’
The controversy was given an authoritative boost by the 1976 report of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, chaired by Sir Brian Flowers, Rector of Imperial College and a part-time member of the Atomic Energy Authority.
This provided a detailed analysis of the current state of play on waste disposal, offering little comfort to the industry.
‘The picture that emerges from our review of radioactive waste management is in many ways a disquieting one,’ the Commission noted with cautious understatement, ‘indicating insufficient appreciation of long-term requirements either by government departments or other organizations concerned.’
Particular criticism was levelled at the industry for planning massive expansion of the nuclear power programme whilst paying scant attention to the waste which would accumulate.
Flowers concluded with a much-quoted dictum: ‘There should be no commitment to a large programme of nuclear fission power until it has been demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that a method exists to ensure the safe containment of long-lived, highly radioactive waste for the indefinite future.’
This was a tall order, especially the concept of an assurance that would  last for ever.
What scientist could make such a promise?
But, taking its cue from the Flowers Report, the industry began to look with renewed vigour for somewhere to get rid of its most troublesome detritus.
Various imaginative plans had already been suggested for dealing with the most difficult problem, the high-level waste.
These included shooting it into space on board a rocket so that its deadly payload would disappear into infinity.
But the risk of rocket failure was considered too high, potentially bringing the radioactivity raining back into the earth's atmosphere.
Another idea was to allow the hot containers to melt gradually beneath the vast polar ice cap.
With this, however, there was concern that, over the years, the radioactivity would still find its way into the oceans through a network of recently discovered lakes beneath the ice.
This left two front runners.
A specially engineered ‘repository’— in effect a massive network of tunnels and shafts — would have to be constructed either deep underground on land or under the bed of the sea.
In the late 1970s geologists were commissioned by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, the government funded research body then in charge of nuclear waste research, to locate suitable sites for a subterranean repository.
Eventually they identified a shortlist of about twenty areas where the rock formations were considered suitably stable and dry to keep the nuclear waste containers intact over the long timescales envisaged.
But although test boreholes were successfully sunk at Altnabreac in Caithness in November 1975, the programme quickly ran into opposition elsewhere.
The thought of thousands of tonnes of radioactive waste being buried under their favourite stretch of countryside filled local residents with horror.
Nobody trusted the geologists' claims that this was simply a series of experiments to see whether the underground structure was suitable in principle: everybody believed that the waste dump would be excavated under their patch.
The growing mistrust with which the nuclear industry was surrounding itself now had a clear target.
One of the sites chosen was a particularly spectacular peak called Mullwharchar in the Galloway Hills of South Ayrshire, whose barren, windswept slopes rose to the south of the bleakly named Loch Doon.
To the geologists this was ideal territory — a solid chunk of Caledonian Granite into which they planned to sink over twenty-five deep boreholes to assess the substrata.
To the locals it was a wilderness they would rather have preserved for the hawks, the salmon and the mountaineers.
A pamphlet produced about the issue was headlined ‘Poison In Our Hills’.
A caravan was parked in the area to give early warning of any approaches.
When the local Kyle and Carrick District Council objected to the drilling application, the Atomic Energy Authority appealed and a public inquiry was held in February 1980.
During the four weeks of hearings, the  Authority admitted that if a waste store was eventually built under Mullwharchar, it could involve a continuous mining operation extending over fifty years.
It would be like building the Channel Tunnel in the Scottish Lowlands, only with a particularly unpleasant traffic.
Test drilling was also planned in Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Somerset and on two sites in the Cheviot Hills, nearly always (to try to avoid objection) using publicly owned land.
But everywhere there was active opposition.
In Wales, even the initial sallies of experts from the Institute of Geological Sciences met with belligerent disruption.
When two geologists were discovered surveying the hills north of Machynlleth, their landrover was chased along mountain roads until cornered by angry farmers.
A policeman called to deal with the fracas suggested that it might be best if the nervous pair took the hint and left.
Meanwhile, the contents of their briefcase had been quietly photocopied.
On another occasion, the flat rented by a suspected investigator was occupied by protesters; he turned out to be a geologist working on a completely different project.
The offices of the Forestry Commission, which had co-operated with the survey teams, were also invaded.
Eventually, the Welsh opponents of waste dumping achieved almost legendary status, local action groups even calling themselves Madryn, which means a cunning fox.
Opposition to the test drilling was not simply informed by fear, or obstinate blocking of any development in the countryside.
Professor Ivan Tolstoy, himself a geologist, was one of the scientific experts who argued that there were enough uncertainties — from the cracking of rocks during an earthquake to the build-up of subterranean water channels — to make the choice of a burial site both unquantifiable and unpredictable.
He explained, ‘Successful disposal of high-level waste requires total isolation from the biosphere for hundreds of thousands of years, time-spans exceeding by a huge factor anything within our technological experience.
I know enough about geophysics to say that these people are lying through their teeth when they claim they can eventually guarantee long-term safety underground.’
The Welsh campaign was actively supported by Don Arnott, a retired nuclear scientist who had spent most of his life working on the uses of radioactivity in medicine.
Arnott was able to challenge the Atomic Energy Authority experts on their own terms and expose their weaknesses.
‘The most disturbing feature of the underground repository is not simply that an accident might occur,’ he said at the time, ‘but that if it did, we might never know until its consequences reached the surface — maybe decades later.’
Those consequences could include serious contamination of the land and drinking water.
In December 1981, the government decided to back down.
Tom  King, then Local Government Minister, announced that no further geological investigations would be carried out in any of the selected areas.
The appeal by the Atomic Energy Authority against the Mullwharchar refusal was dismissed.
Officially, the reason given was that it now seemed more sensible to store the highly active waste above ground for at least fifty years before disposing of it, probably in the form of glass blocks, and meanwhile allowing more of its intense heat to dissipate.
Unofficially, it was clear that the scientists had been sent back to their drawing boards.
Whilst the search for a high-level waste burial site had been shelved, a climax was also being reached over the vexed issue of sea dumping.
After intense lobbying, the pressure of opposition was eventually brought home to the London Dumping Convention.
At its 1983 meeting a moratorium was agreed whilst further scientific research was carried out.
At first, the British intended to carry on regardless with that year's dump, but were forced to back down after a concerted blacking of the cargo by trade unions.
Most crucially, the National Union of Seamen refused to allow any of its members on board the ship.
Two years later the moratorium was confirmed, although it has never become a formal agreement.
It was still one of the first clear successes for the British antinuclear campaigners.
The banning of the annual sea dump brought the issue of nuclear waste disposal into even sharper focus.
With nowhere but the limited Drigg dump near Sellafield for low-level waste, and nowhere at all for intermediate-level, the authorities turned once more to mainland Britain to find an acceptable ‘long term’ solution.
To give the exercise a renewed impetus they also established a new organization to bring together all the main bodies concerned with handling the waste problem.
It was called the Nuclear Industry Radioactive Waste Executive, or NIREX for short.
NIREX quickly announced its intention to investigate two specific sites.
One, considered suitable for intermediate-level waste, was a disused anhydrite mine near Billingham in Cleveland owned by the chemicals company ICI.
This was particularly attractive because the presence of anhydrite was a sign of the absence of water — which could potentially corrode the waste containers.
NIREX planned to construct a vast network of tunnels and caves over 300 feet under the ground.
The other site was at Elstow in Bedfordshire, where it was intended to bury low-level waste in twenty-metre deep trenches, and then cover it in concrete.
Both plans immediately attracted massive opposition.
Packed meetings of BAND (Billingham Against Nuclear Dumping) were chaired by the local vicar and the group was supported by all the local political parties and MPs.
Apart from conventional protests, Greenpeace mountaineers scaled the twin 350-foot towers of a nearby power station to  straddle them with a giant banner.
Over 80,000 people signed a petition which was delivered to Downing Street.
But most crucial was the fact that ICI itself became sceptical that this development was good for either the site or its image.
In the end the company, under huge pressure from the local community, refused permission for the NIREX surveyors to even make an initial survey of the mine galleries.
After fifteen months of heated debate, Billingham was abandoned.
For NIREX, the great white hope of the nuclear industry's waste management policy, this was hardly an auspicious start.
Undeterred however, it decided on a second offensive, this time confined to a search for a low-level waste dump where the material would be buried in shallow trenches.
Because of the pressure on Drigg this was the most urgent requirement, and it was hoped that it would attract less opposition than the Billingham mine.
If the public could be persuaded to accept the lowest-level nuclear waste in their backyard, then maybe the stakes could be increased.
After a trawl through its shortlist, a further three prospective sites were added to the already chosen Elstow.
These were at Bradwell in Essex, Fulbeck in Lincolnshire and Killingholme in South Humberside.
To avoid the problems encountered with ICI, NIREX had ensured that all these sites were in sympathetic ownership.
It had also been granted Special Development Orders by the government in order to bypass planning permission for its investigations.
But when convoys of vehicles arrived at the sites to start their planned test drilling in August 1986 they met a blockade of people sitting in the road.
There was little banner-waving or rhetoric, just a classic example of polite English stubbornness — complete with children, dogs, prams and united linked arms.
The same scenes were repeated on the television news for days in succession.
What NIREX faced was a complete lack of credibility: the public mood was one in which almost anything was preferable to a nuclear dump in their backyard, however low the radioactivity.
Although access was eventually gained to the sites by obtaining court injunctions, the battle for hearts and minds was already lost.
Of crucial importance, in the end, was the fact that all four areas were in Conservative-held parliamentary constituencies.
Three of the MPs were cabinet ministers.
Led by John Wakeham, then the government's Chief Whip and whose seat included Bradwell, they publicly opposed the dumps, no doubt fearful that the issue might sweep away their majorities.
With only six weeks to run before the 1987 general election, the NIREX plans were unceremoniously junked.
The industry has always claimed that this was a purely technical decision without any political overtones.
But it was made so hastily that not even the government's advisory committee on waste management was consulted; one member of the committee, Professor John Greenings, said he was considering resigning  in protest.
The Labour Party's environment spokesman, Dr David Clark, described the government's decision as ‘a squalid attempt to save themselves from electoral embarrassment’.
Having been defeated by politics, the NIREX managers decided to employ some of their own.
With a mixture of public relations and desperation, they attempted to turn the situation on its head.
Instead of forcing their own decisions on a clearly reluctant public, they offered the public the opportunity to make the choice.
In a glossy brochure entitled ‘The Way Forward’, they set out three different versions of underground repositories.
They promised a ‘Rolls Royce’ solution to the problem — no expense spared.
The choices were accompanied by a map of the British Isles showing swathes of coloured areas in which the subterranean geology could be suitable for such a dump.
The Way Forward quickly turned into a retreat.
On the very same day as its official launch, three environmental groups — Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and Cumbrians Opposed to a Radioactive Environment — presented their own solution to the waste dilemma.
Instead of burying the problem, with the horrific potential for its future disturbance by everything from earthquakes to a fresh ice age, they demanded that the waste should be stored on the surface at the point at which it was produced.
Specially engineered vaults should be constructed so that the waste could be regularly monitored and, if necessary, retrieved.
They produced prototype designs for such stores, both from Britain and abroad.
Ultimately, however, the environmentalists criticized ‘the farce of a consultation process which does not offer the public the option of ceasing production of the most lethal waste ever produced by man’.
Around Britain, people were equally concerned by the map which accompanied ‘The Way Forward’.
Careful study of this sent alarm bells ringing throughout vast areas of southern and eastern England.
In Somerset, for example, it was enough for one local newspaper to warn that Exmoor was a ‘potential nuclear dump’, whilst another pinpointed the Polden Hills north of Bridgwater as the ‘nuclear graveyard’.
In the end, wherever NIREX held ‘consultation’ meetings, its teams of experts met a frosty reception.
Virtually none of the local authorities in England, Wales and Scotland was remotely prepared to consider a waste dump in its area.
By 1988 the nuclear industry could therefore look back on over ten years of total failure to solve a problem of its own creation.
In the process, it had simply underlined the almost intractable dangers of nuclear waste disposal.
By announcing investigations all over Britain it had set up a series of confrontations with the public.
It nearly always came over in a bad light, as a bunch of cocooned scientists trying to hoodwink the common sense of ordinary folk.
Even private companies considering  submitting tenders to NIREX for work on waste management began to get worried about their image.
Once a retreat had been forced from one dump site, people believed they could do it again, and did.
By constantly changing its plans, from one type of waste disposal to another, the organization lost any claim it might have had to the scientific high ground.
It was like a football team on a losing streak.
And like all losers, the very name NIREX became synonymous with bad news, the unwelcome intruder, the butt of endless jokes.
Finally, NIREX did announce the result of its ‘consultation’ process.
Having sifted through the views of countless organizations, through its technical appraisals, through computer assessments, it had concluded that there were just two places where it would pursue its investigations for an underground dump.
The fact that they happened to be sites where nuclear waste was already produced, where there might be a flicker of acceptance from the local population, and appeared to have been chosen more from expediency than science, didn't seem to embarrass the already embattled industry.
The two places were the fast breeder research establishment at Dounreay in the North of Scotland, and the nuclear fuel reprocessing works at Sellafield.
2
If one place in Britain has become inextricably associated with the unpleasant side of the nuclear industry, it is the giant complex of reactors and waste handling facilities on the Cumbrian coast just a short drive away from the Lake District.
It is Britain's biggest and most notorious nuclear site.
Even a change of name — from the Windscale that had witnessed the 1957 fire to the brave new world of Sellafield — has failed to expunge public hostility.
There continues to be heated disagreement between the state-owned company which runs Sellafield, British Nuclear Fuels (BNF), and its critics, about the dangers associated with the plant.
BNF has even opened a £5 million multimedia exhibition centre to try to make the place a tourist attraction.
Over 150,000 people visited the centre in 1989 to be told how ‘user friendly’ radiation could be.
But there is enough evidence now to show that the bad image is totally justified.
The site has been shown to have regularly put at risk the health, and often the lives, of those who work or live in its shadow.
More than that, on the basis of the growing catalogue of evidence, the worst news may be yet to come.
The Windscale site had begun to achieve a bad reputation well before its recent rise to national prominence under a new title.
This is because it carries out a unique function within the nuclear industry: it tries to deal with the problems left over at the end.
In the process, it also creates much  of the waste for which the industry has spent so many fruitless years trying to find a burial place.
When the uranium fuel has finished its useful life producing electricity inside Britain's thirty-odd currently operating commercial reactors, it cannot simply be disposed of.
It contains a mass of radioactive byproducts spawned during its time in the reactor, some of them extremely hazardous.
The used or ‘spent’ fuel, as the industry describes it, must therefore either be stored in such a way that none of the radioactivity can escape, or it can be ‘reprocessed’in order to separate the reusable materials from the unpleasant waste.
Britain has chosen the second option.
Sellafield is like a spider at the centre of the British nuclear industry's web.
Its flies, the spent fuel, arrive regularly inside special containers on goods trains from nuclear reactors all over the country.
These large white fuel ‘flasks’ are themselves considered enough of a danger for a hundred mile an hour full-scale train crush to have been tested in 1984.
The industry made much play of the fact that the flask survived virtually unscathed.
Once inside the Sellafield factory, the spent fuel goes through a production line in which it is first stripped of its external cladding and then chemically separated after being dissolved in nitric acid.
At the other end emerge still useful uranium, for potential reuse in reactors, plutonium, which, according to its quality, can be used for either bombs or as fuel in a fast breeder reactor (see Chapter Three); and a cocktail of liquid waste products.
Depending on their radioactivity, these are either stored on the site for eventual disposal, or diluted and discharged through a pipeline into the Irish Sea.
The hazards involved in this operation, the pollution to the environment, the problem of safeguarding the plutonium, and the extremely high costs mean that reprocessing is carried out on a commercial scale by only a handful of other nuclear nations, most notably France and the Soviet Union.
Reprocessing of non-military nuclear fuel was banned in the United States by President Jimmy Carter in 1977.
Like other British nuclear developments, Sellafield had a honeymoon period.
In the early days it was seen as bringing a whirlwind of well-paid high-technology jobs to an area of record unemployment.
The site now employs about 7,000 people directly, although many more are involved in allied industries or in ongoing construction projects.
The apparent safety of the work could also be compared with the horror of the post-war mining tragedy at Egremont, five miles to the north, in which 104 miners died.
During the 1970s, however, a series of events combined to severely tarnish the record.
At the centre of these events was the announcement that Sellafield wanted to expand its activities.
A new complex was planned which would process the new type of uranium oxide fuel being used in more recent designs of nuclear power stations.
Known as the Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (THORP), it would be one of the largest civil engineering projects in the country.
Not just British-produced fuel would be taken there, however, but the outpourings of all those expanding nuclear nations which didn't have their own similar plants — Japan, Belgium, Italy and a potential clutch of other European countries.
The Daily Mirror , then Britain's biggest selling newspaper, carried a front page article warning that this would turn the country into ‘the world's nuclear dustbin'.
At about the same time, a number of serious accidents occurred.
In  September 1973, workers in the B204 building were starting work on dissolving a fresh batch of nuclear fuel.
What they didn't realize was that granules of radioactive material left in the bottom of the dissolving vessel had evaporated the residual liquid and heated up the base.
Their action was therefore rather like pouring water on to a hot frying pan, only with more serious consequences.
A steam explosion sent a burst of radioactive gas out into the building.
Although alarms went off, these were initially ignored, and staff inside the ten-storey building had to be found individually and told to leave.
Thirty-five men suffered serious skin and lung contamination.
The building was in fact being used for a small-scale version of the oxide reprocessing planned for the THORP complex: it has been sealed and closed ever since.
More crucially, in the middle of a national political debate about whether THORP should be allowed to proceed, a leak was discovered in one of the large concrete silos used to store radioactive cladding from reprocessed fuel.
It had probably been leaking, undetected, for about four years.
The ground was so contaminated that it was too dangerous even to try to remove the soil.
This accident was one of the factors which prompted the then Labour government to decide that the new oxide fuel plant should be subjected to a full-scale public inquiry.
The 1977 Windscale Inquiry focused the minds of both the public and opposition groups on the dangers of reprocessing.
It was also the first major examination in Britain of the whole nuclear controversy.
For a hundred days the issues had to be argued out in front of a High Court judge, Mr Justice Parker.
And for environmental groups like Friends of the Earth and the Town and Country Planning Association, it was a chance to marshal their arguments, and see whether such an establishment-orientated forum would deliver the goods.
When it didn't, and Parker gave approval to THORP, there was widespread disillusionment.
Although Friends of the Earth still argued that the hearings provided a useful platform and that any plans for civil disobedience were premature, others turned to direct action, as at Torness.
At Sellafield itself, attention shifted to the radioactive waste created by the reprocessing plant.
Because of the chemical dissolving process, there are very much larger volumes of both solid and liquid waste to be dealt with than at any other nuclear site.
The plant generates about three-quarters of all the low-level and two thirds of all the intermediate-level wastes produced throughout the British nuclear industry.
To deal with this, a steady traffic of lorries takes solid waste from the plant to the nearby Drigg dump.
There, until very recently, the packages and drums of waste were simply left in shallow open trenches, the authorities accepting that rain-water would eventually wash some of its radioactivity into a nearby river.
More dramatically, every day, about two  million gallons of radioactively contaminated water are discharged through two pipelines out into the Irish Sea.
This is the largest recorded source of radioactive effluent in the world.
So strong is the activity in these discharges that it can still be measured in the sea right down the western coast of Britain, northwards round the top of Scotland, and even as far away as Scandinavia.
When the discharges first started, their levels were said to have been kept high for two years ‘as part of an organized and deliberate scientific experiment’.
But even after that, the amount of radioactive material pumped into the sea rose steadily, reaching a peak in the 1970s.
In just five years, between 1970 and 1975, the amount released from the pipelines of one single radionuclide, caesium, had risen from 31,170 curies to 141,377.
The total radioactivity released in 1975 was the highest ever — 250,000 curies.
Concern centred on what effect this radioactive sea would have on the health of people in the area, especially if they ate large quantities of fish.
There was also a debate about what would happen to the most dangerous substances in the Windscale cocktail, particularly plutonium.
This is not only toxic if ingested into the body, but extremely long-lived in the environment.
Sediments containing such radionuclides were thought by the nuclear scientists to sink to the bottom of the sea bed, and stay there.
Other research suggested they might become concentrated, churned around in the waves and eventually deposited back along the beaches and banks of local estuaries.
Higher readings than expected have since been found by monitors along the coastline near Sellafield, and even in the dust inside seaside houses.
A recent investigation by Friends of the Earth found that contamination by alpha particles, including plutonium, was four to five times above official warning levels even several miles inland.
When I visited the area in 1981 I was regaled with fishermen's stories of discoloured fish with scabs and other unusual deformities, of boxes of fish removed from the quayside for testing by the authorities, of radiation in seagulls' eggs, of friends from the same school who had later died unexpectedly of cancer.
A local general practitioner of twelve years' standing, concerned about the increased incidence of myelomas (a type of bone marrow cancer) in his area, told me that nobody in their right senses would eat cockles and mussels from Morecambe Bay.
‘When people cough, you can catch a cold,’ he said.
‘But we could be dealing with something that could take several generations to come out.’
Jean McSorley, secretary of the local protest group, said simply, ‘If just a quarter of what we hear is true, that place should be shut down’.
In retrospect, many of those stories now seem considerably less fanciful than they did at the time.
One extraordinary Sellafield story among many is of the dredging of the  harbour at Maryport, twenty miles north of the plant, in order to build a marina.
When it was suggested that the dredged-out silt could be used to cover a children's playground, the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) advised against this, because of the contamination present.
Eventually, Maryport Council had to apply for a special nuclear waste disposal licence from the Department of the Environment so that it could legally dump the silt back in the sea again.
Since the government decision in favour of the THORP development, Sellafield and its operations have been the subject of regular protests, many of them organized by the local group Cumbrians Opposed to a Radioactive Environment.
CORE was launched in 1980 to oppose the importing of foreign spent nuclear fuel through the docks at Barrow-in-Furness, forty miles to the south of the site.
Concerned about the risk of an accident during the transport of this fuel to Sellafield, the group organized petitions and marches and sent out inflatable dinghies to harass the arriving ships.
But it wasn't until 1983 that a simple protest brought the controversy into particularly sharp focus.
Greenpeace had taken one of its boats, the Cedarlea , to monitor the radioactivity at the end of the Sellafield discharge pipeline.
They had also intended to block the pipe, using specially prepared plugs, hoping to draw international attention to the pollution caused.
It was an amazingly brave and hazardous example of direct action.
When the divers went over the side to swim down the seventy feet to the pipe, however, they immediately discovered how hazardous it really was.
Their radiation monitors picked up surprisingly high readings.
They had apparently been contaminated by an oily radioactive slick.
Their clothing was so radioactive that it had to be destroyed.
The discovery was startling enough for Greenpeace to immediately alert the National Radiological Protection Board.
What had happened, it later emerged, was that British Nuclear Fuels had accidentally released a quantity of a contaminated solvent called Purex into the sea before it had been properly treated.
They had not realized that this had happened.
As soon as it was discovered, there was immediate action by the Department of the Environment.
Since debris contaminated by the Purex was found to have washed ashore, twenty-five miles of beaches along the Cumbrian coast were officially closed to the public.
Some of the contamination registered levels 1,000 times above normal.
The ban lasted for almost nine months, dealing a severe blow to the local tourism and fishing industries, and to many people's faith in the competence of the nuclear industry.
As result of this incident, BNF was eventually fined £10,000 (with £60,000 costs) for failing to ‘minimize the exposure of persons to radiation’ and failing to keep adequate records.
This was the first time that  a criminal prosecution had been taken out against the British nuclear industry.
It remains a subject of some curiosity that this apparently exceptional event occurred just at the time that the Greenpeace boat was moored offshore.
Four years later, Greenpeace returned with another ship and succeeded in properly blocking the pipeline using special rubber balls.
Two Dutchmen, Hans Guyt and Willem Beekman, were eventually sent to prison for six weeks over this protest.
It was another investigation from the outside which brought the effect of those discharges home in a particularly uncomfortable manner.
It also provided some of the strongest evidence to date that Sellafield did directly and routinely harm people's health.
In a Yorkshire Television documentary ‘Windscale: the nuclear laundry, reporter James Cutler revealed that the incidence of childhood leukaemia (cancer of the blood) in the village of Seascale, just one mile south of the plant, was ten times the national average.
One of the only clearly identified causes of leukaemia in children is exposure to radiation.
Until recent improvements in treatment, the illness was often fatal.
A higher incidence of childhood leukaemia and other cancers was also found in other towns and villages along the Lancashire and Cumbria coast.
The implication of this report, that Sellafield was killing children, was serious enough to prompt an immediate government inquiry.
Under the chairmanship of Sir Douglas Black, a former president of the Royal College of Surgeons, this accepted the statistics but could find no scientific logic to the link with the reprocessing plant.
Many people remained sceptical.
In fact, since the TV programme, more leukaemia cases have come to light in the area.
And, as we shall see later, the leukaemia controversy has continued to develop as new findings have confirmed some of the worst fears of people living near other nuclear sites.
British Nuclear Fuels has always denied that its operations cause the sort of dangers alleged by its critics, and affirmed that its discharges and exposure levels are kept within the limits laid down by the regulatory authorities.
We have already seen that these limits are themselves a matter of scientific dispute.
In fact, between 1982 and 1989, the company paid out over £500,000 through a compensation scheme to the families of workers who had died of cancer.
It has not accepted legal responsibility for the deaths.
Attempts are still being made through the courts to establish the company's liability for several other cases where the children of workers are still suffering from cancers of various types.
The company has also turned to public relations and marketing to counter its critics, an exercise described by its chairman, Christopher Harding, as ‘a process applied to any long term product whose appeal to the public has faded for one reason or another’.
Tourists are now bused in their thousands to the Sellafield Visitors' Centre, where all the slick  techniques of modern exhibitions are brought to bear on radioactivity.
In 1989 it won the Institute of Public Relations' top prize, the Sword of Excellence.
Ironically, the award came in the same week that an article in Time Out magazine revealed an ongoing private dispute between Sellafield and the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) about the efficiency and safety of reprocessing.
In one stinging indictment, the CEGB's Lord Marshall said that the fuel rods from power stations would have been better stored in dry, gas-cooled chambers, as environmental critics had proposed, rather than under water.
‘As a direct result of that failure in policy-making we have had radioactive leaks at Sellafield and a loss of public confidence in that plant and in nuclear power generally,’ he wrote.
There could hardly have been a clearer contrast between the raw truth and the glossy image.
One of the most damning reports on the plant was produced by the House of Commons Environment Committee.
Describing Sellafield as ‘a byword for the dirty end of the industry’, it echoed the arguments of environmental groups that there was now no national economic justification for its operation.
The price of freshly mined uranium had fallen to a point where recycling spent uranium fuel made no sense, whilst the prospect of the plutonium being used in a fast breeder reactor was a distant hope.
Other countries avoided the unpleasant side effects of reprocessing by storing the used fuel in dry stores.
Why didn't Britain follow suit?
The committee concluded by recommending that the new THORP plant should be abandoned unless the financial consequences were prohibitive.
At the time of writing, the THORP plant is in fact nearing completion, and the Sellafield management is boasting of the long list of multimillion pound contracts it has already won to reprocess nuclear fuel from around the world.
In the current state of the British economy, this is seen as an important source of foreign currency.
Helping the balance of payments could weigh more heavily on the scales of decision-making than this country's reputation as the universal nuclear rubbish bin.
But the nuclear power-station operators in both Britain and abroad have also begun to look much more seriously at a clear alternative to reprocessing: the storage of the spent fuel until it can be directly disposed of in a special dump.
This already happens in Sweden, the United States and Canada where it is considered a much cheaper option.
In the end, THORP may be hit as much by an economic boycott as by environmental concerns about the international traffic in dangerous waste.
This, in the end, is the bottom line.
For the protests which started in the 1970s over both the reprocessing operation at Sellafield and the ultimate disposal of nuclear waste have had one fundamental effect on the whole nuclear industry.
As we shall see later, they have been one of the factors that have helped to tip the economic balance firmly against the nuclear option.
A NUCLEAR INSURANCE POLICY
1
LOOKING BACK, it s now possible to see that well before the Chernobyl accident in the Soviet Union the storm clouds were gathering for the nuclear dream.
But if nuclear power was as dangerous, polluting and unhealthy as its opponents believed, then why had it survived so long?
Indeed why did it flourish in the first place?
And why, when it has come to the crunch, have British governments of all political persuasions given it such unswerving support?
The original impetus for nuclear power, of course, was military.
Its roots were firmly tethered in the arms race generated by the desire to win the last World War.
Possession of an atomic bomb would be enough to bring the enemy to heel, it was argued; some still believe that dropping the bomb on two Japanese cities did bring the enemy to heel.
After the war, reactors like the Windscale ‘piles’— scene of the 1957 accident described in Chapter One — were designed to produce material for the first British nuclear bombs, and no expense was spared in developing the necessary technology.
The first reactors aimed at producing electricity for civilian use also had a military connection.
The American Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR), still the type most commonly in use in the United States, has a relatively compact core because it was originally designed to provide power inside the hulls of submarines.
The first design of British reactor, the Magnox, had an even more direct link to the atomic bomb: it was originally planned primarily to produce plutonium.
Electricity was an afterthought.
Plutonium is a unique and inevitable by-product of nuclear fission.
Less than ten kilograms are needed to make one bomb, but a large reactor can produce many thousand kilos in its lifetime.
Even outside a nuclear weapon it is a highly dangerous substance — fatal to humans if ingested in even minute quantities.
It has an extremely long radioactive half-life (the time it takes for half its activity to decay) of up to 24,000 years.
In    its purest form, suitable for manufacturing bombs, it can also be extremely valuable.
These twin qualities have given plutonium an almost mythic quality, perhaps best captured when the manic American hero of the TV drama ‘Edge of Darkness’ cracks two blocks together in an instant miniature explosion.
FIG. 1 NUCLEAR POWER IN BRITAIN
Since the early military experiments, the new civilian operators of nuclear power (the electricity generating boards) have argued in public that the two branches have become clearly separated.
There are separate military reactors at Calder Hall, across the river from Sellafield, and at Chapelcross, near Annan in Dumfriesshire, whose job is primarily to produce plutonium for the Ministry of Defence.
There is also now a clearly identifiable civil use for plutonium as fuel for the fast breeder type of reactor which it is hoped will eventually replace existing designs.
In the past, however, the spent fuel from both civil and military reactors has gone through exactly the same reprocessing line at Sellafield.
This fact, plus the ubiquitous veil of secrecy which covers military matters, has fuelled suspicion that the link has never been thoroughly broken and that plutonium produced in civil reactors has found its way into the military stockpiles.
The civilian operators, notably the CEGB, have consistently tried to deny this, although at least one of the first Magnox reactors, Hinkley Point A, had been deliberately adapted so that‘weapons grade’ plutonium could be extracted.
Eventually, Lord Marshal, chairman of the CEGB, admitted in 1986 that some British civil-produced plutonium had been placed in ‘the defence stockpile’.
As far as he knew, the practice had now ceased.
There has been a parallel argument about the lax stock-taking procedures for plutonium.
Some critics claim that up to two tonnes of the element has ‘gone astray’ from the civil stockpile.
There is a further dimension to the link between the civil and military uses of nuclear power technology.
This is the fear that, despite international safeguards, the export of civil power stations and equipment will lead to further proliferation of the atomic bomb.
With a queue of industrialized and developing countries, from Israel to Pakistan, eager to achieve the status of nuclear weapons powers, it is all too easy for them to leach out the necessary technology from ‘peaceful’ atomic programmes.
It is uncertain to what extent British nuclear technology may have contributed to this process.
What is clear is that the military origins of nuclear power in this country gave it a powerful boost as an infant technology, and that the umbilical cord has not been severed.
The status which nuclear power achieved because of its link with the defence of the realm was also retained even when its day-to-day operations were more involved with producing peaceful electricity.
The limited number of large power stations, a comparatively small work-force with  little history of industrial action, and a strong, centralized organization made it an attractive proposition for governments wanting to maintain clear control over energy supply.
At a time when scientific advance was seen as universally beneficial, the nuclear industry was judged to be at the cutting edge of technological endeavour.
It was crucial to this country's status as an advanced nation.
But there is a second powerful strategic argument which has propelled nuclear power forward in Britain, as in other countries.
This is the fact that it is based on what has appeared to be a uniquely simple fuel, and one whose exploitation could avoid dependence on a variety of other uncertain choices.
One of the arguments for first developing nuclear energy in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War was a predicted shortage of coal.
Then, as now, coal provided the fuel for much the greater part of the country's electricity.
There were power cuts over the winter of 1947 because the industry couldn't cope with the demand.
Worse was expected to come as industrial and domestic consumption of electricity picked up after the attrition of the war years.
Now, however, there was an alternative.
A single pound of uranium, it was claimed, could produce the same energy as a thousand tons of coal, whilst a hundred tons of uranium could provide all the electricity that the country could possibly need.
In the event, the coal crisis didn't materialize, but nuclear power was by that time up and running.
A similar spur was provided by the 1956 Suez crisis, this time over oil — then this country's second largest source of fuel for power generation.
The restriction on supplies from the Middle East brought on by the clash with the Egyptian government of Abdel Nasser was so serious that petrol rationing had to be introduced.
Despite the hopes of some optimists, nuclear energy couldn't yet directly power motor vehicles.
But it could provide the electricity in the factories to build them in the first place.
Why rely on such a volatile source of fuel for our power stations when a steady supply could be obtained from the magical uranium?
Although the plans were later cut back, the Suez crisis encouraged a three-fold increase in the then current plans for new nuclear power stations.
These arguments were repeated in 1973 when, in the aftermath of the Israeli-Arab War, the Middle-East oil-producing countries joined together with other sympathetic states under the banner of OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries).
They punished Western support for the Israeli side with a massive price hike, and effectively maintained their control over world prices for almost a decade.
Oil-fired power stations in Britain were put into reserve use only, and there was very nearly petrol rationing for the second time.
This crisis was seized upon by the nuclear power lobby with Messianic  zeal.
The then chairman of the CEGB, Arthur Hawkins, told a House of Commons Select Committee that ‘we need to develop a situation which by 1990 will be entirely nuclear because, as we all know, the fossil-fuel energies just will not be adequate to meet our growing needs’.
Five years later, another nuclear supremo, Sir John Hill, chairman of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA), claimed that the nuclear industry had ‘come just in time to save the world's industrial society from a devastating energy shortage’.
A further twist to the uncertainty of fossil fuel supplies was provided by the growing militancy of Britain's miners.
In response to the austerity measures introduced after the OPEC ban, including a three-day working week, they struck against the Conservative government of Edward Heath in 1975, eventually contributing to its defeat.
With the election of Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister in 1979, however, there was a new determination to defeat the power of the trade union movement.
A secret report to the Cabinet in October of that year, prepared by the Energy Secretary, David Howell, and eventually leaked, gave one crucial justification for an expanded nuclear programme.
It would, he argued, ‘have the advantage of removing a substantial portion of electricity production from the dangers of disruption by industrial action by coal miners or transport workers.'
And if proof were needed that an alternative supply of fuel to coal was vital, it came during the historically lengthy strike of 1984–5.
When the stockpiles of coal reached a critically low level, the nuclear and oil-fired power stations were there to keep the lights burning.
In practice, the country's electricity supplies would probably have survived even without the nuclear element.
Nonetheless, the avoidance of the country ever again being ‘held to ransom’ by the National Union of Mineworkers has provided the nuclear industry with yet another political toehold.
What is also clear is that the miners' strike left deep ideological scars.
Just as much as there is little trust left among many miners for government commitment to their industry, so there remains a deep-seated hatred for the miners among Conservative politicians.
Arthur Scargill is just as much the devil incarnate to the true blue supporter now as he was in the front line at Orgreave Colliery.
When government ministers talked during the mid-1980s about their justification for nuclear power, it nearly always included a catalogue of fearful threats which started with OPEC and ended with Scargill.
In fact, apart from industrial disputes, the nuclear industry's pessimistic predictions about supplies of fossil fuels have been proved wrong in practice.
The dire warnings of world shortages have not come to pass.
Nor have prices gone up as fast as it predicted.
In the wake of the OPEC crisis, for example, oil exploration increased elsewhere, including in the North   Sea, and dependence on Middle East supplies reduced.
Although a 1988 nuclear industry advert said that oil supplies could ‘dry up’ in about sixty years, others set the figure for known reserves (at current rates of consumption) at nearer 200 years.
Coal reserves have also expanded worldwide, with Britain's contribution expected to last several hundred years.
Proven reserves of natural gas have also increased.
Compared with this, uranium reserves are accepted by the nuclear industry itself to have a lifetime measured in hundreds rather than thousands of years.
FIG.
II NUCLEAR FANTASY
The uncertainties surrounding supplies of fossil fuels have nevertheless given nuclear energy a powerful boost.
But whoever is correct in the end on future forecasts of fuel reserves, the nuclear researchers had also developed what they considered to be an ace.
This was a power station that could make maximum use of the available supplies of uranium by actually creating its own new fuel.
The first ‘fast breeder’ reactor was developed in the United States in the 1950s.
Progress since then has been slow but the principle has remained the same.
Using a core of plutonium fuel surrounded by a blanket of used uranium from ordinary nuclear reactors, the chain reaction literally ‘breeds’ more plutonium from the uranium blanket.
This plutonium can then be used as fresh fuel.
(The ‘fast’ description refers to the fact that there is no moderator, as in normal reactors, to slow the reaction down.)
Over a period of twenty years it is claimed that a fast reactor could breed enough additional plutonium to fuel another similar power station.
It would also make extremely efficient use of potentially dwindling uranium supplies.
The main drawbacks associated with fast reactors are their use of the hazardous substance plutonium and the coolant employed, which is usually liquid sodium.
Should any of this sodium come into direct contact with water the result could be literally explosive.
The largest fast breeder reactor in the world is the Superphenix plant at Creys-Malville on the French/Swiss border.
This started up in 1985, but two years later suffered a serious accident when some of the liquid sodium coolant leaked out.
As a result, it was out of action for over a year.
A West German fast reactor, which started construction in 1973, has never been granted an operating licence.
More recently, the demand for fast breeder reactors has seemed less urgent as worldwide supplies of uranium have become more plentiful.
Even so, it continues to be one of the ‘great white hopes’ of the nuclear enthusiasts.
All these strategic arguments in favour of nuclear power, from the military imperative through national pride to the need for an alternative to fossil fuels, have also been given a powerful institutional base.
At the heart of this has been the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
From its early involvement in the fated Windscale piles, the UKAEA  has been responsible for most of the key decisions in the history of British nuclear technology.
It has developed new reactor designs, instigated research into everything from waste disposal to the potential for nuclear fusion, was responsible for fuel fabrication and reprocessing (until this devolved to BNF in 1971), and has put a major part of its effort into developing a commercially viable fast breeder reactor.
It rims the experimental sites at Winfrith in Dorset and Dounreay in Scotland as well as its central laboratories at Harwell.
It has been the main source of advice to successive governments on all matters nuclear.
Government money has poured into the UKAEA's coffers.
Between 1955 and 1962, with nuclear enthusiasm reaching a peak, its staff level doubled from 20,000 to 40,000.
Even in the mid-1980s, after major parts of its operations had been taken over by other bodies, it still employed 13,500 people.
In 1988 it was calculated that over £16 billion had been spent by the Authority over the previous 30 years, about half provided by the Department of Energy or its predecessors.
This was roughly equivalent to an investment of 1.25 pence for every unit of electricity ever generated by nuclear power in Britain.
The largest proportion — about £3.4 billion — had gone on fast reactor research.
The UKAEA has been a consistently bullish supporter of nuclear expansion.
Its great expectations were such that in 1975 it produced what it called a ‘Reference Programme’ of future development based on a dramatic growth in electricity demand.
This envisaged that by the end of this century there would be 104 gigawatts (1,000 million watts) of nuclear capacity, including 33 GW of fast breeder reactors.
Each gigawatt represented roughly one reactor.
By the year 2030, the Authority's projection increased to 426 GW of nuclear power, the vast majority coming from fast reactors.
The figures for the breeder stations alone would have meant about 250 large reactors dotted around the British Isles.
At the time of these calculations there was just 5 GW of nuclear power in commercial operation in this country.
The calculations would seem a lunatic fantasy if it wasn't that they were produced by an organization which then occupied the centre stage of British energy policy.
Although supposedly in the position of providing independent advice for the politicians, the UKAEA's self-interest has been obvious.
In the past, the Authority has repeatedly championed British-bred reactor designs from its own drawing boards against foreign competition, in the case of the Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor with disastrous consequences.
There is also nothing disinterested about its current extensive ‘public information’ programme, which includes a major exercise in promoting the benefits of nuclear power, especially in schools.
In 1990–91 the budget for this programme was £3.1 million.
Against this background, it may seem extraordinary that the UKAEA  is also the main government-backed organization in Britain responsible for research into ‘renewable’ sources of energy — from tidal barrages to wind farms.
Given that these technologies are consistently promoted by opponents as a benign alternative to the dangers of nuclear power, it is perhaps not surprising that they are marginalized within the Authority's remit.
The total expenditure on renewables research up to 1988, for example, had been £152 million, equivalent to less than eighteen months spending on the fast reactor.
The result of this unique situation has been that, although there have been disagreements about which specific reactor type should be built, governments of both main political parties have nearly always accepted the UKAEA's general pro-nuclear arguments.
Although the Conservatives are seen as the natural allies of nuclear power, the ordering of every commercial reactor in Britain up to the 1980s was carried out by a Labour administration.
The political consensus has also extended to the trade unions, where the position of the Trades Union Congress was dominated by the large industrial unions who had members within the nuclear fold.
Throughout the 1970s, its annual meetings passed regular resolutions in support of nuclear expansion.
In 1977, for example, the TUC told the Windscale Inquiry that ‘the nuclear industry will need to be able to make a sizeable contribution to Britain's energy supplies by the late 1990s’.
Frank Chapple, general secretary of the electricians union, the EEPTU, one of three large unions with members in the industry, summed up the view at a meeting of the British Nuclear Energy Society in 1979:
‘We must not lose the battle over nuclear power…
Those of us with responsibility in the energy field must take a more active role in combating apathy.
History may forgive the anti-nuclear lobby, but we will never be forgiven.'
2
Despite — some would say because of— the cosy consensus which had been created by a powerful nuclear lobby with tacit political support, the development of nuclear power in Britain has not followed a smooth path.
In the early years, this was less to do with protests from the outside than with poor decision-making and technical incompetence on the inside.
The first generation of nuclear power stations in this country was of a uniquely British design.
Named after the magnesium alloy used to encase the uranium fuel, these ‘Magnox’ reactors employed carbon dioxide gas as a coolant.
As already explained, the first Magnox power stations (at Calder Hall and Chapelcross) were built primarily to extract plutonium for nuclear weapons.
But a further nine Magnox stations, with twin  reactors on each site, and producing electricity in substantial quantities for the national grid, were brought into operation between 1962 and 1971.
Their cost at the time was over £1.1 billion, an enormous slice of public expenditure.
Announcing this programme, the then Minister of Fuel and Power, Geoffrey Lloyd, said dramatically, ‘Our nuclear pioneers have now given us a second chance — to lead another industrial revolution in the second half of the twentieth century.'
When planned, the total output of these reactors was supposed to reach nearly 5,000 megawatts (million watts) at full capacity, about a fifth of the then total for all UK power stations.
In fact, because of corrosion problems inside the pressure vessel which contains the fuel core, they have all had to be down-rated by varying percentages.
Their potential output eventually fell to less than 4,000 megawatts.
There have been further problems with corrosion, cracking of materials and defective welds, leading to two stations, at Dungeness in Kent and Bradwell in Essex, being out of action for long periods.
As we shall see later, the economic performance of the Magnox reactors has also come under increasing scrutiny.
Nonetheless, they have been described by the CEGB, their operators in England and Wales, as the ‘workhorses’ of the system.
Having started along the path of gas-cooled reactors, the nuclear industry stuck with them when it came to looking for an improved model.
This was at a time when the rest of the world, following the American lead, was developing a clear preference for water-cooled designs.
The second generation of nuclear power stations, heavily promoted by the UKAEA, was based on the Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor (AGR).
An initial series of five stations, each with twin reactors, was commissioned from 1976 onwards.
These were more powerful nuclear units than the Magnoxes and they had a combined potential output of almost 6,500 HW.
The then Minister of Power, Fred Lee, announcing the successful construction tender for the first AGR, said, ‘I am quite sure we have hit the jackpot this time’.
The AGR series proved a construction and operational nightmare.
Nearly all the power stations have worked out much more expensive to build than was estimated.
As problems emerged, building work was switched from one industrial consortium to another.
Design faults meant that each new station required major alterations; any hope of a production line quickly went out the window.
The operating performance of these reactors has also consistently fallen below expectations.
The classic example of AGR failure, the Dungeness B plant on the Kent coast, eventually took about twenty years to finish, cost £3.5 billion to build (at 1988 prices)— roughly five times its original estimate — and has never operated at even half its intended capacity.
Professor Jim Jeffery, who has attempted over many years to disentangle the truth from the official  statistics about the AGR series, estimates that the cost overrun on building just four of the stations (Dungeness B, Hinkley Point B, Hartlepool and Heysham 1) amounts to over £6.5 billion (at 1988 prices).
Even the chairman of the CEGB, Sir Arthur Hawkins, once described the AGR programme as ‘a catastrophe we must not repeat’.
To be fair, some stations, for example the one at Hinkley Point in Somerset, have worked much better than this description suggests, and the two latest examples, at Heysham in Lancashire and Torness in Scotland, look more promising.
The AGRs have also enabled the nuclear component of electricity production in the United Kingdom (including Scotland) to push through the 20 per cent barrier.
But the cost to the British taxpayer and electricity consumer has been enormous.
When the problems started to emerge with the AGR series, the search began for a successor to keep the British nuclear industry in business.
The UKAEA had already been working on two prototypes — a high temperature successor to the AGR (called the Dragon) and the Steam Generating Heavy Water Reactor, another uniquely British concept.
Both were built at its Winfrith site in Dorset.
But the Authority also maintained its faith in the existing gas-cooled design.
By contrast, the CEGB saw this as another opportunity to join the worldwide water-cooled club, now dominated by the Pressurized Water Reactor.
Technical and safety arguments were overlaid with the issue of national technological pride.
For roughly nine years, a debate raged about which design to choose, involving government departments, parliamentary committees, politicians, as well as the nuclear researchers, operators and construction companies.
More public money was poured into researching the various options.
At the end of the period of indecision, however, in 1975, it was ironically Energy Secretary Tony Benn, nowadays a major critic of nuclear expansion, who gave the go-ahead for two further AGRs (at Torness and Heysham).
He also officially endorsed the CEGB's desire to ‘establish the PWR as a valid option’.
This was the beginning of the road to Hinkley Point.
A year later, in 1979, a Conservative government was elected with an unswerving commitment to nuclear power.
One of the first official visits of the then Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, was to France, where the nuclear industry was forging ahead with a massive programme of PWRs, which were reportedly being built with record efficiency, speed and economy.
This was the way forward for Britain as well, she argued.
An ambitious programme of 15 GW of new nuclear capacity, about twelve new power stations, was outlined at a Cabinet meeting by the Energy Secretary, David Howell.
They would start construction at the rate of one a year from 1982 onwards, and they would ideally be PWRs.
This was the tonic which the nuclear industry had been waiting for — a government which was both strongly sympathetic to its point of view, and prepared to make firm decisions.
Coupled with the appointment of Sir Walter Marshall, an enthusiastic proponent of the PWR, first as chairman of the UKAEA and then of the CEGB, the door looked wide open for a third generation of British built, if not designed, nuclear power stations.
It was now just a matter of persuading the public that their operation would be as safe as could possibly be devised.
3
The Pressurized Water Reactor may have been a new type of reactor to Britain, but it was, and has remained, the brand leader in most other nuclear nations.
No other country has pursued gas-cooled reactors so seriously, and though some have maintained indigenous designs, notably Canada and the Soviet Union, as many others have shifted to the most popular water-cooled model.
By the mid-1980s, there were over 180 PWRs in operation in twenty-one different countries.
It was like the Ford motor car of reactors, a production line model whose major component parts were all pre-fabricated in a factory.
And at the time of the original British government decision in its favour, the design had suffered no serious accidents.
To opponents in this country, on the other hand, the PWR was the most unpleasant of the nuclear demons on offer.
Even an AGR would be preferable.
One protest postcard showed a picture of a smiling Uncle Sam in stars-and-stripes suit bending down to offer a gleaming white PWR to the banner-holding British public.
In the sky behind him was the grey shadow of a winged death skull.
On top of the familiar arguments against nuclear power, the PWR had added a mixture of nationalism and dislike for American economic imperialism.
A major technical worry about the PWR design was what would happen if a leak should occur in the high-pressure water-cooling circuit which constantly withdraws heat from the reactor core.
The escaping water would quickly turn to steam, it was feared, which would be much less efficient at removing heat.
Even if the reactor had automatically shut down, there would still remain what is described as ‘decay heat’ from the accumulated radioactivity.
Emergency cooling systems are installed to remove this heat, but what if those failed as well?
Such a sequence of failures is the nightmare of nuclear opponents but a situation on which the nuclear industry sees the remote probability of more than a million to one.
There was also concern about the ‘integrity’ of the cylindrical steel pressure vessel which surrounded the core.
With the intense pressure inside (20 tonnes of water flow through every second), even a small hairline crack could develop into a rupture, with catastrophic  consequences.
Cracks were revealed in some French-manufactured pressure vessels and other parts for PWRs in 1979 and their dangers were publicized by an engineer, Shoja Etemad, who had worked for the company Framatome.
Etemad complained that a solution to the cracking problem was being hampered by excessive secrecy.
Even the House of Commons Select Committee on Energy, reporting on the PWR in 1981, said that ‘all reactor types require regular inspection, but to the best of our understanding, in none of the others can a small failure in the inspection procedure lead directly to the risk of a major emergency or accident…’
In March 1979, a major accident had occurred, at the Three Mile Island PWR near the town of Harrisburg in Pennsylvania.
This was not the result of one single, identifiable cause.
Instead, a unique series of technical failures and operator mistakes had led, as the pessimists feared, to the brink of a disaster.
The fateful sequence of events had started with a malfunction in the main pumps supplying cooling water to the reactor's core.
Auxiliary pumps came on but vital valves had been left shut and they were ineffective.
The result was an immediate rise in temperature and pressure within the reactor.
Two things then happened.
The reactor automatically shut down and, most critically, a pressure relief valve jammed open, allowing cooling water to steadily escape.
As had happened in previous nuclear accidents, the operators misread the situation.
Thinking there was too much water in the system, rather than too little, they turned off even the emergency cooling system which had by then been activated.
But the ‘decay heat’ from the reaction was still  enough to cause the uranium fuel to begin to melt.
At one point, its temperature reached over 3,000° fahrenheit, five times the normal operating level.
As it melted, the fuel's chemical reaction with the surrounding water also caused a bubble of hydrogen to form at the top of the reactor vessel.
When this exploded, fortunately not fiercely enough to breach the wall of the vessel, the operators realized what was happening.
The original jammed valve was finally discovered, over two hours after the sequence of events had begun.
Cooling of the reactor was started up again just in time.
According to a later investigation sponsored by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the reactor was ‘probably within 30 minutes of a complete meltdown’.
This could have taken the burning core through the concrete base of the reactor into the ground, a version of what is colloquially described as the ‘China syndrome’.
The accident caused panic in the immediate vicinity of the plant.
Faced with conflicting advice from radio stations and the state authorities about whether to evacuate, many people just fled.
Tens of thousands of residents simply jumped in their cars, clogging the freeways.
Inside the plant, levels of radiation in the abandoned reactor building rose to many times the lethal level.
Outside, radioactive iodine was regularly released into the atmosphere over the following month.
There are continuing disputes and legal battles about the effect of these releases on people's health, on crops and on farm animals.
When it was possible to investigate, it was found that over a third of the reactor core had melted, leaving one of the biggest radioactive waste disposal headaches ever known.
The clean-up alone has cost over a billion dollars — and is still going on.
Before Chernobyl, the Three Mile Island accident was the worst ever recorded at a nuclear power station anywhere in the world.
Although nobody was directly killed, its effect on public confidence — first in the United States, and then further afield — was catastrophic.
As we shall see, it was one of the factors which led to the US nuclear industry's virtual demise.
In public statements at least, the British nuclear industry and government managed to ride out this severe setback to the image of the PWR.
The Three Mile Island reactor was designed by a different company from the Westinghouse version planned for Britain, they argued.
The accident had, after all, been contained and little radiation had escaped.
The official US investigation had blamed poor operator training, lax maintenance procedures and deficiencies in the regulatory system.
There was no fundamental weakness in the PWR design and British safety standards would ensure that it operated as well as the best.
Meanwhile, the first British PWR was being planned for Sizewell on the Suffolk coast, already the site of a first generation Magnox station.
However, the government had made it clear that there would definitely  be a public inquiry into this first example of the new design and that it would thoroughly investigate all the economic and safety arguments.
This would inevitably delay the start of its construction.
In the meantime, it was important to assess and identify the sites for what was hoped to be a series of follow-on stations.
A number of locations around England and Wales were on the shortlist.
(Scotland, with its own separate generating board, had no plans for nuclear power after the Torness AGR.)
In Wales, there were the existing nuclear developments at Trawsfynydd in Gwynedd and Wylfa on the Isle of Anglesey.
In the South-East there was Dungeness, already home to two nuclear stations.
There was also a promising coastal site at Druridge Bay in Northumberland, where the CEGB had bought 300 acres of land for £700,000 in 1985.
But in the South-West, where a further large power station would be particularly useful to help balance out supplies into the national grid, there were a number of possibilities.
Between 1980 and 1982 the CEGB's experts began to look in detail at three areas in Dorset.
Two of these were near the existing Winfrith experimental plant, run by the UKAEA.
They also earmarked a further three potential sites in Cornwall.
The Cornish investigations proved by far the most controversial.
As soon as rumours spread through the principality that the nuclear investigators were coming, a strong political alliance was formed between Cornish nationalists, the Liberal Party (which dominated local politics) and the environmental groups like Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace.
Over 2,500 people marched through the centre of Truro in protest, still one of the biggest public demonstrations the area has known.
At all three chosen sites — near the villages of Gwithian and Luxulyan and on military land at Nancekuke once used to store chemical weapons — there was immediate concern, particularly at the effect any sort of accident would have on the vital West Country tourist industry.
And when the CEGB's geologists were sent out to look at the geological substrata, they were harassed as heavily as the waste dumpers had been.
The most dramatic direct action was taken at Luxulyan, a village set in a beautiful farming area with a local population mix of traditional farmers, well-heeled professionals and not so well-heeled smallholders.
Two of the leading lights in the ecology movement, Edward Goldsmith and Peter Bunyard, also happened to live nearby.
When the CEGB's drilling rigs arrived at one particular farm, their way was firmly blocked and a local woman and her daughter immediately chained themselves to the equipment.
This was the beginning of a protest that lasted continually for over five months.
The protesters were helped by the disarmingly sympathetic attitude of the Chief Constable for Devon and Cornwall, John Alderson.
Instead of sending in his officers to haul out the occupiers, Alderson argued that this was a civil issue, there had been no breach of the peace and it was not his job to suppress dissent.
The CEGB was forced to use court procedures to make any headway and began the lengthy process of obtaining injunctions against named individuals it could identify.
But as court orders were taken out against one list of protesters, banning them from taking part, a new team would take over.
Lack of any firm action by the police even led the Board to take the whole issue to the High Court.
The CEGB did eventually carry out its test drilling on the farm at Luxulyan.
But by then the political tide had shifted firmly against it.
Even the Tory MP for Bodmin, Robert Hicks, had signalled his opposition to his own government's policy by speaking on an anti-nuclear platform.
Of particular significance was the moment when, in February 1982, Cornwall County Council voted by a large majority against agreeing to any nuclear development.
In the end, the Board announced that Luxulyan, described as the most promising of the three sites, had been ruled out because it was ‘on high ground and would visually dominate the area’.
Nobody believed this explanation.
Dave Lewis, a local authority planner and then chairman of the Cornwall Anti-Nuclear Alliance, says it is still somewhat of a mystery why the CEGB chose such apparently unpromising sites in the first place.
Apart from its prominence, Luxulyan was several miles from a river estuary, requiring both a long water pipeline and cooling towers, whilst Gwithian was near the tourist honeypot of St Ives.
‘I can only assume they were intoxicated by the flood of enthusiasm from central government, and thought they could do anything, even build power stations in the sand,’ he says.
‘In fact, they suffered a humiliating defeat at every level of Cornish society.’
By the middle of 1982, the peninsula had effectively become a ‘no-go area’ for the PWR salesmen.
THE ROAD TO HINKLEY POINT
1
WHEN THE Generating Board had tired of its investigations in the Dorset hinterland and its tussles with the Cornish protesters, it decided to fall back on the one site in the West Country where it felt confident it could successfully build the second British Pressurized Water Reactor.
This was Hinkley Point, an industrial complex on the Somerset coast which already housed two nuclear power stations, and which proudly boasted in its publicity that it was ‘Britain's biggest’.
The Hinkley Point development in fact erupts with total incongruity from the flat coastal plain which borders the Bristol Channel.
Even without the nuclear element, its massive, featureless structures look absurdly out of place and proportion amidst the flow of cornfields, hedgerows and grazing pastures.
Even a decision to paint one of them a garish blue has failed to ameliorate the effect.
At night, the glare of the power station lights transform the complex into something like a beached transatlantic liner.
For many locals, however, they are now just a part of the scenery.
Much of the countryside round Hinkley Point is given over to agriculture.
Traditional dairy farmers rub shoulders with intensive pig rearing units.
Scattered villages house people who work at the power station, or in the nearby towns of Bridgwater and Taunton.
In the summer, holidaymakers stream past on their way to the Butlins holiday camp at Minehead, scattering sheep from the road and crisp packets into the hedges.
In the winter, locals sit round fireside bars which have scarcely changed in a hundred years.
The area is determinedly conservative.
Fox hunting and pub skittling competitions arouse more controversy than politics.
It is an unlikely place for a revolution.
In a memorandum written in July 1982, and marked ‘Secret’, one of the leading CEGB strategists, Derek Davis, had summed up the pros and cons of the Hinkley site.
From the transmission point of view, it would have  been better to site a new station on the South coast, he said.
But, given the continuing uncertainty of public opinion, it was also important to go for an ‘existing and less contentious site’.
Hinkley Point, Davis concluded, was technically suitable, its geology sound and it had one important advantage: there was ‘no strong local opposition and no known County Council objection’.
A public announcement of the plan to build a Hinkley C power station was made a month later.
According to a private CEGB timetable, work on the initial foundations of Hinkley C could start, even after a planning inquiry, in the autumn of 1986.
The station could be up and running by about 1994.
After that, the aim was to proceed relatively quickly with a fourth Hinkley station, possibly one of the first commercially operated fast breeder reactors.
Once the production line was rolling, it was by now hoped to have twelve new nuclear plants in operation around Britain by the end of the century.
A look back at the history of the Hinkley site must have added to the CEGB's optimism.
Permission to build the first, Magnox-type nuclear power station was obtained with precious little opposition.
The main concern was about its intrusion on an unspoilt stretch of coastline with nothing but woodland and fields and a view across the sea to South Wales.
The coastal plain was also overlooked by the westwards sweep of the Quantock Hills, with their wild deer, oak-tree lined coombes and autumnal crop of wortleberries.
The only protest group was in fact called the Quantock Seaboard Defence Committee, who succeeded in obtaining the support of the architectural author Ian Nairn.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) also opposed the plan, extolling the ‘quite extraordinary atmosphere of uninhabited remoteness’ which was about to be disrupted.
However, the Central Electricity Authority (precursor of the CEGB) said that a sparsely populated area had been deliberately chosen, the nuclear power programme had been decreed by parliament, and the risk of an accident was ‘practically nonexistent’.
Although it was possible that the site's nuclear capacity would double in the future, there was no chance of a third power station.
The parish council in the nearest village, Stogursey, whose close-knit community was almost entirely dependent on farming, welcomed it as ‘a real blood transfusion’.
After a public inquiry lasting just two days, the project went ahead.
As the first turfs for Hinkley A power station were being dug in early 1958, an unnamed correspondent in The Times reported how a stretch of countryside that had inspired Wordsworth and Coleridge 150 years before was about to savour the fruits of ‘the atom age’:
‘An advance guard of hundreds of men, with bulldozers, mechanical shovels, tractors and lorries has for months been scarring the lowlands, daubing the green acres with splashes of grey clay and red earth in a mariner unseen since Beaker Folk raised their burial mounds or Saxons threw up ramparts on surrounding hills.
This mechanized army, scooping through hedges, coverts and fields, is fashioning a broad highway, of Roman-like directness, from Cannington to Hinkley Point.
Along it will soon be rolling men and machines.
In four years’ time the world's biggest nuclear power station — a £70 million project with a capacity of 500 megawatts will dominate the scene.’
The newspaper's lyrical reporter could find few moaners among the local population.
There would be lots of jobs; 2,500-odd construction workers would spend money in shops and pubs and local businesses.
The only detractors were the bird lovers and the guardians of the Quantocks.
Radioactivity was scarcely mentioned.
Clive Knox was then a teenager on the family farm right next to the construction site; some of his father's land was taken for the development.
To young Clive it was like living near what seemed a dramatic glimpse into the future.
He recalls:
‘There was fairly free access over the site.
We used to walk in and stand at the foot of one of the giant cranes.
We even got invited to see inside the pressure vessel.
You have to remember that electricity itself was a new, exciting thing.
Our farm was only connected to the mains supply in 1951, and here ‘we were two years later talking about a power station which promised electricity almost ‘too cheap to meter’.'
Nobody asked any questions about whether or not it was safe.
By the time the Board decided to build a second power station at Hinkley Point in the 1960s, an accepting local population had got accustomed to an industrial development in the middle of the countryside.
The influx of large numbers of construction workers had inevitably caused disruption in the nearby villages, especially the closest, Stogursey.
But to Clive Knox, the new development seemed simply ‘a continuation, rather like building an extension’.
He was by now running the family's 700-acre holding in his own right, and farming right up to the power station boundary.
He got used to the station staff coming on to his land to check radiation monitors they had installed and to take away milk samples.
‘We had a reasonably amicable relationship,’ he says.
For Hinkley B, second in the new series of Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactors now being built by the CEGB, there was no public inquiry at all.
During the 1970s, with two power stations in relatively peaceful operation, the Board consolidated its position on the Somerset coast.
It became the biggest local employer, with a basic work-force of about 1,500, and numerous additional contractors constantly in demand.
Although many of the better-paid staff, especially those with engineering expertise, were brought in from all over the country, much of the local  labour came from the town of Bridgwater, ten miles away by road.
The CEGB sponsored rugby matches and other events in the town, ran the largest sports and social club, and its workers mounted one of the biggest floats in the annual Guy Fawkes Day carnival procession.
This was no papier mâché and cardboard affair, but an elaborate performance straddling a giant articulated lorry and trailer, with dazzling costumes, pumping soundtrack and hundreds of brilliant flashing light bulbs.
Nuclear power wasn't mentioned, but it was a good advert for electricity.
By 1982, however, when the CEGB firmly announced its plans for Hinkley C, the public attitude towards nuclear power was changing.
There had been the protests about waste dumping, and the steady leaking of Windscale/Sellafield.
More importantly, the accident at Three Mile Island in the United States had shown how quickly a reactor could get out of control, and had cast its shadow over the reputation of the pressurized water design.
Even at Hinkley Point, the radiation monitoring system was improved as a result.
Unfortunately for the CEGB, it couldn't seize the time and push ahead as fast with its plans as it wanted.
Derek Davis had said it was important to capitalize on the goodwill that existed in the South West with ‘the earliest possible development’.
But the Sizewell ‘B’ public inquiry had still to run its course, and no firm decision to proceed could be made until that had reported.
In fact, that inquiry didn't start until 1983, the hearings dragged on into 1985, and the report wasn't finally published until 1987.
This breathing space proved critical for the opposition.
One immediate response to the CEGB's announcement was the formation of the Alliance Against Hinkley C. This brought together a mixture of Friends of the Earth supporters from Bristol — only some twenty-five miles north of Hinkley — and others who had been active in the Somerset anti-waste-dumping campaign of the 1970s.
There was also interest from local councillors and trade unionists, as well as a scattering of people who lived close to the power station.
But the Alliance was small fry against the nuclear public relations machine.
Nobody took much notice.
There was also the background chorus of opposition from across the Bristol Channel.
Parts of the South Wales coast, with large population centres like Cardiff, Newport and Swansea, are only fourteen miles from Hinkley Point.
The power station is clearly visible on a fine day.
What would happen if something went wrong there, as it had in America, people began to ask.
A Welsh Anti-Nuclear Alliance had also been busy campaigning since 1980, particularly over plans to expand the two nuclear power station sites at Trawsfynydd and Wylfa in North Wales.
In 1982, all Welsh County Councils had declared their intention to become ‘nuclear free’.
An additional impetus to Welsh opposition was the simple equation  that further development at Hinkley Point meant even fewer jobs in the coal mines.
When a handful of persistent pickets parked a caravan at the Hinkley entrance during the long drawn out miners' strike, they got precious little support.
The nuclear workers' cars swept in and out of the gates at each shift without a cursory nod.
Even trade unionists were reluctant to show solidarity.
The experience crudely underlined the miners' feeling that nuclear power was there to take their jobs away.
In May 1985, however, an event occurred which was fundamental to the future of the Hinkley C plan.
Somerset County Council went orange.
After a hundred years of true blue Conservative control, the electors decided they wanted a change.
In an astonishing shift in voting patterns, they elected twenty new Liberal and Social Democrat councillors, giving the Alliance, together with a small Labour group, an overall majority of seven seats.
A year later, in the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident, the County Council officially changed its attitude on Hinkley C from ‘neutrality’ to one of opposition to the proposed Pressurized Water Reactor.
Up to then the CEGB had been quietly conducting its negotiations with county planning officials on the assumption that there would be no basic objection.
There would be discussions about where to put the access roads, how much disruption would be caused, what the buildings looked like, but little more.
Suddenly, all that changed.
Not only did the County Council begin to prepare a major case against Hinkley C, but every detail, from the new roads to the siting of a proposed workers' hostel, was back in the melting pot.
If the local authority sustained its objection, one other thing was also certain: according to the law, there would have to be some sort of public inquiry.
The Board's negotiators were furious.
This political sea change coincided with the most dramatic incident to have occurred on the Hinkley Point site since it started operation.
In November 1985, a maintenance team at the B (Advanced Gas-Cooled) station was working on one of the circulators which drives the carbon dioxide cooling gas round the reactor core.
All went well until suddenly a drive-shaft cover came loose and shot across the room, leaving a small hole through which the gas began to spurt.
The area was immediately evacuated whilst a special team in breathing apparatus was sent in to plug the hole.
Because of the potential seriousness of the incident, a site alert was announced.
Workers rushed to their designated assembly points.
Most dramatically, 500 of them were issued with potassium iodate tablets to counter the effects of radioactive iodine.
It was the first time that such a precaution had had to be taken at a British nuclear power station.
Although relatively small amounts of radioactivity were released into the atmosphere, this event was nonetheless critical in focusing the minds of local people on the unthinkable.
What would happen if there was a  really serious accident at Hinkley Point?
Would they be given iodine tablets as well as the workers?
Would they be able to get away in time?
The fact that an internal investigation eventually revealed that the problem was caused by the failure of a ‘crudely hand-ground’ bolt which had been fitted, against all regulations, when the power station was built, hardly added to confidence in the supposedly super-efficient nuclear industry.
Partly in response to concern caused by the iodine tablets incident, partly because of Chernobyl, the new Alliance-led Somerset County Council took two important initiatives.
Firstly, it decided to set up its own radiation monitoring network.
For the first time, council officials armed with geiger counters and special meters began to take regular radiation readings every month from sixty points throughout the county.
They also swept the holiday beaches along the Somerset coast, from Minehead to Burnham-on-Sea.
All these readings were taken back and analysed at a fully equipped laboratory in Taunton.
The eventual aim was to expand the network to include the more complex analysis of samples of soil, milk or vegetables.
The nuclear industry asked why all this was necessary when monitoring was already carried out by the CEGB itself, as well as by government departments.
In practice, the County Council's network covered a wider area, but as important as that fact was its independence: it was a sign of the growing distrust with which the public judged the nuclear ‘experts’.
As it happened, the Council system soon showed its value when its monitors discovered radioactive contamination under the gantry where nuclear fuel flasks from Hinkley Point were loaded on to trains at Bridgwater railway station, en route to Sellafield.
The CEGB agreed to remove the offending rubble.
The second initiative was a decision to completely overhaul the emergency plan which would be used should an accident at Hinkley Point spread radiation outside the site boundary.
This had previously been organized by the police but had not been seriously updated for years.
When the county's energetic emergency planning officer, Dr Alan Jones, went through it, he was amazed: for example, two of the local assembly points, where people were supposed to collect in the event of an evacuation, no longer existed.
Jones's team produced a new, more comprehensive plan which, though still based on the CEGB's tiny (two-mile radius) evacuation zone, could be expected to run a lot more efficiently than its predecessor.
For the first time, everybody living within the evacuation zone was given a special ‘action card’ telling them what to do in a crisis.
The nearest school to the power station, in the village of Stogursey, was even allocated its own supply of potassium iodate tablets.
The sachets of white pills were locked away in the school secretary's cupboard.
The headmaster, Derek Knight, said ‘I hope they will gather dust’.
However, there is little doubt that this precaution, intended to provide reassurance, was a grim reminder of the ever present danger.
2
By this time, the middle of 1986, the Alliance Against Hinkley C had decided to avoid any confusion with the then burgeoning political coalition of centre parties, and renamed itself with an unambiguous slogan —‘Stop Hinkley Expansion' (SHE).
Spurred by a sense of the growing opposition, especially after Chernobyl, it began to agitate at the grass roots.
Public meetings were organized, MPs lobbied (including the Bridgwater incumbent, Tom King, himself a former Energy Minister), and a mass of information produced to emphasize both the nuclear threat and the local disruption this development would bring to everything from roads to wildlife.
At the end of the year, however, a critical decision was taken.
The environmental pressure group Greenpeace decided to highlight a particular nuclear power station as part of its ambitious post-Chernobyl campaign to have all nuclear installations shut down within four years.
Hinkley Point was its chosen target.
The Greenpeace support was welcomed with open arms.
It enabled the small voluntary group to employ two part-time staff — initially myself and Trevor Houghton, who was later replaced by Danielle Grunberg.
And it was able to set off on a totally different, and more professional, tack.
The group's new-found confidence was shown in April 1957, on the first anniversary of Chernobyl, when we organized the biggest ever rally at Hinkley Point.
Over a thousand people brought wooden crosses in the shape of the radiation hazard symbol and planted them along the grass verge entrance to the power station.
Many bore poignant personal messages.
A flotilla of small boats arrived off the coast from South Wales, a few braving the rocky shallows to land.
A biplane buzzed overhead trailing a banner reading ‘No More Chernobyls.’
Paddy Ashdown, Liberal MP for the Yeovil constituency, addressed the crowd under the shadow of the plant and surrounded by children in radiation suits.
There was a final windswept song dedicated to the Rainbow Warriors — the spiritual defenders of the earth according to North American native legend — who had inspired Greenpeace.
By the end of the day, the stark nuclear presence set in bold defiance on the Bristol Channel had been suitably upstaged.
Stop Hinkley Expansion had made its mark.
Such a confident assertion of local feeling against nuclear power was in tune with shifts in the national political scene.
Since the early 1980s there had been a steady erosion of the pro-nuclear power base within  both the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party.
Chernobyl had further tipped the balance.
In 1986 the Labour Party Conference voted by a massive majority to ‘reduce Britain's dependence on nuclear power’.
The TUC called for a one year moratorium whilst its future was reviewed.
Both have since shifted further against the nuclear option.
But the nuclear industry had by this time received yet a further green light.
The report by the inquiry inspector, Sir Frank Layfield, into the Sizewell PWR had recommended that it should go ahead.
‘The expected national economic benefits are sufficient to justify the risks that would be incurred,’ Layfield concluded.
And the government happily accepted his conclusion.
As the Guardian noted, the report gave the Energy Secretary, then Peter Walker, all he needed to ‘initiate the family of perhaps half a dozen similar stations’.
Stop Hinkley Expansion continued to produce thousands of stickers and badges, organized a giant travelling petition to tour local towns and villages, and assembled a list of prominent sponsors.
They ranged from Sir Kelvin Spencer, former Chief Scientist at the Ministry of Power, to the environmentalist David Bellamy.
The Hinkley C application was eventually submitted to the local authorities at the end of August 1987, and the heat was really on.
Stop Hinkley supporters immediately scaled the fence around the large, green field where the new power station was due to rise — and ceremonially burned a domed model of a Pressurized Water Reactor.
But much more needed to be done if the CEGB's post-Sizewell tide of optimism was to be turned.
The Board offered a substantial package of carrots.
Nationally, there would be 10,000 jobs generated by the scheme, it claimed, 3,000 of them on the site itself.
There would be an injection of £300 million into the Somerset economy.
There would also be new roads and possibly other investment: the nearest town to the Sizewell site had been promised a new swimming pool.
A public relations campaign also started up to draw in the waverers.
Councillors were flown to France to see a PWR in operation, to Torness to see how luxurious the workers, accommodation could be — an attraction to keep them on site and out of trouble.
Free copies of a promotional video were sent to local doctors and accountants.
A smart mobile caravan began to tour the area with a reassuring message of safety and reliability, an information shop opened in Bridgwater, and 35,000 full colour newspapers were delivered door to door.
School parties were bused in to see the existing power stations in action.
This local publicity was mirrored by a dramatic escalation in the national expenditure on public relations by all the major organizations concerned with nuclear power.
A confidential report prepared by the CEGB's Director of Public Affairs, Peter Vey, in June 1986 had warned of ‘the inability of the PR machine to marshal sufficient forces to counter  anti-nuclear sentiment’.
Whether as a result of this criticism or not, in the year after Chernobyl the amount allocated to public relations and publicity by the CEGB almost doubled — from £6.3 million to £12.4 million.
The UK Atomic Energy Authority spent £2.5 million and British Nuclear Fuels £6 million in the same year.
A consortium of eight nuclear organizations had also formed the Nuclear Electricity Information Group, a propagandist organization which began a hard sell for nuclear power.
Giant video screens were erected, for example, to greet passengers arriving at the main London rail termini.
At about the same time, the now elevated Lord Marshall, Chairman of the CEGB, was featured in a BBC television documentary about the future of nuclear power.
A physicist and former Director of the Atomic Energy Authority's Harwell laboratories, Marshall had become personally identified at the vanguard of the British nuclear power programme; in one Monty Pythonesque anti-nuclear cartoon, his balding head replaced the reactor dome of a PWR.
His zeal for the American design had even extended to the suggestion that a batch of them should be sold to the Shah of Iran.
During the TV programme, Marshall was seen conducting a board meeting with his usual mixture of arrogance and honesty.
‘Now we're going to build Hinkley C,’ he explained.
‘Sometime in the future, we don't know exactly when, we'll be decommissioning Hinkley A. We'll be building another, Hinkley D, probably another PWR…
We're going to be working on the Hinkley site virtually forever.’
All this prompted the local Bridgewater Mercury to run a rare editorial.
It opened:
‘Hinkley C will be built, make no mistake about it.
The CEGB know it, the local authority know it, we know it, you know it, and the inspector appointed to carry out the inevitable inquiry will know it before he hears the first evidence.
Alas, we must all go along with the charade which will take months, cost millions and produce enough his balloon a dozen times.'
If, as Stop Hinkley Expansion suspected, such fatalism was not shared by the general population of the West Country, then it was vital to get the silent majority to stand up and be counted.
A new phase of the campaign began.
Welsh activists had already printed special postcards on which to register an objection to the scheme.
It was a simple but effective idea and we followed suit.
Thousands were distributed as fast as they could be printed.
We also began to tap in to those networks previously ignored — the farmers, the parish councillors, the professional middle classes.
Meetings began to be held all over the West Country in village halls and school gyms to debate the issues.
A minibus full of people from the villages near Hinkley Point was taken over to Suffolk to hear and see how  unpleasant a nuclear power construction site would be.
Leaflets were completely redesigned to make the message attractive and accessible.
‘What Does Hinkley ‘C’ Stand For?’one handout asked.
The provocative response was, ‘Cancer, Chaos, Chernobyl’.
To demonstrate its professionalism, the campaign also carried out an opinion poll in the Bridgwater and Taunton constituencies.
Taking a balanced psephological slice of the local population, this revealed that out of 600 people questioned, almost twice as many were firmly against Hinkley C (44 per cent) as were clearly in favour (23 per cent ).
Even among those who had a connection with the power station (because either they or a close friend worked there) there was a third against.
Stop Hinkley Expansion was not alone in this upsurge of activity.
Throughout the West Country, concerned people called meetings in their area to debate the nuclear issue.
I personally spoke at countless gatherings, from twenty suited businessmen at their weekly lunch to 200 noisy schoolchildren packed in a hall.
Dozens of other groups organized their own rallies and petitions and sponsored walks.
In the cathedral town of Wells, an obscure section of the local council rules was unearthed to demand an official referendum.
Though the turnout was small, there was a large majority against Hinkley C.
Farmer Clive Knox was also getting worried.
By now he had had confirmation of the news he had been expecting for some time.
If the Hinkley C power station was built he would lose about 150 acres of his best land.
The land would be used for the construction camp, but he had no doubt that there were ultimate plans to follow Lord Marshall's alphabetic progression into D and even E stations.
There would be compensation payments, of course, but after Chernobyl the doubts had set in.
‘It suddenly occurred to me,’ he says looking back, ‘what if something serious happens there, or even a hint of something.
I produce lambs on the land immediately adjoining the power station.
There are jokes even now when I go in the market about them glowing in the dark.’
Knox got involved in a local action group and became a vocal critic of the plan, regularly appearing on television programmes standing defiantly in the shadow of the existing power station blocks.
Meanwhile, Somerset County Council, led by its planning committee chairman Humphrey Temperley, had been busy pursuing a more formal opposition.
Large public meetings were called in the main county towns to test reaction: CEGB speakers were given a consistently hard time.
The council also set aside an initial budget of£250,000 to employ a legal team and prepare a case for the public inquiry.
As importantly, a coalition of local authorities (later officially titled the Consortium of Opposing Local Authorities, or COLA) was formed to share the financial burden and to  link the Welsh and English sides of the opposition.
Eventually, this was joined by nearly every county authority around the sweep of the Severn Estuary, from Devon to West Glamorgan.
Compared with Sizewell, where neither the local district or county council put up more than minor objections, this was a totally different situation.
But perhaps the most crucial sign that headway was being made into new territory came when the West Somerset District Council, which included Hinkley Point, came out firmly against Hinkley C. Its influential policy committee chairman was married to a nuclear worker and its previous attitude had been at best neutral.
It was the first opportunity for a small celebration.
By the beginning of 1988, as the official three month ‘consultation’ period allowed by the government elapsed, there were almost 10,000 officially registered objectors.
This was over twice as many as for the Sizewell B application.
The tiny district council planning department offices were swamped; extra staff had to be employed to sort through the daily flood of protest post.
And it wasn't just postcards.
There were hundreds of lengthy letters and technical critiques from concerned individuals, including engineers, academics, politicians, scores of organizations and over sixty local authorities from all round Britain.
Even a batch of Irish councils had objected.
One woman enclosed a photo of her two small children as a symbol of her fears.
Most importantly, there were letters from less obvious quarters.
Among the organizations which had put pen to paper were the Farmers Union of Wales, the Somerset Community Health Council and the regional Youth Hostels Association.
The silent majority had begun to stand up.
The question now was whether they would be counted.
PART TWO GOING CRITICAL
A PEOPLE'S INQUIRY?
1
THE HINKLEY C Public Inquiry opened on Tuesday 4 October 1988 with all the traditional razzmatazz of an important event in the anti-nuclear calendar.
To symbolize the power station as an unwanted monstrosity, the day was publicized in advance as ‘White Elephant Day’.
The symbol quickly caught on.
On a grey autumn morning, a herd of mammoths — in card on sticks, constructed out of papier mâché, as masks — congregated outside the hall.
A special badge was produced reading ‘Don't be a Dumbo — Say No To  Hinckley C’.
A blimp-style balloon with a white elephant on the side hovered in the sky above the crowd.
But most attention went to the largest elephant of all, a fifteen-foot-high inflatable which towered over MP Paddy Ashdown — only recently elected leader of the Social and Liberal Democrats — as he officially cut the green ribbon across the door of the Greenpeace-funded Stop Hinkley Centre.
Behind the circus atmosphere of the first day, however, there was a serious problem.
For the simple truth was that, however many signatures we had assembled on petitions or however extensive the lists of worthy organizations opposed to Hinkley C, the decision would now be made in the totally different context of this classically British performance.
On the surface, the veneer of an open democratic debate; underneath, the potential of a pre-determined rubber stamp.
And as the opening arguments unfolded in the agricultural college at Cannington (five miles from Hinkley Point), the balance of forces looked distinctly like the traditional contest of David and Goliath.
Goliath was the Central Electricity Generating Board, a multi-billion pound public company with apparently unlimited resources.
To start with, it had employed an impressive legal team to put its case.
Headed by Lord David Silsoe, a quiet, polite man whose demeanour belied his lightning brain and withering ability to unnerve his opposition, there were four supporting barristers as well as instructing solicitors and  advisers.
Behind the scenes, an army of CEGB staff, providing constant back-up to the front-liners, was always ready to dig out whatever information was required at a moment's notice.
A whole press relations group was also ensconced at Cannington for the occasion.
Rooms were packed to the ceiling with files and photocopiers and computers.
Six mobile offices were even stacked in pairs across the college lawn to accommodate some of the dozens of people employed by the Board especially for the event.
When opposition groups thought in terms of thousands of pounds to finance their case, the Board thought in millions.
But the Board was more than just well-prepared for the Hinkley C Inquiry.
It was brimming with confidence.
Silsoe had been the lead barrister for the CEGB at the Sizewell B Inquiry of 1983–5.
At 350 days, this was the longest inquiry in British history.
Issues of economics and safety had been exhaustively debated.
Whatever the anti-nuclear movement might have said about the way the result was achieved, the CEGB had got the outcome it wanted.
Even after Chernobyl, the government had given the go-ahead for the power station, and when the Hinkley C Inquiry was about to open, the foundations of Britain's first PWR were steadily expanding on the Suffolk coast.
Not only that, but the Conservative government had made it clear that its policy in support of nuclear power remained unfaltering.
This included backing for the plan to construct a ‘family’ of PWRs.
The record showed that out of fourteen nuclear public inquiries since 1956, the nuclear proponents had only lost once.
Whatever the Inspector said, the government could overrule him.
Some people even argued that the inquiry system was now seen by the authorities as a way of diverting public opposition away from other channels of protest.
Following that line, we were walking into a minefield.
Better to stick to the direct action and public protests we knew and could control, and leave the inquiry to people like the local authorities.
However, there was one fundamental argument against these concerns.
This was that if we didn't take part in the inquiry, then it would be easy for the pro-nuclear lobby to accuse us of ignoring democracy, throwing up the chance to have our say, implying that our case was too weak to risk exposure.
The general public wouldn't be interested in the subtleties of unfair regulations and the clear imbalance of resources.
They would see the anti-nuclear movement as having bottled out.
But unless we could ensure that the voice of the people — fresh, urgent and heartfelt — somehow entered the hallowed inquiry chamber, with its unwritten rules and legalistic jargon, we would get stuck in a morass of procedure and paperwork where only the strong, and barristers, could possibly survive.
2
The building which housed most of the inquiry sessions was the former chapel of a twelfth-century priory, with a domed glass cupola, ornate floral decorations and tall niches which no doubt once held classical statues.
It was completely refurbished for the event, with smart new tables and rows of pink upholstered chairs.
On a raised dais in front of large windows looking out on to the agricultural college gardens sat the Inspector.
Michael Barnes was forty-five, an Oxford-educated barrister who specialized in planning law and whose main involvement in major public inquiries had been on behalf of the government over the proposed Stansted Airport.
The government lost.
Barnes was an unknown quantity, without any clear prejudice on the nuclear issue.
Knowledge of him was so slim that the magazine Private Eye even suggested mischievously that the Department of Energy computer might have mistakenly selected him instead of another man of the same name.
Only after the event was over did we discover that he had in fact contributed to a booklet produced just before the 1987 general election by the Society of Conservative Lawyers.
His manner was cool and distant.
He rarely showed any emotion, even when people presented him with the most heart-felt outpourings of their fears and hopes.
Only occasionally did the bubble burst, and he flashed anger at someone who argued back or tried to speak out of turn.
I decided to take freshly picked flowers from my garden every week to brighten up his table, a gesture he later said had encouraged him ‘at low moments’.
What was clear, however, was that he was extremely intelligent, and quickly got to grips with the complex technicalities of nuclear fission and its consequences.
The Inspector was advised by three ‘expert’ assessors, who sat beside him in turn at points in the hearing which bore on their speciality.
Professor Alastair Ulph (economics) was an Ulsterman whose accent was as difficult to penetrate as some of the mathematical equations he discussed.
Dr Kenneth Duncan was a biologist who had recently retired from the top management of the National Radiological Protection Board.
Professor Hugh Simpson provided expertise in engineering and was the liveliest and most questioning of the three.
But there was little feeling that any of them were fundamentally critical of nuclear power.
In front of them to one side were the CEGB representatives, led by Lord Silsoe with streamlined efficiency.
He was reported to be paid £2,000 per day for his efforts — as much as some objecting organizations were likely to spend in total.
His three supporting barristers were well briefed by the CEGB machine and rarely put a foot wrong.
A stream of other officials walked in and out regularly to give advice, pass on information or carry  in the heavy wooden boxes full of papers which surrounded them like a stockade.
On the other side was the team from the Consortium of Opposing Local Authorities (COLA, which by this time had twenty-one local council members and a budget approaching £1 million.
This had enabled the consortium to hire expert consultants to work on technical aspects of the CEGB's case.
Their QC was Gerard Ryan who had two supporting barristers.
There was often a feeling, however, that the CORA legal advisers were scarcely on top of the material under discussion and had little energy for the battle.
At the back, a further row of tables in front of the public seats was occupied by regular opponents from the smaller organizations, including Stop Hinkley Expansion.
There was also one further desk at the front, set just below the Inspector, where ‘witnesses, gave evidence either for or against the proposal.
Every twenty minutes throughout the proceedings a new shorthand writer came in to take verbatim notes.
This, together with the formal dress and language of the (largely male) participants, gave the whole event more than a touch of courtroom formality.
It was an arena it would be difficult to get many ‘ordinary’ people to enter.
Five yards from the entrance doors to the inquiry hall, inside the officially titled Stop Hinkley Centre but known generally as the ‘objectors’ office', SHE faced a daunting task as the inquiry opened.
There were two allied problems: how to keep up with and respond to the welter of material being thrown at it by the CEGB and the various government departments; and how to encourage more people to present their own views in opposition.
Public participation was vital in its own right, of course, as the only way to bring those thousands of signatures to life.
But it was also clear that the longer the inquiry went on, the more it would coincide with the growing national debate about the government's proposals to privatize the electricity industry.
This had already begun to gather steam with the publication in February 1988 of a White Paper which promised special protection for the nuclear industry.
And if there was one hopeful outcome from this process, it was that nuclear power and private investment wouldn't mix.
To keep up with the evidence, the Stop Hinkley Expansion group learned on its feet.
There were such reams of documents that it simply wasn't possible to read them all.
A quick scan was the best you could hope for before launching into the preparation of a cross-examination.
This meant actually producing and maintaining a series of questions directed at the CEGB's expert witnesses, most of whom had clearly spent many hours going through every conceivable pitfall.
The aim was to put them on the spot — or at least to impress the Inspector with your knowledge and concern.
Nobody closely involved with Stop Hinkley Expansion had  ever done this before.
The first time I stood up to cross-examine the CEGB's opening witness, Derek Davis — the man who had said in 1952 that there was ‘no strong local opposition’ to Hinkley C — I felt as though I was floundering in a mess of unthought-out quibbles.
When you knew your basic arguments were so good, to fail to deliver a thrust of any strength seemed abysmal.
Reading through the transcript afterwards was often a depressing reminder of missed opportunities.
One regular cross-examiner, Francis Stoner, compared taking part in the inquiry to clambering aboard a ‘sanitized juggernaut, where there is a suspension of the laws of time, a vortex which can drain energy from people’.
Stoner in fact discovered, as I did eventually, that asking the obvious, straightforward things that worried opponents of nuclear power often got much more interesting answers than any attempt to confront the technicalities.
But even by the end, by which time Danielle Grunberg and I had between us gone through dozens of successive cross-examinations, it was still like performing on the opening night of a new play.
It helped considerably that the ‘batting order’ always started with the Local Authorities' Consortium.
COLA was in the privileged position of being a statutory objector, which meant its barristers were not limited by the (sometimes severe) time limits applied to other questioners.
The Consortium had a lengthy list of over forty witnesses to present, and therefore a lot of material about which it could legitimately cross-question the Board.
Over a hundred other organizations also came to oppose the plan, including trade unions, environmental groups and parish councils.
Only a few could afford to make regular appearances.
These ranged from the high-profile national bodies like Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and the Council for the Protection of Rural England, who all had professional advocates to put their case, through to smaller but persistent participants like the South Wales Women's Support Groups (defending the interests of mining communities) and the Irish Sea Project (concerned about marine pollution).
What was impressive was that each group had something different in the way of experience to contribute, whether about uranium mining or leukaemia clusters or the advantages of energy saving.
When nobody from the long list of eminent organizations which had registered their opposition could be present, however (which was most of the time), the burden of maintaining a presence and regular cross-examining was left to a few stalwarts.
A classic example was Brian Rome, a law lecturer who appeared under the banner of the Bristol Conservation Society.
He was already a walking compendium on nuclear public inquiries before the hearings started, amassing a library of material on Sizewell in his living room.
He even took early retirement to attend the  Hinkley event.
By the end of the inquiry, he had cross-examined nearly every witness from either the nuclear industry or a government department and delivered vast reams of his own evidence on every subject covered, some amounting to several hundred pages of closely-typed script.
He lived the inquiry for all his waking hours.
There were others as well: Robert Green, the nephew of horticulturalist Hilda Murrell, who was murdered in suspicious circumstances during the Sizewell inquiry; Ron Preddy, a registered disabled man who gradually developed the confidence to speak out; May Morris, one of many women who spoke with convincing honesty about their personal fears and beliefs.
In different ways, they were all totally committed to fighting the CEGB to the utmost of their personal capacity.
By contrast, the only regular ‘supporter’ was Kitty Little, a long-standing pro-nuclear activist whose persistent promotion of the fast breeder reactor was matched only by her equally persistent belief that the British anti-nuclear campaign was part of an international plot incorporating the Rothschilds and President Carter and which would eventually lead to the imposition of an ‘atheist Marxist-Leninist dictatorship’.
However, if our main aim had been to get as many ‘ordinary people’ involved as possible, this was in danger of being frustrated by the sheer bureaucracy of the process.
There were special registration forms to fill in, statements of case to prepare, and then a constant flow of official letters and advance programmes which were often as confusing as they were helpful.
To counter this, we distributed thousands of copies of a special leaflet explaining how the inquiry worked and how you should prepare if you wanted to speak.
This was something the authorities had never dreamt of doing.
We also ran day-long workshops throughout the region to help give prospective speakers more confidence.
And in the Stop Hinkley Centre, Jill Sutcliffe, an experienced campaigner who had seen Luxulyan from the gantry head, was ready to encourage and advise the uncertain before they took the stage in front of the cold, piercing gazes of the lawyers and the Inspector.
Although we never transformed the inquiry process into anything approaching a people's tribunal, we did turn it into something much more accessible than many people had ever conceived.
Gradually, the number of individual objectors prepared to enter the fray began to expand outside the initial handful.
But the most dramatic moments came at the special ‘informal’ sessions held to allow ordinary people their say.
We had pressed hard for these and the Inspector eventually agreed to a series at four different venues.
Most importantly, Barnes decided to take the inquiry across to the other side of the Bristol Channel.
When the inquiry went to Cardiff it did more than cross the Severn Bridge.
It entered hostile territory.
On top of the mutual suspicion of the   Welsh for English-promoted schemes, and the real fear of an accident less than thirty miles away, there was the added dimension of the decimated coal industry.
Whereas at Cannington there were a handful of voices raised in favour of the nuclear industry, in Wales this was heresy.
A straw poll carried out by one objector in the centre of Pontypool had shown 83 per cent against Hinkley C.
IF THE ROMANS HAD NUCLEAR POWER, WE'D STILL BE GUARDING THEIR WASTE
The opening Cardiff session was held in the unlikely setting of the New Theatre.
Barnes and his team sat on the stage amid the gold and maroon decorations and with their tables theatrically draped in material to hide their legs.
The first performance came from two people in white radiation suits who walked on to the stage carrying a dustbin allegedly containing nuclear waste.
Their intervention halted Lord Silsoe in the middle of reading a statement.
A stony-faced Barnes retreated behind the scenery.
From then on the atmosphere was electric, as speaker after speaker emotionally declaimed their opposition to the power station from a spotlit microphone, followed by echoing bursts of applause.
Most of the speakers were women and many had prepared lengthy and detailed statements of their views.
One woman, describing herself as a ‘member of an endangered species — the miner's wife’, movingly portrayed the material and spiritual desolation that pit closures had brought to the South Wales valleys.
‘Our mining community has a culture which is unique,’ she said.
‘You cannot build a community round a nuclear power plant.’
Another woman, evidently heavily pregnant, asked simply if there was ‘any other way to generate electricity that can, by its very nature, potentially reach inside to my foetus and contaminate it before it is born’.
The answer from a CEGB expert, surrounded by much verbiage, was essentially ‘No’.
Six people spoke on behalf of CADNO, a protest group based near the Trawsfynydd nuclear power station in North Wales.
They all wore symbolic black clothes over bright yellow T-shirts and all spoke in Welsh, their statements being translated into English afterwards.
The warmest reception from the audience went to Edward Williams, a hill farmer from Gwynedd whose personal radiation measurement in the aftermath of Chernobyl had registered ten times the normal level.
Williams explained that there were still hundreds of farms and thousands of sheep over which restrictions about movement and slaughter were still in force.
‘The whole working pattern of our community has been disturbed,’ he said sadly.
‘No money can compensate for that.’
He added that he himself must ‘inevitably live with the knowledge that I am now more likely to develop cancer’.
Six months later similar scenes were repeated in Bristol, this time under the grand arched wooden ceiling of the Wills Memorial Hall.
This time also there were black speakers as well as white, the unemployed  as well as the professionals.
Their common concern was the chaos that would unleash itself on the city if a radioactive cloud from Hinkley Point was carried by the prevailing wind.
At Cannington itself the first informal session was so full that the inquiry organizers told us afterwards they were concerned that the balcony might not be able to sustain the weight.
Apart from these special sessions we encouraged more and more people to make statements in the main inquiry (where the atmosphere was more formal and they could be cross-examined by a CEGB barrister).
This meant that each subject area covered, from economics through to emergency planning, always ended with several days of ordinary people getting up to have their say.
It was like a chorus to the technical debate.
There were doctors concerned that they had never been given any information about a nuclear accident, farmers worried about the effect of contamination on their stock and crops, and a teacher who recited his own poem about a nuclear disaster and then presented the Inspector with an oak leaf from the Quantocks.
In the end, over 600 people were able to take part in the inquiry, a remarkably high figure given the time required to prepare and attend and the intimidating feel of the proceedings.
3
When the inquiry first opened, there were varying predictions about how long it would last.
Many objectors privately feared that it would be all over in less than six months, and after precious little public involvement.
With the national debate over the proposals to privatize the electricity industry gathering steam we knew how important it was that it didn't fade away.
In fact, by Christmas 1988, after three months solid debate, it had still not completed the first of the five subject areas laid down by Energy Secretary Cecil Parkinson at the start.
The trade magazine Electrical Review even did a calculation which showed that if only half the official objectors spoke for just fifteen minutes the hearings would continue well into 1990.
The record number of people who did get involved, or who wanted to be kept in touch, generated a vast workload for the inquiry bureaucracy, in reality a handful of hard-pressed individuals.
The number of officially registered objectors had by now almost doubled, to over 20,000, all of whom had to be entered on a database and then sent information.
New statements of evidence, or additions to existing statements, were constantly produced by the regular participants.
Hundreds of supporting documents were submitted to back these up.
These ranged from a report on the radioactive intake of shelduck to the texts of vast studies on the phenomenon of global warming.
Keeping in touch with this flow, as well as the hundred-odd pages of daily transcript, was a job practicable only for the zealots like Brian Rome or the massed ranks of the CEGB staff.
In one month alone, two million photocopies were produced on the inquiry's giant Xerox machines.
Throughout this period the CEGB team kept their heads down and remained quietly confident.
After just twelve days of the hearings it was dramatically announced that the first parts for Hinkley C had already been ordered.
This involved what were described as ‘initial forgings for the pressure vessel’— the 36-foot-high steel cylinder which would lie at the heart of the reactor — as well as other basic equipment.
The cost was £17 million.
The Stop Hinkley Expansion group complained to the Inspector, arguing that this was jumping the gun and a waste of public money, despite the CEGB claim that if it didn't order these parts in advance, at its own risk, it would never keep to its construction timetable.
Speaking for SHE, I said that the Board was trying to give the impression that the result of the inquiry was a foregone conclusion.
Delay was an ‘inevitable consequence of the democratic process’.
On two scorching days in May, we also travelled to France to shadow the Inspector on an official visit to the Framatome company's factory at Chalon-sur-Saône where the pressure vessel was being made.
It was a depressing experience to walk along the rows of these giant steel structures coming off the production line and then to see, at the end of the row, the one earmarked for Somerset.
It was even more difficult to ask serious questions about the system for radiographing the integrity of welds, which the engineers were keen to explain, when what really mattered was whether this monster could be stopped from crossing the Channel.
Equally depressing was the finale to the French trip — a tour round the intestines of a nuclear plant won to be commissioned on the English Channel near Dieppe.
As we walked through a network of pipes and valves we realized that this was what Hinkley C would look like before its radioactive inventory took over and no human beings could enter where we were standing.
In a country that has pushed the technology to the limit, the French confidence that nuclear power is safe and unproblematic was overwhelming and saddening.
They simply could not understand why people in England were so worried.
The CEGB also felt confident about the position of the various regulatory and advisory bodies which appeared at the inquiry.
These included the Ministry of Agriculture, the Department of Energy, the National Radiological Protection Board and the Department of the Environment, all of whom have varying responsibilities for controls or policy in the nuclear industry.
The Agriculture Ministry, for example, is  responsible for monitoring the radioactivity of foodstuffs and marine life round nuclear sites, whilst the Department of Energy is in charge of overall energy policy issues and is also the ‘lead department’ on planning for a nuclear emergency.
Despite these important responsibilities the relationship that came over to the objectors was one of cosy acquiescence between these bureaucracies and the nuclear industry.
Nobody wanted to challenge the status quo, especially with a clearly pro-nuclear government policy in the background.
There was no cutting edge to these organizations, no sense that anything might be wrong, or likely to go wrong.
After Chernobyl, such complacency was alarming.
The most crucial organization was the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII), a division of the Health and Safety Executive, which actually maintained a permanent office at Cannington throughout the proceedings.
Through its team of inspectors, the NII is responsible for approving the safety of all nuclear power stations, both before they start up and regularly during their operation.
But because Hinkley C was seen as a virtual ‘replica’ of the Sizewell design, the NII had made it clear from the start that it had no major reservations.
However objectors might have viewed the political reality, it seemed clear that the Inspector saw these bodies as a valuable source of ‘independent’ advice to be set alongside the potential ‘bias’of the CEGB.
This meant that while from our side they appeared cautious and reactionary, for the Board they provided a cheerful dawn chorus to which it could always confidently wake up.
Sometimes these shadowy bodies intervened more directly.
The Department of Energy, for example, was responsible for providing an £80,000 grant to the Cornwall Energy Project (CEP), a research group promoting the use of conservation and renewable sources of energy in the South-West peninsula, The CEP had in turn been requested by the local authorities consortium to provide evidence to the inquiry against the Electricity Board's case.
A month or so before this was due to be delivered, however, a curt memorandum arrived from the Energy Department warning the group that it ‘should resist getting drawn into the fray’.
At a subsequent meeting an official added that it would be ‘most unfortunate’ if the evidence was being heard at the same time as the project's grant came up for renewal.
In the event, the CEP evidence was eventually given by the individuals responsible under the banner of the then Cornwall-based campaigner George Pritchard, although it would undoubtedly have helped its status to be seen as part of the local councils' case.
Even so, the Department of Energy has not provided any substantial funding to the project since that time.
One area in which the CEGB couldn't always rely on support was the  media.
As already explained, in the years since Chernobyl the nuclear industry had been spending increasing sums of money on publicity and advertising.
Whether by chance or design, the opening of the Hinkley C Inquiry coincided with a series of full page national newspaper adverts by the Nuclear Electricity Information Group.
These showed a cloth-capped building worker, brick and trowel at the ready, saying ‘Why should I worry about oil running out?
I won't be around’.
His selfish short-sightedness was contrasted with the source of energy he implicitly ignored — the endless potential for ‘reliable and economical’ nuclear power — and the child playing at his feet, who responds, ‘But I will’.
This subtly psychological approach, no doubt based on much headbanging in the advertising agency, was nonetheless open to parody (see pages 82–3).
And the nuclear industry couldn't always buy itself into the media.
When it came to grabbing the headlines, it was regularly the opposition that stole the show.
Fortunately the inquiry was regularly spiced with drama.
On International Women's Day, over a hundred women arrived to protest at the male domination of the event: they wore white featureless masks inside the hall — to symbolize women's invisibility-and, in men's suits, held a mock inquiry outside.
When the National Union of Mineworkers produced its President, Arthur Scargill, and MP Tony Benn among its impressive line-up of witnesses, there was as much attention as if the royal family had arrived.
Surrounded by cameras, Benn announced that Hinkley C would be ‘the first power station to be built on purely ideological grounds’.
Scargill dominated the hearings with his presence like some grand master of ceremonies.
He accused the government of ‘a paranoid determination to reduce the coal-mining industry and the power of the miners’.
To opt for nuclear power after Chernobyl would be to ‘swap the prospect of a tragedy for the certainty of a catastrophe’.
The media coverage served two purposes.
To the sceptical, it helped to justify and explain our involvement in the inquiry.
But it also allowed us, as the main local opposition group, to speak directly to millions of people about our concerns.
There is little doubt that the consistent media focus was a critical factor in maintaining our supporters' faith in the message and in shifting even more people against the project.
Though to start with it was scarcely perceptible, the mood in the cluster of villages round the power station itself began to change.
This was a critical group, among whom the most commonly heard comment was ‘There's nothing you can do to stop it’.
At first, any hostility centred on the major new roads which would have to be ploughed across untouched farmland to carry extra traffic to the plant and the proposed hostel which threatened to inject up to 700 unmarried building workers into an isolated rural community.
Gradually, other issues came to the suffice.
An early shift was when the parish council in Stogursey, the only village within the official power station evacuation area, registered its opposition, not just because of the feared disruption, but because of the increased risk of an accident.
‘We have had our share of trouble, we have made our contribution to the need for power generation.
We consider we have done enough,’ the parish representative eventually told the inquiry.
A door-to-door poll in Cannington itself showed a virtually equal number for and against Hinkley C; a similar result was found in neighbouring Nether Stowey.
Both were villages with large numbers of Hinkley workers and which, a few years before, could have been relied on to toe the company line.
One example, however, came to symbolize the shift which a growing awareness of the nuclear issue had brought to this part of Somerset.
This was the saga of the village of Combwich.
WHY SHOULD I WORRY ABOUT OIL RUNNING OUT?
WHY SHOULD I WORRY ABOUT NUCLEAR WASTE?
Combwich (pronounced ‘Cumidge’) is a quiet, picturesque community clustered round a bend in the River Parrett as it meanders on its way from the sea to Bridgwater Docks.
It was once an important port, but now contains little more than a wharf, the use of which is also limited by the extremely wide range of the Severn Estuary tides.
Nonetheless, the CEGB had used the wharf to ship in large, pre-fabricated parts for its earlier power stations.
It assumed it could do so again.
This assumption proved its downfall.
In order for the vast pressure vessel (the one we had seen being manufactured in France) to negotiate the narrow village streets, it was necessary for the Board to buy up the frontages of over thirty houses.
Garden walls would be knocked down.
An old barn would also have to be demolished.
Having failed to get voluntary agreements from all the residents, compulsory purchase orders on the properties were issued, with classic insensitivity, just before Christmas 1988.
But concern about the legal process soon turned to questions about what was really involved.
An active group of villagers discovered that there could be up to eighty of these heavy loads.
The only access to the village would be blocked for long periods.
Not only that, but once the wharf had been modernized for the construction of Hinkley C, it was highly likely that it would be used again to take out the radioactive debris from the dismantling of Hinkley A. This had never been mentioned before.
The thought of radioactive material passing their front doors and then possibly being stored at the wharf, until the tides were right, tipped the balance for many residents.
From reluctant acceptance, the village mood was rapidly transformed into outright hostility.
The parish council was forced to retract a previous resolution in favour of Hinkley C. Even many of the locals who worked at Hinkley Point turned against their employers: a village poll showed 72 per cent against the scheme.
‘For sale’ signs began to multiply as panic set in that the village would be blighted.
Visiting celebrities, from Paddy  Ashdown to Bridgwater MP Tom King, were regularly seen on television treading the controversial route with worried villagers.
King even promised to lobby on their behalf for a new jetty to be built instead off Hinkley Point itself — the only time he made a strong stand against any aspect of the Hinkley C project.
The CEGB succeeded in scoring two more own goals.
In the middle of this furore the manager at Hinkley Point wrote to the vicar of Combwich offering to contribute £2,000 towards a fund to restore the church's organ.
Not only that but he suggested in his letter that it would be sensible to keep the donation quiet.
The CEGB denied that it was intended as a bribe.
When it came to the special compulsory purchase hearings (taken as part of the Hinkley C Inquiry), the Board also fell flat on its face.
After the CEGB barrister mentioned in passing that the Board was in fact already applying to build a completely new road, skirting the village, the Inspector angrily abandoned the proceedings.
He later recommended the reimbursement of the objectors, costs.
Maureen Randall, who led the protest group Combwich Residents Environmental Concern with her husband John, said at the end of the inquiry that she had started off with ‘no particular views on nuclear power’.
She was now determinedly against.
As an organization, Stop Hinkley Expansion had initially expected to present only a handful of witnesses at the inquiry — people who would stand up on our behalf and defend their arguments against the assault of Lord Silsoe and his colleagues.
The short list included Professor Jim Jeffery, a long-standing combatant with the CEGB on economics, and Dr Janet Rowe, a well-known adviser on ecology, who would look at the effect of the development on its immediate environment.
As our confidence rose, however, so did our sights.
By the end we had increased the number to nine, with both anti nuclear activists and academics covering subjects as diverse as nuclear waste disposal and the Irish fears of an accident at Hinkley.
They also included one unusual name: Donald Swift-Hook, the man who had run the CEGB's own research effort into wind power for eight years, agreed to give his views on our behalf.
This was, among other things, a tremendous publicity coup.
Meanwhile, there were continuing protests against Hinkley C outside the confines of the inquiry.
One of the most amusing was when a group calling itself the Renewable Energy Generating Board drove on to the proposed reactor site and installed a miniature array of ten-foot-high wind turbines.
They spun round undisturbed in front of the nuclear power stations for several hours.
Stop Hinkley Expansion also published its own fortnightly magazine, the Hinkley Inquirer .
This was an attempt to provide a readable, reasonably objective report of the event which would reflect both sides of the argument (and with gossip and humour thrown in to lighten the load).
It was even called ‘the only complete and clear account’.
Fortunately, journalist Brigid McConville was available to help tussle with the almost impossible task of distilling up to 1,000 pages of transcript and even more pages of documents into eight sides of pithy words, all of which were edited and made up into camera-ready artwork at the inquiry itself.
The Inquirer proved a great success.
It even snatched an exclusive interview with Lord Marshall when he made a flying visit to Cannington to inspect the front-line troops.
On walking into the Stop Hinkley Centre, Marshall introduced himself with typical candour as ‘the enemy’, then launched into a long shaggy dog story about how much opposition there had been to a hydro-electric scheme in Snowdonia.
Eventually we began to feel that the Inspector had at least some leanings towards our point of view.
He had already stood out against the Board's obstinacy by forcing out their version of the comparative costs between nuclear- and coal-powered electricity (see Chapter Six).
After twice refusing, he finally agreed to the demand of a petition of over 10,000 names asking for a session of the inquiry to be held in Bristol.
The status of SHE within the inquiry had also steadily risen.
We were treated as an accepted channel of communication with the mass of independent objectors and were often the only other organization apart from the local councils' consortium whom Michael Barnes asked to comment when dramatic announcements were made.
Our relationship with the man himself also got closer; he would even wander into the objectors' office to see how we were doing.
The final accolade came in Barnes' closing speech, when he announced that never in his experience, ‘and I think rarely if ever in anybody's experience, has a local group without legal representation appeared and presented their case so consistently over an enormously long inquiry such as this.’
In May 1989, however, Barnes surprised us all with the most dramatic decision of the whole event.
He announced that he would make one of the longest fact-finding journeys ever made by a public inquiry in Britain.
This was a week's trip to the Soviet Union with a centrepiece visit to the site of the world's worst nuclear accident — Chernobyl.
To the objectors, Barnes's decision justified our persistent assertion that the Chernobyl accident was central to any assessment of nuclear power in Britain.
Chernobyl spelled out the dangers in letters ten feet high.
To the CEGB, however, the tragedy was a closed book: its lessons had been learned, the main one being that there was precious little which the British nuclear industry need change.
Barnes's decision therefore came as somewhat of a slap in the face to these well rehearsed points.
They were not pleased.
There was little doubt it represented a major success for the objectors.
The Chernobyl visit was just one of many reasons why the inquiry was still running when even the conscientious Barnes decided to take a summer break.
When the event resumed in September 1989 it was expected to finish off the closing submissions which had already started and then gently fade away into history.
In fact, a series of unexpected decisions over which Michael Barnes had no direct control meant that it reached a totally different climax.
THE WHITE ELEPHANT EXPOSED
1
IN 1985, the Central Electricity Generating Board produced a large, full colour poster proclaiming the wonders of the Pressurized Water Reactor.
There was a cutaway picture showing the inside of the familiar hemispherical dome of the reactor housing, a brief explanation of how it would be built and operated, and a map of the world to emphasize that, internationally, this was ‘the most widely used’ type of nuclear power plant.
‘A PWR in Britain', it proudly proclaimed in large type, ‘would be the cheapest source of electricity.’
The poster was specially designed to decorate the walls of schools or libraries or anywhere else where the public was eager to learn the ‘facts’ about nuclear energy.
Three years later the poster was reprinted to promote the ‘second British PWR’ at Hinkley Point.
The colourful pictures were much the same, the number of PWRs around the world had increased, but there was one major difference.
Close examination showed that the sentence about ‘the cheapest source’ had totally disappeared.
This tacit admission that something had gone seriously wrong with the original expectation of atom-fired electricity ‘too cheap to meter’ has been one of the best kept secrets in the whole nuclear power debate.
Whilst public protest and scientific concern have concentrated on the dangers of the industry's radioactive threat, and others have challenged the strategic arguments, the economics have remained the preserve of a few academic critics who have been prepared to tussle with the limited information available.
Against this, protected by the sheltering arm of state-owned companies and compliant politicians, the nuclear industry has set its strongest claims — that nothing would undercut power from the miraculous uranium.
Over the period of the Hinkley C Inquiry, those claims finally fell apart.
It was a process which had been gathering momentum for some time and has continued since.
In the end, it was also the issue which  secured a vital nail in the coffin of Britain's nuclear dream.
I shall make no attempt to deal with every subject which was raised during the encyclopaedic Hinkley C Inquiry.
By the time the talking was over, the hearings had generated over nine million spoken words.
A record 572 proofs of evidence had been submitted, with over 4,500 additional documents to back them up.
In the process of satisfying the demands of the flood of participants, the inquiry's photocopiers had dealt with over fifteen million sheets of paper, enough to demolish a forest of 1,000 trees.
Nearly every major issue to do with energy policy had been raised, from conservation measures to coal prices to cancer risk estimates.
The hearings provide an invaluable snapshot of the state of the arguments about nuclear power as the 1990s open and I shall return to look at some of these, especially where new information came to light.
But throughout the verbal onslaught of 152 days of intense and heated debate, one simple question remained firmly at the top of the agenda: whether nuclear power would be cheaper than other potential sources of electricity.
In the end, this became critical to the industry's survival.
Ever since the post-war beginnings of the atomic dream, it had been the received wisdom that nuclear power was an unquenchable, reliable and, above all, cheap source of electricity.
Alongside the other strategic arguments in its favour, the economics of the uranium fuel cycle had been taken for granted.
In 1957, Sir Christopher Hinton, about to become the very first chairman of the CEGB, had predicted that by the 1970s nuclear power would be ‘appreciably’ cheaper than coal-fired generation.
When the 1970s arrived, it was claimed that nuclear stations actually were producing electricity which was 35 per cent cheaper than coal and 50 per cent cheaper than oil.
Ten years later, the Sizewell B PWR was said to promise a bargain in power generation compared with a coal-fired alternative: in 1985, leading CEGB executive John Baker described it as ‘a clear winner’ over coal.
Even when the miraculous promise of steadily falling costs has faltered at the point of delivery, a further cast-iron prediction has been installed, and the search for the nuclear philosophers' stone has continued with a renewed and fiery zeal.
The arguments in support of cheap nuclear power have always derived from a deceptively simple premise.
This is that whilst nuclear plants may be more expensive than other types to construct in the first place, they are potentially very cheap to run.
By contrast, whilst coal stations (the main alternative historically in Britain) are cheaper to build, their running costs — with vast tonnages of the black stuff to be daily transported and fed into their bowels — are considerably higher.
Over time, it was argued, the cheapness of running a nuclear plant should prove decisive.
The trouble has been, however, that with the longer construction periods for nuclear stations and the further period before their cheaper running costs  will allegedly show up, it can take a long time to see which way the scales really tip.
Even if they keep within budget, nuclear plants are at least twice as expensive to build as coal stations.
The reason for this is essentially because the materials employed on nuclear construction are more costly — layers of thick stainless steel, intricate computerized systems, for example— and the design far more complex.
Safety requirements demand, among other things, the installation of multiple back-up systems for emergency cooling of the reactor, as well as constant checks by regulatory bodies on the standard of even the smallest weld.
As a result, building costs are higher right across the board for nuclear stations and construction time is also up to twice as long.
On such capital-intensive projects, any over-runs can rapidly push up the overall costings.
As we have already seen, the early record of British nuclear construction was not impressive.
Virtually none of the industry's first generation of Magnox power stations were built within their expected time or cost.
Hinkley Point A, for example, even with the benefit of the ‘mechanized army’ so lyrically portrayed by The Times correspondent, took seven and a half years to build instead of its projected five, and went about 25 per cent over budget (£34 million).
But the second series of Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactors, whose ‘main objective’ was said to be ‘to reduce the capital cost of reactor installation’, was far more disastrous.
As each new AGR started construction, such serious engineering and design problems were encountered that the designers had to make major alterations to the next in the series.
These proved extremely expensive.
But it has taken outside analysts to underline just how much public money was involved.
Professor Jim Jeffery, for example, who gave evidence for Stop Hinkley Expansion at the Hinkley C Inquiry, had by then spent over eight years in private investigations of the figures on nuclear costs produced by both the industry and government departments.
A former consultant to the Central Electricity Research Laboratories, his assessment of the AGR costings was particularly revealing.
According to Jeffery's calculations, the worst example of the AGR series, Dungeness B, was originally supposed to cost £688 million (updated to 1988 prices).
After almost twenty years of delays, confusion and mismanagement, it eventually cost £3.5 billion, about five times as much.
Three other stations — Hinkley Point B, Hartlepool and Heysham 1 — exceeded their similar estimates by between 1.6 and 3.9 times.
On the basis of Professor Jeffery's figures, the total bill for building all seven AGRs will have been £15 billion, well in excess of their expectation, and prompting their description as ‘the largest loss making civil project ever undertaken in the UK’.
These are the judgements of hindsight, however.
At the time, as the  stations were being built, it was much less easy for outsiders to see what was going on, or to make informed assessments of the rosy promises being made about the future.
Secrecy created by the mixture of large state bureaucracies and the military connection made it difficult for people like Professor Jeffery to get hold of any meaningful figures.
And the reality of escalating costs had also been blurred by the way in which the nuclear accounts had been publicly presented.
The first nuclear stations, for example, were given a special ‘plutonium credit’.
This was supposed to account for the value of their contribution towards the stockpiling of plutonium as fuel for future reactors.
It certainly helped them look economic on paper.
But in retrospect, with no immediate prospect of a plutonium-fed power station becoming an economic proposition even now (decades later), the ‘credit’ is meaningless.
Even more important was the way in which nuclear costs began to be presented in the publicly available accounts.
When it came to producing the overall figures for coal and nuclear generation in its annual reports the CEGB used a system of ‘historic cost’ accounting.
This involved combining the current running costs of the plant with the cost of capital investment at the time it took place, many years before.
Since capital costs represented a much higher proportion with nuclear power, and inflation was rising fast, this systematically distorted the comparison in favour of the nuclear stations.
Throughout the 1970s, these calculations produced significant and much quoted advantages for nuclear generation over coal.
This device eventually prompted criticism from a number of quarters, most notably the House of Commons Select Committee on Energy.
In a 1981 report, the committee noted that the use of historic costs had made the resulting figures ‘highly misleading as a guide to past investment decisions and entirely useless for appraising future ones’.
When the Board finally shifted from historic to current cost accounting in the same year, this had dramatic effect on the comparative costs.
From being marginally more expensive than nuclear power, coal suddenly became markedly cheaper.
By that time, however, the new generation of AGR stations was promising to herald yet another new dawn of plummeting nuclear costs.
Whilst this use of ‘creative’ accountancy may have helped to avoid the harsh reality of nuclear power's burdensome construction charges, there have also been major problems in the area of running costs.
To start with, some of the power stations have significantly failed to operate as efficiently as expected.
The CEGB's Magnox series, for instance, was expected to produce on average 75 per cent of its maximum output each year.
In fact, the average during the 1980s has been nearer 50 per cent.
The performance of the AGR series has been even worse.
Taking three of the early stations — Heysham, Hartlepool and Dungeness — their average  annual availability to produce power between 1987 and 1989 was respectively 43 per cent, 27 per cent and just 15 per cent .
Dungeness has thus continued its appalling construction record into its working life.
So poor has been the overall AGR performance, in fact, that it has actually resulted in a fall in the proportion of nuclear electricity produced on the CEGB system.
Although it has picked up since, between 1984–85 and 1987–88 this slumped from 17 per cent to just 14.25 per cent.
Britain continues to be well down any international league table of reactor efficiency.
Some of the AGR stations have worked better than this description suggests.
Hinkley Point B, for example, has been one of the best.
But in 1987, even this flagship station suffered a major breakdown in a turbine generator which put one of its twin reactors out of action for over six months.
For the CEGB, trying to sell nuclear reliability to an increasingly sceptical local population, this could hardly have come at a worse time.
A second operational factor was eventually to prove even more critical for nuclear economics.
This was the issue of the steadily rising costs for what is called the ‘back end’ of the uranium fuel cycle — the reprocessing of spent fuel, the handling of wastes at the Sellafield works and the dismantling of the reactors at the end of their lives.
So rosy was the CEGB's picture of these costs during the 1960s that it assumed that the charges for reprocessing would be covered by the value of the recovered uranium and plutonium.
Even when it was clear that this wouldn't happen and that it would have to accumulate a special fund, especially for the future cost of ‘decommissioning’ the stations, the Board's accounts showed a relatively small amount being set aside.
This was because the process of decommissioning was expected to take place so many years ahead that its costs were easily discounted into the future.
In fact, the CEGB only began to build up a fund for decommissioning in 1976.
Gradually, the reality of the ‘back end’ costs has sunk in.
They were particularly important for the Magnox reactors, which used larger quantities of fuel and had bulkier structures to dismantle.
Even before the build-up to the Hinkley C Inquiry, the sum set aside by the Board each year in its special ‘future provisions’ fund had risen sharply from £133 million in 1982 to £604 million in 1986.
As events turned out, such figures were to be totally dwarfed by later calculations (see Fig.
V).
The cost of reprocessing had also risen, according to the CEGB by 35 per cent between 1984 and 1987, whilst the waste disposal charges made by the Sellafield management had, because of the pressures to improve safety measures, gone through the roof.
In January 1989 the CEGB's Nuclear Fuel Director was finally forced to admit that nuclear fuel cycle costs (the majority of which come from the ‘back end’) had overtaken those of coal  stations.
‘This is a feature we would never have dreamed of ten years ago,’ he said.
All these factors have helped to make Britain's existing nuclear stations more expensive than was hoped for.
By precisely how much we shall see when we come to look at the attempts to sell them to private investors.
Economic analyst Alex Henney, who has made a detailed study of the economics of nuclear power, estimates that, looking at the total balance sheet, the CEGB's nuclear activities have been running at a substantial loss.
These calculations also exclude the billions of pounds which have been spent by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority on research, whose profligacy we have already noted.
But it is important to realize that it is only relatively recently, especially during the 1980s, that the full picture has begun to emerge.
It has taken the combined expertise of ferreting economists and inquisitive academics, people like Professor Jeffery and Colin Sweet-an energy economist who has pursued the issue through every nuclear public inquiry since 1977 — to tease out the truth from the statistics.
Against this, the nuclear industry has provided a wall of obfuscation — juggling figures to suit its needs, making wildly exaggerated claims for nuclear performance whilst minimizing its costs — and all in the optimistic hope of making the ‘cheap’ label stick for as long as possible.
It hadn't helped the economics, of course, that the nuclear industry had shifted its allegiance from one reactor design to another, scattering new research expenditure as it went.
There was little chance to establish production line economies.
But by the time of the Hinkley C Inquiry, the CEGB had firmly opted for the Pressurized Water Reactor.
With over 200 PWRs already in operation around the world this was a proven design.
The first one was already being successfully built at Sizewell in Suffolk.
Not only that but the Board predicted that with its second station it could improve substantially on the Sizewell performance, setting British construction times and operating records among the best in the world.
The bandwagon of economic optimism was back on the road.
Sceptics could start by looking at the reality of the Sizewell capital cost.
An analysis by the Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) showed that less than a year after the first structural concrete was poured, the project was already £136 million over budget.
By the end of the inquiry the Board admitted that this had risen by a further 10 per cent.
At 1989 prices, this would turn the first British PWR into a £2 billion project even before it had generated a single kilowatt of electricity.
It was also possible to judge the viability of a British PWR by looking at the experience of the United States.
Most US nuclear power stations are Pressurized Water Reactors of the same basic design as that proposed at  Hinkley Point.
What was the economic record on the other side of the Atlantic?
An analysis by economist Alex Henney showed that during the 1970s — the last period of intense activity — construction time and costs of US nuclear plants had repeatedly exceeded expectations.
Building them often took twice as long as planned, and costs were two to three times the original estimate.
One classic example — Unit 1 reactor at Seabrook in New Hampshire — was projected to cost almost $5 billion to complete (seven times the initial estimate) when the company filed for bankruptcy in 1988.
Plans for five nuclear plants in Washington State had proved so financially disastrous that local councils had been landed with debts running into millions of dollars.
Stop Hinkley Expansion in fact succeeded in flying over Professor Kemp Houck, a member of the Mid-America Coalition for Energy Alternatives, who proceeded to tell the hearing about his unusual welcome at Heathrow Airport.
Stamping his passport, the customs official had revealed that he was also a registered opponent of the Hinkley C plan.
Houck had personally followed the histories of two reactors in Missouri (Callaway) and Kansas (Wolf Creek) which were prototypes for Hinkley C. Both had cost three times their original budget — $3 billion apiece — and had been plagued with teething problems in their first few years of operation.
‘No American utility would now consider buying another reactor like Wolf Creek and Callaway,’ Houck told the Inquiry Inspector.
Alex Henney also revealed how the operational costs of US nuclear power stations had escalated.
‘Non-fuel’ running costs, for example, had risen from $25 per kilowatt of capacity in 1974 to $94 in 1984, making nuclear plants about as expensive to run as coal.
How had this dramatic explosion in costs occurred?
A crucial factor had been the tighter safety regime introduced by the regulatory authorities following first, the notorious 1975 fire at the Brown's Ferry plant, and then the 1979 Three Mile Island accident.
The spillover effect of safety demands on costs, coupled with an economic recession, had effectively resulted in no new nuclear stations being ordered in the United States for over a decade.
In 1985, the influential business magazine Forbes had in fact all but written an obituary for the American nuclear industry:
‘It wasn't technology that doomed nuclear power in the US, nor was it the dedicated obstructionist tactics of the anti-nuclear forces, effective though they were.
The truth is that nuclear power was killed, not by its enemies, but by its friends.
The failure of the US nuclear power programme ranks as the largest managerial disaster in business history, a disaster on a monumental scale.'
But if rising construction and running costs were already casting a  shadow over the economics of the British PWR programme, then a parallel process had significantly benefited the comparative advantage of coal-fired generation.
For during the 1980s the world price of coal had tumbled dramatically.
It had fallen from a high point of $90 per tonne to as low as $30 per tonne.
The reason was a mixture of improved productivity and the exploitation of large new reserves, especially in the US, Australia and South Africa.
Looking ahead, the price by the year 2000 was expected to be no more than about $50 per tonne.
This compared with the $100 per tonne prediction for the end of the century being made by the CEGB at the time of the 1983–5 Sizewell B Inquiry.
Since fuel is a major part of a coal station's running costs, the fact that prices were not rising nearly as fast as had been expected would have a fundamental impact on the future cost of coal-fired electricity.
The increased competition from imported coal which the proposed privatization of the electricity industry was expected to unleash would also force down the price of British mined coal — most of which is used in CEGB power stations.
A simple example of the effect of this fall in coal prices could be seen in the changing views on the conclusions of Sir Frank Layfield, the Sizewell Inquiry Inspector.
In his report Layfield concluded that there was only a one in forty chance that a coal station would be cheaper than Sizewell B. By the time that the then Energy Minister, Peter Walker, gave his seal of approval to the project in 1987 the odds had been reduced to one in seven.
By July 1988, when the House of Commons Energy Committee came to reassess the figures, it concluded that ‘many of the critical assumptions that underlay the Inquiry Inspector's view that Sizewell B will be economic are no longer tenable’.
Not surprisingly the CEGB did its best to avoid any detailed discussion of the comparative economics of coal and nuclear power at the Hinkley C Inquiry.
It refused to produce any figures.
Arguing that government policy was clearly in favour of further nuclear development, especially under the proposals for privatizing the industry, it said there was now an obligation to build Hinkley C, whatever the cost.
To the Inquiry Inspector, Michael Barnes, this point-blank refusal to discuss an issue which had become central to the nuclear debate was like a red rag to a bull.
In the first example of his tenacity, he pointed out that there could be no guarantee that the government's privatization plans would go ahead in their then current form and they might not happen at all.
In those circumstances, a comparison with fossil fuel costs would be extremely useful.
He stuck to this line like a persistent terrier.
Eventually, after the subject had been raised many times by the Inspector, the CEGB gave in and agreed to produce the figures ‘without prejudice, to its main argument.
This was a major breakthrough for the  objectors.
One local newspaper even headlined its story ‘Hinkley C Protesters Set For Big Win’.
When the CEGB figures were finally published, in December 1988, it was a historic moment.
According to the Board's economics expert, Frank Jenkin, if the nuclear industry operated under the minimum rate of return on capital expected in the private sector (8 per cent), Hinkley C would be ‘clearly less economic’ than coal.
If the rate of return was increased to 10 per cent, a more realistic figure, Jenkin considered that ‘the economics of a new nuclear station are significantly adverse against all the alternatives’.
In other words, nuclear power would be a lot more expensive.
This was the first time that the nuclear industry had admitted at a public inquiry that the electricity from one of its future reactors would be more expensive than the output from an equivalent coal-fired station.
It was like throwing heresy in the face of a sacred cow.
For those who had criticized the flawed economics of the nuclear protagonists' case for so long it was the beginning of their justification.
The white elephant had finally emerged from the confusion behind which its promoters had concealed it for so many years.
2
It remains unclear to what extent the government and its advisers in the Department of Energy were aware at this stage, as the Hinkley C Inquiry progressed through its first few months, of the true state of nuclear economics.
Lord Marshall had once said about the old Magnox stations that, even if they weren't economic now, there would still be ‘jam tomorrow’.
Maybe they hoped that the PWR would also eventually come sweet.
But, whatever their knowledge, of far greater importance in official thinking was the strategic value of a power source which lent itself naturally to centralized control, which was operated by a well paid, reliable work-force and which would continue to keep the miners at bay.
They were prepared to do almost anything to retain that ‘insurance policy’.
This mixture of strategic and ideological arguments, whose origins I described in Chapter Three, had by now been encapsulated in the single phrase ‘diversity’.
Diversity sounded like an idea against which nobody could object.
It seemed sensible to have a choice of ways of generating electricity.
But this diversity meant something specific: protection against the interruptions in supply and the price shocks which the miners and the oil sheikhs had most recently provided.
It was not diversity for environmental reasons, towards a cleaner source of energy.
And the best protection in these circumstances was seen as nuclear power.
The  government's representative at the inquiry, Energy Department official Christopher Wilcock, described it openly as ‘a broad, political — and I stress the word political — strategic judgement’.
However, a new element of strategic policy had by now entered the arena.
This was the Conservative government's commitment to privatization.
After British Telecom, British Gas and British Water, the electricity supply industry — which encompassed the CEGB (and its Scottish equivalent), the regional distribution boards and the National Grid — was to be the biggest sell-off in the country's industrial history.
As we shall see later, it also eventually created a crisis for nuclear power.
At the moment, it is important only to note that the prospective sale of the industry and the opening up of competition within electricity generation produced a fundamental dilemma.
Could there be any guarantee, given the public disquiet, high initial costs and debatable economics, that any private investor would actually choose to buy nuclear?
Against a background of the strategic concerns outlined above, the government decided that it was not prepared to take the risk of rejection by the market.
It therefore incorporated into its privatization plans a new version of the diversity policy.
At the centre of this was an unwieldy new catchphrase — the ‘Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation’(NFFO).
The NFFO was a clever device intended to ensure that, whatever the commercial pressures under privatization and whatever the state of nuclear economics, a proportion of electricity would continue to be produced by nuclear power.
A fossil fuel meant any fuel which derived from decayed animal or plant matter: this encompassed not only coal, but also gas and oil.
The only obvious contenders for the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation were therefore all the various ‘renewable’ sources — such as wind, wave and tidal power — and nuclear, which used uranium ore.
By not calling it a ‘Nuclear Obligation’, the government hoped to avoid a charge of totally rigging the market and could be seen to at least throw out a lifeline to the renewables.
But in practical terms of what could be achieved in the time-scales envisaged, with new contracts due to be signed between the privatized generating and distribution companies by the end of 1989, nuclear power was the only option for large chunks of capacity.
It was, to all intents and purposes, a ‘nuclear quota’.
The NFFO was not expressed as a precise numerical quota throughout the period of the Hinkley C Inquiry.
But government spokesmen said that they wanted to see it eventually set so as to maintain the level of existing capacity at the end of the century.
Nuclear power then accounted for about 20 per cent of total CEGB generation capacity.
But about a quarter of that, comprising the older Magnox stations, was due to retire during the 1990s.
So Hinkley C and two further stations would be needed to make up the shortfall.
At the opening of the Hinkley C Inquiry the CEGB felt so confident about the support of this government policy that it was raised like a standard at the front of its arguments.
On the third day of the hearings Derek Davis, the most senior CEGB executive to give evidence, spelled it out.
‘The justification for Hinkley C,’ he said, ‘is solely a justification based on the government diversity policy associated with the NFFO.’
The government had said that more nuclear power stations should be built for strategic reasons, whatever the economics, Davis argued.
The CEGB was ready to build Hinkley C. There were no other non-fossil sources of power which could provide the same reliable capacity within the same time-scale.
Since it was not the job of a public inquiry to question government policy the CEGB should get permission.
QED.
End of argument.
There could hardly have been a more blatant political manipulation of the public inquiry system in favour of the developer.
John Blake, the advocate for the Town and Country Planning Association, which had played a prominent role at the Sizewell public inquiry, described the outcome as a ‘foregone conclusion’ and largely withdrew to the sidelines.
But this didn't stop him, and other objectors, from effectively countering the basis for the diversity argument — the need to have a (nuclear) choice away from coal.
Whatever one's political leanings, the threat of serious disruption from the miners, union seemed quite evidently an ideological hangover.
With over eighty pits closed down, a work-force more than halved in only four years from 171,000 to just 80,000, the emergence of a second, more conciliatory union, and above all, after the defeat of the National Union of Mineworkers in an historically lengthy strike, it just wasn't an argument that held water.
The subsidiary threat of a sudden rise in coal prices also made little sense in 1989.
As already explained, the international price of coal had actually collapsed and reserves showed no sign of being exhausted.
With the electricity industry about to be privatized there should also be new competition in fuel supplies.
British Coal would lose its position as virtual monopoly supplier to power stations.
Coal would almost certainly be imported in greater quantities, in turn putting pressure on British Coal to keep its prices down.
There would also be competition from other fuels, especially gas.
This in itself would create diversity.
Whatever one's political view of them, if the privatization proposals made any sense then prices being kept down by competition should be at their heart.
It therefore didn't add up for the government or the CEGB to argue that nuclear power provided such an enormously valuable insurance cover.
The effect of the government's strategic protection of nuclear power on  the mining industry was graphically explained to the inquiry by the National Union of Mineworkers.
The union's research officer and main advocate, David Feickert, bitterly attacked the way that energy policy had been reduced to a question of how to beat the miners.
Feickert showed how, since the early 1980s, financial support had been steadily removed from coal mining, most recently, he argued, to pay for the losses on nuclear power and to ‘fatten up’ the electricity industry in advance of its sale.
His analysis was devastating.
‘Subsidies have been eliminated completely from coal production.
A hundred thousand jobs have been thrown away, along with many million tonnes of coal reserves — not to increase productivity and efficiency but in a madcap effort to curb the power of Britain's miners…
The strategic effect of nuclear power is to destroy deep mine reserves, close collieries and sack miners.’
The Coalfield Communities Campaign, which represented seventy-nine local authorities in current and former mining areas, was even more specific.
Over 2,500 mining jobs, and twice as many again in related industries, would be lost if Hinkley C was built instead of a coal station, it calculated.
In stark contrast to the opposition to nuclear power, the campaign listed three suitable sites where local planners were more than happy to see a new coal-fired development.
Not all objectors to the Hinkley C plan supported such a straightforward advocacy of coal, especially with the growing problems of acid rain pollution and the greenhouse effect to which I shall return in Part Three.
But there was agreement on one simple point: that if diversity was really needed it would best be served by a quite different approach from that advocated by the CEGB.
The question of how to create an economic and reliable supply of electricity without the costs and environmental disadvantages of nuclear power was approached from two separate directions.
On the one hand, it was argued that there was a clear choice of methods of generating power which would be both cheaper and safer.
The other approach was to switch the emphasis away from the development of new sources of electricity supply to the issue of how the demand for power could be controlled in the first place.
And if demand was substantially reduced then the urgency for bringing new power stations on stream could equally diminish.
Sources of alternative supply fell into two categories: new, cleaner or more efficient methods of burning fossil fuels, and the whole range of renewable sources.
These included everything from wind turbines to exploiting the heat from rocks deep under the earth's surface, The phrase ‘renewable’ referred to the fact that instead of having constantly to supply new fuel from the earth, as with coal or nuclear materials, the energy source, such as wind or water, is constantly renewed.
But although there  was little doubt that many of the latter ideas were attractive in terms of pollution, their practicality was a matter for some debate.
Unlike nuclear power, some of this was technology in its relative infancy.
The attractions of wind power were emphasized by the appearance at the inquiry of Professor Donald Swift-Hook, who had actually run the CEGB's own wind research programme from 1978 to 1986.
Swift-Hook was by no means anti-nuclear and was keen not to upset his former employers.
But on wind power he was adamant.
Not only was the CEGB pursuing it too slowly but it had underestimated the potential, he argued.
Wind turbine prices were falling as production increased and the problems of public acceptability of wind farms were exaggerated.
‘Wind power is cheaper, cleaner and safer — and there's plenty of it,’ he told the Inspector with disarming certainty.
One crucial explanation produced by Swift-Hook for the failure to take wind power seriously enough was what he described in an interview with the Hinkley Inquirer as ‘the naughty reasons’.
By this he meant the career structures and sheer institutional inertia which kept thousands of the industry's boffins stuck to their nuclear portfolios.
Swift-Hook estimated that about 30 per cent of the CEGB's researchers were then working on Pressurized Water Reactors.
‘Imagine all those people out of work, and doing what?’ he asked.
‘Windmills!
It's only human to stick with what you know.’
Swift-Hook's rhetorical point is readily supported by the statistics.
As numerous objectors pointed out, the amount spent annually by the government on research into renewable energy has been less than a tenth of the spending on nuclear research.
In the latest year then available (1988–89) the comparative figures were over £240 million for nuclear research and just £16 million on all the renewable sources (see Fig.III).
When, even with their minimal research and development funding, some renewables have looked promising enough to threaten the nuclear hegemony their prospects have been unceremoniously ditched.
This, the inquiry was told, was what happened to Britain's nascent wave energy programme in 1982.
After investing £15 million in a variety of different schemes over the previous six years, and just when developments were looking promising, the government's funding (channelled through the Energy Technology Support Unit, part of the Harwell-based UK Atomic Energy Authority) was cut.
British wave energy research has not yet recovered from this body blow.
But just how this sudden demise had come about was even more sinister.
At the centre of the controversy was Professor Stephen Salter, now Professor of Engineering Design at Edinburgh University, and the inventor of one of the most promising wave power systems.
Salter told the inquiry how his ‘bobbing duck’ device — a duck-shaped canister which, when installed in lines out to sea, would continually extract energy from the waves — had at that time (1982) been officially estimated to be capable of producing electricity at about 5 pence per kilowatt hour (p/kWh).
‘Until then waves had looked like a pleasant photogenic distraction on television, and not a serious challenge to anything else,’ Salter recalled, ‘but getting so close to 5 p/kWh would have rung a lot of alarm bells with people who would feel threatened.’
Fig.
III The Energy Gap
This is exactly what happened.
The advisory committee which decided on research and development money for renewable energy was dominated by nuclear proponents.
At a fateful meeting in March 1982 even the manager of the wave energy programme, Clive Grove-Palmer, was deliberately excluded.
And when a cut was demanded in the total spending, from £14 to £11 million, they chose the waves as the sacrificial lamb.
Nuclear research was then receiving £200 million per year.
Salter later discovered that the figures on the costs of building his device appeared to have been deliberately misrepresented in order to justify this decision.
A figure of £10,000 per tonne had been given, for example, for the steel lining of the ‘ducks’.
This compared with Salter's figure of £850.
The failure rate of the undersea cables which would carry the electricity generated back to shore was said to be 300 times more often than an initial consultants' report had suggested.
Salter was never consulted about these or other differences.
But the effect of this series of pessimistic changes was to more than double the estimates for wave power up to a range of 8–12 p/kWh.
At the Hinkley C Inquiry the CEGB was still quoting the lowest cost for wave power electricity as 9.8 p/kWh.
After a long campaign to set the record straight, including an investigation by a House of Lords committee, Salter was eventually vindicated in 1990 when the Department of Energy agreed to adjust the figures in its official literature.
A similar lack of government commitment could be found when the flip side of the alternative scenario to Hinkley C — energy conservation — was considered.
Over the period of the inquiry build-up, the funding for energy efficiency measures had actually been reduced and the budget for the government's Energy Efficiency Office slashed.
Proof that investing in energy saving measures could actually make sense to an electricity producer came from an American expert.
Susan Hickey, an executive of the Bonneville Power Administration, which supplies electricity to a number of North-West states, said that the organization had decided consciously to pay for conservation measures because they were the least expensive option.
Almost $700 million had been invested over seven years in such things as home insulation, efficient lighting systems and triple glazing, resulting in a saving of 220 HW of electricity, about the output of a small power station.
Construction of  two PWR stations in the region had actually been placed ‘on hold’ when they were 70 per cent complete because conservation was found to cost half what it would to complete them.
‘We are avoiding a significant capital cost,’ Hickey explained.
‘It's simple economics — we've saved a billion dollars this way.’
Whilst paying lip service to the concepts, the CEGB remained unconvinced that it should bother seriously with either conservation or the renewable sources of energy, especially if it meant abandoning Hinkley C. It was up to the government to decide whether to provide incentives for energy efficiency, whilst the renewables must wait until pilot projects showed their worth.
Both views are highly contentious.
I shall return in the last part of this book to discuss the realistic potential for both the renewables and conservation in more detail and within a non-nuclear energy policy.
3
If economics had dominated the opening months of the Hinkley C Inquiry, then ironically this was not what concerned most objectors to the proposal.
They were much more worried about the other problems associated with such a large, unwieldy beast — its potential for erratic behaviour, its contamination of the countryside and the waste products it would leave behind when it had performed its task.
Even three years after the accident, the shadow of Chernobyl still hung heavily over the proceedings.
With sheep farmers in Wales still unable to market their lambs, and with new ‘hot spots’ of contamination still being discovered in parts of the country, this was a crisis that was continuing to leave its mark well beyond the Ukraine.
Reports from the Soviet Union itself were also beginning to reveal what appeared to be the latent horrors of the disaster — the large numbers of children born with deformities, the thyroid complaints, the increase in immune deficiency.
At the back of everybody's mind was what would happen if something similar occurred in Britain.
A woman from Yeovil, Penny Price, spoke for many in the way she summed up her feelings about the dangers.
‘There is so much anguish being caused by the plan to build another potentially dangerous reactor,’ she told the Inspector.
‘Nobody, however knowledgeable in the nuclear power field, can guarantee 100 per cent safety, a fact which causes my daughter to have nightmares, myself to lose sleep and be dogged by melancholy and dread, and my son to lose respect for those who are supposed to be wiser than he.’
She described a recent visit to her local Samaritans' branch, where a voluntary worker told her that they received telephone calls from teenagers who were ‘so filled with fear, and so  depressed by the constant threat of a nuclear accident’ that they had to be deterred from committing suicide.
I cannot assure my children that all will be safe if Hinkley C is built,’ she concluded.
‘This breaks my heart and makes me very, very angry.’
The CEGB countered many of the fears expressed about Chernobyl with a simple phrase, ‘It couldn't happen here’.
From the basic engineering of the reactor, through to its back-up safety systems, automatic shutdown procedures and the regulatory supervision in the background, the structure was such as to make such an event literally impossible in Britain.
‘The difference between the PWR proposed for Hinkley C and the RBMK reactor at Chernobyl is not a matter of degree or fine detail,’ the Board's engineering expert Brian George asserted to the Inquiry Inspector.
‘It is one of gross and fundamental difference in the quality of the safety approach.’
But if exactly the same type of accident as occurred in the Russian RBMK could not occur in a British PWR, was that the end of the story?
Or were there other possibilities for serious malfunction leading to a major release of the reactor's ‘inventory’ of radioactive material?
A major factor in the Chernobyl accident, for example, had been human error.
This emphasized the extent to which the sheer unpredictability and perversity of a nuclear power station operator could bypass the best laid computer models.
The importance of operator reliability was underlined when Stop Hinkley Expansion presented the inquiry with a copy of a report on US nuclear reactor safety during 1987.
Compiled by the Public Citizen consumer protection organization, this showed that there were 2,940 ‘potentially significant safety events’ in American nuclear power stations during the year which had to be officially reported to the watchdog Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The events included radioactive leaks, unplanned shutdowns and component failures, as well as vandalism, drug abuse and unauthorized use of firearms.
Seventy-four per cent of the total involved human error.
One particular station, at Peach Bottom in Pennsylvania, had actually been officially stopped from operating after the control room staff were found to be falling asleep on the job.
The report concluded that ‘the nation's nuclear power plants are unsafe and the industry's poor safety record shows no signs of improving’.
America not only has a largely privatized nuclear industry but is the home of the Pressurized Water Reactor.
Others pointed to more specific accident scenarios.
The Hinkley Point site, for instance, lies in an area used extensively by low-flying military jets.
The sudden roar as they sweep over the horizon is part of life in this otherwise quiet stretch of countryside-often alarming enough to send children into bursts of frightened tears.
The power station is also a matter  of miles from the Lilstock bombing range in the Bristol Channel, where aircraft can be watched from the coast as they wheel and circle in the sky before a fiery flash and a splash of water shows that they have hit their ‘target’.
The range is designated a Military Danger Area.
Although flying is officially banned within a radius of one nautical mile and below 2,000 feet around the station, Dr Ray Seymour, a research physicist from Somerset County Council, produced Ministry of Defence figures which showed that roughly 2,400 flights each year from the nearby Yeovilton air base pass over or adjacent to Hinkley Point.
How often did they stray closer to the plant than they should, especially given its stark attraction as the only prominent feature in an otherwise flat coastline?
And what would happen if one of these aircraft crushed into the power station?
The CEGB itself admitted that if a plane weighing over 2.3 tonnes — a five seater light aircraft — struck one of the core buildings of the complex at a critical point it could lead to an ‘uncontrolled release of radioactivity’.
When another objector pointed out that the Pan-Am jumbo jet which exploded in mid-air over Lockerbie in Scotland in December 1988, killing 270 people and scattering its debris for miles, had just minutes earlier passed over the Chapelcross nuclear power station, the reality came frighteningly close.
One other inquiry witness made everyone else's predictions of the worst seem tame.
Dr Richard Webb, an American nuclear physicist who had worked on the early submarine PWRs, produced scenarios which showed that a land area about the size of the British Isles could have to be abandoned in the wake of a catastrophic accident.
The CEGB did not claim that all these various accidents were totally impossible.
What it did was to produce complex mathematical calculations to show that the risk of their happening was so remote as to be discountable.
The record in Britain, at least since the Windscale fire, showed that there had been no serious incident involving a release of radiation.
Support for this approach came from the government department responsible for assessing safety in the nuclear industry — the Health and Safety Executive, which incorporates the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate.
In the aftermath of the Sizewell Inquiry the HSE had published a consultative report called ‘The Tolerability of Risk from Nuclear Power Stations’.
This concluded that the maximum tolerable risk of death to a member of the public from a modern industrial process should be about one chance in 10,000 per annum.
By contrast, the chances of a major nuclear accident resulting in 100 fatal cancers was set at one in a million.
One direct result of the nuclear authorities' assumptions on the remote possibility of catastrophic accidents, however, was that its plans for  dealing with an emergency were consequently limited.
Based on the most serious accident which it was realistically supposed could occur, these plans set the limit of expected evacuation of people living round the Hinkley Point site at just over two miles.
Even this was larger than at some other nuclear power stations, because it was thought inappropriate to cut the village of Stogursey in half.
But it contrasted starkly with the immediate evacuation area around Chernobyl of about nineteen miles, and the eventual relocation of people living much farther away.
The CEGB also anticipated that there would be several hours in which to warn the surrounding population that an escape of radioactivity was about to happen.
There would therefore be ample time for them to deploy their mobile radiation monitoring teams, for the police to tour the area, knocking on doors and warning people living nearby, for the protective potassium iodate pills to be issued and for a decision to be made on whether the public should stay indoors until the cloud had passed — or evacuate to a safer place.
The thought that an accident could follow such a clear and restricted pattern was treated by most objectors with complete disbelief.
At one stage the Hinkley Point site was said to be officially designated as ‘remote’, because the number of people living in the immediate vicinity was small — about 1,500.
But within ten miles there is a population of 50,000, within thirty miles over 1.5 million.
Two of Britain's largest conurbations, Bristol and Cardiff, lie respectively thirty-five and twenty miles to the north, the former directly in the path of the prevailing westerly winds.
One projection by Greenpeace showed that a radioactive plume could reach both cities in a matter of hours.
Two unspoken reasons could have explained this apparent lack of adequate precautions.
Cynics argued that it was not in the interests of the nuclear industry to create even more public concern.
Or it could be simply that there hadn't yet been a serious British accident.
After the Three Mile Island meltdown, for example, a statutory emergency planning zone was established for ten miles round every US nuclear power station.
Everybody living within that area was expected to receive warning of an accident within fifteen minutes.
When Stop Hinkley Expansion members had conducted a test run in 1957 to see just how quickly every house within the Hinkley Point evacuation zone could be visited (as part of a campaign for sirens to be installed) it had taken over two hours.
Perhaps the most astonishing fact to emerge was that nobody who lived round the plant, not even farmer Clive Knox, could claim compensation for any accident from their own insurance company.
Every household policy contains a specific clause which excludes any liability for an event involving ‘ionizing radiations or contamination by radioactivity from  any nuclear fuel or nuclear waste’.
Instead, they would have to rely on the insurance cover held by the nuclear industry, backed by a special government fund.
The total value of this is £230 million.
The estimated cost of the Chernobyl accident was then over £10,000 million.
4
Alongside concern about the potential for disastrous accidents there was also a debate about how safe Hinkley C would be when it was operating under ‘normal’ conditions.
At the heart of this was the question of radioactivity, its movement in the environment and the effect of its transmitted radiation on human and animal health.
Not only would over 400 people regularly work inside the power station, but many thousands more would continue to live within relatively close proximity.
Were the limits set on their radiation exposure acceptable?
The CEGB had no doubts.
The discharges from its nuclear stations into the air and the sea were very strictly controlled, the effects on the environment were regularly monitored (not only by the Board but by the Agriculture and Environment Ministries) and the estimates of radiation doses received by the most ‘exposed’ people — living or working near the sites — were made ‘with considerable pessimism’.
The increased dose they would get from having Hinkley C on their doorstep, according to Jeremy Western (a manager from the Board's Health Physics department who confidently fronted the radiation case) was less than if they had simply moved from one part of Britain to another — where the ‘natural’ background radiation happened to be higher.
The CEGB had looked for support in this area from the National Radiological Protection Board, the government funded organization responsible for providing advice on radiation hazards.
In fact, the NRPB had taken the unusual step in 1987 of moving ahead of the notoriously conservative International Commission on Radiological Protection, which provides the generally accepted international standards, and had recommended dramatically reduced radiation dose limits both for people living near nuclear power stations and those working inside them.
The scientific basis for these reductions was the latest research findings on the health of the 90,000 people who had been exposed to the radiation from the 1945 Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs and were still alive.
New projections from the gradually deteriorating health of these survivors showed that the risk of fatal cancer resulting from exposure to radiation was about three times what had previously been thought.
In numerical terms, the NRPB advised corresponding reductions in the maximum annual dose to nuclear workers from 50 millisieverts to 15, and to the general public from 1 millisievert to 0.5.
Although the CEGB said it could happily live with these new limits, the situation at Sellafield, where radiation doses were much higher, was far less certain.
And the NRPB's move also emphasized a process that had been continuing for many years.
As new evidence came to light the risks from exposure to radiation appeared worse and worse.
The upper level of exposure for workers had reduced to a seventh of its level in the 1930s, for example.
What would happen, we asked, if new information in ten years' time showed that the people working inside Hinkley C had been in even greater danger?
Even more crucially, if the nuclear industry was right about the lack of danger to health from its routine operations, then one piece of evidence stood out like an unexplained sore thumb.
This was the series of reports which showed that round some nuclear sites there was a higher incidence of childhood cancers, especially leukaemia.
At the Hinkley C Inquiry this issue was pushed to the fore by the Severnside Campaign Against Radiation (SCAR).
Based in Gloucestershire, the organization had formed after a series of childhood leukaemia cases was discovered in and around the village of Lydney, directly across the Severn Estuary from the nuclear power station at Berkeley.
SCAR's expert, medical statistician Michael Palmer, reminded the hearing of how the leukaemia controversy had developed since the 1983 Yorkshire TV revelations about Sellafield (see Chapter Two).
Three years later a similar investigation had been carried out around Dounreay, the site of two experimental fast breeder reactors on the north coast of Scotland.
Among other findings, this produced five cases of young leukaemia within eight miles of the plant over the period 1979–84, where less than one would have been expected on the basis of national rates.
The Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment (COMARE), which looked at both the Sellafield and Dounreay findings on behalf of the government, concluded that they supported the hypothesis that ‘some feature of the nuclear plants…leads to an increased risk of leukaemia in young people living in the vicinity’.
COMARE's chairman, Professor Martin Bobrow, went even further in a newspaper interview.
‘The burden of proof,’ he said, ‘now rests with the nuclear industry to prove that there is no connection’.
Other surveys had shown excesses of young leukaemias round military sites which handled nuclear materials.
A 1987 study by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys which looked at all nuclear installations in England and Wales had identified an increased incidence of the illness round those sites built before 1955.
A separate investigation showed significant excesses round the Aldermaston and Burghfield military establishments in Berkshire.
But the most dramatic announcement came in December 1988, only weeks before the Hinkley C Inquiry was  about to launch into its sessions on the subject of safety and health.
In an announcement which took everybody by surprise, Dr Cameron Bowie, the Director of Community Medicine for Somerset Health Authority, revealed that his department had carried out its own survey on young leukaemia incidence around the existing Hinkley Point power stations.
The researchers had gone through the medical records for the whole period from 1959, when Hinkley A was still being built, right through to 1986.
They had used exactly the same methodology as that employed to reach the results at Dounreay and Sellafield.
And their findings were decisively similar.
Over the entire period, there were twenty-two cases of under-25 leukaemia, when only eleven would be expected, and in one critical period — from 1964 to 1978 — there had been fifteen cases where six would have been normal.
The probability of this occurring by chance was 1,700 to 1.
Dr Bowie, a normally taciturn man, said that if radiation from Hinkley Point was responsible, ‘there would have had to have been an enormous leak’.
As I sat listening to Dr Bowie and his statistician talking at the press conference called to launch their report, carefully explaining the origin of the figures, I realized the significance of this news.
Bowie was a cautious man and his two previous reports on leukaemia incidence in the county had not been tinged with any anti-nuclear sentiment.
His findings were authoritative.
For the first time, an entirely independent body had uncovered a direct statistical link between Britain's biggest nuclear power station and one of the few types of cancer which displayed a clear pathway back to radiation exposure.
This was sensational.
‘Hinkley In Cancer Deaths Scare, roared the Bristol daily paper the following morning; ‘N-Plant Cancer Warning’ echoed the Daily Mirror .
Although the CEGB immediately denied that there had been any unreported incident at the power station, the effect of the health authority report was electric.
For people living round Hinkley Point the headlines were particularly frightening.
I remember a man with a family of several young children who worked at the plant saying at one of the first local public meetings I addressed that it would certainly change his mind about nuclear power if the link with leukaemia was substantiated.
What was he thinking now, or for that matter the parents of any youngsters in the vicinity?
Once again, it was the insidious, unseen nature of the threat which made it even more unpleasant.
The Bowie findings were by no means conclusive, but they were yet another sign of the hidden dangers of living in the nuclear shadow.
5
There was one other issue which the CEGB tried hard to avoid at the Hinkley C Inquiry.
This was the thorny question of what would happen  eventually to the reactor's residue of radioactive waste.
Because the fuel used in PWRs is comparatively compact, it can in fact be stored on site after use for much longer than in previous British designs — up to seventeen years.
During this time it would be kept in vast concrete-lined tanks filled with water, colloquially known as ‘cooling ponds’.
What happened to it then would depend on the prevailing attraction of reprocessing at Sellafield, especially the cost.
But whether reprocessing took place or not there would still be thousands of cubic metres of other wastes to deal with over the lifetime of the power station.
But if disposing of the waste generated by the Hinkley C reactor during its normal operation was a problem, what about the waste that would result from the eventual shutdown and dismantling at the end of its hoped-for forty years of operational life — the process described as ‘decommissioning’?
Here, like all nuclear reactors, Hinkley C stood out as unique when compared with other means of generating electricity.
A coal-fired power station could be dismantled straight away and the value of the scrap materials would roughly pay for the cost of the work.
With a nuclear station decommissioning was a lengthy, expensive and potentially hazardous enterprise.
To start with, all the used fuel assemblies would have to be unloaded from the reactor core and transported by special container either to Sellafield or to a storage site.
This process alone would take about five years.
Then all the comparatively non-radioactive building materials and superstructure would be removed — again over a period of up to seven years.
Finally, there would remain a central core containing the reactor building itself.
This would still be intensely radioactive inside.
John Large, an engineering consultant who gave evidence for the local authorities consortium, compared the problem to dismantling a beehive at the end of the season.
Instead of a placid colony, Large warned, the honey collector could be surprised by an aggressive stinging mass.
Opinions in fact differed at the inquiry on how long this central core should be left before removal.
The industry said it would be preferable to leave it for up to a hundred years to allow its radioactivity to decay to a manageable level.
Other environmental pressures could shorten this to nearer the fifty years required by law in the United States.
Whichever happened, it was clear that the citizens of Somerset could look forward to a radioactive legacy on their coastline for more than many of their lifetimes.
Meanwhile, the site would have to be constantly monitored and guarded.
This alone was expected to cost £500,000 each year.
There were two further doubts about the process.
The first was the fact that no full-size commercial reactor had ever been totally decommissioned anywhere in the world to date.
At the time of writing, this is still the case, although the initial process of removing the fuel has occurred in many instances.
The decommissioning of a small experimental reactor on the Sellafield site has been continuing for some years.
Ingenious robots are now being prepared to gradually cut its insides apart, watched by operators from behind thick glass screens.
But this is in a different league from a full-size Pressurized Water Reactor.
Fig.
IV.
Public Relations Spending and Public Opinion
The second doubt was about the cost.
The CEGB said that for Hinkley C this could total about £200 million, but ‘since no large commercial nuclear power station in the world has yet been decommissioned, present cost estimates must be regarded as uncertain'.
This was to prove a classic understatement.
Uncertainty about how straightforward the physical process would eventually be was compounded by the enormous time-scales over which it was likely to happen.
And all the time there were the escalating costs for handling, packaging and processing the wastes at the Sellafield complex.
In the end, as we shall see, the cost of decommissioning became a vital part of the accountants' nightmare that laid the nuclear beast to rest.
‘ EVERYTHINGS FREE, INCLUDING THE BRAINWASHING.’