

1
Catherine Marsden wriggled further into the corner of the hansom cab, and tucked her coat around her.
Even though it was May, the wind blowing up-river from the east was bitterly cold.
Occasionally the sun would appear from behind a roof-top, and she would feel its warmth for a few seconds.
Of course, she was not normally up at this time of the morning.
Her routine was to rise at a quarter past seven, bath, take a light breakfast and catch an omnibus into the City.
But, last night, she had been unable to sleep.
She had tossed and turned — as she had for a fortnight — thinking of Amy, full of foreboding.
It had come out of the blue: a brief note from her, saying that she had to undergo a surgical operation.
It read like a cry for help, for support.
They had been so close at their boarding school; but when they left, five years ago, they had drifted apart.
Amy had thrown herself into the social round, while Catherine had begun a career in journalism.
With her warm effervescent nature, Amy had attracted a host of male admirers.
At twenty she had become engaged, married on her twenty-first birthday, and within a year had a beautiful baby daughter to dandle on her knee…
Now they were having to take away her nature.
It must have been a dreadful shock.
Even with ether to deaden the pain, it was still a dangerous operation; and there was no knowing what they would find.
Faced with this, Amy had seemed to abandon her frivolous society friends — or had been abandoned by them — and turned to someone she could trust.
Catherine had spent most of the evenings, during the last two weeks, at Amy's Knightsbridge house talking over old times, remembering people from the past, while her husband prowled about restlessly.
Then last night he had taken her to St Bartholomew's Hospital.
Of course, Catherine had kept away; it could be the last time he  would see his wife alive.
But she could not distance herself from her friend's tragedy.
She had lain awake, filled with worry wondering what would happen to the little girl if…
From time to time she would turn over irritably, and try to compel herself to sleep.
After all, the world would go on.
Amy's husband was well-to-do.
The child would be cared for; would not even miss a mother she had never really known…
The trite, emotive phrases kept going round in her head like a music-hall ditty.
At five o'clock, with daylight creeping round the curtains, she had got up and dressed.
Cook and Joan would not be down for another hour yet, so she made herself a cup of coffee on the gas stove.
As she was drinking it, she decided that she would go into the hospital, on her way to the office.
The night nurses finished their duty at six o'clock.
If she could get to Bart's before the day staff had begun their routine, she might be allowed a few moments with Amy.
She would be ridiculously early for work, but what did that matter?
Now she was rattling along the empty streets, the horse's hooves sounding sharp and crisp in the silence.
At this time of day London seemed serene: an entity detached from the fates of the scurrying thousands who would soon pour on to its streets.
How little people mattered, she thought.
Their function was to work, to procreate and to give place to the next generation; while the sprawling capital endured.
Amy would have done her part…
But what of herself?
She had fulfilled the first part of the scenario.
She was a reporter with the City Press , and an occasional correspondent for the Star — a radical national daily.
And if her father's influence had created the opening for her, it was no more than was indispensable in this male-dominated society.
Her success had been due to her own qualities; and she had even received national recognition for some of her work.
True, she had prospered from her acquaintance with Sergeant Bragg and Constable Morton, of the City police; but all journalists had to have their sources.
She had received the plaudits with becoming modesty, of course.
Men still hated to see a woman succeed.
But she had earned them on sheer merit.
Beyond that, she had shown that women were capable of being more than simpering wallflowers, or unpaid housekeepers.
She was paid as much as her male colleagues, and earned every penny.
She irritably suppressed the knowledge that Mr Tranter, the editor, allowed her to stay at home on Saturday mornings, ostensibly to work.
Well, she did work — usually.
Anyway, there was little point in going to the office on a Saturday.
The City Press was only published on a Wednesday and Saturday.
By Friday night, the next day's edition was finalized.
It was much more useful to spend Saturday morning in her parents' house, in Park Lane, planning future articles.
And she knew that her male colleagues would be propping up the bar of a public house, by eleven o'clock.
Yes, she was undoubtedly holding down a real job, in a man's world; and where she had gone, other women would follow.
But was she sacrificing too much on the altar of women's equality?
She was not a feminist; never would be.
The satisfaction she derived from the job was that of any good journalist.
If a feminist point needed making, she had already made it; and time was slipping by.
Her friend's illness had driven that home forcibly.
She was the same age as Amy — well, a year older, since her twenty-third birthday last month — and Amy's life might already be over.
It was all too easy, when one was young, to disregard the future in the exhilaration of the present.
Men did not have this problem.
In truth, there was little else for them to do but work, if one disregarded the gilded nincompoops who surrounded the Prince of Wales.
Without a job, men's lives would be empty.
Women had a much more important role in life…
Of course, Amy would have left a daughter.
But what had happened to her could happen to any woman.
If she were in Amy's position, how much would it matter?
She might merit a short obituary in her own paper, two lines in the Star , and then oblivion.
The world would go on, leaving only her grieving, disappointed parents.
She doubted if even James Morton would remember her for long.
They had co-operated on several criminal cases; the scoops that had brought her the professional acclaim she revelled in.
He was tall, handsome and amiable, and she delighted in his company.
They were eminently suited to each other.
In truth, he was as much of an oddity as she was herself.
He was the son of Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Morton.
And, because of his elder brother's incapacity, he was almost certain to inherit the baronetcy on the death of his father.
Yet, from some moralistic quirk in his nature, he had eschewed the empty life of a socialite, and joined the City of London police as a constable.
She was sure that he was strongly attracted to her — yes, loved her.
But when he had asked her to marry him, she had declined out of nothing more than pique.
Since then, they had maintained their relationship — a kind of teasing familiarity — but he had never proposed marriage again.
If she had  accepted him, she could have been looking forward to a child of her own now.
Or, had she preferred it, she was sure that he would have agreed to her continuing to work for a time.
She had thought it over endlessly — when it was too late.
Initially they could have lived in James's rooms, in Alderman's Walk, with Mr and Mrs Chambers to look after them.
She could have continued at the City Press , and he remained a policeman.
But she accepted that, in the longer term, he would want children.
Paralysed as he was, his elder brother Edwin could never father a child.
The Morton line would only survive through a son born to James.
But could she recover from her petulant rejection of him?
Now that Amy's predicament had paradoxically stimulated her own instincts — be they maternal or merely sexual — would she be able to re-awaken James's interest?
If not, what then?
She glanced around her and sighed.
To her left, the contractors had completed the demolition of the ancient buildings of Furnival's Inn.
In its place, they were erecting a flamboyant, terracotta cathedral to the glory of the Prudential Insurance company.
Everywhere the old was being sacrificed; new roads, new railways driven.
Everyone was looking forwards, talking of the twentieth century a mere six years ahead.
Her mother had even remarked that her father would soon be painting the portraits of twentieth-century people.
Why did life have to rush on so?
She paid off the cab at Bart's Hospital, and went through the main entrance.
She approached the porter's desk.
‘I have come to see Mrs Edgerton,’ she said tentatively.
‘Have you now, miss?’
His brow wrinkled.
‘Visitors aren't supposed to be allowed, at this time of day.
Have you been sent for?’
‘Not exactly; but she is having an operation today — a serious one.’
‘Aren't they all!
Well, you can but try.
Up the stairs to the right — and don't say I didn't warn you!’
Catherine crept up the stairs and along a gloomy corridor.
At the end she could see part of the ward, a gleaming parquet floor and white-painted bedsteads.
She was about to sneak inside, when a nurse appeared.
‘Hello,’ she said with a smile.
‘Are you lost?’
‘To tell the truth, I was hoping to have a quick word with Mrs Amy Edgerton…
I have to go away,’ she added pleadingly.
‘She's the hysterectomy, isn't she?
Just a moment, I will go and  see.’
She went to a bed in the far corner of the ward.
The curtains were drawn round its head, and a frilly-capped sister was bending over it.
There was a brief conversation, a shake of the head, then the nurse returned.
‘I am sorry,’ she said, ‘but Mrs Edgerton is being prepared for the theatre.
You will have to come back again.’
‘When can I see her?’
‘The best thing is to keep in touch with her husband.
He will know how things are.’
She turned and walked briskly away.
So the nurses were prepared for the worst, also.
Catherine wandered away dejectedly.
There was nothing more she could do.
Perhaps the hospital authorities were right in not allowing visitors.
Amy had screwed up her courage for this.
She must have faced up to the worst outcome, in the process.
By now, an artificially cosy chat with an old school friend would have been irrelevant, even an irritant.
Catherine opened her coat and looked at her fob watch.
Ten minutes to seven.
What on earth was she to do now?
It was only a few minutes' walk to her office in Aldersgate Street; but she normally did not arrive there till nine.
Well, the cleaners ought to be at work; and they might have left the outer door open.
If not, she could try to find somewhere for a cup of tea.
She went along Duke Street, then, instead of going down Little Brittain, decided to cut through Bartholomew Close.
It would be safe enough at this time of day.
As she entered the narrow lane, the soot-blackened buildings seemed to close in on her threateningly.
The sun vanished behind them; even the blue of the sky paled to a bleary grey.
She shivered, and was glad to gain the comparative safety of the open area in the centre.
She stopped to steady herself.
It was absurd!
She had been through here on numerous occasions.
She was allowing Amy's predicament to prey on her nerves, sap her confidence.
She looked up, and was glad to see the sunlight touching the chimneys.
On the other side of the yard, the first of the City's homeless were coming out of the union.
They were ragged and cowed, but they had been given a bed for the night and an enforced bath.
One of them looked at her resentfully, and she hurried into the eastern end of the lane.
it was unwise to linger in such a place.
Fifty yards along, she could see the entry to a yard, its gates closed.
Against one of the pillars of the gate, a young girl was sitting.
She seemed to be asleep.
Poor child!
Catherine thought.
She was wearing only a white dress; she would be frozen  without a coat.
Catherine opened her purse and took out a coin.
‘Here you are,’ she said.
‘Get yourself a warm drink and something to eat.’
The girl did not look up.
Catherine put out her hand and shook her shoulder…
Slowly the girl toppled to the ground.
She looked as if she was still asleep…but there was blood on her breast.
Catherine touched her hand.
It was quite cold.
Her heart seemed to swell in her chest — she could not get her breath!
Then she heard her voice screaming…
A few men appeared at the corner of the union building, on their faces a blend of caution and apathy.
None came to her aid.
Then she heard the clump of boots on the sets, and a uniformed policeman ran up.
‘Christ Almighty!’ he exclaimed.
He seized Catherine by the arm.
‘Right, you come along with me!’
‘I…
I found her, officer,’ Catherine croaked.
‘That's as maybe.
But I don't want you doing a disappearing trick on me.’
Catherine dug into her handbag and produced her card.
‘Look!’ she cried.
‘I am a journalist on the City Press .
I was walking through here to the office.
Ask those men over there; they saw me.’
The policeman scrutinized the card.
‘I've heard of you,’ he said slowly.
‘Aren't you Joe Bragg's tame reporter?’
The constable's down-to-earth tone steadied her nerves.
‘I suppose I am,’ she said.
‘Is there any way that you can contact him?
Since I am involved in this affair, it would be preferable to me if he were dealing with it.’
‘I dunno,’ the constable said, scratching his nose.
‘I'm supposed to report things like this, straight to the Snow Hill nick.’
Catherine forced an appealing smile.
‘You could easily slip over to his lodgings, in Tan House Lane.
He will be having his breakfast now.
It would be more efficient if you were to bring him straight here.’
The constable looked cautiously at her.
‘Please,’ she said.
‘All right.
You stay here, mind.
I'll be back as soon as I can.’
He clattered down the lane, and there was silence.
The vagrants from the casual ward had disappeared at the sight of the policeman; the street was empty.
The little girl lay curled up on her side, her hair in the dust.
Catherine leaned against the wall and shivered.
Detective Sergeant Joseph Bragg pushed away his plate, and wiped his ragged moustache.
Bloaters! he thought grumpily.
Why did Mrs Jenks insist on giving them to him for breakfast?
They were tasteless things, at the best of times — obscene, if you considered that the herrings had been cured with their innards still inside them.
But boiled, they tasted just like wet newspaper.
Time and again he had asked her to cook them for his supper, when she could at least bake them in a hot oven.
But she took no notice.
One of the few things he could instantly recall from his own brief marriage was his wife's grilling a kipper on a gridiron over the fire.
Inside first, she had insisted, then the skin side; you lost less of the oil, that way.
Even now, he could savour the soft, succulent flesh, hear the sudden spurt of flame as the juices dripped on to the coals.
Now, at forty-three, he had to be content with cardboard bloaters!
Londoners had no idea how to feed, he thought.
Boiled salt cod, boiled salt brisket, faggots and peas…
Ugh!
In Dorset, where he came from, there would be fresh meat every day; cheese and new-baked bread.
Here you bought things at the door — fish, pies, cakes; you didn't know where they had been!
The butcher's shop looked right enough, but he had got his meat from Smithfield market, not from the farmer who'd raised it.
The people in London had no conception of fields of wheat, cattle in a meadow…boats pulling into Weymouth harbour in the early light, laden to the gunwales with sprats.
Food, to them, was a commodity, and they treated it with as little respect as a bar of soap.
Not that he was blameless, himself.
If he had persevered a bit more, he might have found a landlady whose idea of cooking extended beyond steak-and-kidney pudding and spotted Dick.
When his wife had died, in childbirth, he'd had to give up his married-quarter.
He couldn't stand the idea of going back to the section-house, so he had taken a series of private lodgings.
He'd had no idea that Dora Jenks would last any longer than the others.
Tommy Jenks was a dust contractor, with his own horse and cart.
He made a good living, and seemed resentful of his wife's decision to take in a lodger.
But she'd obviously brought him round to her way of thinking.
A good thing, too!
One day Mr Jenks had cut his hand on a tin can.
It was a bad cut, but he'd shrugged it off.
It was always happening, he said.
But it had taken bad ways and, by the time he'd agreed to see the doctor, it was too late.
Septicaemia, they said.
Bragg could hardly abandon Mrs Jenks, with her husband fresh in the grave.
She needed someone; needed his  money, too.
So he had stayed — for thirteen years now.
Over that time, things had got a bit more relaxed between them.
She did not insist on his taking his meals upstairs, any more; and he did some of the hard work in the garden — not that she acknowledged it, mind you.
Most of his evenings he spent in the big basement kitchen, reading a library book, with Mrs Jenks knitting opposite him.
No doubt people reckoned that they only needed one pair of sheets, but they were wrong.
Mrs Jenks had her skittish moments; particularly after an evening at the music hall, and a few port and lemons.
But he'd never had his leg over, not once in all those years.
And it wasn't as if he put up with her cooking in the hope that he would.
He was just in a rut; comfortable, but a rut all the same.
As he took out his pipe, there came a knocking at the front door.
He ran up the back stairs and opened it.
‘There's been a murder, sir!’
The constable was red-faced and panting.
‘Where?’
‘Bartholomew Close, off Aldersgate Street.
A little girl.’
‘Good God!
Is anybody there?’
‘That Miss Marsden, sir.
She asked me to come straight to you.
I haven't reported it yet.’
‘Right.
See if you can get a cab, while I put my collar on.
It'll save a bit of time.’
Ten minutes later, they had collected Morton from his rooms near Liverpool Street station, and were rattling along Aldersgate Street.
‘Right, constable, you can report in now,’ Bragg said, as they pulled up at the end of Bartholomew Close.
‘Tell the desk-sergeant that I am looking into it.’
There was a knot of people around Catherine, when they arrived: tenants from the houses in the lane.
Bragg pushed his way through and bent over the body.
Her mouth was slightly open, in a frozen half-smile.
She looked as if she was asleep.
‘Was she like this when you found her, miss?’ he asked.
Catherine looked at him dully.
‘No.
She was sitting up, propped against the pier of the gate.
I shook her, to waken her…and she toppled over.’
‘So, you didn't close her eyes?’
‘No.’
He turned to Morton.
‘See if you can get a hand-cart from Smithfield market, lad.
We had better take her to the mortuary, before the daily hordes come pouring in.’
‘There is one in the court, by the union,’ said a man from the crowd.
Morton went off with him and returned pushing a wide porter's barrow, with empty sacks in it.
‘That will do nicely.’
Bragg bent down to lift the slight body.
‘Hey!’ he cried.
‘She's not fully stiff yet!
Take Miss Marsden to her office, lad, then run across to Finsbury Circus.
Get Dr Burney over to the mortuary.
I want as precise a time of death as I can get.
Then go down to the coroner's office.
Tell Sir Rufus I want this one.
Understand?
After that, find out what you can from the residents here.’
‘Right, sir.’
While Morton led Catherine gently away from the scene, Bragg lifted the child on to the barrow and covered her with the sacking.
He took her by back streets to Golden Lane, where he handed her over to Noakes, the mortuary attendant.
He then went down to Snow Hill police station.
‘Hello, Joe,’ the desk-sergeant greeted him.
‘You must have a nose like a bloodhound; sniff out a murder before it's happened!’
‘It's my guilty conscience — can't sleep.
Can I have a look at the beat-card that takes in Bartholomew Close?’
‘Number two?
Certainly.’
He produced a large envelope from his desk and extracted a card.
Bragg perused it carefully.
‘So the beat constable should go down that lane once in every hour,’ he remarked.
‘If that is what the card says.’
‘Who was on that beat, last night?’
‘Charlie Willis.’
‘Where will he be?’
‘He came off duty at six.
I expect he will have gone home to bed.’
‘Where does he live?’
The sergeant consulted a list pinned to the wall.
‘He's up at the section-house.
A north country lad, about thirty.’
‘Is he reliable?’
‘He was a corporal in the army, if that means anything.’
‘Right, thanks.’
Bragg hurried across to the police section-house.
He discovered that Willis was, indeed, in his room.
After he had battered on the door for a couple of minutes, the lock was turned and the door opened a crack.
A bleary eye peered out at him.
‘Open up, Willis!
Sergeant Bragg, of the detective division.’
There was a grunt, the rattle of a chain, then the door swung open.
‘What have you got in here, lad?’
Bragg asked jocularly.
‘It's like the Tower of London!’
‘There are a lot of thieving buggers up here, sergeant.
Socks, vests — I even lost one of a pair of boots, last month.
Imagine that!
One boot!
Had to go on duty in my Sunday ones; got them wet through…
And some bugger is wearing it!’
‘Never mind; there are worse things.
Somebody might nick half your drawers next time.’
‘There won't be a next time, I've seen to that.
What is it that you want?’
‘You were on the number two beat of Snow Hill station, last night, I'm told.’
‘Yes.’
‘A young girl has been found dead, looks like she was stabbed.
I want to find out how long she'd been there.’
Willis looked at him warily.
‘Where was she?’ he asked.
‘In a yard gateway, in Bartholomew Close.’
‘Was she?’
‘According to the beat-card, you were supposed to go through Bartholomew Close at ten minutes past every hour.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, did you?’
‘Not on the dot, I didn't.
Anyway, it depends what you mean by Bartholomew Close.’
Bragg smiled reassuringly.
‘You will have to explain that riddle for me,’ he said.
‘I was in the First Division, when I did my time on the beat.
I don't know your area well.’
The constable relaxed.
‘It's behind St Bartholomew's Church.
There are lots of courts and alleys there, and one big open space in front of the doss-house.
Three lanes lead off from it, four if you count the short length from the hospital.
The beat-card counts them all as Bartholomew Close.
Well, if you poked around the lot every hour, there wouldn't be time to cover the rest of the beat properly.
I can't speak for the others, but I do some of it each hour.
I have a general look round every time but, as far as trying doors and that, I split it.’
‘What about last night?
Say, after four o'clock.’
‘I want through the churchyard at four, and into the Close from the west side.
Then through the square, and out by the lane that  leads to Aldersgate Street.’
‘It was there that the child was found.’
‘In that gateway on the south side?
Just before Albion Buildings?’
‘Yes.
She was propped against the brick pier, as if she was asleep.’
‘She certainly wasn't there at four o'clock, sarge.’
‘Sergeant to you, lad,’ Bragg said roughly.
‘You are not in the army now!
When did you next go through the Close?’
‘At about five o'clock, sir.
That time, I came in through Queen's Square, walked down the lane to the union and out towards the hospital.
I wouldn't have been able to see that gateway, so I can't say whether she was there or not, at five.’
‘What about six o'clock?’
Bragg asked irritably.
‘Well, as you say, I'm supposed to be there at ten past the hour, and my shift finished at six.
My pick-up point is on Long Lane, opposite Blyne Street.’
‘So, the fact of it is that you last went down that stretch of lane at four o'clock.’
‘Yes, sarge…sir.
But the officer on the day shift should have been down there soon after six.’
‘If he follows your methods, you mean.
Never mind.
I know from the death-stiffening that she was there before six.
Get back to bed!’
Irritated beyond measure at the inefficiency of the beat system, Bragg made his way back to the mortuary.
Noakes was busy hosing down one of the dozen or so grey slate slabs ranged along each wall.
‘That's yours,’ he said, jerking his thumb towards a white-swathed slab under the window.
‘The boss said you was to go in, if you called.’
Bragg crossed to a door in the middle of the opposite wall, and entered the examination room.
There was a long wooden bench under the window, littered with instruments and jars.
In the corner was a white glazed sink and, next to it, a glass-fronted cabinet containing books and bottles.
In the middle of the room was another mortuary slab, on which a man's body lay.
‘Ah, Sergeant Bragg!’
Dr Burney wiped his hand on a bloodied apron round his middle, and held it out.
‘You are no doubt concerned about your little girl.’
He had a round, cherubic face and balding head.
His mouth was wide and slack.
Whenever he spoke, it would compose itself into a ghoulish grin.
‘That's it, sir,’ Bragg said.
‘I got her up here as soon as I could.
there was still movement in her limbs.’
‘Very perspicacious of you, sergeant.
I had a quick look at her; but she will have to wait until I have finished with our friend here.’
So far as Bragg could see, the man had clearly been killed by a crushing blow to the head.
He did not see why Burney need concern himself with dissecting the kidneys.
‘It's the time of death that concerns me at present, sir,’ he said.
‘Yes, of course.’
Burney crinkled his eyes in a man-in-the-moon smile.
‘And did you notice the back of the neck?’
‘Er…no, sir.’
‘Some lividity staining there…quite pronounced on the thighs and the small of the back.
Interesting, don't you think?’
‘If you say so, sir.’
‘As to the time of death, I took the internal body temperature at eight o'clock.
By then, rigor mortis was progressing, but Noakes had got her more or less straightened out.
I examined the body again, a few moments ago.
In my opinion, the onset of rigor is now complete.’
‘So, what does that mean?’
‘Be patient, sergeant.
You must allow me my minor gratifications!
I also took the body temperature anew.’
‘And?’
‘On both counts, I can be reasonably certain that death occurred around ten o'clock last night.’
‘Ten o'clock?’
‘Perhaps half an hour later.
It was a cool night, and the subject was quite small — not undernourished, you understand, but slight of build.’
‘The body wasn't where it was found, at four o'clock this morning,’ Bragg said.
‘I gather from Noakes that it was crouching in a gateway.’
‘That is correct, sir.’
‘However, in my opinion the body had lain for some hours after death in a supine position.’
‘On its back?
How do you make that out, sir?’
‘The distribution of the lividity can only be explained in that way.
Blood had initially drained down to the back of the neck, thighs and mid-back.’
‘Can you say when the body was moved?’
Burney grinned sheepishly.
‘No, sergeant.
I am not a magician!
I can say, however, that there would have been a considerable loss of blood, judging by the position of the wound.’
‘Can you comment on the weapon yet?’
Bragg asked.
‘Is it important that you should know at this very moment?’
‘It could be.’
‘Very well.
’ Burney took a probe and a steel rule from the bench, and went into the mortuary.
He crossed to the window, and pulled the sheet back from the girl's body.
There was a black elliptical wound in her chest, between the breast bone and her budding breast.
Burney inserted the probe into the wound and poked about.
‘I am afraid that I cannot venture an opinion as to the length of the weapon, until my examination,’ he said, withdrawing the probe and wiping it on his apron.
‘We can, however, determine its width.’
He laid the rule on the girl's chest and peered at the calibrations.
‘One and four-tenths inches,’ he said.
‘Is that of any help?’
‘It might be.
When will you have completed your examination of her?’
‘That depends on what I find in my present subject, sergeant.
If you are anxious, you could call again this afternoon.’
Morton got back to the headquarters building of the City of London police, in Old Jewry, soon after lunch.
Bragg was sitting in his room, gloomily dismantling his pipe.
‘How is Miss Marsden?’ he asked.
‘I took her to her office,’ Morton said jauntily, ‘and instructed that she should be plied with hot, sweet tea.
I also spoke to the assistant editor, when he came in.
He was less sympathetic than I would have expected, but I am sure that he will send her home if she is unwell.’
Bragg looked at him reprovingly.
‘It must have been a big shock.
For all her self-confidence, her upbringing had not prepared her for that.’
Morton grinned.
‘I would not like to have the task of telling her that she would never make a crime reporter!’
Bragg scowled at Morton's open, friendly face.
‘You know bloody well what I think, lad.’
He took a pipe-cleaner from a drawer and pushed it into the stem of his pipe.
‘As I remember it, on the occasion when she first accosted us, you told her that she would be better off at home with a baby on her knee.’
‘So she would!’
‘Alas!
She is a modern young woman.
Domesticity has no appeal for her.
She has to prove that she is equal to a man in any and every sphere.’
‘Well, you know my views,’ Bragg said emphatically.
‘You think that she and I would make a happy married couple.
For once, your judgement of people proved faulty, sir.
I asked her to be my wife, and was rebuffed in no uncertain terms.’
‘Surely to God you wouldn't take that for an answer?’
Bragg said roughly.
‘Women's moods are like sun on a cornfield, changing all the time.’
Morton shrugged.
‘I can hardly approach her again.
At the moment we maintain an easy, friendly relationship.
It would never survive another rejection.’
Bragg snorted.
‘Well, you know your own business best, I suppose.’
He pushed the stem of the pipe into the bowl, and aligned it carefully.
‘How did you get on in Bartholomew Close?’ he asked.
‘I did not find it the most co-operative of neighbourhoods,’ Morton said wryly.
‘The majority of the dwellings are old and decaying.
I suspect that most of the inhabitants are footloose and shiftless.
None of them seemed keen to be involved with the police.
I could not, of course, track down the vagrants who stayed at the union that night.’
‘So, what did you find out?’
Bragg said testily.
‘The only thing approaching a positive observation was a remark of one Thomas Weekes, the tenant of twenty, Bartholomew Close.’
Morton took his notebook from his pocket and flicked through the pages.
‘He is a barman at the Great Eastern Hotel.
He passed through the lane at half-past one this morning, on his way home.
There was no body in the gateway at that time.’
‘Well, there wouldn't be,’ Bragg said crossly.
‘I have already got it from the beat constable that she wasn't there at four o'clock.’
‘I see…
Good.
There is one other thing.
He said that the handcart was not by the union building, either.’
‘Was it not?
Hmm…
Do you think, lad, that it might have been used to bring the body into the alley?’
‘It seems a reasonable supposition.’
Bragg began to cut thin slices of rough, black twist with his juice-stained knife.
‘Would it have come from Smithfield market?
I wonder.’
‘It is certainly of a type in common use there.’
‘Well, you could hardly push one of those far, in the middle of the night, without somebody noticing.’
Bragg rubbed the tobacco lovingly between his palms, then began to feed it into the bowl of his pipe.
‘It is possible that the body was taken to the Close only a short time before it was discovered,’ Morton said.
‘Though that would be risky, because it would be broad daylight, and there would be plenty of people about.’
Bragg grunted.
‘You would think the beat constable would have the answer to that,’ he said.
‘But he hasn't.
I can't even be certain that he went through at four o'clock.
If you ask me, all he was interested in was getting to his pick-up point on time.’
Morton grinned.
‘At least, you have proved the value of detectives pounding the beat for two years!’
Bragg laid a match across the bowl of his pipe, and puffed until the air was blue around him.
Then he sighed contentedly.
‘On the other hand,’ he said, ‘Smithfield market is beginning to stir at four in the morning.
Someone pushing a barrow would not be all that conspicuous.’
‘True.
But if the person involved were prepared to take a chance, he would be even less so at six o'clock.’
Bragg pondered, puffing steadily at his pipe.
‘If it is a Smithfield barrow, then the child must have been killed somewhere nearby.
Even if it isn't, I can't see that it was pushed any distance…
What do you think is the significance of Bartholomew Close?
There are plenty of areas like it, anywhere in London.’
‘Perhaps it is just far enough from the place where she was killed, to divert our attention.’
‘That could be it.
The murder could easily have taken place over the boundary, in the Metropolitan police area.
Not that it would restrict our investigations; but the murderer might not know that.’
‘Of course,’ Morton remarked, ‘the barrow might have been used by a local resident just to move furniture.
If the girl had been killed locally, she is small enough to have been carried through the alleys — perhaps even by a woman.’
‘That is so,’ Bragg nodded.
‘And there would have been little risk, if they had bothered to ask at Snow Hill what time the beat  constable was due to pass by.
Mind you, I can't see a woman being the killer.’
‘Why not?’
‘Just a feeling, I suppose.
But Professor Burney said that the knife wound measures one and four-tenths inches across.
And it looked as if she had been stabbed with a weapon that had a central rib; the wound gaped quite a bit in the middle.
It certainly wasn't a kitchen knife.’
‘Most of the spring-knives in common use would have a blade no more than half that size,’ Morton said.
‘It should be easy to identify.’
‘If we ever find it.
I bet it's at the bottom of the River Thames, by now.
Still, make sure that it's mentioned in the next circular, lad.
It might ring a bell in somebody's mind.’
‘Very well.’
‘Now, where is the nearest night cab-stand to Smithfield?’
Morton considered for a moment.
‘The only one at all nearby is in Holborn, opposite the new prudential building.’
‘Right, then let us take a stroll.’
They walked the half-mile to Holborn Circus at a brisk pace.
The weather had held up well; the fleeting moments of sunlight made the stone of the imposing new office blocks glow warmly.
Even Prince Albert on his plinth, raising his eternal bronze hat to the City, seemed benign.
‘You know,’ Bragg observed grimly, ‘a case like this gets to you.
To knife a child…
Christ!
My son didn't live more than a few hours, but I can feel for the parents of that little girl.
What sort of a person would stab a child to death?’
‘It will be interesting to discover.’
‘Aye…
We are going to get this bugger, lad.
Make no mistake!’
‘I presume that the coroner will accede to your request, and appoint you his officer,’ said Morton.
‘Naturally, he was not in his chambers when I left your message.’
‘Huh!
I suppose it's too much to expect a senior Queen's Counsel to work the same hours as ordinary folk,’ Bragg said grumpily.
‘Who did you speak to?’
‘The clerk of the chambers.
As you would imagine, he was rather huffy!
He made it clear that it was for Sir Rufus to determine, and for you to comply.
However, I expect that he will do as you wish.’
At the cab rank they went to the shelter, where drivers could  while away the night hours in warmth and obtain food.
Bragg went over to the counter, where a man was pouring cups of strong tea.
‘Police,’ he said.
‘I want to know if any of your drivers saw something unusual last night.’
‘Like what?’ the man said in a surly tone.
‘Like someone pushing a meat market barrow in the direction of Smithfield.’
The man looked up with a contemptuous smile.
‘Blimey, guv,’ he said, ‘there are 'undreds of 'em round 'ere.’
‘Not in the small hours, there aren't…
Say, any time between two o'clock and six.’
‘Somebody been nicking the family silver, 'ave they?’
‘No, a young girl has been stabbed to death.
Pass the word, will you?’
The man's face changed.
‘Cor,’ he said, ‘that's different.
Yes, I will.
You from Theobald's Road nick?’
‘No, we are City police.’
‘Oh, the swell mob.
Where can I find you?’
‘Don't worry.
We will call in.’
As Bragg and Morton approached the mortuary, a hansom cab pulled up and Sir Rufus Stone climbed down.
‘Ah, Bragg,’ he said assertively.
‘So you are bestirring yourself on this case!
What have you discovered?’
He paid the driver and led the way into the building.
‘Nothing of substance, sir,’ Bragg replied quietly.
‘We have done all we can until we get the pathologist's report.’
‘Then let us see what we can do about it.’
The coroner strode across the mortuary and flung open the door to the examination room.
He glanced irritably at the man's corpse, still on the slab.
‘Come now, Burney,’ he trumpeted.
‘Surely you are making rather a meal of this one?’
‘Ah, Sir Rufus.’
Burney put down his scalpel and held out his hand.
The coroner ignored it and crossed to the end of the room, where he took up his favourite position a-straddle the fireplace.
‘I know an autopsy is an important matter, Burney,’ he said, ‘but sometimes I feel that your approach is over-meticulous.’
He was holding a lapel of his frock coat in each hand; his head, with its  mane of grey hair, was thrust forward.
It was as if he was addressing a recalcitrant jury.
‘In what way?’
Burney asked mildly.
‘Well, we both know that the man you are gradually reducing to cat's meat was killed by a fall from scaffolding.
I would have thought that anyone with the most elementary grasp of relative importance would have decided that priority should be accorded to a female child done to death by some scoundrel.’
He flung out a hand oratorically.
‘Thank God that I am not answerable to any higher authority; but were I in the position of having to justify myself before the great British public, even I would find it difficult to defend your priorities.’
‘One must be methodical, Sir Rufus.
That is the first lesson I teach my students at Bart's.
And it applies to me equally with them.
The second lesson is that they must be thorough.’
‘Huh!
Then let us hope that here endeth the second lesson.’
‘Not quite, though I should complete my examination tonight.
You might be interested to know that there was considerable narrowing of the arteries, which could have produced spells of dizziness.’
‘That would hardly obviate a finding of accidental death.’
‘No, but it might be relevant if his family tried to put the blame on his employer.’
The presence of a legal justification deflected the coroner's irritation.
‘However that be,’ he said portentously, ‘I have come to discharge my solemn duty to view the body of the deceased at the earliest possible opportunity.’
Burney's mouth sagged open in a shamefaced grin.
‘By all means,’ he said.
‘Come this way.’
He led them into the mortuary, and pulled the sheet back from the body of the girl.
‘Hmm…
How old would you say she is?’
Sir Rufus asked.
‘About twelve.
You can see that the body is clean, the fingernails clean also.
Even the hair is newly washed.’
Sir Rufus leaned closer.
‘Her hair smells of some scent or other,’ he said.
‘You are not suggesting that she might have been sacrificed in some demoniacal ritual, are you, Burney?’
The pathologist laughed.
‘It is for you to draw inferences, Sir Rufus.
But, in these enlightened days, that seems rather farfetched!
I was merely pointing out that she is not a waif; she must belong to someone.’
The coroner swung round and glared at Bragg.
‘Have there  been any reports of missing children?’ he demanded.
‘Not that we are aware of,’ Bragg equivocated.
‘But, if the body had been brought in from the Met area, we would not necessarily have been alerted.’
‘Hmm…
She was a pretty child,’ Sir Rufus murmured.
‘One would think that she was merely asleep.’
Then he frowned.
‘Is that not strange in itself?’ he asked.
‘In how many cases of sudden death, Burney — of murder — have you found the victim's eyes closed?’
Burney considered for a moment.
‘In truth, none in cases of a violent death such as this.’
‘There you are, Bragg,’ the coroner beamed in triumph.
‘Find the person who closed her eyes, and you have her murderer.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Bragg searched for something to provide a distraction.
‘As you realize,’ he said, ‘we have been thinking that she might have been murdered outside the City boundaries, and brought in on a meat barrow.’
‘Well?’
‘Would it mean that you no longer had jurisdiction, sir?’
Sir Rufus snorted.
‘Fortunately, coroners are not required to indulge in transcendental divination as to the locus of a murder.
Any body found within the boundaries of the City is mine, regardless of where they might or might not have been killed.
So you cannot shuffle off your responsibilities as my officer in that way, Bragg.’
‘Very good, sir.
In that case, can we go back to something you said just now?’
‘What was that?’
‘You remarked that she looks as if she were asleep.
It would be much easier to get her identified if we could take some photographs around, to show to likely people.’
Is not that rather ghoulish?’
Sir Rufus wondered.
‘I am not thinking of a police scene-of-crime picture.
More a portrait like you see in photographers’ windows; reclining on a divan or something — only she would be asleep.’
‘Hmm…
If it were tastefully done, I do not see that anyone could object.
But it must be done quickly.
I insist that the autopsy shall be completed by tomorrow night.
I intend to open the inquest on Monday, the seventh.
I shall take evidence of discovery and identity — if you have determined it by then.
After that, I shall adjourn.
You will make the necessary arrangements, Bragg?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Good!
Now I suppose I shall have to tramp back to Moorgate underground station, before I can find a cab.
I really think, Burney, that you should get your mortuary moved to somewhere more convenient.’
Charged by Bragg with writing up notes on the case, Morton decided that they could equally well be done that night, at home.
He went instead to the City Press office, only to find that Catherine had been sent home.
He took a cab to Park Lane, and knocked on the door of her parents' house.
It was a splendid villa, overlooking Hyde Park.
A discreet brass plate announced William Marsden RA .
Her father was a well-connected painter, his field being mainly portraits of the notables in society.
Since he could command a thousand guineas a time, he was well able to afford such a residence.
The door opened, and a smartly dressed maid appeared on the threshold.
‘Oh, Mr Morton…it's a bit late for paying calls, isn't it?
I have just cleared away the tea things.’
Morton smiled warmly at her.
‘It is not merely a social call, Joan.
I would be glad if Miss Marsden could spare me a few moments.’
‘Well, come inside, anyway.’
She led him into the comfortable drawing-room at the front of the house, and disappeared.
Morton strolled to the window and watched the unending procession of cabs and carts, two-horse vans and omnibuses.
He was admiring the dexterity of a young street orderly, who was darting into the stream of traffic to scoop up the piles of horse-droppings, when he heard the rattle of the door knob.
He swung round.
It was not Catherine, but her mother.
She was taller, if anything, than Catherine, and was still dressed for afternoon receiving.
Ah, there you are,’ she said vaguely.
‘Were you wanting to speak to Catherine?’
‘If that would not incommode her, ma'am.’
‘Well, that is just it, Mr Morton.
She came home early from the office, and she has locked herself in her room.
I tiptoed upstairs, some time ago, and I could hear her crying.’
‘Oh, I am so sorry.’
‘It is not at all like her,’ Mrs Marsden went on in an aggrieved tone.
‘Normally she is so collected, so self-controlled.’
I wondered if you might have.’
Mrs Marsden lifted an accusatory finger.
‘It is very difficult, as you can well imagine, for a parent to exercise proper control over the friendships of a daughter who insists on following a career.
But it does not mean,’ she said starchily, ‘that one is totally without influence, or that propriety has been put in abeyance.
If you have a message which I may properly convey to her, I will do so.
Otherwise I will bid you good afternoon, Mr Morton.’
Morton was nonplussed.
He had spent many pleasant evenings here; and Catherine's parents had been trusting enough to withdraw to the morning room, leaving them alone together.
‘I am afraid that I do not understand!’ he exclaimed.
‘I can well comprehend your daughter's being upset but, I assure you, I would have given a great deal to prevent it.
‘No doubt you would!’
Mrs Marsden said in an injured tone.
‘It is all too easy…
’ The door opened and Catherine stood there, eyes red-rimmed, a handkerchief clutched in her hand.
‘James,’ she said in a flat voice, ‘I am so glad that you have come.’
Mrs Marsden looked from one to the other in confusion.
‘Oh…
Ah,’ she murmured, ‘I must go to see cook about dinner.’
She drifted hesitantly out of the room, but left the door ajar.
Catherine came close to Morton and let her head droop on his shoulder.
‘I am so unhappy about that poor child,’ she said.
Morton put his arm lightly round her waist.
‘It was a dreadful ordeal, but you will get over it.’
‘I stood by her for almost half an hour, before you came.
I felt so desolate, and so angry.’
‘In time you will forget.’
Catherine pulled back sharply.
‘I do not want to forget,’ she said.
‘I want society to be changed, so that such an affront to civilized behaviour will no longer be tolerated!’
Morton released her and wandered back to the window.
‘It is not tolerated now,’ he said quietly.
‘Sergeant Bragg and I will not rest until we have the murderer under lock and key.’
Catherine blew her nose, then sat down by the fireplace.
‘I am sorry, James.
I was already upset because one of my best friends, a girl I knew at school, has been having a surgical operation today.
I still have no idea of the outcome.
And with this in addition…’
‘You need not apologize for being so upset,’ Morton said  quietly.
‘You set standards for yourself that a paragon could only reach for.
But I am afraid that you have another ordeal ahead of you.’
Catherine sniffed.
‘What is that?’ she asked.
‘The coroner is opening the inquest on Monday.
You will be called to give evidence of having discovered the body.’
‘I shall not mind that,’ she said.
‘At least I shall be doing something to bring the murderer to justice.’
‘Good…
There is another thing that I would like to ask.
But you need not reply, if it distresses you.’
‘Don't be silly, James,’ she said with something approaching her usual spirit.
‘I cried like a schoolgirl because I felt so alone.
I dared not tell Mamma, or she would begin to badger me again to give up my job…
And, oh, James, she was so little…
’ She blew her nose again.
‘Were her eyes closed when you found her?’
Catherine looked up.
‘Why?’ she asked.
‘Apparently it is virtually unknown for a Person who has been murdered to be found with closed eyes.’
‘Even if they have been killed in their sleep?’
‘So it would appear.
Both the coroner and Professor Burney seem to regard it as significant.’
‘Well, I did not close her eyes, nor did anyone who came on the scene before you.’
‘Right, that is helpful.’
Catherine stood up and smoothed her dress.
‘Thank you for coming, James.
I do not often feel so sorry for myself, I assure you.
I am much better now.’
‘There was something else,’ Morton said, ‘though in the circumstances it is clearly too much to ask.’
‘And what is that?’ she asked sharply.
‘We are faced with the task of identifying the girl.
Until we do, we shall be blundering about in the dark.
The coroner is not averse to our using a photograph, if it is what he describes as ‘tasteful’.
Of course, we have scene-of-crime people, but not in the wildest stretch of the imagination could one describe their efforts as tasteful.
Sergeant Bragg remembered that your friend Aubrey Rivington has assisted us in the Past — through your good offices.
I had hoped that you might persuade him to help us again.’
To his surprise, a smile formed on Catherine's lips.
‘Goodness!
I think he would collapse with fright.
He is not a very manly person, you know.’
‘But he is a brilliant photographer.
Every morning I thank his maker for that.’
‘Every morning?
You intrigue me, James.’
‘Ah!
That is the last thing I wished to do.
I am afraid that I have been indiscreet.’
‘I can imagine that Aubrey might be indiscreet, but not that you — of all people — would celebrate the fact in your morning orisons!’
‘I am sorry.
I have betrayed a confidence.
Please forget it.’
‘No, James!
I insist, if you value my friendship.’
Morton pursed his lips.
‘Oh well,’ he said with a sigh, ‘in the face of such force majeure , he may forgive me for capitulating.’
Catherine smiled.
‘Well, then?’ she asked.
‘What is this dire secret?’
Morton looked down at the toe of his boot.
‘After you had been presented to our gracious Queen, last summer, you followed custom by having your photograph taken in all your finery.’
‘Yes,’ Catherine prompted.
‘I suborned Aubrey Rivington into so far forgetting his professional integrity as to give me an illicit copy of that photograph.
It has graced my bedside table ever since.’
Catherine gave a gurgle of laughter.
‘Oh, James, you are a clown!’
‘Am I forgiven?’
‘Well…perhaps you may earn forgiveness, in time.’
‘And Aubrey also?
I really was most pressing.’
Catherine considered for a moment.
‘There is less excuse for him,’ she said.
‘I feel that some penalty should be imposed in his case.’
She smiled.
‘It would be just, I think, if he were made to use his talents in a far more worthy cause.
Yes, I think that I can persuade him to do what you require.’
‘You will not tell him that you know of his lapse, will you?’
‘No, that will not be necessary.
Equally, we must only say in general terms what is required of him.
If he knew, he would go into a swoon!
Just wait a moment, while I make myself a little more Presentable, then I will come with you.’
They walked the few hundred yards to Rivington's studio in companionable silence.
‘Good, he is still there,’ Catherine said, pointing to a glow of light in the window.
‘Now, since you are evidently so well acquainted with him, you shall broach the subject.
I will stand  ready to reinforce your attack, should you seem likely to fail.’
Morton grinned.
‘So I am to be punished, after all!’
He pushed open the door and allowed Catherine to precede him into the studio.
At the jangle of the bell they heard footsteps from the passage leading to the dark-room, then Rivington pulled the curtain aside.
‘Ah, my favourite people!’ he exclaimed fulsomely.
Slightly built, he had long, yellow locks and a sketchy beard.
He was dressed in a green velvet smoking-jacket and a floppy orange bow-tie.
‘Oh, I say!’ he cried.
‘Don't tell me that you are going to get married!
Well, it mustn't be till July!
I am booked up solid.’
His soft mincing voice dwelt fractionally too long on every vowel.
‘No, we are not getting married,’ Catherine reproved him.
‘I am glad…
Shouldn't say things like that, I suppose,’ he simpered, ‘but all my friends are going off and doing it.
There will not be anybody of our age around here soon.’
‘This is much more important than any wedding photograph of mine could ever be,’ Catherine assured him.
‘Ooh!…
What is it, then?’
‘You will appreciate,’ Morton intervened in a solemn voice,
‘that this is a matter of the utmost confidentiality.’
‘Oh, you can trust me!’
Rivington said, his eyes bright with curiosity.
‘I hope so.
You have been selected, Mr Rivington…’
‘Aubrey, Please!’
‘You have been selected for this commission because of your exceptional technical skills, and your great artistic ability.
But I have been charged to satisfy myself of your discretion also.’
‘I can keep a secret,’ Rivington protested.
‘What about all those naughty goings-on last year?
I helped you then, didn't I?
And nobody heard a whisper of it — not from me, anyway.’
‘I am aware of that,’ Morton said quietly.
‘But this is rather different, and the court would need to be assured of your trustworthiness.’
‘Ooh!
I say!
The Court!’
He hugged himself.
‘How delicious!’
‘For reasons that will become apparent, I cannot reveal the name of the subject.
Perhaps you will accept my assurance that it is a matter of importance and delicacy.’
‘Ooh, I will!
Well, I know the Queen has come up to Buckingham Palace, for the Season.
And the Prince of Wales is in residence at Marlborough House.’
‘Quite…
You will accept that, in the circumstances, it will not be Possible for the subject to come here.’
‘Of course not!’
‘Have you any equipment that is sufficiently light to be taken in a cab?’
‘You know very well that I have!
Didn't I take that photograph in the street for you, a couple of years ago?’
‘Of course.
Excellent!
Then may I collect you at half-past eight tomorrow morning?’
‘Yes, that will be all right.
I will pin a note on the door, saying I have had to cancel all my appointments…
Tell me, will i be allowed — I know it seems awful cheek — in due course, do you think that I shall be able to display the photograph in my window?’
Morton smiled.
‘I suppose you might be able to, after a time, if you wanted to,’ he said.
2
Next morning, Morton was at Rivington's studio at the time appointed.
The phonographer had dressed himself in clothes that were less foppish than his usual attire.
Morton reflected that if, indeed, he ever did become a royal photographer, life would be much duller for his acquaintances.
He stowed Rivington and his equipment in the four-wheeler, then went to give the driver his instructions.
Rivington was hugging himself with glee, as they approached Hyde Park Corner.
When they turned down Constitution Hill, and Buckingham Palace came into view, Morton thought he would burst.
‘Where is it to be?’ he asked.
‘Is it the state apartments, or the throne room?’
‘You must know that the Queen herself would hardly be about, at this time in the morning,’ Morton said with a smile.
‘I suppose not.’
For a moment Rivington was deflated.
‘Perhaps it is Prince George,’ he began again.
‘They say he is always up early, having been a sailor and all that.’
‘I can promise you that it is a young lady.’
‘Good, I am glad of that.
I get on quite well with them…
Hey!
The cabby is going past the Palace!
He should have turned there.’
‘We are not going to Buckingham Palace,’ Morton said calmly.
‘I thought you said…’
‘Don't be impatient, you will find out, soon enough.’
‘I know!’ cried Rivington, as they turned into The Mall.
‘It is St James's Palace!’
‘Not St James's Palace, either.’
‘Oh…
Of course!
It must be Marlborough House.
How silly I am!
I had forgotten how well you know the Prince of Wales!’
Morton maliciously kept silent, watching the photographer's face fall as they trotted down towards Trafalgar Square and  away from Marlborough House.
When they turned into The Strand, he slumped into the corner, his brow creased in a frown.
Then he smiled.
‘I know,’ he said.
‘It is something on at the Tower of London.’
‘Not the Tower.’
‘Oh.’
He subsided again, until they began to climb Ludgate Hill, and St Paul's came into view.
‘I hope it isn't in the cathedral,’ he said mournfully, ‘I am never at my best in churches.’
Morton laughed.
‘It is nothing like that.
I suppose, at this stage, I might bring you into our confidence to some extent.
Your commission is to take a photograph of a young lady — in bed.’
‘In bed!
Ooh!
I might have known it!
I don't want to become involved in taking naughty pictures for the Prince!’
‘It is not for the Prince.’
‘Well, any of his friends, either!
There won't be anybody else in bed with her?’
‘She will be alone in her bed, and she will not be awake.’
‘This is not at all what I thought,’ he complained.
‘You need not be disappointed,’ Morton said.
‘I am sure that, afterwards, you will admit it has been a most interesting assignment.
I have no doubt that you will emerge from it with your reputation enhanced.’
‘Emerge from it?
That doesn't sound very nice.
Where are we?’
‘Golden Lane.’
‘This is a shabby area, I must say…
Why are we stopping?’
‘We have reached our destination.’
Rivington peered out of the window, and gave a cry.
‘Oh, my God!
The mortuary!’
He flung open the door and began to run down the street like a rabbit.
Morton caught up with him at the crossroads.
‘What is the matter?’ he asked, taking a firm hold on Rivington's arm.
‘You didn't tell me it was going to be anything like this!’
‘I said not a word that was untrue,’ Morton replied.
‘The coroner's court has instructed me to obtain a photograph of a young girl…who will never wake up again.’
Rivington shivered.
‘What do you want it for?’ he asked.
‘We have no idea who she is.
She seems to be from a good family, and we want to trace them.
Sir Rufus Stone suggested that we ought to go round with photographs, until we find her parents.
Sergeant Bragg refused to use a police photograph…
Aubrey, daughter.
The shock could be enough to kill her.
I know of no one who could spare her that, who could make a tasteful picture, but You.
‘Yes, well…’
‘I have seen a photograph in your window, of a society girl reclining on, I suppose, a chaise-longue .
Your brilliance was such that you had made the background virtually vanish; she seemed to be floating on air.’
A glint of satisfaction showed in Rivington's eyes.
‘I know the one.
Yes, it was good though I say it myself.
But that doesn't mean I have to be involved in this kind of nauseous business.’
Morton released his hold, and put his arm round Rivington's shoulders.
‘As I see it,’ he said gently, ‘it is a matter of personal responsibility.
You have been given great talents, you can achieve results that are beyond the ability of anyone else.
It is not in your nature to use them just for your own enrichment, for titillating the vanity of young society women.
I know you are not concerned with the fee — though you will be paid handsomely.
I ask you to think of that mother, waiting anxiously for her child to return.
Only you can ease the pain for her.’
‘Yes, well…’
‘Miss Marsden assured me that you would agree.’
Rivington sighed.
‘Oh well, then, I suppose I shall have to.
But I think you have both been very naughty.’
He turned and reluctantly retraced his steps.
With Noakes's help, they formed a pillow from two sheets, and fixed a third behind the slab to make a screen.
Then Morton helped to carry the equipment in from the growler.
As he worked, the look of resentment and repugnance faded from Rivington's face.
He even began to whistle a tune under his breath.
The glass roof of the building allowed in sufficient light for his purpose; though, to be on the safe side, he took two exposures with a magnesium flash-gun also.
When he was satisfied, Morton helped him to dismantle his equipment and sent him on his way home.
‘That was a caper, and no mistake,’ Noakes remarked.
‘Never had anything like that in all my years.’
He prepared to pull the sheet over the body again.
‘Strange how red her lips have stayed.
At a glance you could think she really was asleep.’
‘Death's pale flag is not advanced there’,’ Morton murmured.
‘What?’
‘Nothing.
Do you have her clothes?’
‘Yes, I put them on one side for you.
Do you want them now?’
‘Please.’
Noakes went into his little cubby-hole and produced a small brown-paper parcel.
‘Here you are,’ he grinned.
‘You can tell your squeamish friend he was just in time with his tripod.
Dr Burney is going to do her first thing.’
Morton strolled over to the offices of the City Press .
He approached the doorman.
‘Is Miss Marsden in yet?’ he asked.
‘Yes, sir.
Right on time, just as if nothing had happened.
Grand young woman, if I may say so.’
‘Yes indeed!
Would you know if she is in her room?’
‘Well, you can always try.’
‘Thank you.’
He went upstairs and found Catherine checking some proofs.
She lifted her head and smiled cheerfully.
‘Were you successful in your enterprise?’ she asked.
‘In our enterprise would be more accurate.
He actually fled down the street, at the sight of the mortuary!
I had to invoke your sacred name before he would agree to do it.
So you see how powerful you are.’
‘I feel anything but powerful, this morning.’
‘How is your school friend?’
She gave a smile of relief.
‘I went to see Amy's husband last night.
Although he had not actually seen her, he had been assured by the surgeon that she is doing well.
So, you see, all my histrionics yesterday were needless.’
‘Good!
In that case, perhaps I can consult you about the other unpleasant incident.’
A shadow crossed her face.
‘If you must,’ she said.
‘We have very little information,’ he began quietly.
‘We conjecture that she was brought to Bartholomew Close on a market-porter's barrow, and we feel that the journey started not too far away.
If we can identify the likely areas, we shall be able to take our photographs to them first.’
‘I understand.’
‘I have brought the girl's clothes.
If you could bring yourself to examine them, I would be grateful.’
Catherine bit her lip, and looked away.
‘Is there no end to it?’ she asked.
‘Not for me, until her killer is caught.’
She gave a rueful smile.
‘Nor for me.’
Morton untied the parcel and put the small heap of clothes before her.
With reluctance Catherine sorted through them.
‘I have relatively little to do with young people,’ she remarked,
‘but clearly the dress is of the latest fashion.
The frills and lace are Perhaps not in the best of taste, but fashionable nevertheless.
The material of the dress is of good quality.
I would suggest that it was bought in one of the better stores, say, Marshall & Snelgrove or Debenham & Freebody.
The under-garments are of good quality also, as are the stockings.
As for the boots, they are of soft leather, and scarcely worn…
Is that enough?’
‘Yes, thank you.
It confirms our impression of a girl from a well-to-do background.
I am most grateful.’
He began to wrap the garments again.
‘Well, I am glad to have that over,’ Catherine said.
‘I am sorry that I could not spare you.’
‘I do not wish to be spared…
Anyway, there was less blood than I would have imagined.’
‘We wonder if she was the daughter of a good family, who was kidnapped for ransom.
According to my cousin Violet, it is happening more and more in America.’
Catherine bit back a cutting remark about Violet.
‘If so,’ she said,
‘one would have expected the ransom to have been paid.’
‘Something could have gone wrong, Perhaps the gang overestimated the prosperity of the family, and demanded more than they could afford to pay.’
‘Or were prepared to pay,’ Catherine said icily.
‘Yes.
Alternatively, the police might have got too close.
In a case such as that, the captive would certainly be able to identify some of her captors.’
‘But you know nothing of any kidnap?’
‘Not in the City, certainly.
It could have occurred in the last couple of days, within the Metropolitan police area.
We would not necessarily have been notified yet.’
‘Presumably you have told them of her death.’
‘Indeed I have.
We may get a reaction from them, in a day or two.’
‘And if you do not?’
‘We shall be back using Aubrey Rivington's photographs, I fear.’
After lunch Morton went back to Old Jewry, to find Bragg sitting morosely at his desk.
He looked up.
‘How did you get on with Miss Nancy, lad?’
‘I am afraid I do not understand, sir,’ Morton said, straight-faced.
‘I am not acquainted with any young lady of that name.’
‘The photographer, you stupid sod!
Did he do the job?’
‘Yes, after a great deal of persuasion and pressure.
Without Miss Marsden's influence, I am sure he would not have agreed to do it.’
‘When shall we have them?’
‘Them?
What?’
‘Stop pulling my pisser.
I've had a bad morning.
The photographs, you half-wit!’
‘Ah!
They will be ready tonight.’
‘That's something, anyway…
I don't understand it, lad.
I have been to every Metropolitan police station, from Islington in the north to Bow Street in the west.
Never a one has had a report of a missing child.’
‘Strange.
One would have thought that she must have been brought in from that area.
I suppose it is out of the question that one of our own police stations might have received such a notification, and failed to pass it on?’
‘Out of the question or not, lad, I checked up first thing.
If you believe what they say, they've never heard of a little girl going missing!’
‘You seem somewhat jaundiced today, sir,’ Morton said lightly.
‘Jaundiced?
Who wouldn't bloody be?
A pretty little thing like that found dead, and nobody has even missed her?
It's unnatural, that's what it is.
Un-bloody-natural!’
‘One must accept’, Morton said carefully, ‘that it would be unlikely the body had been brought from south of the river, because of the danger of being caught on a bridge.
But there is still the possibility that she came from the area north-east of the City.’
‘I agree.
Later on, I will go up to Hackney.
And, since you are so full of chirp today, you can do Bethnal Green and Stepney.’
‘Very well.’
Bragg pushed his chair back.
‘But, on the way, let's call in at Hobson's in Houndsditch.
They might be able to give us some ideas on the weapon.’
Ten minutes later, they were standing at the window of the cutler's shop.
In it were elaborate displays of every kind of knife: from vegetable knives for the kitchen, to horn-handled hunting knives.
Bragg took the left side of the window, Morton the right, and they inspected the exhibits systematically.
‘I can see nothing like it,’ Bragg said irritably.
‘Can you?’
‘No.’
‘Then let us see what they can tell us.’
They marched into the shop and asked for the manager.
When they were told that he was still at lunch, Morton thought that Bragg would explode, but he controlled himself and settled for a middle-aged assistant.
‘Police,’ he said evenly.
‘We are trying to identify a particular kind of knife.
It was used in a murder, and seems a bit unusual.’
‘Why should you think it was bought here?’ the man said sharply.
‘We don't.
In fact, we think the body was brought into our patch from elsewhere.
But you are the biggest dealers around; if anybody can help us, you can.’
‘I will do what I can,’ the man said, mollified.
‘For a start, the blade is one and four-tenths inches wide.’
The assistant took a ruler from a drawer, and marked off the dimension with his thumb.
‘Hmm…
That is unusual.
It sounds more like a hunting knife.
There are some in the window with roughly that width of blade.
Did you see them?’
‘Yes, we had a look.
The trouble is, they only have one edge.
The type we are looking for must have two edges, and a central rib.’
‘More of a dagger, then…
There is not much call for implements of that kind, nowadays,’ the assistant said musingly.
‘Come off it, mate,’ Bragg exclaimed, ‘it's a bloody weapon!
You could kill a man with it, as easy as spit.’
The man smiled deprecatingly.
‘It's just a trade term, sergeant.
We are, after all, suppliers to the domestic market.
From what you say, it would be too heavy for an ordinary spring-blade knife.
One and four-tenths inches…
Why, that is as wide as a sword blade.
Double-edged, you say?’
‘From looking at the wound, I would say that it must be.’
The man screwed up his face in distaste.
‘Did the blade pass right through the person?’ he asked.
‘No.’
‘I see.
I find it very difficult to be of assistance, sergeant.
Normally the widest part of a…a weapon such as a dagger, is at the hilt.
Have you any idea how far it went in?’
‘No.’
The assistant thought for a moment.
‘There is a market for ornamental daggers and suchlike,’ he said.
‘But we do not handle them ourselves.
Now, some of them have wide, even curved, blades.
You can get them up to two inches at the hilt, in the oriental style.’
Bragg sighed.
‘I see.
It isn't as easy as I thought.
So we might be looking for an ornamental dagger, then?’
‘Or perhaps an antique original.
But I am not an expert, sergeant.
Please remember that.’
Having arranged to meet Morton back at Old Jewry, Bragg took a train to Hackney Downs and walked the quarter-mile to the police station.
He waited in growing irritation while a woman minutely described her missing cat, and impressed on the desk-sergeant that it would only answer to the name Roger.
At last she was satisfied that the local constabulary would diligently seek the animal, and departed.
‘I see that Hackney is a hot-bed of crime,’ Bragg said, showing his warrant-card.
‘Silly old biddy,’ the sergeant replied.
‘Every other week, that damned tom-cat goes missing!
Well, they do, don't they?
It's in their nature.
But try telling her that.
Now, what can I do for you?’
‘The body of a young girl — around twelve years old — turned up in an alley in the City.
She's good class, so she didn't belong where she was found.
We reckon she was brought in from somewhere nearby, and dumped on us.
Have you had any reports of missing girls?’
‘Not that I know of.
When would it be?’
‘Well, she was killed the night before last; but she could have gone missing some time before that.’
‘I'll have a look.’
The sergeant took his incident book from a shelf, and began to thumb through it.
‘No,’ he grunted.
‘To be on the safe side, I've been back to the beginning of the year.
We have not had any reports of missing children in that time.
Is four months enough for you?’
‘Yes.
The child we have is well nourished and cared for.
She has not been held away from home for long.’
‘That's it, then.
Sorry!’
Bragg left the Police station, and sat on the railway platform for half an hour, waiting for a train.
He turned what little they had discovered over and over in his mind.
It did not make sense.
In  death, the girl had looked beautiful and serene; the kind of daughter anyone would be proud of.
How could a child as well cared for as that vanish from her ordinary life without someone raising a hullabaloo?
It was inexplicable.
He got back to Old Jewry at four o'clock, to find Morton waiting for him.
‘Come on,’ he said, ‘we might as well call at the cab-rank, before we go to the mortuary.
The walk might clear my brain.
Did you have any luck, lad?’
‘No.
There seems to be a dearth of missing children.
Neither Bethnal Green nor Stepney have any mislaid infants on their books.
On the face of it, our young lady is singularly lacking in family connections; yet, from her appearance, she has not been left to her own devices.’
‘What do you think of the idea of oriental daggers?’
‘One could certainly build a theory around it.
Let us suppose that she is an heiress, left to the uncertain care of a guardian.
He, having lost all his money gambling or speculating in stocks, seizes such a weapon from the wall, kills her and dumps her body in the alley.
He would not report her fate to the Police, and he could divert enquiries by saying that she had gone to friends in the country.
At any moment, he will realize all the assets in her trust fund, and abscond abroad.’
He seized Bragg's elbow.
‘Look!’ he cried.
‘That carriage, racing down the street!
There he goes!
Quick, blow your whistle!’
Bragg pushed him roughly away.
‘For Christ sake, stop your Play-acting!
There's a young maid lying dead.
Have some respect!’
‘Sorry, sir.’
‘Mind you, there is that way of looking at it.
Not every family is protective…
On that basis, we are wasting our time, thinking her absence will have been reported.’
‘I would have thought we have now exhausted that possibility.
We could, I suppose, circularize the provincial police forces.
It is Possible that she might have come to the big city on her own.
Some girls of that age are very independent; my own sister was a case in point.’
‘I somehow don't see this girl having a baronet for a father…
So, how did your country girl end up in Bartholomew Close?’
‘She was led astray by someone who Promised to give her lodgings, then robbed and disposed of her.
It must happen all the time.’
‘You are a great comfort!
We will never get rid of this case.
Let's  see if the cabbies have something for us.’
They crossed to the shelter and went inside.
‘Have you discovered anything for me?’ he asked the man behind the counter.
‘You're the copper what called yesterday, aren't you?’
‘That's right.’
The man went to a jacket hanging on a nail in the corner, and Produced a used envelope with pencilled writing on the outside.
‘Albert Jackson says he saw something,’ he said.
‘I got him to write it down proper, so's there would be no mistake.’
Bragg took the envelope and read the scrawl on the back.
‘He says that he had some grub here, around half-past four on Wednesday morning.
As he went out of the shelter, he saw two people with a barrow, a man and a woman, he says.
They were pushing it east, towards the City.
By the time he got to his cab, they had gone as far as Holborn Circus.
He was going in the same direction, empty.
He is almost certain that they went up Charterhouse Street.
He's sure they didn't go over Holborn Viaduct, because that was the way he went.’
‘It makes sense,’ Morton remarked.
Bragg went back to the counter.
‘Thank Mr Jackson for me, will you,’ he said.
‘I think this is going to be very helpful.’
‘Will there be a reward, or anything?’ the man asked hopefully.
Bragg laughed.
‘We don't know who she is, yet.
But you never know.
There might be a sovereign or two from her grieving Parents.’
They walked briskly to the mortuary, and were told to go into Burney's inner sanctum.
He was sitting at the bench in the window, writing notes.
Morton averted his eyes from the violated corpse of the girl on the slab.
‘You have finished then?’
Bragg asked cheerfully.
Burney gave a bashful grin.
‘Yes.
The coroner will have my full report in the morning.
A most interesting case.
It completely overturned my preconceptions.’
‘How do you mean, sir?’
Bragg asked sharply.
‘Now, sergeant, you must not press me.
My function is to lay before you, in a logical and detached manner, the fruits of my experience.
If I allow you to harry me, I shall be failing in my duty.’
Bragg contained his impatience.
‘Where are you going to start, sir?’ he asked.
‘I imagine that your primary interest lies in the weapon used in  the attack.
Shall we begin with that?’
‘Right.’
‘Death was undoubtedly caused by a single thrust from a pointed instrument.
It had penetrated the chest wall from the front, and pierced the left ventricle of the heart.
However, the wound did not continue through to the chest wall at the back.’
‘Can you say how long the knife was?’
Bragg interrupted.
‘Be patient, sergeant.
My mind is not intuitive, like yours.
If I am interrupted, I shall fail to convey some fact which might ultimately be crucial.’
‘Sorry, sir.’
‘I cannot say precisely how long the blade was, but I think you will agree that it is legitimate to deduce its length, from a progressive diminution in the width of the wound.
At an approximate depth of three inches from the chest wall, the wound was a mere half-inch wide.
Up to that point, the tapering of the blade had been continuous.
On the basis that it had continued thus, the blade would have had a total length of about five inches.’
‘It was a two-edged weapon, was it?’
‘Indeed, sergeant, and extremely sharp.
We can comfort ourselves in the knowledge that death must have supervened very quickly.
There were some thin smears of blood around the wound.
There was also a considerable amount of clotted blood and fluid in the left chest cavity, and also in the bag which contains the heart.
I can tell you the number of ounces in each case, if you wish.’
Bragg grimaced.
‘No thank you, sir.’
Burney grinned.
‘Modern policemen have no stamina!
When I was a young man, aspiring detectives would attend at autopsies on their rest days, just for experience.
Somehow the whole fabric of society is softening, becoming effete.’
‘This isn't the part of the job I enjoy most, I'll admit that,’ Bragg said curtly.
‘But I don't think it makes me any worse of a detective.’
Burney looked abashed.
‘Forgive me, sergeant.
It is sometimes difficult to maintain a Proper sense of perspective, in this work.
Moreover, I must confess that my quip was directed towards deflecting justifiable irritation on your part.
I fear that, through momentary inattention, or a moralistic rejection of the evidence, I may have wasted your valuable time.’
‘What on earth are you on about, sir?’
Bragg asked.
Burney took him over to the grey slab in the middle of the room.
He pointed to a circular wrinkled scar, on the skin of the  girl's abdomen.
It was surrounded by a narrow area of brown pigmentation.
‘You see that?’ he asked.
‘It's a birth-mark,’ Bragg pronounced.
‘What about it?’
Burney smiled shamefacedly.
‘It is not a birth-mark and, if I had rid myself of my preconceptions, I would have recognized it for what it is, on superficial examination of the subject.’
‘Are you going to tell me, or not?’
Bragg grunted crossly.
‘It is called a gumma, and is characteristic of a particular medical condition.
It was only when I dissected the heart, this afternoon, that its significance struck me.
See.’
He turned to the bench, where unidentifiable pieces of tissue were neatly arranged.
‘Perhaps Constable Morton would be interested also.’
Morton reluctantly went over, and peered at the object which Burney was indicating with his probe.
‘This is a section taken from the aorta, close to the aortic valve.
The aorta, I should explain for the benefit of our young friend, is the major artery leading from the heart…
Now, do you see that pearly thickening?’
‘Yes,’ Bragg grunted.
‘And this longitudinal wrinkling?
There are also characteristic areas of scarring.
I am afraid that there is no conceivable doubt.
The subject was in a fairly advanced state of syphilitic infection.’
‘God Almighty!’
Bragg exclaimed.
‘Syphilis is a venereal disease!’
‘Just so.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘There is no possible doubt.’
‘That beautiful young girl?
I can't believe it!
Could she have inherited it?’
Burney shook his head.
‘Not in my view.’
‘Are we dealing with a case of family abuse?
Father, uncles?’
The pathologist sighed.
‘No, I think not.
I examined the genital area, to test my suppositions.
There was considerable vaginal dilation; in my view, only consistent with full penetration over a long period.
The sole conclusion I feel able to draw is that your young lady had been a child prostitute.’
‘Oh, my God!’
Bragg looked bewildered.
‘You said advanced syphilis.
When do you reckon she caught it?’
‘If you want the opinion of an expert, you should see Dr Rubin, of Bart's.
It is possible for the advanced stage to supervene a few months after infection, but it would normally take ten or fifteen  years to develop.
In the circumstances of this case, let us say…two to three years.’
‘But she's only twelve now!’
Bragg Protested.
‘Yes.’
‘So she was a prostitute at the age of nine?’
‘It is not unknown…
If it brings you any comfort, sergeant, her life expectancy was already very short.’
‘Poor little bugger.’
Bragg turned to Morton.
‘One thing's for sure, lad, we are going to get the swines who are responsible for this.’
Morton stood stunned.
‘We had begun on a totally false premise,’ he said at length.
‘We shall certainly have to rethink our approach…
So the redness of her lips was attributable to lip-salve.
We ought to have known.’
‘Having delivered my mea culpa ,’ Burney said, ‘I may nevertheless be able to atone for my lapse.
When examining the wound, I noticed a dark area at each end of the cut.
They were round in shape, and about three-sixteenths of an inch in width.
I made an incision across each mark, and established the presence of extravasated blood.’
‘What does that mean?’
Bragg asked.
‘The discoloration was as a result of bruising…
In view of the marks’ being similar at each end of the incision, I conclude that they were caused by the weapon which killed the subject.’
‘I see,’ Bragg said slowly.
‘So the dagger, or whatever, was stuck in with such force that the guard caused these bruises.
It sounds like a very violent attack, but does it take us any further?’
Burney smiled smugly.
‘Yes indeed,’ he said.
‘To me it indicates what I would have thought was a very distinctive weapon.
The bruising was not contiguous to the incision.
There was a gap of, say, one-tenth of an inch between them.
One can conjecture, therefore, that the hilt of the weapon was not flat, but had circular Projections towards the point.
They might have been intended to catch the blade of an opponent, thus preventing it from sliding past the hilt, and injuring the holder.’
‘Hmm…
I can't say I have ever seen one like that, have you, lad?’
‘No,’ said Morton.
‘But I have!’
Burney said triumphantly.
‘Or rather, I have seen the results of the use of such a one.
I looked it up in my book.
I encountered precisely similar bruises in a stabbing case in April.
The name of the victim was Andrew Livesey.
He was certainly the subject of a frenzied attack.
The characteristics of the blade were identical to the present one.
I believe that the case was dealt with by Inspector Cotton and Sergeant Mack.
You will be able, no doubt, to compare notes with them.’
Bragg and Morton tramped back to Old Jewry in silence.
They went up the curving Georgian staircase to Bragg's room, and hung their bowlers on the bentwood hat-stand.
‘This is a real sod of a case,’ Bragg remarked, as he sank into his chair and pulled out his pipe.
‘If Inspector Cotton finds out there is a common weapon in this case and his, he will be saying that he ought to control both…
And very sensible it will seem.’
‘But you only nominally come under his aegis.
The fact that you report through him is nothing more than a formula to save his face.
You are really responsible direct to the Commissioner.’
Bragg struck a match.
‘I know, lad.
But try telling Cotton that.’
He puffed vigorously.
‘This could be the very opening he is looking for.
And you know we don't get on.’
‘Well, we must ensure that he does not get to know.
For my part, I would find it just as irksome as you, to work under his direction.’
‘It's easy to say that, lad.
But what happens if, half-way through, he finds out we are working it independently?
We can hardly suppress what the police surgeon has just told us.
Even if we tried, Professor Burney is bound to point out the connection, in his report to the coroner.
Cotton would catch us with our trousers down, and no mistake.’
‘I would happily take that chance,’ Morton said firmly.
‘No doubt you would!
You could easily find something better suited to your talents — become a Member of Parliament, or something.
Me, I would be out on my ear — no reputation, no job, no pension.’
‘What about the estimable Miss Hildred, in Dorset?
I would positively swear that she is Panting with desire…to have you living in Bere Regis, running the family brewery — in your spare time, of course!’
‘That's enough of your cheek, my lad.’
‘Heavens!
You are blushing, sir!’
‘I can run my own affairs, without you Poking your nose in,’ Bragg growled.
Morton was suddenly serious.
‘Ah,’ he said, ‘but this is your affair.
You know full well that, once Inspector Cotton learns the girl was a prostitute, he will write the case off.’
‘I expect you are right, at that.’
‘But I heard you swear that you would track down her killer.
Can you really be reneging on that vow, merely because a connected case is being investigated by the Inspector?’
Bragg knocked his pipe out.
‘It is tempting to close our eyes to the Livesey case but, say what you will, it would be bad police Practice.
It should never happen.’
‘Perhaps.
But it would be even worse if the best detective officer in the City force were emasculated, because his immediate superior is inept.’
Bragg looked up angrily, then walked to the window and gazed at the church tower beyond.
‘I suppose,’ he said at length, ‘that we could Play stupid, and not see the connection.
But I would dearly like to know what, if anything, they have found out.’
Morton grinned.
‘Then let me casually go across to the office, and draw the file.
If I am caught, I can easily plead an insatiable appetite for vicarious experience.’
‘I doubt if they would know what the bloody hell you were talking about.
You won't keep many friends, you know, if you shove your Cambridge education down their throats.’
‘You can rely on me.’
Morton jumped to his feet and vanished.
Bragg stared moodily out of the window.
Morton was right.
A murdered prostitute was of no account in anybody's book.
For them, to be carved up was a hazard of their way of life — it was almost their own fault, people would say.
Particularly the prosperous merchants and bankers, whose taxes paid for the police.
They wanted the traffic kept moving, burglars and screwsmen put behind bars, footpads eliminated.
Their sort wouldn't let on they even knew prostitutes existed.
But whose money was it that tempted these stupid girls?
And she had been pretty on that slab, all the influences of birth and upbringing cancelled out.
He would have been delighted with a daughter who looked like that.
Whatever her situation, she had still been a human being, entitled to warmth and shelter and protection.
She hadn't become a whore because she wanted to; it was because the money of perverted old men had offered her an easy way out of poverty — those same old men who would clamour for the investigation to be  dropped.
Well, he was not going to play games.
In strictness, the coroner was independent of the police.
As his officer it was Bragg's duty to investigate, regardless of any other cases.
So long as he had the support of Sir Rufus Stone, he could thumb his nose at Cotton.
The door opened, and Morton skipped inside.
‘I managed it!’ he said triumphantly.
‘Here is the file!’
He dropped it on Bragg's desk.
Bragg opened the folder and flicked through the contents.
‘Well, there is not much on Mr Andrew Livesey here.
a few addresses and suchlike.
Fortunately, Sergeant Mack's notes on the autopsy report do not mention the size of the wound, or the bruising near it…
All right, lad, we will act stupid and see how far it takes us.
Hide that folder in your pocket, and we will see if Sir Rufus will back us.’
They strolled down to the Temple, in the evening sunshine.
The brick of the old walls glowed warmly, the grass of the lawns was a lush green.
These courts had existed for centuries already, ever since the medieval Templars had been a power in the land.
They seemed to have a significance independent of the self-satisfied barristers and scurrying clerks who peopled them now.
They climbed the stairs to Sir Rufus Stone's chambers, and were told that he was in conference.
They sat chatting to his clerk, until his door opened and two men emerged.
From their conversation, as they passed down the corridor, they were well pleased with the advice they had received.
So Sir Rufus was not exactly being pauperized by spending part of his time as coroner for the City of London.
‘You can go in now,’ the clerk said.
They went down the lino-covered corridor and knocked on the door.
‘Come!’ he called.
He was engaged in tying up a large bundle of documents with red tape.
‘More satisfied customers, sir?
I hope they pay well!’
Sir Rufus looked up imperiously.
‘The case is fascinating, Bragg.
That is why I took it.
One benefit deriving from advancing years is that my clerk diverts to others briefs that are devoid of interest.
It was for that very reason that I declined appointment as a judge.
Can you imagine a worse fate than being condemned to listen to the endless trivia that surround most criminal prosecutions?
And give them your full attention, too!’
‘I expect you can rely on your clerk to keep the guineas rolling in.’
Sir Rufus smiled.
‘Someone must pay for the Privilege of having me spend valuable time in directing the operations of bone-headed policemen like you!
Well, what is it now?’
‘The young girl, sir.’
‘Ah, yes.’
The coroner struck his customary pose in front of the empty fireplace.
‘You have no doubt succeeded in identifying her.’
‘Not exactly, sir.’
‘Good God, Bragg!
There cannot be many missing girls of her class.
It ought to be the easiest thing in the world.’
‘You haven't spoken to the pathologist, then?’
‘Burney?
Not since yesterday.
Why?
Is there some development that I should have been made aware of?’
‘Nothing critical, sir.
You will be getting his report in the morning, I expect.’
Then why are you wasting my time?’
‘We happened to be at the mortuary…not that it will make any difference, but there is one thing we thought you would find interesting.’
The coroner looked at Bragg suspiciously.
‘Well, what is it?’ he demanded.
‘The girl had advanced syphilis; she had been a child prostitute.’
A shadow crossed Sir Rufus's face, immediately suppressed.
‘That is no good reason for interrupting me.
Great heavens!
If every minion came running to me with his little scrap of information, I would never get any work done.’
‘There is more to it than that, sir.’
Sir Rufus's eyes narrowed.
‘Well, what is it?
You provoke me at your peril!’
‘It seems that the weapon used was very distinctive.
Professor Burney is certain that the same dagger was used in another case recently.’
‘Indeed?
Well, he is not likely to be mistaken.
Which case was that?’
‘A man called Andrew Livesey.
He was knifed in a cab, on the thirteenth of last month.’
‘Ah, yes.
Friday the thirteenth, I remember.
A maniacal attack, was it not?’
‘So the file says, sir; that was how it was left.’
‘What do you mean, Bragg, ‘left’?
As I remember it, I directed the jury that a finding of murder by person or persons unknown was indicated, and they so found.
Police enquiries are continuing.’
‘No, sir,’ Bragg said quietly.
‘I do not understand you!’
Sir Rufus exclaimed angrily.
‘Sergeant Mack was appointed coroner's officer, since you were frittering away your time in some backward locality of this great country of ours.’
‘I was on leave in Dorset, yes.’
‘Ah!
I see it now!
You wish to have Sergeant Mack superseded — yourself appointed in his stead.
No, Bragg!
Much as I esteem you, I will not manipulate events for your personal gratification.’
‘It is not quite like that, sir.’
‘Then out with it, man!’
‘We drew out the Livesey file, this afternoon,’ Bragg said in a neutral voice.
‘The investigation has effectively been closed down.’
‘Closed down?’
The coroner seemed on the verge of apoplexy.
I have not authorized such a course!
This is intolerable!
On what grounds has this been done?’
‘It is not as cut and dried as that,’ Bragg said evenly.
‘Here, lad, let us have the file.’
As Morton produced the manila folder from his pocket, Sir Rufus seized it and began leafing through the papers it contained.
‘There!’ he exclaimed, Pointing to a document bearing his signature.
‘I communicated the finding of my court to Sergeant Mack, on the twenty-third of April.’
‘Yes, sir; but not much has happened since then, has it?
It isn't Sergeant Mack's fault.
He has not got the freedom of action that I have.
Inspector Cotton has oversight of his cases.
The Inspector is a great one for statistics; he likes to see cases finished and closed down.’
‘Closed down?’
‘Livesey's pocket-book was found on the floor of the cab, its contents strewn about.
As the Inspector sees it, a footpad burst into the cab, demanded money and, when Livesey resisted, stabbed him and escaped.’
‘But Mack said nothing to me about this,’ the coroner said angrily.
‘It is not the prerogative of the police to close down a coroner's investigation.’
‘As you can see from the file, sir, there is no indication that it has been.
But young Morton found it among the dead cases, all the same.’
‘This is intolerable!’
Sir Rufus fumed.
‘I have never approved of  investigating officers.
He surrenders too much of his authority, and is diminished thereby.
No doubt those shiny-elbowed clerks in the Home Office prefer it so.
They wish to suppress all obstacles to their dreary domination.
Well, I will have you know that the office of coroner dates back to the twelfth century, before civil servants were thought of!
I have a mind to recruit a force of my own investigating officers, so that I can carry out effectively what is my sworn duty.’
‘I would not think you need go quite so far,’ Bragg said, picking up the file.
‘After all, you would be paying for them out of your own pocket.
What I would like is for us to be able to poke about a bit; see if there are any angles in the Livesey case that might lead back to this girl.
It would be much easier if I could do that informally.’
The coroner seemed deflated by the financial implications of his notion.
He nodded reluctantly.
‘Very well, Bragg.
And, make no mistake, you have my full authority for any action you care to take.’
Bragg and Morton had barely got back to their office when a young constable Poked his head round the door.
‘Miss Marsden is here to see you, sir,’ he said.
‘Right, send her up.’
‘I wonder if our friend Aubrey Rivington is proving recalcitrant,’ Morton said with a grin.
‘He'd better bloody not,’ Bragg growled.
‘This case is getting complicated enough.’
He stood up as Catherine entered the room.
‘Nice to see you, miss,’ he said.
Morton set her a chair at Bragg's desk, and perched on the window-sill.
‘I hope that I shall not be taking up your time needlessly,’ Catherine said, ‘but something has been troubling me.
Ever since James brought me the clothes of that unfortunate young girl, I have been beset by a conviction that I failed to notice something of importance.’
‘I see.’
‘Perhaps, if I were to examine them again, it might come to me.’
‘Here they are.’
Morton crossed to the cupboard and gave her the brown-paper parcel.
She untied it and spread the dress and the  shift on the desk, side by side.
She scrutinized them carefully.
‘In part, it is the blood,’ she said.
‘I would have expected more; Particularly on the shift, which would have been next to the wound.’
‘You have something there, miss,’ Bragg muttered.
‘But that was not all of it…
’ She superimposed the shift on the dress, making sure that the shoulder seams coincided.
Then she folded back the top of the shift.
‘I thought so,’ she murmured.
‘Have you a magnifying glass, sergeant?’
‘Are you going to share it with us, miss?’
Bragg asked as he passed over the lens.
She smiled.
‘One should always be certain of one's facts before publishing, or so I was told.’
She peered intently at the tears in the garments.
‘Yes…of course.’
‘Well?’ asked Bragg impatiently.
‘The girl was not wearing these clothes when she was stabbed,’ Catherine said.
‘Look, the tear on the shift is too high to coincide with that on the dress, and too far to the side.’
‘Might she not have had it on crooked?’
Bragg asked.
‘No.
The sleeves of both garments would be tight-fitting.
They would hang evenly from the shoulder seams.
The tears ought to coincide exactly.’
‘Oh, yes?’
Bragg said dubiously.
‘In any case, a glance through the lens will convince you that I am right.
The tears have been made by pushing a blade of some scissors through the fabric, and then cutting.
You can see a notch quite clearly on the shift.’
Bragg peered through the glass.
‘She's right, you know,’ he muttered.
‘Of course I am right, sergeant!
I do not know how you can hope to investigate crime effectively, without the assistance of the superior sex!
‘All right, miss,’ Bragg growled.
‘Where does that get us?’
‘Well,’ said Morton, ‘had she been wearing clothes, her murderers would hardly have removed them, to dress her in these.’
‘Unless the first lot were readily identifiable,’ Bragg objected.
‘You mean, like a Salvation Army tunic?
That is hardly likely.
No, it all makes sense now.
She was naked when she was killed, so no blood came in contact with her clothes.
These tears were manufactured, as Miss Marsden has so brilliantly demonstrated, to help to conceal the circumstances of her death.
But there had to be  blood…
We really ought to have noted the various quantities remaining, when Dr Burney offered to tell us this morning.
Anyway, the people who disposed of her body mopped up some blood, and squeezed it out on to the garments.
Then they dressed her.
Later on, they loaded her on to the hand-cart and trundled her along to Bartholomew Close.’
‘You have obviously learned more, since I last saw you,’ Catherine remarked.
‘Have you anything I could use in Saturday's edition?’
‘We know precious little at all, miss,’ Bragg said.
‘Until you put it all together for us, we had nothing more than a report from a cab driver that he saw a man and a woman pushing such a barrow along Holborn and up Charterhouse Street.’
‘Then you are being excessively flattering, to suggest that I have put it ‘all’ together.’
‘I never flatter,’ Bragg said quietly.
‘Why do you not let me take my participation a stage further?’
Catherine said buoyantly.
‘If we were to put a full description of the girl, and of the clothes she was wearing, in Saturday's paper, it might be seen by her parents or someone who knew her.
We have a wide distribution outside the City itself.’
Bragg shifted uncomfortably in his chair, glancing towards Morton who was staring out of the window.
‘It is not quite as straightforward as that,’ he said.
‘Why not?’
‘I agree with everything you have said, miss.
Why don't we leave it at that?’
‘You are hiding something, sergeant,’ Catherine said in amusement.
‘James, he is keeping something back, isn't he?’
Morton glanced round.
‘I prefer to be left out of this,’ he said.
‘What is it?’
A determined note crept into her voice.
‘You cannot be partial in your confidences, sergeant.
You cannot ask me to help you at one moment, and leave me out in the cold the next.’
Bragg sighed.
‘If you were my daughter, I would not want you soiling your hands with this lot.’
‘But I am not your daughter.
I am a reporter, and this is news.
If necessary, I could put together an intriguing article on how I solved a vital problem for the police…
Come to think of it, I could still get it in tomorrow's edition of the Star .
You would be famous throughout the nation, sergeant!’
‘I thought there were laws against blackmail,’ Bragg  complained.
‘All right, what is it you want to know?’
‘Why, everything, of course!’
‘There isn't an ‘everything’.
We are only just starting, thanks to you.’
‘Do you know who she is?’
‘Not yet, we don't.’
‘But you do not want me to do an article for the City Press ?’
‘I cannot see that it would do much good.’
‘Why not?’
Bragg merely shrugged.
‘Have you discovered where she was murdered?’
Catherine persisted.
‘Not specifically, we haven't.’
‘But generally you have — if that means anything.’
‘We think that it could have been in the Holborn Circus area.’
‘I hardly think that my demonstration, added to that fact, would make everything clear,’ Catherine objected.
‘All right, miss.
Don't say I didn't warn you…
We had been going on the idea that whoever killed her lunged at her when she was standing up: a thrust parallel to the ground.’
‘I see, yes.’
‘Then you showed us that the cuts were not made when she was stabbed.
It followed, as young Morton said, that she was naked when she was killed — by a downward slash.’
‘Why should that follow?’
Bragg sighed.
‘It ties in with something the pathologist said.
As you know, blood begins to settle in the lowest part of the body as soon as the heart stops pumping it around.
It is all very scientific and predictable.
Professor Burney said that the body had been kept on its back for some hours, before being put in the gateway.’
‘What you are saying is more obfuscatory than explanatory,’ Catherine said crossly.
‘It will all come out when you have caught the murderers, why not tell me now?’
‘There is no point in bothering your head with stuff that is not relevant to a conviction.
Why don't you be content, and wait till the trial?
I give you my word there will be one, if it's the last case I am allowed to handle.’
‘I am more and more intrigued, every minute,’ Catherine said.
‘No, I am not prepared to wait for the trial.
You have admitted that it was I who caused all the evidence to fall into a pattern.
I am entitled to your full confidence.’
‘There are some patterns that are not worth looking at, miss.
This is no kaleidoscope.’
‘You need not treat me like a half-witted child!’
‘Very well…
She was killed at about ten o'clock on Tuesday night.’
‘That was rather late for a girl of her age to be up.
How old was she?’
‘Twelve…
But she was in her bed, all right.’
‘Then surely she would have been wearing a nightdress?’
Bragg cleared his throat.
‘I expect you know that there are houses where certain women entertain men very…intimately.’
A look of intense amusement crossed Catherine's face.
‘Of course I do, sergeant!
I have read Moll Flanders .’
‘Yes, miss.
Well, it happens among children, as well.’
‘Really?
I would not have thought a youth of such tender years would have been able…
’ She stopped in confusion.
‘No, miss, you still do not understand.
Between grown men and little girls as young as nine.’
Catherine flinched, white-faced.
‘How obscene!’ she cried.
‘Don't you worry, miss,’ Bragg said gruffly.
‘We will catch them; but it won't be straightforward.
Now, why don't you let young Morton take you home?’
‘Yes, please, James,’ Catherine said dully.
‘It is so shocking.
There seems no end to the bestiality of men.’
‘Not all men, miss.’
Bragg turned to Morton.
‘And while you are down there, lad, pick up those photographs.
I have an idea we shall still need them.’
3
That night Catherine could not sleep.
James had been very considerate.
In the cab, on the way home, he had chatted inconsequentially — about the coming spring, mutual acquaintances, his chances of being picked to play cricket for England in Australia that winter.
There had been a highly amusing interlude, when they called for the photographs.
When James proposed it she had agreed, though in reality she dreaded it.
Aubrey had been at his most affected, protesting volubly at the trick that had been played on him.
James had asserted his innocence, and enthused about Rivington's skill and professional detachment.
Eventually the photographer's indignation was assuaged, and he parted with the prints.
It was an effort for her even to glance at them, but she was glad that she had.
There was not the slightest hint of the surroundings.
The child's face was serene and beautiful; there was the outline of a pillow, a coverlet, but the rest of the background was a blur of light.
It was like a vision.
This was, surely, what would remain in her mind…
James's plaudits were so evidently sincere, that Aubrey forgot his pique.
Basking in this praise, he went into considerable technical detail about how he had achieved the effect.
He even expressed his willingness to act for the police in the future, if needed.
They had then walked the short distance to Park Lane, her hand in the crook of James's arm.
Her mother, normally so detached, had inexplicably sensed that something was wrong.
Presumably on the basis that it could not involve James, she had asked him to join them for supper.
They had spent a pleasant evening, and James had been most solicitous when he took his leave.
But her protestations had been unfulfilled; she had not forgotten.
As soon as she drifted into sleep, she was back in the Close, her gaze locked on the white huddled figure.
She tossed and turned, willing herself  to stay awake.
When she finally slept, she had a hideous nightmare.
A man was crouching over her, a knife in his hand.
As he struck she seized his wrist.
But she could not hold him off!
He was forcing the blade closer and closer to her breast.
As his face came nearer, she could see that it was James!
She screamed herself awake, then lay shivering.
When daylight came she got up and dressed.
It was stupid to behave like this, she thought.
She was acting like the weak woman that men would invariably cite when equality was pressed for.
Instead of suffering on behalf of that poor betrayed girl, she should be fighting for all such children.
Surely there was something that she could do?
As she cast her mind about, she realized that there might be something she was especially fitted for.
As soon as she arrived at the office, she went to see Mr Tranter, the editor.
‘Are you aware’, she asked, ‘that the National Society for the prevention of Cruelty to Children has now been in existence for ten years?’
‘Is it so long?’ he asked.
‘How time flies!’
‘I thought that I might do an article to celebrate it; describe the problems they face, and their success in tackling them.’
‘Yes,’ he mused.
‘Yes, I like that idea.
Our lady readers will be interested; and, if you touch their hearts, it might dispose their husbands to be charitable.
Also, it will show that we are not so parochial as to be concerned only with money and the minutiae of City affairs.
Yes…take your time, we will keep it for the Wednesday edition.
And, if you can give it a specifically City slant, so much the better.’
Catherine discovered that the NSPCC office was in Cloth Fair, on the northern fringe of the City.
With a shudder she realized that it was in the same block of buildings as Bartholomew Close.
Half regretting her initiative, she set off.
She determined to avoid Bartholomew Close, so circled the block on the southern side.
She went past Bart's Hospital and entered it by way of Barley Mow passage on the west.
Cloth Fair was a narrow, gloomy street, hemmed in by tall Georgian buildings.
Paint was peeling from the shop fronts, some premises were derelict.
She walked the length of the street without finding the office.
It was only by chance, returning on the other side, that she saw its brass plate.
It was screwed to the jamb of a doorway that gave access to the premises of Henson & Burbidge, Fat and Bone Dealers.
Catherine climbed worn wooden stairs, up five flights in all, until she reached the attic  storey.
She pushed open the only door, and found herself in a spacious but gloomy office.
At a glance, the view from the grimy window was magnificent, a scattering of church spires thrusting upwards, and the majestic dome of St Paul's in the distance.
There were two desks in the room, facing each other by the window.
One was occupied by a plump woman in her forties, who was briskly sorting through a pile of letters.
Opposite her a white-haired, pink-faced man was writing in a ledger.
In front of him were squat columns of coins and a few cheques.
‘Good morning,’ Catherine said cheerfully.
‘I am a reporter on the City Press .’
She handed her card to the woman.
‘I thought that, since your society has been in existence for ten years, I might do an article on your work.’
The woman scrutinized her briefly.
‘What kind of article, Miss Marsden?’ she asked authoritatively.
‘Above all, one that will be helpful to your work.
I thought that I would begin with an outline of the problems you face, and go on to chronicle your successes.’
‘Then your second part will be short indeed,’ the woman said.
‘Come, come, Mrs Theobald,’ the man interrupted.
‘It is not as bad as that.’
He stood up and held out his hand.
‘I am Thomas Surtees.
I have kept the books of this branch since I retired from banking, five years ago.’
Catherine took the chair he set for her, and extracted her notebook from her bag.
‘Perhaps we might begin with a statement of what you are trying to achieve,’ she said.
‘Our aims are obvious from our title,’ Mrs Theobald said peremptorily.
‘In the present state of what passes for civilization, our efforts have to be directed solely towards relieving the plight of children living in poverty.
No doubt there are other forms of cruelty to children, but we have to ignore them.’
‘I think,’ Surtees broke in, ‘that where there is poverty, there is also a full catalogue of cruelty to and exploitation of children.
I would not have you think that we are merely a national soup-kitchen society!’
‘I did not imply anything of the sort,’ the woman said sharply.
‘But, for practical purposes, our work has to be among the very poor.’
‘What are you concerned with?’
Catherine asked.
‘Conditions within the City itself are tolerable,’ Mrs Theobald said.
‘But immediately over its borders there are the most frightful  neighbourhoods, where poverty is endemic.
We work mainly in Clerkenwell and Pentonville, where the problems are particularly intractable.’
‘I would be glad if you would make it clear’, Surtees interjected,
‘that it is not a simple case of money collected in the City being spent outside its borders; though that, I suppose, would be true charity.’
He smiled reflectively.
‘In a sense the problem has been foisted on the surrounding communities, by the City's development.
It was, of course, laudable to clear the rookeries; essential to drive new roads through slum areas.
The trouble is that no provision was made to house the people who were displaced.
Their only recourse was to crowd into the slum areas around.
So you see, it is at least a moral responsibility of the City.’
‘I will certainly emphasize that point,’ Catherine said.
‘What level of deprivation are we speaking of?’
‘Children barefoot, and dressed in rags or old flour sacks,’ Mrs Theobald said.
‘Children who have to steal to eat; who have been abandoned by their parents, if they ever knew them; children who huddle in a doorway at night, because they have nowhere to sleep.’
‘It is surprising that any survive,’ Catherine remarked.
‘Indeed!
And those that do, grow up in a sub-culture that is a disgrace to England; unable to read or write, born to crime as a way of life, most of them have never even seen the inside of a church.
I often say that nowhere in our empire — not even in the slums of Calcutta or Bombay — is there worse poverty than is to be found in the shadow of the mother of Parliaments.’
‘You will obviously never have the resources to remedy that,’ Catherine said.
‘It ought clearly to be a responsibility of the government.’
‘But until the nation wakes up to its responsibilities, we must try.’
‘Is there any part of the problem which might respond, without the expenditure of enormous sums of money?’
Catherine asked.
‘Indeed there is,’ Mrs Theobald said peremptorily.
‘It would only take a change of attitude amongst men to improve the situation out of all recognition.
And I am not talking about the drunken louts who beat their wives to death in a cellar.
I am talking about middle-class, well-to-do men: traders, businessmen…bankers like him!’
She shot a malevolent glare at her companion.
Surtees smiled wryly.
‘Since I have heard this particular sermon  frequently,’ he said, ‘perhaps I might be allowed to provide an exegesis of the text.
There is no doubt that a factor in the problem is the low wages paid to women.
Goodness knows why girls continue to forsake the countryside, in the hope of a better life in the cities, but they do.
Once here, there are only the most menial jobs open to them — shop-girls, domestic servants, seamstresses.
They have no security whatsoever.’
‘And they are paid a pittance,’ Mrs Theobald interrupted.
‘They spend their lives sewing shirts in dark attics, and their employers throw them a few pence for their pains!’
Catherine glanced around her, and suppressed a sardonic smile.
‘There is some justice in Mrs Theobald's complaint,’ Surtees said.
‘And, curiously enough, it would take only a comparatively small rise in wage rates to make an enormous impact on the problem.’
‘How can that be?’
Catherine asked.
‘At the moment, there are vast numbers of young women flocking on to the labour market.
Because of the competition for jobs, they are forced to accept low wages.
But they are not only competing amongst each other, they are competing with men as well .
We now have a situation where, in the unskilled occupations, an employer will take on a woman in preference to a man — since he would expect higher wages.
It follows that, because our young men cannot earn good money, they cannot afford to marry and take their wives out of the labour market.’
‘Is not that analysis against the spirit of the age?’
Catherine asked.
‘Surely, anybody concerned with the state of society should welcome women's emancipation?’
‘I agree,’ Mrs Theobald joined in assertively.
‘You are talking nonsense, Thomas!
Women are rebelling against domestic drudgery.
Why do you think that these girls come to London, in the first place?
Because they can see nothing in front of them but cooking and scrubbing and mending…and endless babies.
They come here because they reject their age-old exploitation by men!’
Surtees gave a short laugh.
‘I have not noticed that coming to London has stopped them having babies,’ he said.
‘They seem to have brought with them a complete breakdown in the moral order.
There has been a marked fall in church-going; in all our cities, the institution of marriage is in severe decline.
Amongst the working classes in this area, there seems to be no stigma attaching to a woman with a child she does not even know the father of!’
‘And whose fault is that?’
Mrs Theobald exclaimed.
‘It takes two to make a baby…but men have always run away from their responsibilities.
Men are the root cause, always searching out for sexual adventures.
They tempt a poor girl with money, or an evening's pleasure, then leave her to bear the consequences.’
‘In my experience,’ Surtees observed, ‘these same young girls are only too ready to confer their favours on you, in exchange for a hot supper and an evening at the music hall!’
Mrs Theobald flushed with indignation.
‘You disgust me, Thomas!
I wonder how you can bring yourself to work for the society.’
‘Perhaps I am atoning for my misspent youth,’ he replied amiably.
‘You hear that?’
She turned to Catherine.
‘Does that not show how trivial it is to a man?’
She returned to the charge.
‘It may be a small thing to them, but it is a disaster for the woman.
Whatever she can urge in mitigation, she is a fallen woman for the rest of her life.
One moment of weakness, and she is labelled a whore.
No employer of substance would even consider her…
And what can she demand from the father of the child, for its upkeep?
A miserable two shillings and sixpence a week!
Is it any wonder that our streets are full of barefoot, starving children?’
‘I am sure that many men are more generous than that,’ Surtees observed.
‘I doubt that!
But I am talking about a woman's rights.
What she is entitled to under the law.’
‘In the present spirit of the age,’ Surtees replied with a sidelong glance at Catherine, ‘more generous provision from the public purse might even lead to a proliferation of bastardy.
You would not want that!
Be reasonable.’
‘That is typical of a man,’ Mrs Theobald said angrily.
‘They can afford to be reasonable.
It is men who sit in parliament, debating the laws which control a woman's destiny.
It is men who decide what a woman can reasonably expect of life.
They have no conception of what women really feel and want!
We are regarded as either inferior men or superior animals.
Until we have women legislating in Parliament, Miss Marsden, our needs will be totally ignored.
And that will not happen until women — all women — are given the vote.’
Surtees raised his hands in mock surrender.
‘I think that we are getting a long way from the subject,’ he said.
‘Oh, no, we are not!’
Mrs Theobald's tone was accusatory.
‘Not only does the present law put all the blame on an unfortunate woman, it is used to punish her for her misfortune.
’ She turned to Catherine.
‘Do you know that when, in her desperation, such a woman turns to the parish for relief, the first act of the authorities is to part her from her child?
It is no wonder that baby farms flourish!’
‘Baby farms?’
Catherine echoed.
‘What are they?’
‘Thomas, you explain.
I am almost too angry to speak!’
Surtees took a deep breath.
‘Where should we start?’ he murmured.
‘Well, suppose that a young woman is unfortunate enough to give birth to a child outside marriage.
Unless she has money of her own — which is an eventuality we can ignore for practical purposes — she is in extreme difficulty.
Because of her indiscretion, the number of people who will employ her is limited.
Almost whatever her personal qualities, she cannot hope for anything other than the most menial of work.
Many, of course, turn to prostitution.
That, at least, could have the attraction of allowing them to keep their baby.
But the better class of girl, say a governess or a typewriter, naturally finds such a fate abhorrent.
She cannot get parish relief without relinquishing her baby, so she is half-way to losing it already.
‘And this is where the baby farm comes in.
These are establishments which, for a fee, will undertake to foster children of very tender years.
Often our unfortunate young woman will be able to extract the sum involved from the father of the infant.
For him, it settles the problem once and for all.
As for the girl, it gives her the opportunity to start again and, hopefully, refrain from future transgression.’
He picked up a newspaper and looked through its pages.
‘Ah, here is an example,’ he said.
Catherine took the paper and read the advertisement he indicated.
A person wishing a lasting and comfortable home for a young person of either sex will find this a good opportunity.
A married couple having no children of their own are about to proceed to America.
Premium fifteen pounds, Respectable references given and required.
A box number at the newspaper was given for replies.
‘You can disregard the requirement for references, and the  going to America,’ Surtees said.
‘They are merely genuflections in the direction of propriety.
What the advertisement really means is that anyone with an unwanted child can get rid of it, permanently, for fifteen pounds.’
‘I suppose that fifteen pounds might be a large sum for an unemployed typewriter to find,’ Catherine said.
‘But surely it is wholly inadequate to fund the upbringing of a child?’
Surtees looked at her steadily.
‘I imagine that few of these wretched children trouble their adoptive parents for long.
No doubt, the latter's first act is to pay a large insurance premium on a burial policy.’
‘But that is appalling!’
Catherine exclaimed.
‘Surely they can be punished?’
‘We have tried to initiate such action, you may be sure.
But what proof is there?
In our cities, children die in their hundreds, every year, from malnutrition and disease.
How are these foster children to be differentiated?’
‘Surely, no one could be so cruel as to deliberately set out to starve a child to death?’
Surtees shrugged.
‘Well, some of them have an economic value.
The good-looking ones can be hired out to professional beggars.
But only a small child tugs at the heart-strings.
After a certain age, the outlook is bleak.’
‘Except for good-looking girls,’ chimed in Mrs Theobald acerbically.
‘Their degradation is not yet complete.
They are often despatched to houses of ill-fame, to satisfy the animal lusts of depraved men.’
‘But I thought the recent Act of Parliament had stopped all that,’ Catherine said.
Mrs Theobald snorted.
‘That act was devised by men, and men choose to pretend it has been effective.
Of course, there are no longer bawdy houses, where these unfortunates are displayed openly to debauched satyrs.
But mark my words, where there is money, means will be found to satisfy the appetites of these…these vile lechers!’
‘Before I came,’ Catherine said, ‘I had thought of your function in biblical terms — to feed the hungry and succour the needy.
The actual situation is much starker, and less comfortable to live with.
I will do what I can to publicize the true position.
But, alas, I too operate in a man's world.’
The street was rutted, the surface powdery; horse dung lay about uncollected.
On either side were low soot-blackened houses, without even a token front garden.
Ill-dressed children stood around in groups, scowling at the intruders.
‘This is it, lad.
Number eleven.’
Bragg banged on the front door.
After a time there came quick steps and it was opened a crack.
‘Police!’
Bragg thrust his warrant-card at the opening.
The woman pulled the door wide.
‘What is it you want?’ she asked shrewishly.
‘We have come to see your husband.’
‘What for?
It's his rest day.’
‘I know,’ said Bragg amiably, ‘or we wouldn't have come here, would we?’
‘All right, he's in the garden…
But don't you go upsetting him!’
‘I see no need for that, ma'am.’
They followed her down a narrow passage and into the sunshine beyond.
A man was dozing in an old armchair.
‘Mr James Parks?’
Bragg asked quietly.
The man awoke with a start.
‘What the bloody hell do you want?’ he asked with panic in his voice.
‘Just a chat.
We are City police officers, here is my identification.’
Morton thought he detected a momentary look of relief on the man's face.
‘What do you want now?’ he asked peevishly.
‘We would like to go over a few points relating to the Livesey murder,’ Bragg said evenly.
‘Not that again!
I thought it was all over.’
‘A murder case is never over till it's solved, Mr Parks.’
‘I've had enough with them others,’ he protested.
‘You've no right to question me without my lawyer being here.’
‘You can afford a lawyer, can you, Mr Parks?
You must be doing well.
Not many cab drivers could say the same.’
‘You rozzers never let up, do you?
That bull-necked bugger accused me of murdering him myself.’
‘Would that be Inspector Cotton?’
Bragg asked mildly.
‘That's him.
Real bastard, he is.
Kept me locked up all bleedin' night.
as if I wasn't in enough trouble with the cab company already — blood all over the place!’
‘Ah, well, the Inspector will have his little jokes…
All I want to  do is go through a few aspects of your statement, to make sure I've got them right.’
‘You mean, to see if you can trip me up!’
‘No, not at all.
I have inherited this case, in a way.
It is helpful to discuss it with the main witnesses, first off; brings it alive, if you know what I mean.’
‘For the last three bleedin' weeks, I've been trying to forget it,’ Parks complained.
‘I doubt if you will be able to do that, until you know who the murderer is.’
‘You mean, until you know it wasn't me!’
‘If you like…
Now, suppose we go gently over the events of that night.
It will help me and, who knows, you might remember something new.’
‘Go on then,’ the man said grudgingly.
‘Where did you pick up Mr Livesey?’
‘I didn't know it was him!
He was just the bloke in the crowd what came over when I drew up.’
‘Where was this?’
‘Outside the Civil Engineers' Hall, in George Street.’
‘Did you get a good look at him?’
‘No…
Yes…
I suppose so.
It was dark, by then, but they have them new electric lights there, so I must have seen him.
But I didn't take no notice.
How was I to know he was going to be murdered?’
‘What time was this?’
‘Around eight o'clock.’
‘Did you see who got into the cab with him?’
‘That's what them other coppers kept on at me about!
Look, sergeant, when I'm driving a four-wheeler, I'm perched up at the front.
To see who got inside, I would have had to turn myself right round.
Anyway, it's something you don't do, if you want a tip; the customers don't like it.’
‘But you are certain that Livesey was the person who gave you instructions?’
‘Not really, I'm not.
It was raining, and he had an umbrella up.
All I can say is that a bloke in a top-hat spoke to me.
It could have been Livesey, but I couldn't swear to it.’
‘What directions did he give you?’
‘What did I tell that Cotton bloke?’
‘Surprisingly enough, you did not seem to remember.’
‘Nor would you, mate,’ Parks said defensively, ‘if you'd been  accused of murder.
It was bad enough finding the poor bugger; to be suspected of carving him up put me in a right tizzy!
How the hell could I have done it?
I was up on the box all the time!’
‘So you said, but you cannot blame Inspector Cotton for being a bit…surprised.’
‘Look,’ Parks said angrily, ‘I went through all this with the other lot.
Since then I've tried to forget it.
Christ!
I didn't sleep for a week, and now you are raking it all up again.’
‘It's necessary, I assure you.’
Bragg said soothingly.
‘Will you tell me about how the body came to be discovered?’
‘Well, I was in the cab-rank outside Liverpool Street station…
If I'd gone to the rank inside, it would have been the railway police's case.
I reckon I'd have been better off with them, they don't try to hang one on you…
Anyway, I was waiting for the Norwich train to come in.’
‘Were you the first in the queue?’
‘No, there were half a dozen there before me.’
‘What did you do while you were waiting?
Did you stay on the box?’
‘Not bleedin' likely!
I went for a cuppa tea, didn't I?’
‘That was before the body was discovered?’
‘'Course it was!
Spewed my flamin' guts up, when I saw it…
Here!
What's to say two other blokes didn't get into my cab, while I was away?
It needn't have been my fare at all.’
Bragg scratched his nose.
‘That's a point, sir.
We will have to look into that.
Tell me, was your fare catching a train from Liverpool Street station, do you think?’
‘No!’
Parks said scathingly.
‘There ain't no trains out, around that time; and a gent like him would hardly hang about in a station buffet!
Anyway…
’ A look of surprise suffused his face.
‘I'd let him off already, hadn't I?’
‘There was nothing about that in your statement.’
‘I know!
I've just remembered, haven't I?’
Bragg controlled his irritation.
‘Where did he pay you off?’
‘Half a mo…
I remember wondering if it would be better to go back to the West End, for another fare, or go on to Liverpool Street.
Yes…
I remember a hansom pipped me to a good prospect, in Threadneedle Street.
I reckon I dropped my fare just before the Bank of England.’
‘In Cheapside?’
‘I should think so.’
‘Is there anything else new, that you can recall?’
The man stared into the distance.
‘I just have this feeling’, he said slowly, ‘that my instructions were changed half-way.’
‘You mean that someone leaned out of the window and shouted to you?’
‘How else would he do it?’
Bragg pondered for a moment.
‘Right,’ he said.
‘Now tell me about the finding of the body.’
‘Blimey!
Every bleedin' night I dreams about that.
It's driving me barmy, it is.’
‘I would appreciate it, if you would describe what happened,’ Bragg said earnestly.
‘It is much more helpful to get it from an eyewitness, than from scribbled notes.’
‘Cor!
Me helpin' the police!
That's a turn-up!
Well…
I finishes my cuppa just before the train is due.
So I goes to the cab rank, and gets up on the box.
As usual, a bunch of passengers rushes out all at once .
There was this old lady comes towards me; she was fussing about her luggage, that a porter was pushing behind her on a trolley.
I sees her get to the door and open it.
Next thing there was a screech like a stuck pig — never heard such a row.
I jumps down and goes round.
This bloke is propped up in the corner of the cab, and blood all over the place.
Been properly carved up, he had…
Then one of your blokes comes, and it all started.
I was kept hangin' about, while they took the poor sod away.
Then your Inspector took it into his head that I'd done it.
And now you're startin' all over again.
Can't I have any bleedin' peace?’
Bragg stood up.
‘Thank you, sir.
You have been very helpful,’ he said.
‘That is all, for the moment.’
‘Well, Bragg, what is it now?’
Sir Rufus Stone glared balefully from his desk.
‘I have a particularly intricate brief to master.
Must you pester me at this moment?’
‘There has been a development on the Livesey case, sir.
I wondered if I might consult your file.’
‘Huh!
Are you working that case also?’
‘Not exactly, sir, though there is the link with the death of the young girl, as you know.’
‘Yes, yes,’ the coroner said testily.
‘And as you are well aware, I have had precious little from the police on that case.’
‘It was the record of the inquest that I was interested in, sir.
I am  sure that is immaculate.’
‘You are not roasting me, I trust,’ Sir Rufus said menacingly.
‘Of course not.
That would be unthinkable.’
‘Then we are agreed at least upon one point, Bragg.’
He rose and went to a bookcase, where leather-bound books were displayed.
He took down the end one, and carried it to his desk.
‘Let me see,’ he murmured.
‘Livesey…
Here we are!
What is the information you seek?’
‘Who gave evidence of discovery, sir?’
‘A Mrs Audrey Ballater, from Norwich…
Yes, she said that she opened the door of the cab, to enable the porter to place her luggage within, before entering herself.
That, as I recall it, was the gist of a somewhat incoherent account.’
‘It must have been a terrible shock.
I would have thought you'd have spared her reliving it all.’
‘You are becoming soft-headed in your old age, Bragg.
You well know that I cannot dispense with first-hand evidence.’
‘Yes, sir,’ Bragg said meekly.
‘And who gave evidence of identity?’
‘A man called John Roberts.
He is the works manager at the chemical factory owned by Livesey.’
‘Ah.
Where was that, sir?’
‘Do you know nothing?’
Sir Rufus exclaimed.
‘In heaven's name, what have the police been doing all these weeks?’
‘It's not much over a fortnight, sir.’
‘In which time Inspector Cotton, and his minion Sergeant Mack, have bestirred themselves sufficiently to write the case off as a killing during petty larceny!
Barely culpable at all, one might suppose.
‘It's not quite like that,’ Bragg said mildly.
‘Though the police file is pretty thin.’
‘You seem to have changed your tune since yesterday, Bragg.’
The coroner glared at him through narrowed eyes.
‘I suspect that some devious ploy of yours is in the offing.’
‘It isn't in my nature, sir.’
‘Hah!
Perhaps I ought to formally reopen the inquest; compel the police to reveal publicly how little they have achieved.’
‘You are surely forgetting, sir; they are acting as your officers.
It would come back on your head.
No, sir.
Why not let me poke around quietly?
It will cause less fuss, that way.
And, if things go wrong, you can always disown me.’
‘It is not in your nature to put your head on the block; so much I do know.
Your proposal brings me no comfort whatever, but I suppose I have little alternative.
Mind you, I want results, and quickly.’
Bragg got back to Old Jewry, and found Morton finishing his notes on the Parks interview.
‘Did you get sight of the pathologist's report on the Livesey case, sir?’ he asked.
‘No, lad.
The coroner was a bit uppity.
I reckon he has got a law case on his hands that he thinks he might lose.
If that happened, by God we'd have to keep our heads down.’
‘We seem to be between Scylla and Charybdis, on this one.’
‘What?’
‘Sir Rufus on the one hand, and Inspector Cotton on the other.’
‘Ah, yes…
Well, what were your thoughts on our friend of this morning?’
‘From my notes, he emerges as decidedly shifty.
He seemed, if you remember, almost relieved to find that we were merely policemen.
I suppose it is not beyond the realms of possibility that he was passively involved in the supposed robbery — an accomplice who was merely required to ignore it.’
‘I don't know, lad.
It couldn't work if more than one man were in the cab.’
‘Unless the second was in the plot, also.’
‘That is getting a bit far-fetched.
Anyway, I am not happy about the pocket-book business.’
‘Why is that?’
‘Well, put yourself in the robber's place.
You've just forced yourself into a cab, which is going down a London street at eight o'clock at night.’
‘There would be very few people in the City proper, at that hour.’
‘Be that as it may…
You have demanded money from the occupant, and he has refused.
The likeliest thing to happen is that you leg it because, in a hullabaloo, you are one against two…
I grant you that if the driver were in complicity with the robber, that would not apply.
But, anyway, if you had just killed a man and taken his pocket-book, would you quietly go through it there?
Waiting till the next street lamp, for another squint at its contents?
No, lad.
You would grab the pocket-book and run like hell!’
‘Again, your view would only really hold if the cab driver were  not an accomplice.’
‘All right, we won't close our minds to that.
And we must remember our interest in Livesey is only that he might give us a lead to the young girl's killer.’
‘We are hardly likely to forget that.
It is the most obscene crime I have ever encountered.’
‘Feel strongly about it, do you, lad?’
‘I am so incensed, that I find it difficult to remain objective about it.’
‘No doubt, you would do anything to catch her murderer?’
‘Absolutely anything!’
‘You wouldn't shrug your shoulders, on account of her being a prostitute?’
‘What do you take me for?’
Morton said angrily.
‘She was what men had made her.
The blame should lie with those revolting perverts who brought her so low.’
‘Hmm…
Your own appetites are normal, then?’
‘Of course!
Why?’
‘Well, you never know with toffs.
I wouldn't want to tip you over the brink.’
‘Tip me?
What on earth are you talking about?’
‘Well, we cannot get much further on our case without discovering the identity of the girl.
I'm going to tell you how it can be done.’
‘Go on.’
‘You are going to have a word with your dissolute friends, and discover where these girls are to be found.
Then you will go round those establishments, with one of the likenesses, until you find some girl who recognizes it.’
‘That seems to be the height of impracticality,’ Morton said with a smile.
‘Even if I were able to discover the whereabouts of these establishments — and that is by no means a foregone conclusion — the moment I produced my warrant-card, everyone would close up like a clam.’
‘I know, lad.
That's why it would be useless for me to try.
I look like what I am: a slow, stupid peasant.
But you are a young aristocrat, wealthy, able to indulge your carnal desires whatever your particular leanings…
So you will go as a customer.’
‘Oh, no!
I draw the line at that!
I have my reputation to consider.’
‘I don't know about your reputation, but I do know you are a  policeman, and a good one.
Out there, somewhere, is a man or woman who callously stabbed that young maid to death.
As you were quick enough to remind me, we swore we would do anything to bring the killer to justice.
As far as I am concerned, that still holds.’
‘For me also.
But you are asking too much!
What if my parents heard of this?
Suppose Miss Marsden discovered it?
It is totally out of the question.’
‘You wouldn't be any use at the job, if you had nothing to lose.
Do you think I wouldn't do it, if I could?
Do you think that I would ask you to risk your reputation, if I could think of another way?’
‘No,’ Morton said dully.
‘Can you think of a better?’
‘Not offhand.’
‘Well, then.
You have tackled more dangerous things than this.’
‘It is not the danger which concerns me.
I find the whole suggestion repugnant.’
‘No doubt you do.
I expect our little miss found it repugnant, the first dirty old man she was put to.
Don't you want to do your bit towards stamping it out?
Think of your sister; would you want her to have been forced into that way of life?’
‘Of course not!’
‘Well, you can't pick and choose.
You are a policeman; you treat all humanity the same.’
‘I have never been so close to resigning from the force,’ Morton said slowly.
‘Then you will do it?
Good lad!’
‘I suppose so.
But remember this; I rely on you to see that my name is not sullied by reason of this hare-brained scheme.’
‘I won't fail you!
Now, look up Livesey in the classified telephone directory.
He will be among the chemical manufacturers.
My visit to the coroner was not wholly wasted.’
They found the factory of J. K. Livesey & Co. in Ratcliffe Lane, Stepney, near the Regent's Canal dock.
The massive corrugated-iron sheds towered above the mean houses clustering round them.
A signboard, by the entrance, proclaimed that the business had been established in 1852.
There was a big central yard, with a storage shed on one side.
What looked like flour-sacks were piled in one section of it, and the floor was dusted with yellowish  powder.
On the opposite side was what appeared to be the factory building.
There was an unloading ramp at one end, where the ground was highest; through an open door, Bragg could see machinery.
He looked around for the stables, but could see none.
Opposite the gate, at the top end of the yard, was a newish office building.
Next to it was a somewhat  dilapidated structure that had probably been the cart-shed.
At that moment, a lorry turned into the yard, pulled by two big Clydesdales.
Bragg could not resist the impulse to stroll over.
It took him back to his childhood, and the family carter's business.
By his early teens, he had been driving just such a cart; clopping down the Dorset lanes, in the early summer sun…
The lorry pulled up beside the pile of sacks and the driver went into the office.
It was a fine, sturdy vehicle, almost brand new.
Bragg slapped the off-side horse on the rump, and it shook its head as if in greeting.
Probably just flies, Bragg thought.
He had always been sentimental about horses — too much so, according to his father.
Perhaps it was as well that he had left home, gone into something with a bit of brainwork in it.
As he walked back to Morton, he caught sight of a name painted on the side rail of the cart:Thos Simpkins .
So Liveseys' didn't have their own transport?
Somehow that was surprising.
Even if their trade were seasonal, in some way, you'd think they would have horses and carts of their own.
The driver sauntered back from the office, and was joined by two labourers who would load his cart.
‘Right, lad, let's see what they have to say,’ Bragg remarked.
‘It does not seem to be a hive of industry,’ Morton said.
‘No.
But with the owner killed, it's not all that surprising.’
They pushed through the door, and found themselves in a big general office.
There were two desks near the counter, one vacant and apparently unused.
At the other a skinny youth was going through a pile of invoices, checking them against what must be a goods-inward book.
At the back was a somewhat larger desk, occupied by a bald-headed man wearing pince-nez.
Near him was a door which presumably led to a room beyond.
The man rose and came towards them.
‘What can I do for you, gentlemen?’ he asked with a worried frown.
Bragg showed his warrant-card.
‘We are police officers, we would like a word,’ he said.
‘Yes, yes.
Of course.’
He hesitated.
‘I think perhaps we should  go through to Mr Andrew's office.’
He opened the door by his desk, and they followed him into a large room filled with dark, solid furniture.
There was a good carpet on the floor, Morton noted, oil paintings on the walls.
‘We had heard nothing for two weeks,’ the man said nervously.
‘I thought it might have been cleared up by now…
I had supposed it would be Mrs Livesey who got to know first.’
‘What might your name be, sir?’
Bragg asked.
‘Albert Peace.
I am the office manager.’
‘Well now, Mr Peace, we have just inherited this case, so you will have to bear with us.
The notes on our file are not all that complete.’
‘What happened to Sergeant Mack?
Not sick, I hope.’
‘No, he got switched to something else.
So we have to pick up the pieces on this one.’
‘I see.’
‘Andrew Livesey was the boss here, was he?’
‘He ran the firm, yes.’
‘Where does J. K. Livesey fit in?’
Peace smiled.
‘John Knox Livesey started the firm.
He came down from Edinburgh, in his twenties.
A real dour Scot, he was, but a hard worker.
He built the business up from nothing — and it was a good business while he was here.’
He sighed.
‘It was a great pity.’
‘Did he die, then?’
‘No.
He was struck down with gout, in his late forties.
I see that you are smiling, but he was not a high-liver.
He was a widower, and very abstemious…
Sometimes he was in such pain, he could hardly hobble up the yard.
But he wouldn't give in.
He'd carry on as if nothing was the matter, though some days his face was grey with pain.
Then in 1878 he started to get swelling of the legs, and he had to give in.
By then, of course, Mr Andrew was of an age to take over.’
‘What happened to the father?
Is he still alive?’
‘Yes, indeed, at the age of sixty-nine.
Strange, isn't it?
Mind you, I haven't seen him for sixteen years.
He went back to Edinburgh to live.
I am sure that it was the wrong thing to do; still, he would always have been interfering, I suppose.’
Bragg looked round the room.
‘The business doesn't seem to be exactly thriving,’ he remarked.
Peace cocked his head.
‘Well, I know you should not speak ill of  the dead, but Mr Andrew wasn't half the man his father was.
Don't mistake me, he was clever enough; but somehow he wasn't practical with it.
If you ask me, we should never have let Mr Kebbel go.’
‘Who is he?’
‘A man of about Mr Andrew's age.
He was works manager at the time John Knox retired.
He was good with machinery; we never had major breakdowns while he was here.’
‘What happened to him?’
Peace smiled deprecatingly.
‘Why, we could never have hoped to keep him.
He was a fully qualified engineer, with a university degree!
Liveseys' would only ever have been the first rung of the ladder, to him.’
‘Where is he now?’
‘As a matter of fact, he set up in business for himself — not far away, in Mile End.’
‘Doing what?’
‘Much the same thing as we used to do.
In fact, he does a lot of the manufacturing for us.
Nowadays, we mainly factor chemicals produced elsewhere.’
‘I see.’
Bragg tugged at his moustache.
‘Took the business away with him, did he?’
‘No, definitely not.
In fact, on several occasions after he left, he would come down to sort out a problem for us.
The machinery here is old, you see, and not very reliable.’
‘Did Andrew Livesey come in every day?’
Bragg asked.
‘In recent years, you mean?
Yes, of course.’
‘Only, we have his address down as Lightwater, in Surrey.
That's about thirty miles each way — a terribly long way to come, particularly as he would have to cross London.’
Peace smiled.
‘No, no!
He used to stay at his club during the week, and go home for the weekends.’
‘Which club is that?’
‘New Club, in King Street, Covent Garden.’
‘I see.
What family did he have?’
‘There is a daughter.
I suppose she will be around ten now.
His wife, Sarah, is the daughter of Charles Hollis, the Member of Parliament for Reading,’ Peace added proudly.
‘Is she, now.
That explains why they moved out that way.’
‘Yes.
It was a pity, really.
Do you know,’ he said animatedly,
‘when they lived in Little Russell Street, in Bloomsbury, Mrs  Livesey would sometimes come down to tea with my wife.’
‘Hmm…
Slumming, was she?’
Peace bridled.
‘No, indeed!
She's a real lady!
Even after they moved, and that's ten years ago now, she would make a point of coming up for the children's party, at Christmas.’
‘How has she taken her husband's death?’
‘I have only seen her at the funeral.
As you would expect, she was overcome with grief.’
Morton stood in the entry, and peered up the street.
It was all very well for Bragg to instruct him to go the rounds of prostitutes' haunts, but he had precious little idea of how to go about it.
As for the notion of canvassing his licentious friends, it was out of the question.
For a start, he could think of precious few men who would consort with prostitutes.
In the present relaxed moral climate, there was always a frisky society matron willing to accommodate a discreet young man.
Anyway, he would certainly not discuss the subject with the raffish set who would stoop to street-women.
His reputation would be lost at a stroke.
It would have been easier, ten years ago, before brothels were outlawed.
In those days, the women of the town were housed there.
Intending clients could stroll in from the street, look over what was on offer, and come to an arrangement with the young lady of their choice.
It was a social connection, so to speak.
And it was absurd to think that, by closing down such establishments, prostitution would diminish.
In a sense, the whole social system encouraged it.
A young man of good family, with prospects but no wealth of his own, was in some difficulty.
He could not marry a girl of his own age and class, because her father would reject him.
For perhaps the best of reasons, parents were reluctant to subject their daughters to even the slightest diminution in their standard of life.
Throughout his young manhood, while he was making his way in the world, the upper-class male had to satisfy his physical needs with casual encounters and women of the street.
And it was no recompense to find that, once he had amassed his fortune, he could command the hand of a beauty half his age.
Such a marriage was hardly conducive to harmony.
It was on idiocies like this that the frail sisterhood thrived.
He watched a woman walking briskly through the pool of light shed by a gas-lamp.
She was hardly the type.
If anything, she  looked more like a missionary bent on saving souls.
She passed him with a fractional quickening of her pace.
Oh, dear!
He was giving palpitations to perfectly decent women, by lurking like this.
But he could think of no other way to tackle the problem.
As he argued it, he had no option but to skulk in alleys.
Naturally enough, it had been deemed impractical to legislate against the women themselves.
Where was one to draw the line?
So the brothels had been succeeded by houses of convenience, where street-women could rent a room — by the hour, the day, the month.
Now, instead of her clients coming to her, she had to walk the streets displaying her attractions; perhaps luring to depravity men who might otherwise have been content to dream and wonder.
Morton had conscientiously paced the streets around Holborn, waiting to be approached.
It was beyond possibility that he could be recognized as a policeman, yet he had not even been given a coquettish smile.
He had seen several young women hurrying about their business, eyes decorously lowered.
But he had not even caught a glimpse of a young girl.
Perhaps arrangements were different for them.
Perhaps they did not have to ply their trade on the streets.
After two hours, Morton became dispirited.
He was too close to his rooms for comfort, and he had achieved absolutely nothing.
After a final desultory wander round Charterhouse Square, he made his way home to bed.
4
Bragg and Morton went through the imposing portal of the Civil Engineers' Hall, and looked about them.
Ahead was a short marble staircase, leading to what appeared to be a lecture-room on the next floor.
On the left of the stair was a heavy mahogany door.
On the right, a corridor disappeared into the depths of the building.
Just as they were about to go down it, the door opened.
‘Can I be of assistance, gentlemen?’
The man who spoke was burly, with grizzled hair and a neatly clipped moustache.
‘Police.’
Bragg held out his warrant-card.
‘We are looking for the Secretary,’ he said.
‘I am he.’
‘According to the file, you must be James Forrest.’
‘Then the file is correct!’
‘You were seen by Sergeant Mack, concerning the death of Andrew Livesey,’ Bragg said stolidly.
‘We just want to clear one or two points.’
Forrest gave an impatient frown.
‘You had better come to my room, then.’
The magnificence did not extend beyond the door, Morton noted.
The room beyond was small and ill-lit.
Forrest's desk was of cheap pine, and the chairs he gestured to were not upholstered.
‘It seems’, said Bragg, ‘that Mr Livesey was on his way home from a meeting here, when he was killed.’
Forrest gave a bark of laughter.
‘Even allowing for the subject under exposition that evening,’ he said, ‘I would hardly think that the two were connected.’
‘I don't expect so, but we have to start somewhere.’
‘Start?
I thought it was finished.’
‘Oh, no sir,’ Bragg said.
‘We are doing a review of the evidence; you know, fresh minds…’
‘I see.’
‘Would you say that you knew pretty well everyone who was at that meeting, sir?’
‘by no means, sergeant.
I have been Secretary of the Institute for only three years.
Before that, I was a major in the army.
‘Really, sir?
What regiment?’
‘The sappers, of course.’
Forrest smiled proudly.
‘So you are an engineer yourself — one of them.’
‘Not exactly.
Though I suppose I was chosen because I have a better understanding of what they are about than your average pen-pusher.’
‘I'm sorry, I interrupted you,’ Bragg said.
‘You were going to explain why you didn't know some of the people at that meeting.’
‘I must amend the ‘some’ to ‘most’, sergeant.
You will understand that I am only acquainted with the members of the Institute who come here regularly — who, in essence, are the ones who work in this area.
Apart from that, it was not a Civil Engineers' meeting as such.
The Society of Engineers arranged it.
They are mainly mechanical engineers, with odds and sods like electrical and chemical thrown in.
It was decided that their hall, in Finchley Road, would be inadequate to contain the anticipated audience; and so it proved.’
‘This lecture was a bit special, was it?’
Bragg asked.
‘Indeed!
I understand it was a quite unique event.
It was given by Aird, the Comptroller of the Patent Office — quite a high government official.’
‘Why the interest?’
‘The title of the lecture was ‘Patents, the law and the practice’.’
Forrest smiled with inner amusement.
‘Ah.
And why should that get everyone swarming around like bees?’
‘That would be to overstate it somewhat.
Nevertheless, there was a score and more standing at the back.’
‘It sounds a dull subject to me,’ Bragg said.
‘Perhaps.
But to engineers — particularly mechanical engineers — patent law is something to be aware of.
It was soon apparent that many of the audience were critical of the way in which the law is being administered.
Some got extremely hot under the collar about it.’
‘Rowdy, was it?’
Forrest laughed.
‘Not exactly!
Perhaps it is merely that patent  law is a subject which generates a fair amount of heat.’
‘Why should that be?’
‘Well, it is in the very nature of the subject.
A patent is, after all, a licence to print money for fourteen years — if your invention is a good one, that is.
Of course, you are likely to get some people who say that they thought of it first.
Then again, there will be others trying to improve on your invention.
If they can achieve that, and get it patented, all your hard work goes down the drain.
It is hardly a relaxed area of human activity.’
‘So you don't set much store by the ill feeling around, that evening?’
‘Again, that is too strong an expression.
I would rather describe it as a lively interest.’
‘Very well.’
Bragg paused, as if in thought.
‘Now, what happened at the end of the meeting?’
‘The lecture ended at around seven o'clock.
There were some fifteen minutes of questions — dealt with exceedingly briskly by the speaker, I may say.
The hall would have been clear by half-past seven.’
‘You say ‘would have been’.
Do you not know, sir?’
‘Not categorically.
I took Mr Aird down the corridor, and let him out of the side door.
When I returned, at twenty-five minutes to eight, the hall was deserted.’
‘Was Aird dodging out to escape?’
Bragg asked.
Forrest raised an eyebrow.
‘He told me it would be easier to get to the underground railway from the side street.
It appears that he lives in Wimbledon.’
‘Right.
So what did you do then?’
‘I locked the lecture-room, came downstairs and checked that there was no one in the ground-floor rooms, then locked up the building.’
‘You came out of the main door?’
‘Yes.’
‘Now, you said in your statement that you think you saw Mr Livesey standing on the pavement.’
‘Having since been taken to see the poor man's body, in the mortuary, I am certain that I did.’
‘Had you seen him before?’
‘No.
But he had a thinnish face, with an aquiline nose and really black hair.
I noticed him because he very much resembled a friend of mine.
who was killed in the battle of El Teb in '85.’
‘So you are not likely to be mistaken?’
‘Certainly not, sergeant.’
‘Where exactly was he standing?’
‘Immediately opposite the entrance of the hall.
He was chatting with a group of others, presumably waiting for a cab.’
‘Did you see if anyone else got into his cab?’
‘No, sergeant, I did not stay there.
From experience, I know it is better to walk the hundred yards or so to the rank outside Westminster Abbey.’
‘I see.
Can you remember who was standing with Livesey, when you left?’
Forrest pondered.
‘It was quite a small group,’ he said.
‘Certainly I recognized George Tenison, the consulting engineer.
And I am sure that Alfred Nobel was part of the group, also.’
‘Is not he the Swedish explosives magnate?’
Morton asked.
‘That is so.’
Forrest smiled in approval.
‘What on earth would he be doing there?’
Bragg asked.
‘It is not at all surprising.
He has a branch office in Gracechurch Street, and spends a considerable amount of time in this country.’
Catherine had barely set out the pens and Pencils on her desk, when the editor pushed open the door.
‘I am sorry that I am late this morning, Mr Tranter,’ she said.
‘I had to give evidence at the inquest on the young girl.’
Tranter looked momentarily nonplussed.
‘Ah yes,’ he said.
‘I had forgotten that.
Most upsetting for you, I am sure.’
‘Yes, but I have composed myself now.’
He walked to the window and stared out for some moments.
In his hand, Catherine could see that he was holding her article on the NSPCC.
‘I am sorry, Miss Marsden,’ he said, swinging round to her.
‘This has not turned out at all as I envisaged it.
When you proposed it, I understood the article was to be a celebration of ten years’ good work.
What we have here is a catalogue of failure.’
‘It came out like that, Mr Tranter, because anything else would have been a misrepresentation.
The Society is barely denting the problem, for all its good intentions and hard work.’
‘But you must remember’, he said plaintively, ‘that it is a voluntary society.
If we publish an article in these terms, we would dishearten not only the workers but their supporters also.’
‘You have, of course, focused precisely on the problem,’
Catherine said with an admiring smile.
‘The relief of cruelty, ignorance and destitution is not a task that should be left to charities.
The enlightened will see our article as a condemnation of the failure of the existing statutory bodies.’
‘I don't know…
’ Tranter sat down unhappily.
‘We are not a national daily; we do not go in for moral crusades.’
‘You once reminded me that our readership is well informed and intelligent.
Because of that, I have merely pointed out incontrovertible facts, and left them to draw the inevitable conclusions.’
Tranter tapped with his finger-nails on the edge of the desk.
‘Be that as it may,’ he said, ‘you do not sell newspapers by making people feel guilty.’
‘Nor will we improve the lot of the lowest in society, unless our readers are made to feel, at the very least, uncomfortable.’
‘But you have gone beyond the bounds of prudence; knowing perfectly well that the great majority of our readers are men…’
‘Wealthy men,’ Catherine interrupted.
‘You suggest that, as legislators, men disregard everything but their own interests.’
‘I assure you, Mr Tranter, that I have written nothing but the truth,’ Catherine said quietly.
‘Young women do sell their babies because of economic necessity.
Since I met the NSPCC people, I have examined the advertising columns of the national newspapers.
Baby farms do exist!
It is nothing less than a national scandal that such despicable practices can take place in 1894!’
Tranter sighed unhappily.
‘Nevertheless, we must remember that your column was never intended to encapsulate the essence of our paper.
The City Press is intended to be a well-informed, urbane commentary on people and events in the City of London — which are often more influential and important than their counterparts in Parliament.’
‘Then my article will act as a welcome digestif to the turgid diet of financial news.’
Catherine smiled sweetly.
‘I think that you wilfully misunderstand me,’ the editor said crossly.
‘You know full well that your brief is to produce articles which will interest the wives of City men, so that they will take a copy of the paper home with them.’
‘Do you not think that our women readers will be interested in what I have written?’
Catherine asked evenly.
‘Shocked, I would think!’
‘But we have a responsibility to deal with matters honestly,’
Catherine urged him.
‘It would be dishonest to pretend that the NSPCC is making any significant impact on the problem — even they would not claim it.’
‘I wonder if you have not been somewhat naive,’ Tranter said reflectively.
‘For charities, there has always to be work yet undone.
I cannot say that I care for these self-perpetuating societies.’
‘Then, if you think that I have overstated the reality, why do you not come with me into the slums of Whitechapel or Limehouse?
You could see for yourself then.’
‘That is not necessary,’ the editor said irritably.
‘I am aware that there is poverty.
Poverty exists in every nation.
The lowest class in any society will always be poor in relation to those above it.’
‘But here we are encountering absolute destitution and despair!’
Catherine cried.
‘No man could come near to imagining the anguish experienced by a woman when she is forced to give away her child so that she herself may live!’
‘Whereas you, a childless young society woman, can feel it in full measure,’ Tranter said sarcastically.
‘I tell you it will do the NSPCC no good to suggest, however indirectly, that men do not care about these issues.
You will have to gain their support, if change is to be brought about.’
‘But surely that is the core of the problem!
Women have been brought up to accept the role of second-class citizens, subject to their husbands’ whims and opinions.
Is it any wonder that men regard them as half-wits?’
Catherine exclaimed angrily.
‘Only male contempt for women as a class perpetuates the present system.
As a fair-minded man, you must accept that women are treated as if they are the sole cause of illegitimacy.
But who gets these poor wretches with child?
They are not criminals, but the innocent victims of men.
If women had the vote, something would be done!’
‘No doubt.’
Tranter rose to go.
‘Why do you not vent your crusading zeal in an article for the Star ?’ he asked.
‘You are a stringer for them, after all.
Then you can write a piece for me which will point out the problems, without declaring that they are insoluble short of a social revolution.
That way, the coffers of the NSPCC might be filled, even if your conscience is not salved.’
Bragg was contentedly puffing his pipe, and mentally sifting through the facts they had so far obtained, when the door burst  open and Inspector Cotton strode in.
‘I hear your lad has drawn out the Livesey file,’ he said belligerently.
Bragg slowly removed the pipe from his mouth.
‘That's right,’ he said.
‘I asked him to get it for me.’
‘Why?’
Cotton's good-looking features were pink with anger.
For the first time, Bragg noticed that his hair was decidedly thinning at the temples.
‘I have a stabbing case myself,’ Bragg said amiably.
‘First I've had for ages.
The last one I was involved in, it was me that was stabbed!
I thought I would look at your file, to see if I could pick up any hints from how you had dealt with it.’
Cotton allowed himself to be mollified.
‘It's funny how there are fashions in crime, as in everything else, Bragg,’ he said didactically.
‘Thirty years ago, the dragsmen would regularly steal baggage from the roof of a four-wheeler; then it went out of fashion.
Better lighting in the streets near the stations, I suppose.
Anyway, stealing from cabs is coming back again — only, this time, it's robbing the passengers inside.
When Mack got that Livesey case, I was struck by the name of the cabby.
What was it?’
‘Jim Parks.’
‘That's the man.
I thought I had seen it in a Met report, some time back.
And I wasn't wrong.’
A self-satisfied smile settled on the Inspector's lips.
‘In that case, a bank messenger was taking a Gladstone bag full of sovereigns to another branch.
The bank had arranged for a four-wheeler to pick up the messenger, round the back of the building.
All that went according to the plan.
Anyway, Parks was the driver of the cab, and he took a damned queer route to his destination.
In a quiet street, the cab was attacked.
The door was wrenched open, the messenger hit on the head with a cosh, and the money taken.’
‘Was Parks in the plot?’
‘He must have been.
I spoke to the Met Inspector in charge of the case.
Parks claimed that he wasn't even aware of what was happening till he heard the door slam shut as the thieves made their escape.
When asked why he took that particular route, he reckoned he thought it would be quicker than going along the busy main streets.’
‘Did the messenger put up much of a fight?’
‘Huh!
The Met think he was getting a cut, too.
He swore it all happened so quickly, he could do nothing about it.
The bank can't have believed him; they gave him the sack.’
‘And you think Parks was in on the Livesey case too?’
‘I'm sure of it.
A real shifty sod, he is.
Sticks to it that, when you are up front driving, you can neither see nor hear a damned thing that is happening behind you.
Convenient, isn't it?
As long as you go at a slow, steady pace, the job can be done and you none the wiser.
I gave him a good going-over, I can tell you.
He won't be involved in that sort of thing again, in a hurry.’
‘But are you saying that neither we nor the Met have been able to build a case against him?’
‘Not one that would stand up in court.’
Bragg paused, and knocked out his pipe in the big glass ashtray.
‘Was there any mention of a knife, in the Met's case, sir — if only to threaten the messenger?’
‘No.
It hardly matters, does it?’
Cotton asked roughly.
‘I expect not.’
‘Is a cab involved in this case of yours, Bragg?’
‘No, sir.
It's the one where the young prostitute was found dead in the gateway.’
Cotton's lip curled.
‘I don't know why you waste your time on that riff-raff!
There's plenty of more important work to do.’
‘I will certainly take note of your views, sir.’
Cotton gave him a glare, and stalked out.
When Morton came in, a few minutes later, he found Bragg staring out of the window, his dead pipe clenched between his teeth.
‘This is going to be a tricky one, lad.’
He turned back to his desk.
‘Inspector Cotton is getting uppity, because we have looked at his precious Livesey file.’
Morton grinned.
‘So he found out, did he?’
‘Yes.
I managed to pacify him and, in return, was given the benefit of his opinions — unsolicited, I might say!
Strange how the human mind works, isn't it?
He sees the Livesey case as a simple robbery, because our friend Parks's cab was involved in a bank snatch, some time ago.
We see a different connection, because of the knife wounds…
I shall never get any further in this force, lad.
To make your way, you have got to have a proper respect for money.
Human lives don't matter, but sovereigns are what make the world go round…
How did you get on?’
‘Once I had realized that Tenison, the consulting engineer, was not spelt in the same way as Tennyson, our late-lamented poet Laureate, I had no difficulty.’
‘And Nobel?’
‘His offices are indeed at eighty-five, Gracechurch Street.’
‘Then let's start with him.
He's the big fish, after all.’
The day had turned unseasonably cold and cloudy, and they were glad of their overcoats as they trudged along the windy streets.
The offices of Nobel's Explosive Co.
Ltd were on the first floor of a substantial building, near Allhallows Church.
They were greeted by a clerk.
‘Mr Alfred?’ he said.
‘No, he will not be coming here today or, indeed, tomorrow.
He is away for a few days, in the country.’
‘I would have thought they had enough country in Sweden,’ Bragg said crossly, ‘without his bothering about ours.’
The man smiled.
‘I expect that business is involved,’ he said.
‘It usually is, where Mr Alfred is concerned.’
Bragg and Morton retraced their steps to Cheapside, and turned into Gutter Lane.
I here you are, sir, Morton said cheerfully.
‘Tenison Woods & Co.’
‘What's the betting he isn't in, either?’
Bragg remarked sourly.
This time they were greeted by a good-looking young woman.
‘Police,’ Bragg said genially.
‘I wonder if we could have a quick word with Mr Tenison.’
She gave them a warm smile.
‘He is certainly in; I will see if he can receive you.’
She disappeared through a door in the back of the office.
‘Things are certainly changing, lad,’ Bragg said with a grin.
‘And for the better, too.
I'd much rather see a bright young woman around the place, than some of the desiccated fuddy-duddy men we meet.’
‘Then perhaps we ought to recruit young ladies into the police force,’ Morton said, straight-faced.
‘Don't be bloody stupid!’
Bragg retorted.
‘What good would they be to us?
And there would be all sorts of hanky-panky going on…
‘I understand that you want to see me.’
A tall, sandy-haired man, in his mid-fifties, strode into the room.
‘That is correct, sir.’
‘Well, then?’
‘It is a rather confidential matter,’ Bragg said gravely.
Tenison looked from one to the other uncertainly.
‘Oh, well,’ he said finally, ‘you had better come in.’
He led them into a room overlooking an attractive courtyard, with a paved area  surrounded by shrubs.
‘Very pleasant place to work, this,’ Bragg observed.
‘Yes.’
Tenison busied himself with gathering up plans and files, which seemed to litter every surface.
Then he motioned them to sit.
‘What is it that you wish to discuss?’ he asked.
‘I take it that you are George Tenison,’ Bragg said.
‘If I were not, I would be considerably put out at having been compelled to tidy my desk!’ he said.
The tone was light, but his blue eyes remained wary.
‘We are informed that you were at a lecture, on the thirteenth of last month.’
‘Was I?’
His eyes sought a calendar on the wall.
‘A Mr Aird, from the Patent Office, was giving a talk.’
Tenison's face cleared.
‘Ah, yes.
I remember.
It was at the Civil Engineers' Hall.’
‘May I ask what your interest was, sir?’
‘In the lecture, you mean?
Well, it was hardly intense, or I would not have forgotten it.
Patent law is a rather specialized area.
As a consultant, I am rarely involved directly in it.
Nevertheless, I thought it would be a good idea to go.’
‘On such a filthy night?’
‘Was the weather bad?
I do not recollect.
I expect I would have gone anyway; it was something of an event.’
‘I gather that some ill-feeling was shown towards the speaker,’ Bragg said.
‘Ill-feeling?
No, I would not call it that.
There were undercurrents, certainly, but not overt hostility.’
‘And what did you do at the end of the meeting?’
‘I took a cab home to Finchley.’
‘Are you sure you didn't come here, to your office?’
‘Yes, sergeant, I am quite sure.’
Bragg paused, then: ‘Does the name Andrew Livesey mean anything to you?’ he asked.
‘No.
Should it?’
‘We are told that you were chatting to him, amongst others, while you were waiting for a cab.’
‘Then it must have been inadvertent, in his case.’
‘Who do you remember chatting to?’
‘Well…there was certainly Alfred Nobel, yes, and Robert Ingham.
I cannot remember anyone else.’
‘Would you accept that Livesey might have been there?’
Tenison shrugged.
‘He could have been.
Is it important?’ he asked.
‘Do you mean to say that you don't know he was murdered?’
Bragg asked coldly.
‘Murdered?
Good God!
When?’
‘Straight after the meeting, in a cab on his way home.’
‘I really had no idea!’
‘Then you must be about the only person in London that hasn't heard,’ Bragg said drily.
‘Anyway, I hardly see what this has to do with me.’
‘Well, sir, the way we see it is that, instead of going to Finchley, you took a cab as if you were coming back here.
You offered Livesey a lift and, since he lived in Covent Garden, he accepted.
You killed him, during the journey, paid off the cab in Cheapside and left the body to be discovered by some old biddy in Liverpool Street station.’
‘That is total rubbish!’
Tenison's face had gone a blotchy pink; his eyes were staring.
‘Is that all you have to say, sir?’
‘There is nothing more I can say!
Why on earth should I kill him?
I was barely aware of his existence.’
‘So you now admit that you knew him?’
‘No…
I had seen his name in the list of members of the Society, or something like that.
Nothing more.’
‘Well,’ Bragg said amiably, ‘no doubt it will all come out, in time.
Is there anybody who can vouch for your whereabouts, from half-past seven that Friday night until, say, nine o'clock?’
Tenison stared numbly at the calendar, then shook his head.
‘No, officer,’ he said slowly, ‘I am afraid there is only my wife, and you are unlikely to be satisfied with her confirmation.’
Bragg and Morton went through the unpretentious entrance of the New Club, in King Street, and sought out the Secretary.
He greeted them with some impatience.
‘Since you had not been here for a fortnight,’ he said, ‘I assumed that you had completed your enquiries.’
‘No, sir,’ Bragg said stolidly.
‘I want to have a good look round Mr Livesey's rooms.
We think we might have missed something.
I take it that they are still undisturbed.’
‘Indeed!
The rent has been paid until the twentieth of this  month; we shall leave them as they are until then.’
‘You will leave them for longer than that, if I tell you,’ Bragg said brusquely.
‘Right, show us the way, will you?’
The Secretary led them up a marble staircase, to the first floor; then along a lofty corridor with a moulded cornice, to the back of the building.
He stopped and unlocked a door.
‘There you are.’
He motioned them inside and left them.
The room was not as grand as the corridor had led them to expect, but it was of reasonable size.
A polished table was in one corner, with dining chairs askew round it.
There was a deep-pile carpet on the floor, and comfortable armchairs on either side of the fireplace.
Bragg strolled over to the window.
The view was poor.
being restricted by the roofs of the meaner buildings on the other side of the street.
On the right of the window was the door to the bedroom.
Slightly smaller than the living-room, it held a large bed, a chest of drawers and an enormous wardrobe.
Behind the door was a wash-stand, with a razor and a cake of soap on the marble top.
‘Shall I go through his clothes?’
Morton asked.
‘I suppose so; though surely to God Mack will have done that!’
‘Not if the file is to be believed.’
‘All right.’
Bragg wandered back to the living-room and sat in one of the big armchairs.
It was a comfortable place to spend your weekday evenings, that was for sure.
There was a cigar humidor on a small table near the fire, ashtrays, a pipe-rack on the sideboard.
Bragg had a sudden longing for tobacco, but suppressed it.
He mustn't get too relaxed.
He was here to soak in the atmosphere of the place.
Certainly it was a man's room, but that was to be expected.
There was a tantalus and glasses on the top of a bureau, in the alcove to the left of the fireplace.
Above the mantelpiece was a series of display shelves, each niche holding a shepherdess in Dresden china, or a small bronze.
There were no photographs.
At first, Bragg thought this strange.
Every house he had visited had been littered with the things: no doubt looked at with pride for a little while, then becoming just another object to dust.
But, of course, this was not a home, just a weekday lodging.
On that basis, Livesey had done himself proud.
Morton came in from the bedroom.
‘I have been through everything in there,’ he said.
‘Nothing seems out of place, nothing is unexpected…
Mmm!
I like that,’ he murmured, strolling over to  the fireplace.
He picked up a bronze of a naked beauty, standing on a shell.
‘Livesey obviously had classical tastes.
This must be Aphrodite, the goddess of love, rising from the sea…
Quite
‘I like the one with the bow and quiver best,’ Bragg said.
‘Yes, quite dramatic.
‘Queen and huntress, chaste and fair’.
She is lovely!’
‘What's that about?’
‘Ben Jonson's ‘Hymn to Diana’.’
Morton crossed to the bookcase and peered at the volumes.
‘There is a bound set of Punch here,’ he said.
‘Livesey must have been an amiable sort of man…
Some textbooks on chemistry and engineering, a pile of Pall Mall Gazettes …
He appears to have been interested in foreign travel, also, to judge from the books he collected.
But, clearly, his abiding passion was classical sculpture.’
‘A refined, artistic chap, would you say?’
‘On a very superficial view, yes.’
Bragg grunted.
‘I am way out of my depth here, as you will have realized.
This is like a palace, compared to my rooms at Mrs Jenks's house, and yet something seems unexpected.
I can't nail it down, but it makes me uneasy.’
‘He seems to have surrounded himself with every comfort; but that is hardly surprising, if he has stayed here all the week for ten years.’
‘I suppose so.’
Bragg stood up briskly.
‘You go through the books.
Give them a good shake, in case an interesting piece of paper has been used as a bookmark.
I will have a look in the bureau.’
Bragg extracted the papers from the pigeon-holes, and began to read them methodically.
Once he paused.
‘I have here a bank-book,’ he called, ‘a current account.
The balance has been kept always around the eight hundred pound mark.
Does that seem reasonable to you?’
Morton stopped to consider.
‘It would certainly seem reasonable for someone in his position to have a fairly large sum to hand,’ he said.
‘Nevertheless, it is strange that he should keep such a sum on current account, when he could have been earning two per cent interest.’
‘Hmm…
What does that tell us about him?’
Morton smiled.
‘Perhaps it is an example of the impractical side of his nature, that the office manager complained about.’
Bragg stuffed the papers back into the pigeon-holes and closed the lid.
He pulled open the top drawer beneath.
It was lined with baize, on which reposed row upon row of miniatures.
They were exquisitely painted; almost all of them were of women.
Usually they were portraits; occasionally, the whole body of a naked nymph.
‘Come and look at this lot, lad!’
Morton crossed over.
‘Good heavens!’ he exclaimed.
‘What a superb collection!
They must be worth a mint of money.
Perhaps that explains the large sum in his current account.
I imagine you have to secure one of these as soon as it comes on the market.’
Bragg closed the drawer with a grunt.
‘I can't abide things you have to peer at through a magnifying glass before you can see them,’ he said, and pulled open the bottom drawer.
It was stuffed with manila files and loose papers.
‘Have you found anything?’ he asked.
‘No.
The bookcase seems to hold no deadly secrets.’
‘Then help me with this lot.’
Bragg tipped the contents of the drawer on to the table, and divided them into two piles.
After some minutes' browsing, Bragg threw a document over to Morton.
‘What do you think of that?’ he asked.
Morton examined it carefully.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘it is clearly an application to the Patent Office, soliciting the grant of a patent for some kind of process…
It involves the combining of certain chemical compounds which, it is claimed, constitutes a patentable improvement in the manufacture of an explosive.’
He turned to the front of the form, and pointed to a pencilled note at the top: ‘KITES’.
‘Perhaps it is to be applied to some kind of child's toy — a gunpowder-propelled kite!’
‘Hmm…
Put it on one side, lad.
We will take that with us.’
Silence descended for a spell, then Morton pushed over a gilt-edged square of card.
It bore a single line, penned in regular rounded script.
Please help us!— S .
‘This seems to be of interest, sir,’ he said.
‘There is no address on the envelope, merely Livesey's name.
That would suggest it was delivered by hand, either here or to his home.’
Bragg examined it.
‘A woman's writing, would you say?’
‘At first glance, yes.
If we had a larger sample, it would be easier  to venture a firm opinion.’
‘It looks like some kind of begging-letter.
Put it with the other.
I haven't found anything else of interest, have you?’
‘No.
In some ways, Livesey seems to have led an abstemious, not to say ascetic life.
He did not seem to dine out, there are no bills from wine merchants.’
Bragg snorted.
‘I could live an ascetic life, lad, as long as it included plenty of whisky and tobacco.’
He got to his feet.
‘Come on, let's get back to the office.’
Morton pushed his plate away, the steak half-eaten.
It was just too much.
Mrs Chambers must think she was feeding a navvy!
Though, if he were honest, he would normally have been able to eat it.
He had taken too much pâté, that was it…
No, it wasn't.
Chambers had removed that half-eaten, also.
Oh, dear!
Life was complicated.
Mr and Mrs Chambers were more like proxy parents than servants; they might be upset at his sending back so much food.
He had known them all his life, of course.
When he had kicked over the traces, after Cambridge — joined the City police as a flat-foot, instead of following his family's military tradition — they had volunteered to come to London with him.
His mother was faced with losing her cook, and his father with losing his valet, but they had readily agreed.
Lady Morton had no doubt enjoined them not only to look after his every need, but also to report back to her.
Not that they would, in any sense, agree to act as spies; anything they discovered about his private life, they would treat with total discretion, he was sure of that.
But he had been careful never to invite back to his rooms any of his rowdier friends, lest their susceptibilities were offended.
And the only young woman whom they had seen here was Catherine Marsden…
That had been in the first exhilarating days of their relationship, and he had been elated at their evident approval of her.
He drained his wine glass.
That had been before she had declined to become his wife.
Had she accepted, he might have been back at The priory now, with her as his bride.
His father, Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Morton, had retired from active service, and held the largely ceremonial post of Lord Lieutenant of Kent.
This involved frequent absences from home, so that, even if he had wished it, he would not really have been able to run the estates himself.
It was something which Morton itched to do — perhaps only because he knew it was impossible.
His elder brother Edwin was next in succession to the baronetcy, but he was a total invalid.
He had duly entered the army from school, and seemed to enjoy the life.
In 1884 he had gone out to the Sudan with the rank of captain, and had been wounded at the battle of Abu Kru the following January.
For months he had hung between life and death, with a bullet in his spine.
Then he had been brought home, paralysed from the waist down, embittered and resentful.
Resentful mainly of a younger brother who was active and healthy; a younger brother whose son must now succeed to the title.
With typical American generosity of heart, his mother had set out to make up for his disabilities.
She had declared that Edwin must henceforward run the Ashwell estates, as if he had already come into his inheritance.
His father had gone along with the masquerade.
If the truth were known, Sir Henry had never wanted to be a country gentleman, which must have seemed very small beer after such a distinguished and varied military career.
So his parents had colluded in persuading Edwin that there was a worthwhile job he could still do.
Edwin would sit, propped up in his room, with plans of the estates and charts of the crops.
He dared venture out on only the balmiest of days, lest he catch cold.
Twice or three times a year he would be carried out to the automobile or the dog-cart, and be driven round the home farm.
For the rest, the bailiff pretended to consult him, then did as he thought best.
All Morton's protests had been sternly rejected.
Yet the truth of it was that the estates were going to rack and ruin.
And, however much money his mother was prepared to pour in from her American trusts, without firm and continuous direction they would continue to decline.
Often Morton had told himself savagely that there would soon be a point at which he would lose interest in the prospect of salvaging them.
But he knew it would never come.
So, as a kind of protest against his parents' values, he had joined the police as a constable.
This, he thought, would be a worthwhile job while he was waiting; this and cricket.
And so it had proved.
He had been put under the tutelage of Sergeant Bragg, a great bear of a man, a man whose principles would not allow him to stoop to the self-serving tactics of his superiors.
Two misfits together, he had confided to his parents; yet they had been extremely successful.
So much so, that the Commissioner, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir William Sumner, had taken them out of the formal structure and appointed  Bragg as his personal detective assistant.
In that way, Sir William was able indirectly to indulge his penchant for meddling in the basic work of the force, without upsetting the senior officers.
Not that Inspector Cotton was pleased!
But his face had been saved by the fiction that, while functionally independent, Bragg would report to the Commissioner through him.
Because of all this, Morton was now sitting here — off his food, filled with indignation because he had to go crawling through the gutters of London to satisfy Bragg's social conscience.
He pushed back his chair, and went to change into the evening clothes that Chambers had laid out for him.
He brushed his brown wavy hair, put on a top-hat, and went down the stairs to the street.
Half an hour later, he was pacing the area around Haymarket.
This had been the centre of society vice in the old days.
Here had been the baroque brothels, where wenching had been carried on in the grand manner.
Here were still the great theatres, whose promenades had been paraded by the most sublime courtesans of the age.
Surely, he reasoned, some of that must remain?
The disapproving proscriptions of puritanism could not have squeezed all impropriety from the area.
He was right.
He soon spotted several well-dressed young women who strolled up and down their particular stretch of pavement, faltering and looking up with decorous winsomeness when a likely man passed.
He himself was accosted in this way several times, and had to admit that, in the gas-light, they seemed very attractive…
But not once did he see a young girl.
Perhaps they were never let out.
Perhaps they could not be trusted; they might run away.
It might be that they could only be reached through their elders.
‘Hello!’
She was shapely, a little on the mature side, but attractive nevertheless.
‘Are you looking for someone?’
‘Why…yes,’ he stammered.
‘Come with me.
I'll give you a good time.’
She gave him a lubricious smile.
‘I am sure,’ Morton said.
‘But, actually, I am looking for someone younger.’
‘I'm young,’ she said archly.
‘I only had my eighteenth birthday last week.’
‘I mean, really young…a young girl.’
She drew back.
‘You filthy pig!’ she screeched.
‘Bugger off!’
She spat at him, then resumed her genteel stroll up the pavement.
Morton wiped his face on his handkerchief.
Damn Bragg!
It was  coming to something, when he had to endure the derision of whores in the line of duty.
He went into Haymarket itself, where he was amused to see that A Woman of No Importance was playing at the Theatre Royal.
Well, he had hit life's muddy bottom tonight, at the hands of a fallen woman.
‘James!
James Morton!’
A young man was waving his stick from the other side of the road.
His heart sank.
It was Jack Trumper, one of the few disreputable acquaintances of his Cambridge days.
He stopped, and waited as Trumper crossed the street.
‘I saw you looking over the fillies,’ he said with a braying laugh.
‘Ah, you are acute, as ever,’ Morton said lightly.
‘This place is useless now — a lot of old tat.
You should go to the Devonshire Arms, in Irving Street.
Tell the landlord I sent you.
He will see you right.’
‘Actually,’ Morton said hesitantly, ‘if I may borrow a phrase from some distinguished bon viveur whose name I have forgotten, nowadays I like my fruit a little green.’
Trumper drew back.
‘God Almighty!
Surely not?
Christ, Morton, you disgust me!’
He turned on his heel and marched self-righteously away.
5
Catherine tiptoed over the polished parquet floor to the bed at the bottom of the ward.
Amy was propped up on pillows, reading an old copy of the Lady .
She looked tired, and her face had lost its usual bloom, but she still gave a bright smile as she saw her.
‘Catherine, how lovely!’
‘I cannot stay long, dear.
I am supposed to be covering a charitable fund-raising event at the City Temple.’
Catherine stood back and pretended to scrutinize her.
‘You look marvellous!’ she cried.
‘Is it terribly painful?’
Amy gave a wry smile.
‘So long as I keep still, I feel very little.
But I dread having to get out of bed.
If only the nurses were less…were a little more gentle.
Still, it will pass.
The main thing is that everything is going to be all right!’
Catherine leaned over and hugged her friend, then set a chair by the bed.
‘Will life…really be normal?’ she asked.
‘Are you, by any chance, being excessively delicate?’
Amy asked.
‘Well, yes, I am!’
‘Goodness, I think you are almost blushing!
Yes, there will not be a noticeable difference physically — neither for me nor for Charles.
And there will be no close seasons!
He will like that.’
‘Amy, you are incorrigible!’
‘And, as Amanda Blore said, I shall not need to be careful any more.’
Catherine laughed.
‘I am delighted that you are so cheerful and optimistic.
And you do have a child, after all.’
A shadow crossed Amy's face.
‘Yes…but I cannot pretend that it isn't a family disaster.
Charles would have wanted a son.’
‘Men set ridiculous store by perpetuating their family name,’ Catherine said stoutly.
‘Why they expect women to surrender  theirs, without a pang, I will never know.’
‘It is not just the name.
Most of the Edgerton family wealth is in land, which will come to Charles.
It is not entailed to the eldest son, or anything like that; but as things stand, on Charles's death it would go to the particularly repellent son of his younger brother.’
‘But Charles has a daughter of his own!’ said Catherine.
‘Why not leave it to her?’
Amy sighed ruefully.
‘He has this notion that women are not capable of managing anything more important than their own kitchen — and then only if they have a competent cook.
Now, if I had been more like you, Catherine…
The sad thing is that men take one's social accomplishments totally for granted.’
‘Surely you are not concerned about these things?’
‘Yes, I am.
I have been ever since I knew I had this trouble.’
‘But Charmian will marry…
All Charles needs to do is satisfy himself that your future son-in-law is proficient in such matters, and even he will be content.
I cannot see the remotest reason for your worrying.’
Amy squeezed her hand.
‘Yes, that is what I tell myself…but it would not be the same as his own flesh and blood.’
She picked at the counterpane across her thighs.
‘I am afraid’, she said, ‘that he may turn against me.’
‘Surely not!’
‘He is very solicitous at the moment, of course.
But there are plenty of predatory young women around, whom he might think would be able to give him a son…
You know, in that horrible time when I first knew I had to have this operation.
I used to be worried that I would die and Charmian would be brought up by another woman…
I suppose I would still have her, if he divorced me.
But now, that seems a small compensation for what I would lose.’
‘You are being silly,’ Catherine said indulgently.
‘He cannot just divorce you for no reason.’
Amy shrugged her shoulders.
‘The courts are apt to regard a harmless frolic as amounting to adultery,’ she said.
‘What a horrible word it is!’
‘But surely you have not been unfaithful to him?’
‘Of course, and he to me.’
‘You didn't!’
‘When your prince calls, you obey.
That is what society is all about, isn't it?
You cannot belong to the Prince of Wales's set, and not accept its moral values.’
‘When he made advances to me, I turned my back on him and his set,’ Catherine said roundly.
‘But you can afford to.
You have a satisfying career away from society.
For me, life would be dreary.’
‘You sound as if you have turned into a brainless ninny, like the rest of them,’ Catherine said crossly.
Then, seeing tears forming in her friend's eyes, she took her hand.
‘I am sure’, she said, ‘that you are worrying needlessly.
Although I do not know Charles well, I am convinced that he is a gentleman.’
‘Yes, he is that.
And I think that he would shy away from scandal, it would ruin him socially also.’
Amy blew her nose.
‘Anyway, I am sure he would not find anyone who would give him such a good time.
We used to have fun!
And I am sure we will again.’
She dabbed her eyes.
‘Have you tried it yet?’
‘Of course not,’ Catherine said in embarrassment.
‘I am not married!’
‘And you used to maintain at school that women should be as free as men.
Well, you should sample it.
Life is slipping by!’
Bragg leaned back in the comer of the railway carriage, and puffed at his pipe contentedly.
Opposite him, Morton was reading a newspaper.
It was a funny relationship they had, he thought.
Nothing remotely in common, yet they had developed a warm regard for each other .
Morton was a cut above the average nob, that was for sure.
Mind you, his family were real class.
On the few occasions that he had gone down to The priory with the lad, his parents had treated him as one of the family.
Joe Bragg!
The very thought made him feel warm inside.
People who had lived in that great rambling fortress of a house for generations, treating him as one of them — and he a carter's son from the depths of the country!
Not a hint of snobbery about them.
Not even his young sister — and they were usually the worst of all.
Not that he could always fathom what went on in Morton's head.
To be honest, they worked in different ways, on different planes.
For him, it was gut feeling every time; instinct from of over twenty years’ experience — not only of police work, but of people and their ways.
For Morton it was less heart and more head.
He could see connections between things that no one else in the force would even guess at.
It was partly because he was out of the top drawer, of course.
And, if the truth were known, they ought to  have more like him.
It was all very well nailing cracksmen who had nicked half-a-dozen fur coats from a warehouse; but the real criminals in the City were amongst the money-men.
And, on that level, Morton seemed able to smell if there was something wrong…
They worked well together, too.
Many a case had only been solved by a combination of Morton's flair and his own instincts.
Not that it could go on for ever.
Before long he would find something better to do.
At one time, it had been rumoured that he was being groomed to be the next Commissioner.
And the way Sir William treated him didn't give the lie to the notion.
But, by now, he would have had to be moving up the ladder, getting experience of command.
It was said that he had turned down promotion to sergeant, in return for being allowed to play cricket for his county.
And, once he had taken three months off to play for England in Australia, the rumour seemed to have died the death.
It was a pity, in a way.
Granted that senior army officers, like Sir William, were used to handling men and making decisions, they still couldn't be expected to understand what was involved in a tricky investigation, be able to discuss tactics.
Sir William seemed to encompass the worst of every world, somehow.
He wanted to keep close to the poor bloody infantry, so he would get into discussion with the constable on the beat, the detective on a case; and he would end up being drawn into endorsing action that the Inspector in charge would not countenance.
At least Morton would never fall into that trap…
But it was all moonshine.
There were better things in life, for a young man like him, than plodding round London after a pick-pocket.
Bragg saw the signal box down the line, and knocked out his pipe.
‘Come on, lad,’ he said.
‘We are almost there.’
Lightwater station was surrounded by stunted conifers and scrub.
To Bragg's eye, the soil was sandy and poor.
No wonder they had let the army take over this area; it was worth nothing for farming.
The village itself was some distance away from the railway, and there was no transport of any kind.
However, it was a pleasant morning; the sun shone, there was a light breeze, it was just the weather for a country hike.
By eleven o'clock they had reached the cluster of buildings that formed Lightwater, and identified the Liveseys' house.
Bragg's knock was answered by a good-looking woman in her early thirties.
She was of medium height and slim build; she was dressed in a dark frock, though it would hardly constitute  deep mourning.
‘Mrs Sarah Livesey?’
Bragg enquired.
‘Yes.’
‘City police.
I am sorry to have to disturb you at home, ma'am, but you don't seem to be connected to the telephone system.’
She stood back.
‘Come in,’ she said.
‘If you will wait in the drawing-room, I will be with you in a moment.
I am preparing something for my daughter's lunch.
She will be coming home from school at noon.’
She ushered them into a room at the front of the house.
It looked comfortable, but everything seemed well used and, to Morton's eye, not harmonious.
The curtains were of heavy velvet, but seemed somewhat skimpy for the expanse of window.
‘I suspect that Mrs Livesey is not much of a home-maker,’ Morton remarked.
‘She lets her servants get away with murder, too.
Look at the dust on that photograph frame.’
Bragg picked it up.
‘I suppose this is of Livesey.
He must have been a good bit older than her.
Cocky-looking bugger, I must say…but the Scotch usually are.’
He crossed to the window.
‘Some nice shrubs in the garden, though they could do with cutting back.’
The door knob rattled, and Mrs Livesey came in.
Morton noted that she had combed her hair.
‘You must understand that my husband's death has been most upsetting,’ she said in a quiet, tuneful voice.
‘May I express our deep sympathy, ma'am,’ Bragg said.
She seated herself by the fireplace, and motioned the two men to sit.
‘You will appreciate’, Bragg said, ‘that this is a difficult case.
Mr Livesey got into a cab in Westminster, and was never seen alive again.
We have not been able to establish if anyone got into the cab with him outside the Civil Engineers' Hall.
If someone did, it could be any one of a couple of hundred people.’
Mrs Livesey's hands were tightly clasped.
‘I understand,’ she said.
‘On the other hand, it seems quite possible that someone could have joined your husband in the cab, in the course of the journey — perhaps with your husband's consent.
So we are a bit at sea.
I don't suppose you know of anyone who might have wanted to kill him?’
Mrs Livesey looked down at her hands.
‘No,’ she said.
‘We are beginning to think that it might have been someone  from his past,’ Bragg said.
‘So we are trying to fill out the details of his early life.
We have found out about the business side from the people at the factory.
We hope that you will be able to tell us about the personal side.’
‘I will try.’
‘When did you first meet him?’
She took a deep breath.
‘I was presented at Court in the summer of 1882,’ she said quietly.
‘I met him several times at balls and routs, and I found him very entertaining.
I suppose we saw a good deal of each other, over the ensuing months.
Then, just before Christmas, he asked my father for my hand in marriage…
It was all very romantic.’
She dabbed the corner of her eye with a black-edged handkerchief.
Andrew Livesey was quite a catch, was he?’
She looked up startled.
‘I never thought in those terms, officer.
However, my father must have made the usual enquiries, and been satisfied, for he consented to my marriage.’
‘When was that?’
‘My marriage?
In January 1883.
Let me emphasize that, so far as Andrew and I were concerned, it was a love-match.’
‘I'm glad to hear it, ma-am.’
She looked at him askance.
‘I suppose so,’ she said.
‘Though it is hard to feel gratitude to fate, at the moment.’
‘You lived in Bloomsbury to start with.’
‘Yes.’
‘May I ask why you moved out here?’
‘I do not understand the purport of your question.’
‘I wondered if there were any external pressures that led your husband to make the change.’
‘No.
It was simply the imminent arrival of Charlotte.
I had no wish to rear a child in the centre of London, with its fogs, its smallpox, its fevers.’
‘I see.
Why not go to Reading?
Your father is the MP for that constituency, I understand.’
‘That is true.
But he actually lives in Ascot, which is a mere four miles away.’
Bragg smiled.
‘Near enough, yet not too near, eh?’
‘If you wish.’
‘So, you know of no one from that time who would have wished your husband dead?’
‘No.’
‘Or more recently?’
‘No one…
Though I must emphasize that I have had little to do with the business.
My contact with it has been purely social.’
‘Yes, we heard about the tea-parties and the Christmas get-togethers.
Your visits were much appreciated, by all accounts.’
Mrs Livesey smiled.
‘Thank you, sergeant,’ she said.
‘May I ask where you were, at the time of your husband's death?’ he said evenly.
She looked surprised.
‘In fact, I was in London.
My father has a flat, which he uses during the parliamentary session.
I had gone to see him there.’
‘I see.
Where is that?’
‘In Dover Court, Old Queen Street.’
‘Only a stone's throw from the Civil Engineers' Hall.’
She gave a twisted smile.
‘If you say so, sergeant.’
‘And the little girl?’
‘She was staying with friends, in the village.’
Bragg gave her a searching glance.
‘Did you get on well with your husband, Mrs Livesey?’ he asked.
‘Yes, sergeant,’ she replied coolly.
‘Ours was an ordinary happy marriage.’
‘By God, lad, there's a stink here!’
Bragg pressed his handkerchief to his face.
‘Sulphur dioxide, I would suppose,’ Morton gasped, and made a dash for the office building.
Bragg arrived, puffing, a few moments later.
‘Ah, that's better,’ he mumbled.
‘A bit different from Liveseys' place, eh?’
‘Factoring chemicals is obviously a more gentlemanly activity than manufacturing them!’
‘What can I do for you, gentlemen?’
A clerk came up to the counter.
‘Police.
We would like a word with Mr Kebbel.’
‘Just a minute.’
He returned shortly and ushered them into an airy office, overlooking the Grand Union Canal.
In contrast to Livesey's, the room was purely functional.
The floor was covered with linoleum; books and box-files were kept on open shelves; a trestle table under the window was stacked with folders and papers.
The only hint of self-indulgence was an oak, leather-topped desk in the  middle of the room.
a man of about forty rose as they entered.
‘I am Hubert Kebbel,’ he said, holding out his hand.
‘Sergeant Bragg and Constable Morton, of the City police detective department,’ Bragg said.
‘We would like to ask you a few questions about Andrew Livesey.
You knew him, I believe.’
‘Yes, officer.’
He motioned them to chairs.
‘Naturally, I will do what I can.
It was quite incomprehensible.’
‘Indeed, sir.
To tell you the truth, we are a bit at a loss.
We are casting about, as you might say, hoping to pick up a whiff of a scent.’
‘Then I am at your service.’
Kebbel was tall and powerfully built, his somewhat heavy features tending to coarseness with middle age.
He was relaxed, yet there was an air of dominance about him, of dynamism kept in check.
Morton had met many like him; the thrusting entrepreneurs who could shoulder aside the rigid structures of Victorian society, and almost be accepted…
‘I was hoping you could fill in his background for us, sir,’ Bragg continued.
‘We understand that you worked at Liveseys', some time ago.’
‘Until ten years ago, in fact.’
‘It seems that you were well thought of; why did you leave?’
Kebbel smiled, then leaned back in his chair, hands clasped behind his head.
‘I suppose it was all to do with origins, sergeant,’ he said.
‘I started from the bottom — a poor family, elementary school, then night school while I was working as a clerk.
I cannot say that they were happy days, but they taught me what life is about.
And I did well.
I managed to get a charity bursary, which allowed me to take a degree at London University.
As you can imagine, I have paid them back a hundredfold.’
‘And when did you join Liveseys', sir?’
‘Straight from university.
It was a good opening.
Liveseys' had a fine reputation and, as works manager, I had an interesting and responsible job.’
‘What kind of a young man was Andrew Livesey?’
‘I saw very little of him, in the early years.
Old John Knox Livesey was running things back in ‘76.
He was a hard, practical man and yet, as is often the way, he indulged Andrew beyond all reason.’
‘Was the business profitable?’
Bragg asked.
‘I imagine so; there was certainly a big turnover…perhaps the answer to that question ought to be that I do not know.
I had  nothing to do with the financial side of the firm, and big output does not necessarily mean big profit.’
‘And what was Andrew's job in the business?’
Kebbel smiled.
‘To start with, not much.
He was four years older than I was, and had been given the silver-spoon education that the son of a wealthy Edinburgh family was entitled to expect, I suppose.’
‘Which was what?’
‘Oh, public school — Fettes, I think.
Then the old man sent him to Manchester University for his degree.
I suppose he ought to have been very practical, from that background, but nothing was further from the truth.
Don't misunderstand me, he was a brilliant chemist; nobody could touch him with the theory.
He just didn't have the self-discipline to apply it…
He was nominally learning the business, when I got there; but in reality he never soiled his hands.
He would spend all his time with well-to-do society people, though he hadn't got their sort of money.
I believe that Albert peace, the office manager, spoke to the old man about it once.
Andrew was meant to be helping him and, hard-headed as usual, John Knox had put the supposedly spare clerk on other work.
As Andrew seldom bothered to come in, poor old Peace was getting into arrear.
The rumour was that Peace was told he would get the sack, if he dared to criticize Andrew's conduct again.
In some ways, it is quite remarkable that Andrew turned out as well as he did.’
‘When was it that John Livesey had to give up?’
Kebbel smiled.
‘John Knox Livesey.
You must always think of him in those terms, to get the flavour of Calvinistic humbug that ruled his life, and therefore everyone around him.’
‘Except his son?’
‘Except his son!
Old John Knox had been ill for a long time and, two years after I joined the firm, he was told that he must retire.
I believe he is still alive…and his son dead.
Strange, isn't it?’
‘What happened when he retired?’
He went back to Edinburgh — to a climate more congenial to his cold stony soul, I imagine!
And Andrew took over the business.’
‘Andrew was a partner, was he?’
‘Oh, yes.
I believe that he was made a partner as soon as he had finished his degree — but that may be pure conjecture on my part.’
‘How did you get on with Andrew?’
‘Very well.
I was proficient at my job, so we had a good relationship.
In many ways he was an unassuming man, and  always likeable.
He was honest enough to admit that he had to rely on me for the practical side of the business, and gave me a good rise in pay.
We worked together very harmoniously.’
‘What was he doing?’
‘The overall management of the business and the sales side.’
‘What were you making?’
‘Speciality chemicals, mainly for the foundry industry.
Liveseys' had a niche in the market, with no serious competition.
If ever we came under competitive pressure, Andrew was always able to think up something new, that left us still on top.
I used to say that he must have a personal speaking-tube to the Almighty!’
‘I see.’
Bragg pondered, tugging absently at his moustache.
‘Then why did you leave?’ he asked at length.
Kebbel laughed.
‘I suppose I got a bit above myself.
You see, as a working-class lad, I had more to prove to myself than Andrew had.
I could not be content with living in lodgings, running the production at Liveseys'.
I knew I was capable of doing better — as I think I have proved.’
‘You certainly seem to be doing well — even if you make foul smells in the process.’
Kebbel laughed.
‘It's a copper-bottomed sign of success in the chemical industry, sergeant.
Liveseys' used to smell like this, in the old days.’
‘So why did you leave them?’
Bragg repeated.
Kebbel stared up at the ceiling.
‘We got ourselves into one of those silly situations, in the middle of 1883, which meant there was no way for me to remain.
I was demanding a big rise in salary, just to prove my worth; and Andrew was refusing to give it to me, as a matter of principle.
We parted amicably, still holding different views of my worth!
In retrospect, Andrew's evaluation was closer to the truth than my own.
I had some very tricky moments, before this business got on its feet.’
‘But you kept a good personal relationship with Livesey?’
‘Always.
He was a charming man.
And, in purely business terms, it was fortunate.
The plant at Liveseys' was old, even then.
Soon after I left them, they were working overtime to fulfil a big order, when there was a breakdown.
Andrew appealed to me to help them.
I did so and, afterwards, Andrew asked me to take over the bulk of the manufacturing for them.’
‘Was that not a bit risky?’
Bragg asked.
‘Bearing in mind your row?’
‘There had been no row, as that incident demonstrates.
I have continued to manufacture for Liveseys' ever since.’
‘So what has Liveseys' business consisted of in the last ten
Kebbel smiled.
‘I shall have to simplify a little, because I produce bulk chemicals, whereas Liveseys' sell various combinations of chemicals.
I do some of the mixing here, some is done by them at Stepney.
If you said that Liveseys' do twenty per cent of the mixing and all of the marketing, you would get an approximate idea.’
‘I see.
So you had a stranglehold on Liveseys' business?’
Kebbel's head tipped sideways, with a frown.
‘I suppose you could say that, but I had never thought of it in those terms.
I have been more concerned with what would happen to my business if Andrew switched his manufacturing orders to someone else.’
‘Were you never worried that he might start manufacturing again?’
Kebbel thought for a moment.
‘No,’ he said.
‘He never had the humdrum application to do that; anyway, he would have had to re-equip his factory.’
‘So, what happens now that Livesey is dead?’
Kebbel's eyes drifted over to the window.
‘I am worried, as you can imagine.
I have virtually no customers of my own.
If Liveseys' goes under, I go under…
I suppose it is up to old John Knox.
He is the surviving partner, though whether he still has his senses is anybody's guess.
If he does not act soon, I shall have to start laying off men.’
‘Could you not approach his customers yourself?’
Bragg asked.
Kebbel shook his head slowly.
‘The trouble is, I do not know who they are.
All the dispatching was done from Liveseys'.’
‘Ah, well, we all have our crosses to bear — Mrs Livesey more than most, I expect.’
‘Indeed, sergeant.’
‘Tell me, sir, did you go to the lecture at the Civil Engineers' Hall that Friday?’
‘Yes, along with every other engineer in London, I expect!’
His smile was attractive, Morton thought, with his full mouth and white even teeth.
‘Did you see Livesey there?’
‘In a literal sense, I did.
He was standing with some people in the  entrance hall when I arrived.
I waved to him and passed on into the lecture room.’
‘You didn't speak, then?’
‘No.
We had met on the previous Wednesday, to discuss business matters.
There was nothing new to say.’
‘Did you meet after the lecture?’
‘No, for the same reason.’
‘So you didn't share his cab?’
‘No, sergeant.’
‘Did you see him outside the hall?’
Kebbel reflected momentarily.
‘I am not aware that I did.
As you can imagine, there was a considerable scrimmage, with people anxious to obtain cabs — particularly so in view of the rain.’
‘That is why we think Livesey might have shared with someone…
So, what happened to you?’
‘I walked up to Covent Garden.’
‘On such a filthy night?’
Bragg asked incredulously.
Kebbel laughed.
‘I was getting wet chatting on the pavement, anyway.’
‘Do you live in that area?’
‘No!
I am not one for the bright lights.
I live in Gunmakers Lane, overlooking Victoria Park.
That means I can walk to work in the morning.
I'm a real East Ender, sergeant, and proud of it!’
‘So why walk up to Covent Garden?’
‘I was dining with a fellow engineer, who was home on furlough from Argentina.
He is building railways there.
As it happened, the lecture ended earlier than I had expected, so I had time to waste.’
‘I see, sir.
Where were you dining?’
‘At Rules, sergeant, in Maiden Lane.’
Bragg and Morton took their leave, and walked down the canal towpath towards Stepney.
Every now and again, they would have to stand aside as a great shire horse, leaning into its collar, plodded by.
The rope seemed too slender to tow the forty-foot barge, piled high with coal or timber; but it would glide by, scarcely breaking the still surface of the water.
On each occasion Bragg turned and looked back in fascination.
‘A fine sight, that,’ he murmured, as they were finally leaving the towpath at Stepney station.
‘They say a dog is man's best friend, but they've got it wrong.
Where would we be without the 
‘I doubt if the prince of Wales would agree with you, sir,’ Morton chaffed him.
‘Though it would be a fine sight to see a dray-horse careering round Tattenham Corner in the Derby!’
Bragg scowled.
‘Huh!
I'm talking about real men, and real horses.
That lot only know how to squander what other men have earned.
These Labour party people are right, you know.
It is time for some changes.’
Morton grinned.
‘I might welcome it.
Perhaps I could induce a socialist government to take The priory off our hands.
Turn it into a utopian commune where women, gazing through mullioned windows at the lake, weave medieval tapestries.’
‘Stop taking the piss, lad.
Anyway, you would never want to leave there.’
‘Sometimes I feel that I never want to see it again.’
‘Get away with you!
It's in your blood.
Your family has lived there for…goodness knows how long.’
‘Three hundred and fifty years, give or take a few.’
‘Well, then.’
‘Perhaps the time has come for someone else to take on the burden.
Someone whose social aspirations demand a disparate jumble of old buildings, to give them substance.’
‘If I thought you were serious, I would give you a thick ear!
I've been there, don't forget, and I've seen how you are looked up to.
You've got responsibilities, and you can't shirk them.’
‘You sound more high-Tory than Lord Salisbury, sir!
But perhaps I am shirking my responsibilities by being here, in the police force.’
Bragg scowled.
‘That's a matter for you.
But as long as you are here, there's one saving grace — you do as I bloody well tell you!’
They turned into Liveseys' yard, and went up to the office.
Peace greeted them irritably.
‘You look glum today,’ Bragg said good-humouredly.
‘So would you be, if you had my job!
Mr Roberts and I don't know where to turn.
It's not right that we should be left to run the place.
We shall only be blamed if things get into a mess.’
‘And will they?’
‘They are already!
It's not up to us to say what will happen.
We cannot promise to meet orders, so we are running out of work.
We should really be laying men off; there is no money in the bank.’
‘But surely the business will be kept going?’
‘You would think so, if only to sell it.
At this rate Mrs Livesey will get nothing out of it.’
‘Was she a partner?’
‘No, only Mr Andrew and his father.’
‘Can the old man not do anything?’
‘Well, I have written to him, and the firm's solicitor has written to him, but neither of us has got an answer.
The solicitor is supposed to be going up to Edinburgh, to see him.’
‘Did John Knox come to his son's funeral?’
‘No, it was very quiet.’
‘When was it?’
‘Wednesday, the eighteenth of April.’
‘Did you go?’
‘Yes.
John Roberts and I shared a carriage with Mrs Livesey.’
‘Who else was there?’
‘No one, except for the parson and the undertaker's men.
I don't think Mrs Livesey wanted any fuss.
It's not the same as dying in your own bed, is it?’
‘I suppose not…
Right, Mr Peace, I want to see all the firm's accounting records.’
Peace's jaw dropped in outrage.
‘You can't have the books!
They are private.’
‘And they would have stayed so, if he had died in his bed.
As it is, I need to see them.’
‘But I haven't the authority…
’ Peace blustered.
‘You will have to wait till I get the consent of the solicitor, at least.’
Bragg stepped forward, so that he towered over the office manager.
‘I'm not going to be mucked about by the likes of you, mate.
I'll slap a warrant on you that will stop everything.
You won't be worrying then, because you will be out of a job, and every other bugger that works here!’
Peace's face went white.
‘I…er…but why do you want to see them?’ he asked plaintively.
Bragg relaxed.
‘In order to pursue my enquiries, sir,’ he said amiably.
‘I see…yes.
Well, I hope you won't need to take them away.’
‘No, sir.
We can look at them in Mr Livesey's room.’
Without waiting for an answer, Bragg strode across the office and flung open the door.
Within ten minutes they were seated on either side of Livesey's desk, surrounded by files and account books.
‘I will take the Private Ledger,’ Bragg said, pulling out his pipe.
‘The Sales Ledger and the Cash Book are yours.
Try and identify the general pattern of trading; then you will recognize any deviations from it.’
They sat for half an hour in silence, turning the pages and scribbling notes.
The air in the room grew thick with tobacco smoke.
Then Bragg knocked out his pipe.
‘Have you found anything?’ he asked.
‘Not much of interest in the books themselves,’ Morton said,
‘though I do not possess your expertise in these matters.
But I found this in a file.
It seems to be a rough trading account for the year to the thirty-first of March 1894.’
He pushed it across the desk.
Bragg studied it intently.
‘It doesn't show a very healthy picture,’ he said.
‘And not all the expenses are down, by a long chalk.
For instance, the manufacturing wages are down, but not the office staff.
There is no charge for haulage and, since they do the distribution, it must be considerable.
Other bits and pieces are missing too, like insurance premiums.’
‘So, what conclusions do you draw?’
‘I don't know, lad, it's a bit of a conundrum.’
Bragg chewed at his moustache thoughtfully.
‘From this trading account, you would expect the business as a whole to have made a thumping loss for the year…
Get Peace for me, will you?’
The office manager was summoned, and he stood before Bragg's desk like a delinquent schoolboy.
‘I have been looking through the private Ledger,’ Bragg said amiably.
‘I know nothing about that,’ Peace countered sharply.
‘Mr Livesey always kept that — and his father before him.’
‘I am not wanting explanations, just comments.
Look at this plant account — come round here, and have a good look.
You won't be breaching any confidences!’
Peace walked round to Bragg's side and bent to inspect the ledger.
‘You can see that the plant account has been ruled off at the thirty-first of March 1894.
Now, what do you make of the pencil entries at the start of the new year?’
Peace frowned.
‘They look as if new plant has been acquired — two grinding machines, a mixer and a rolling machine.’
‘Or were going to be acquired, since the entries are in pencil.’
‘Yes…
But I have heard nothing of this!
Nor has Mr Roberts, or  he would have told me.’
‘You haven't seen any orders for new machinery?’
‘Definitely not!’
‘Is it the kind of machinery you would expect to be ordered for the factory?’
‘Well, yes…
Of course, I have no notion of the specification of these new machines.
Nevertheless, they appear to be of a type that would be used in the manufacture of bulk chemicals.’
‘I see…
Right.
If the works manager has anything to add, let me know, will you?’
‘Yes.
Yes, indeed.’
Peace escaped back to his own office.
‘Perhaps the purchase of this new plant was prompted by a message down the speaking-tube to the Almighty,’ Morton quipped.
‘It's a rum business, certainly, because Andrew Livesey's capital account is very low indeed…
They seem to be a darned queer family.
Old John Knox is still a partner, but he drew all his capital out in March 1879 — presumably once he'd retired.’
Bragg turned the pages.
‘Ah…
Here it is!
A loan from the Birkbeck Bank, to take its place.
Yet that was paid off in December 1880.
Strange…
’ He thumbed his way back to the private accounts.
‘Yes.
In that month, forty thousand pounds was paid into Andrew Livesey's capital account, and the loan repaid out of it.’
‘Perhaps John Knox relented and put in some money,’ Morton suggested.
‘No.
It would then have gone into his own capital account.
Moreover, he would have been putting back pretty well all he had drawn out the previous year…
I suppose it is possible, but I doubt it.’
‘Then it might have been from a bank loan that Andrew raised privately.’
‘Using what as collateral?
He seems to have been a bit of a wastrel, from what Kebbel told us.’
‘Can one use one's share in a partnership as security for a loan?’
Morton asked.
‘Maybe.
But why do it that way?
Why not get a loan from Birkbeck's, as before?’
‘I cannot say, sir.
But I do think that we are becoming more involved in the Livesey affair than our legitimate interest justifies.
It is only the coincidence of a knife wound that links Livesey to our case.’
Bragg swung round angrily.
‘Coincidence?
What do you bloody mean, coincidence?
It's a certainty, you know that.’
‘Perhaps it is, but I do not see how our digging into Liveseys' trading accounts — however fascinating they may be — will help us to discover the identity of our murdered girl.’
Bragg scowled.
‘Until you can bring yourself to do the rounds of the whore-houses, and find out who she was, we haven't much option, have we?’
With reluctance, Morton decided that he must make another attempt to identify the dead girl.
He looked through the pile of engraved cards on his escritoire.
From now until the end of July there was an endless stream of invitations to balls, picnics, garden parties, receptions.
Most were from people he barely knew — mothers hoping that he might be induced to take an interest in their daughters, hostesses needing a young man who was prepared to dance.
Ah, this one would be ideal: a drum at Lady Beresford's.
That meant no dancing, just hordes of people staying long enough to see and be seen, then passing on to some other entertainment.
But her supper table was renowned; it was likely to attract the right kind of dissolute young man, coming out of the theatre or on his way to a private gambling party.
At ten o'clock Morton put on full evening dress, and took a cab to the Beresfords' mansion.
His hostess was beginning to wilt as she greeted the guests who, by now, were queuing half-way up the grand staircase.
She gave him no more than a perfunctory ‘So glad you could come,’ before passing him on to her husband.
Lord Beresford was disposed to chat about the forthcoming cricket season, but was briskly recalled to his duties.
Morton drifted into the grand salon, which was teeming with people.
The hubbub was so intense that it would be impossible to hold any private conversation.
He looked around, and identified several of his acquaintances who might just have the information he needed.
But they were all squiring young women.
He could hardly tap them on the arm and yell: ‘Can you tell me where I could find a child prostitute?’
No, a little more finesse was required.
Supper-time would be best; at least the noise would subside somewhat.
But that was an hour away!
Still, there was always the refreshment room.
He went up to the next floor, where uniformed footmen and maids were dispensing coffee and cakes, biscuits and ices.
As he  entered, he recognized Lord Toby Cheetham, precisely the kind of man he was seeking.
Toby was persuading a buxom young waitress to bring him a bottle of champagne from the supper room.
With a coquettish smile she disappeared, and soon returned with a tray bearing a bottle and several glasses.
Toby leered his gratitude and, as she turned away, pinched her bottom.
‘Toby!’
Morton greeted him heartily.
‘Haven't seen you for ages!’
‘James!
Good God!
What are you doing with yourself?’
‘I am stranded on the family estates, in Kent.
What about you?’
‘Oh, this and that.
All too much of this, and all too little of that!’
‘Still enjoying life, I see.’
‘You don't call this life, James!
No, the fact is that my trustees have been putting the screws on.
The old kitty is empty, you see.
They tell me I must face up to my responsibilities, get my title out of hock to the moneylenders, and marry an heiress.’
‘A gloomy prospect.’
‘Yes.
And they look a poor crop this year.
Have some champagne.’
‘Thank you.’
Cheetham took another glass and filled it.
‘Here's to freedom!’ he said.
‘To freedom,’ Morton echoed.
‘Don't say that you are looking for a gilded mare too!’
‘No…perhaps my appetites are a little jaded, nowadays.
Most of what is on display here seems…well, rather over-fleshed and tired.
I would be looking for someone like the Beresfords' youngest daughter — innocence, childlike freshness and beauty.’
‘She cannot be more than twelve years old.’
‘Quite.
After that age they are coarsened, concerned only with security and marriage.’
Cheetham looked at him speculatively.
‘You could not, of course, debauch a Beresford.
But then, it is hardly necessary.’
Morton dropped his voice conspiratorially.
‘My previous connection no longer exists.
What I need is an introduction to a new house, where I can meet these fresh delightful creatures.’
‘With the emphasis on the fresh, eh?’
Cheetham smiled.
‘Why not try ten, Martins Court, near Leicester Square?
The housekeeper's name is Rose; she will be at her desk in the hallway.
If you ask for my niece, she will fix you up.’