

THE INHERITANCE
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SECOND EMPIRE in France came about because the determination of one man was ultimately sanctioned by the will of many.
The man was Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte; the many were that section of the French people who, newly enfranchised in 1848, gave him their votes and made him first their president and then their emperor.
The regime was fated to end badly for both participants — but whose the greater fault remains a matter for debate.
Only by looking at what happened can one begin to form a judgement, though, as will be seen, there are conflicting views as to what caused the final catastrophe, while the principal actor in the events has even had doubts cast upon the authenticity of his claims to the leading role.
Was he his father's son?
The question was of some importance, for if Louis-Napoleon was not the son of Napoleon I's brother Louis, who became King of Holland during the period of the satellite Bonaparte Kingdoms, then all his pretensions to the Imperial inheritance were null and void.
Of his mother there can be no doubt; Queen Hortense, stepdaughter of Napoleon I by his marriage to Josephine and sister-in-law by her marriage to his brother Louis, wrote in her diary:
On the night of 20–21 April 1808 I gave birth to a son.
…I learned afterwards that the surgeon said in the waiting room: ‘Queens have the right to be brought to bed before their time; they don't count like other people.’
My son was so feeble that I thought I would lose him at birth.
He had to be bathed in wine and wrapped in cotton in order to keep him alive.
A difficult birth was soon linked to a disputed paternity, for it was said that Hortense had had a lover — several names were suggested — and that Louis-Napoleon was the result of an illicit union.
Although it is a  close-run thing arithmetically, there seems to be no real basis for this charge of bastardy.
Because of the death of their eldest son in 1807, Louis and Hortense, who normally preferred to live apart, had two brief reunions.
These occurred between 28 June and 6 July and again between 12 and 27 August.
At some time during this period of reunions, Hortense became pregnant — an event which was announced in the Journal de l'Empire in October of the same year.
Louis-Napoleon's enemies were, in later years, to make great play with the supposed dubiety of his paternity, but the case was never proven.
He himself believed he was his father's son, and even more importantly, his uncle's nephew, and that is what matters.
At the worst he can merely be accused of unwittingly acting out a fantasy, but even if this were so, it was a fantasy with very real consequences.
As a child Louis-Napoleon showed himself to be both alert and sensitive, two attributes which made his life difficult, because he was the victim of the unhappy marriage of his parents.
Tossed about between the two, he lacked a stable background, a circumstance which was aggravated by the changes in the fortunes of the Bonaparte family as a whole.
The collapse of the Empire in 1814 and the fall of Napoleon I brought about a dispersal of the Imperial House and although the return of Napoleon from Elba in 1815 led to a restoration of the family fortunes, it was all over in the Hundred Days.
For the eight-year-old Louis-Napoleon, this episode was of great importance for it provided his only memorable contact with his uncle.
For his last few days in France, after Waterloo, the Emperor retired to La Malmaison, which had belonged to Josephine until her death in 1814 and now belonged to Hortense.
There he found a moment of illusory tranquillity with his stepdaughter and her two sons, before setting out on the journey which was to end at Saint Helena.
Hortense and her sons also went into exile, for all the Bonapartes were banished from France in perpetuity, by a decree of Louis XVIII, and as a result of the hostility of the major European States Hortense had great difficulty in finding some corner of Europe where she could set up home.
It was finally thanks to the generous attitude of the Swiss government that she was able to purchase a small property at Arenenberg near Lake Constance, in the Canton of Thurgau.
From this time Louis-Napoleon found himself alone with his mother, as a result of his elder brother's going to live with their father, for ex-King Louis had established himself in Tuscany and had insisted that his wife entrust their elder son to his charge.
This arrangement left Hortense with the responsibility of her younger son's education, which she decided to entrust to a private tutor.
Her ultimate choice was surprising, for Philippe Le Bas was the son of a man who had sat in the Convention of 1793 and who had never renounced the republican ethos in which his father had brought him up.
The appointment of Le Bas was not only surprising but also, in some ways, unfortunate in that the tutor's view of life was informed by a vision of austere republican virtue, which was not necessarily the best philosophical base for approaching a sensitive child of twelve.
There is no doubt that Le Bas was shocked by the softness of the atmosphere which surrounded the young Prince, arising not only from the superfluity of femininity which guided him but also from the child's isolation from the world.
To the credit of both Hortense and Le Bas, it was agreed that Louis-Napoleon should be enrolled in the High School at Augsburg, a move which it was hoped would not only remove a tendency to idleness and day-dreaming but would also give him a chance to make friends with other boys of his own age.
The plan worked because in this new environment the young Prince found not only friendship but also the stimulus of intellectual competition.
As a result, at the end of just one year Louis-Napoleon moved from 50th to 24th place in a class of 94.
By the age of 19 Louis-Napoleon had outgrown Le Bas and the tutor was dismissed.
By now the basic characteristics of the young Prince were beginning to appear.
On the one hand he had developed a taste for study, which he nourished with a diet of steady and wide reading.
Combined with this went an active physical life — fencing, rowing, and above all riding, the latter perhaps reflecting a feeling that he looked better on horseback than on foot, for his body was rather too long in proportion to his legs.
By inclination the young Prince was a romantic, a child of his time.
However, his romanticism displayed itself not only in his paying court to young women and in producing verses which are best forgotten, but also in his cultivating the memory of his uncle.
His  devotion to the cause of Bonapartism became devout and unswerving, based on a conviction that it was the only possible political solution not only for France but for Europe.
The effects of the 1815 settlement seemed to Louis-Napoleon to have led to the stifling of all that was noble, generous, and progressive in favour of a stultifying conservatism.
Fired by a determination to change this order of things, Louis-Napoleon found his first outlet by participating in the risings of 1830–31 in Italy directed against Austrian rule, in themselves an echo of the July Revolution in France which had overthrown the restored Bourbon monarchy.
The Italian insurrection was a dismal failure, one which caused the young man not only political disappointment but personal tragedy, for his elder brother died as a result of illness contracted during the rising.
The fatal disease was unromantic (measles), but it almost carried off Louis-Napoleon also, and only the courage and devotion of Hortense prevented her losing both sons.
Fearing that Austrian reprisals might be possible if she stayed on the continent, Hortense decided to take her son to England, stopping off in Paris on their way in the hope that the new King, Louis-Philippe, might allow her to stay there, at least for a time.
The King, however, made it clear that neither mother nor son was welcome and so the journey to England had to be resumed.
It was a short stay, but the year was to be an important one, for during it Louis-Napoleon began to see new ways in which his devotion to the Bonapartist cause might be developed.
The unexpected death of his elder brother in 1831, followed by the death in Vienna in 1832 of Napoleon I's son, known since 1815 as the Duke de Reichstadt, changed dramatically the position of Louis-Napoleon in the Bonaparte family.
As far as the members of the dynasty were concerned the law governing the Imperial succession enacted during the Empire remained in force.
According to its provisions, Napoleon, if he left no direct heir, would be succeeded first by his brother Joseph, then by his brother Louis.
The latter was to have as his successor his son, who now could only be Louis-Napoleon.
Suddenly a new perspective began to open before the young Prince; he could not only dream of a Bonapartist cause, he could himself become the representative of that cause.
His assumption of leadership was made possible by the indifference shown by the older  members of the family towards any idea of a re-establishment of the dynasty.
All they wanted was to live out their lives in a peaceful and financially comfortable exile and they had no thought of putting themselves or their positions at risk by indulging in some political adventure.
During his period in England from 1831 to 1832, in what was to be the first of several such sojourns, Louis-Napoleon met his uncle Joseph — only to be received with a glacial politeness and a lecture on his Italian escapade.
Having already been severely admonished by his father, the young man despaired of finding any sympathy or understanding from his immediate family, always, however, with the exception of his mother.
To her he wrote:
How could the French people be expected to remember us when we ourselves have devoted fifteen years to the task of being forgotten, when, for fifteen years, the mainspring of the actions of the entire family has been the fear of compromising themselves, and they have avoided every chance of coming forward, the only way of publicly recalling themselves to the people's memory?
Louis-Napoleon was now convinced that he must do something to remind Frenchmen of the existence of the Bonapartes.
As he said, ‘My position and my name impose obligations on me of whose importance I am well aware.’
The problem of facing up to these obligations was not, however, an easy one to resolve.
Since the family were exiled from France there could be no question of the Prince having a political role within the country, even though there was no lack of latent Bonapartist feeling among all sections of society.
The only way, therefore, was to make the public aware of his existence by writing and ensuring that his published works circulated in France.
This he proceeded to do, producing in 1832 a little brochure entitled Rêveries politiques , followed in 1835 by a Manuel d'artillerie .
The first was full of idealized conceptions of a Bonapartist state, made up of ‘The people, the Legislative Body and the Emperor’, which would provide the answer to the political problems of the day.
Chateaubriand, who happened to be visiting Arenenberg was asked by the young author for his opinion of the work, and the great writer graciously suggested that it would be improved if, where the  word ‘people’ occurred, the Prince were to replace it with ‘nation’.
This advice was ignored, and throughout the pamphlet the emphasis was on the sovereignty of the people.
In this respect the Prince's ideas were to remain constant, for on reading this early pamphlet one sees the future constitution of the Empire clearly outlined.
All the subsequent writings were merely glosses on an established text.
The Manuel d'artillerie was a technical work of more than average competence, a 500-page closely-reasoned and well-documented study designed to appeal to professionals.
The author, himself a captain of artillery in the Regiment of the Canton of Berne, did not, of course, fail to point out that Napoleon had begun his career as an artillery man, a fact which provided a point of departure for comment on the Emperor's ideas in general .
Great care was taken to see that this work was disseminated as widely as possible.
Military men not only in Switzerland but in Britain, Germany, and above all France, received copies with the author's compliments.
The Prince began to be talked about though this did not necessarily mean that he was being taken seriously as a political alternative to the regime of Louis-Philippe.
The monarchy established since 1830 was still far from being popular, but opposition to it was inchoate and lacking focus.
It seems that Louis-Napoleon, through a combination of misinformation and wishful thinking, overestimated the strength of Bonapartist feeling in France and foolishly decided to attempt the overthrow of the government of Louis-Philippe by means of a coup d'état .
The decision to use Strasbourg as a point of departure for this attempt was based upon a calculation that the strong army garrison in the frontier city would respond to the name of Napoleon, but in fact the whole affair was a disaster and ended in ridicule with the Prince's arrest.
It would, however, be a great mistake to dismiss the event as an act of folly without any serious consequences, for the proof of the existence of a serious candidate led to the definite rebirth of Bonapartism as a political force in France and it was this movement which was later to carry Louis-Napoleon to power.
The idea of ‘Napoleonism’, that is, the concept of the Emperor as a phenomenon of history and therefore politically dead, was one which appealed to the conservative strata of French society, which were glad to remember the glory the Emperor had  given to France but had no wish to see him re-embodied.
Henceforth, as a result of the Prince's action at Strasbourg, this cosy doctrine was threatened by a recrudescence of popular Bonapartism in which the key figure was not the dead Napoleon but the living Louis-Napoleon, who was offering a political alternative to the existing system.
In order to reduce the publicity surrounding the affair, and to minimize its importance, the government decided simply to exile the Prince to the United States of America, thus avoiding a show trial.
In return, Louis-Napoleon agreed not to return to France for some years.
It is unlikely that either side in this arrangement had much hope that it would last, but it had at least enabled the government of Louis-Philippe to avoid an embarrassing public debate, which a trial might well have become.
The Prince landed in Norfolk, Virginia, on 30 March 1837, having come by way of Brazil, since the French authorities wanted to be sure of his whereabouts for six months at least.
There is an agreeable story that on arrival the Prince wanted to change money and found an agent who advertised ‘Here we exchange sovereigns for Napoleons.’
‘That’, he is said to have remarked, ‘is exactly what I want.’
From Norfolk Louis-Napoleon travelled to Philadelphia and then New York, where he took up residence in the Washington Hotel, Broadway.
Whatever future plans the young man may have had, fate decided his course for him.
On 3 June he received a letter from his mother saying she was ill, on the outside of which her doctor had written ‘Venez!
Venez!’
Alarmed by the doctor's message, the Prince immediately took passage on the George Washington and sailed for England.
On arrival he applied for a passport, but neither the French, the Austrian or the Prussian embassies were willing to provide one and he was ultimately obliged to travel disguised, on a Swiss passport.
He arrived at Arenenberg on 4 August to find that Hortense, suffering from a cancer, was in fact dying, although she lingered until 9 October.
The French government acceded to her request that she be buried at Malmaison, but her son was permitted to accompany the funeral only as far as the frontier between France and Switzerland.
The death of his mother certainly took from Louis-Napoleon the one person (with perhaps the exception of his son) to whom — during his entire life — he was totally devoted  and to whose memory he was always faithful.
On the positive side, his inheritance freed him from financial constraints and so he decided to settle in England, setting up house in London at Carlton Terrace, an event which led Disraeli to write somewhat mockingly: ‘…
Prince Florestan is come to town.’
Prince Florestan had a serious purpose however, and did not confine his activities to mixing with London society, even though he enjoyed a guaranteed entrée.
He spent much of his time reading and studying with a view to producing a firm and concise version of his political ideas.
In 1839 this political credo was given definitive form in the Idées Napoléoniennes , which served not only as a resumé of the history of his uncle but sketched, in some detail, a possible future regime.
The book was a success: 500,000 copies were sold in a few years, and it was translated into all the major European languages.
Encouraged by its success and well informed by his agents in France of the increasing unpopularity of the July Monarchy, the Prince decided in the summer of 1840 on a second attempt to seize his inheritance.
This time the expedition was sea-borne, setting out from Gravesend on a paddle-steamer hired for the occasion, but the landing at Boulogne was no more successful in rousing public support than the previous attempt at Strasbourg and by the evening of 6 August Louis-Napoleon was once again under arrest.
This time the government proceeded to a public trial, which resulted in the condemnation of the Prince to life imprisonment in the fortress of Ham in the north of France.
The imprisonment was, in fact, to last for six years, a period which Louis-Napoleon later called his ‘university years’, and which he put to good use by both studying and publishing.
He wrote on various subjects, all of them with one aim in view, namely to keep his name before the public and to make sure that his ideas were not allowed to disappear from circulation.
The main thrust of all the writings was to show that Bonapartism was for France the natural system of government and that it had been so since the Revolution.
The key to establishing this popular regime must be the introduction of universal (male) suffrage, which represented the only means of restoring to the people their rights.
Any form of limited franchise, such as that which had been in operation since 1815, was a direct affront to the principles of 1789, which had declared the people  to be sovereign.
Louis-Napoleon made it plain that he was himself sure that the main result of the establishment of universal suffrage would be his own success.
His idea found a ready audience among those, not least the Republicans, who were angered by the constant refusal of the Royal government to contemplate even an extension of the very limited franchise which prevailed.
With the publication of what was his most important work apart from the Idées , namely the Extinction du Paupérisme, the Prince showed himself to be aware of the grave socio-economic problems which afflicted the mass of the French people; to whom he now offered a solution.
The impact of this work was to bring him the support of the social democrats and thus to extend the appeal of his Bonapartist message.
In 1848 Louis-Napoleon resolved to escape from Ham.
Weary of his imprisonment and suffering from a deterioration in his health due to the conditions in the damp and miserable fortress in which he was confined, he could see no alternative.
He successfully accomplished his design by the simple expedient of walking out of the gaol disguised as a workman while his doctor pretended that he was ill and confined to bed.
He made for London, where he resumed his former way of life, a mixture of study and worldly pleasures, but never losing sight of the main objective.
He had, however, learned patience and had no intention of indulging in any further escapades while remaining convinced that sooner or later he would fulfil his destiny.
In 1845 he had written to a friend:
I believe that certain men are born in order to further the forward movement of the human race, like those animals who are born in order to destroy other more dangerous animals, perhaps in order to function as a point of departure, after their death, for others even more developed.
I see myself as one of these animals, and I await with resignation but with confidence the moment when either I live out my life as providence decrees or I die as prescribed, convinced that I shall thus be useful in two ways, first to France and then to humanity.
It would be quite wrong to view these sentiments as being merely some form of literary exercise, particularly as they were addressed to a  personal and close friend with no thought of their being made public.
Louis-Napoleon's enemies frequently accused him then and later of being without principles or ideals.
It was not their only misinterpretation or a highly complex personality, but it was to turn out to be a very serious one as events were shortly to prove.
On 29 February 1848 the July Monarchy was overthrown by a revolution in Paris; five days after the fall of the King, Louis-Napoleon returned to Paris.
The return proved to be premature because the new Assembly was uneasy at his presence and, invoking the Law of Exile, which was still in force, invited the Prince to leave.
Having made a dignified protest, he returned to London.
He was convinced, however, that his hour had finally arrived, for the Assembly had decreed universal suffrage, and his conviction was borne out by his success in the elections, for he was returned by four separate constituencies.
Once again the hostility of the Assembly led to his resigning his seats, a happy decision as it turned out, for during the month of June the government touched its lowest point of popularity by authorizing the brutal suppression of an insurrection in Paris.
In September a combination of politically clean hands plus a rising tide of Bonapartism led to the Prince's being elected yet again, this time in five separate constituencies.
Weary of the struggle and increasingly harassed by both right-wing and left-wing elements, the Assembly gave way, repealed the Law of Exile and allowed Louis-Napoleon to take his seat.
The elections for the presidency were set for December and Louis-Napoleon put his name forward as one of five candidates.
In reality only two names were significant, his own and that of General Cavaignac, regarded by the right as its strong man since his suppression of the June insurrection.
The result was decisive: 5,434,000 for Louis-Napoleon, 1,448,000 for the General.
Political circles were shocked and surprised by the outcome, apart from the Prince himself, who had never doubted that universal suffrage would give him what he wanted.
The regimes of 1815 and 1848 had, with their restricted franchise, based on an electoral élite, taken care to exclude the people from participating in political decisions.
By giving the vote to some ten million electors this élite had discovered that the people's will did not necessarily correspond  with those of their masters and Louis-Napoleon had reaped the benefit as the people's choice.
François Guizot, an archetypal representative of the political élite, neatly summed up the Prince's appeal: ‘It means a great deal to be at one and the same time a national glory, a revolutionary guarantee, and a principle of authority.’
A friend of the Prince's youth, Benjamin Disraeli, was to explain with less elegance the reason for his own arrival in power: ‘I have climbed to the top of the greasy pole.’
The difference between them was that Louis-Napoleon had no intention of sliding down again and in this determination he was aided, not for the last time, by the actions of his opponents.
The political élite regarded the situation after December 1848 as one which would be finite, destined to end in 1852 with the election of a new President, who could not be Louis-Napoleon since the Constitution precluded a second term.
They omitted from their calculations two factors which were to make a nonsense of their plans.
One was the desire of a majority of the country to make an end of the Republic — a desire shared by the élite but for different and anti-popular reasons.
The other was the ability of Louis-Napoleon to make use of his legal position and his popularity with the masses.
Little by little he freed himself from the control of the political groups, at the same time successfully exposing their divisions and their increasing isolation.
Simultaneously he proceeded to reinforce his own direct links with his electors by undertaking tours of the provinces and by publicly associating himself with progressive measures.
His skilful efforts to put the Assembly in the wrong were abetted by the deputies' seeming determination to alienate the masses from the regime, attempts which culminated in an electoral law of 1850 which disenfranchised some 3,000,000 voters on the basis of a residence qualification.
The measure was clearly designed to deprive the more popular elements of their vote and was, whatever its purpose, a clear attack on universal suffrage as established by the Constitution.
The President accepted the law, but under protest, delighted that the Assembly had thereby provided him with a weapon which could be turned against them when the need arose.
If the Constitution could be altered once, why could it not be so twice?
Hence began the campaign to enable the President to stand for a second term of office.
While planning future political developments on a national level, the Prince also applied himself to being President in a more symbolic sense.
He had been installed in the Elysée palace, designated as the official residence of the Head of State since the Tuileries palace was not only associated with the departed monarchy but had also been sacked by a group of insurgents during the February revolution.
Its condition, therefore, left much to be desired, though according to contemporaries, the state of the Elysée was hardly better:
The (Presidential) apartments are as faded as the President (a reference to the Prince's dressing in sombre colours) and the bronze chandeliers which date from the First Empire, in the same style as those of the English Embassy, make decent lighting impossible for there are too few lights in the chandeliers on the wall-brackets, and the candelabras.
The furniture is neither splendid nor plentiful; as for the carpets and the curtains, the former are threadbare and the latter faded.
In these dismal surroundings the Prince president was supposed to uphold the dignity of his position and to represent worthily the French nation.
Since those who were politically important did not expect the occupant to remain there for long, they brusquely declined to listen to his requests for refurbishment.
For his part the Prince had no intention of using his own money — he had better uses for it — and so things remained as they were.
Being unmarried, Louis-Napoleon had no one who would automatically become hostess and so he invited his cousin, Princess Mathilde Bonaparte, to act as his official ‘wife’.
Mathilde had in fact just missed being his real wife, for they had been engaged until 1836, when, as a result of the Strasbourg episode, Mathilde had broken it off.
Daughter of King Jerome, former ruler of Westphalia during the First Empire, Mathilde had eventually married Count Anatole Demidov, a Russian multi-millionaire whose morals and behaviour were such (he frequently beat her) that she had been separated from him.
Wit and coquettishness combined with a degree of physical attractiveness made Mathilde a suitable hostess for her cousin, particularly as she was equally imbued with a fervent admiration for their uncle.
The less agreeable side of  Mathilde's nature revealed itself in her tendency to what the French call l'esprit démolisseur , a sort of wilful destructiveness, which led her to become a focus for the intellectually disaffected during the Empire.
The marriage of Louis-Napoleon to Eugénie de Montijo undoubtedly stoked up the fires of her discontent, but the hearth was comfortably alight even before the marriage.
Mathilde's brother, Prince Napoleon Jerome, better known perhaps under his nickname of ‘Plon-Plon’, was to prove even more of a burden to his cousin, for his activities were political, to such a degree that he seemed frequently to take pleasure in publicly opposing Louis-Napoleon's policies.
He shared with his sister a dislike of the future Empress, a dislike which in his case was exacerbated by the fact that Eugénie, by producing an heir, effectively removed his hopes of succeeding to the throne.
All this, however, lay in the future, for between 1848 and 1851 the future of the Prince President was by no means clear.
Theoretically his presidency must end in 1852, but it was already evident that the Prince hoped for a second term of office, to which end he began to organize a campaign to drum up sufficient popular support for this to become possible.
As a consequence, petitions flowed in to the National Assembly from all the local councils in France calling for a constitutional revision, but the majority in the Assembly rejected the appeals.
The conservative leaders wanted a Prince Consort not a Prince president, and as if to underline their determination to keep Louis-Napoleon in check, the same group refused a request for the restoration of universal suffrage by the abrogation of the law of 1850.
It seemed as if the conservative group were determined to drive the president towards a coup d'état , from which they could benefit — for he was a guarantee of order and stability — but from participation in which they could be legally, if not morally, absolved.
It seems certain that Louis-Napoleon would have preferred a prolongation of his power by legal means, but in the long run it was equally clear that he would not shrink from a confrontation with the opposition.
For some months he had been making his preparations by placing his men in key positions, so that if and when the moment came, the coup would be swift and, he hoped, bloodless.
On the evening of 1 December 1851 the Prince President was holding  his usual Monday reception at the Elysée palace.
As usual he mingled with his guests, with whom he remained until just after ten o'clock.
His withdrawal was unobtrusive, but it was of great import, for he was off to launch his ‘Operation Rubicon’; the long-awaited coup was scheduled for the night of 1–2 December.
An Imperial triumph: the Emperor surrounded by the visiting sovereigns in 1867.
The official view.
An Imperial triumph: the Emperor surrounded by the visiting sovereigns in 1867.
The popular view.
The Empress and her ladies by Winterhalter.
The classic Court portrait.
Princess Mathilde, patron of the arts.
The Empress.
It all went surprisingly easily.
The opposition leaders were arrested, most of them roused from their beds and quietly transferred to the prison of Mazas.
The army offered no resistance, a success which owed less to the distribution of ‘beer and sausages’, as Marx said, than to the effect of the name Napoleon: ‘Your history is also mine.
There is between us in the past a shared glory and a shared misfortune…’
In any case the French army had, by 1851, become accustomed to changes of regime, so that many may have thought one more would make little difference.
On the morning of 2 December Paris was placarded with proclamations from the Prince dissolving the Assembly, ordering the holding of new elections with a full, restored franchise and proclaiming martial law.
The Prince submitted his action to the judgement of ‘the one sovereign that I recognize in France — the people!’.
At ten o'clock he rode out from the Elysée to be greeted by the cheers of the people, and on entering the Place de la Concorde he was saluted by cries of ‘Vive l'Empereur !’ and shouts of ‘To the Tuileries !’.
But the Prince had, as yet, not decided on the change of residence, for it is by no means sure that even at this stage he had decided on the Empire.
For the moment he therefore confined himself to a tour of the streets, even though popular clamour made it clear what was wanted, for few cried ‘Vive la République ’.
Among the professional politicians there could be little opposition, partly because the key men had been arrested but largely because all attempts to rouse the people made by those still at liberty failed dismally.
Here and there a few barricades were erected but they were defended half-heartedly by the few who manned them.
One young republican deputy, Baudin, was killed in a skirmish with troops — the only member of the Assembly to lose his life in defence of the Constitution.
The real loss of life occurred on the evening of 4 December when a group of insurgents, accompanied by a crowd who had apparently come along to watch events, was fired on during a panic reaction on the part of the  soldiers.
Civilian casualties seem to have amounted to some 400 (the exact figures are unknown), while the soldiers lost 26 dead with some 200 wounded.
The figures are both shocking and tragic, but set in the context of 19th-century political convulsions in France they are relatively mild.
The new regime submitted itself to a plebiscite on 28 December and the result was a resounding success for the Prince president.
‘More than seven million votes have absolved me’, he proclaimed.
The figure was exact, but the use of the word ‘absolved’ is interesting, for Louis-Napoleon had a bad conscience about his actions on the night of 2 December.
As the Empress Eugénie remarked: ‘It was for him a cannon ball that he dragged at his feet all his life.’
In January 1852 the new Constitution was promulgated.
As well as establishing a nominated Senate and a Legislature elected by universal male suffrage, it gave the presidency to Louis-Napoleon for a period of ten years.
In fact, it closely resembled the constitution of the Consulate established in 1800, and like its predecessor it would require little change to turn it into an Empire.
The process took exactly one year from the coup d'état and on 2 December 1852 came a second plebiscite which put a formal proposition to the electorate: ‘The people wishes to re-establish the Imperial dignity in the person of Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte…’
The vote was a clear affirmative: nearly 8,000,000 for, 250,000 against, and over 2,000,000 abstentions.
One republican adversary, Jules Ferry, commented:
The rural masses showed that they could want .
The peasant wanted to crown his legend and by his word be made the Empire.
This word was heartfelt, free, and sincere.
He repeated it three times, and with greater enthusiasm, in 1852 than in 1848 and 1851.
France had a new sovereign ‘By the grace of God and the will of the people’, who took the title of Napoleon III, but who, from the outset, rejected all concepts of an hereditary claim to his title.
In his address to the two houses of the Parliament he proclaimed: ‘My reign does not date from 1815; it dates from the moment you informed me of the nation's votes.’
Nevertheless, there was an Empire and an Emperor; it followed that there must be a court and that this court must reflect the nature of the new regime.
Clearly there must be a re-creation of many aspects of the court of Napoleon I, but it would be a great mistake to see the court of the Second Empire as a simple pastiche — just as it is a great mistake to see in Napoleon III nothing but a simulacrum of his uncle.
No ruler in Europe was so aware of the changes that time had brought about and no ruler was more determined to recognize and use the effects of these changes.
THE EMPIRE RESTORED
ONE IMPORTANT QUESTION HAD TO BE SETTLED, once the Empire was reestablished: was there to be a coronation?
It seems that Napoleon III briefly entertained the idea of being crowned by the pope, as his uncle had been, but Pius IX showed little enthusiasm for this scheme.
When pressed for a favourable reply the pontiff put forward a set of propositions which would have to be accepted by Napoleon before the ceremony could take place.
Since the majority of the papal proposals were designed to increase the Church's influence and weaken the power of the Concordat which had regulated church-state relations since 1801, Napoleon III refused to entertain them.
The idea of a coronation was allowed to drop — probably to the relief of both parties, since the pope's unwillingness to perform seems to have been equalled by the Emperor's reluctance to participate.
Mindful of the quarrels over precedence among the Bonaparte family which had marred his uncle's coronation, Napoleon III may have felt it unwise to provide them with a similar occasion for bad manners.
In any case, for him 7,500,000 votes was sufficient legitimacy, and it could, after all, be assumed by those of a religious turn of mind that God had already blessed his enterprise — could he have succeeded otherwise?
Questions spiritual having thus been dealt with, there remained those of a temporal nature, of which a suitable civil list was held to be the most pressing.
The figure originally proposed by the Senate commission which had been established to consider the matter was 12,000,000 francs, but under pressure from one of the Emperor's oldest and most loyal supporters, the Duc de Persigny, the sum was increased to 25,000,000.
This was done without the knowledge of Napoleon III, who was astonished by the amount and, interestingly, remarked that ‘half of that would have been more than enough’.
He insisted that there be no increase for the rest of his reign, a wish which was adhered to, so that in 1870 the original sum had not been altered.
Later, in the 1860s, Persigny remarked to the Emperor that the charges on the civil list were enormous — to which Napoleon III replied that had so much money not been allotted in the first place he would have been unable to fulfil all the demands which were made upon him.
Even Imperial civil lists were subject to Parkinson's Law.
In so far as he could limit expenditure, Napoleon III did his best.
Of the extensive Bonaparte family only Napoleon I's remaining brother, King Jerome, and his family (the Prince Napoleon and the Princess Mathilde), were given the status of Imperial Princes (Princes français ), with a separate civil list and the right to sit in the Senate.
For the rest, the Emperor maintained them out of his privy purse, showing to them in many instances a generosity far beyond their worth.
It is said that on one occasion Prince Napoleon accused the Emperor of having inherited ‘nothing of the Great Emperor’, to which Napoleon III replied ‘Yes, the family’.
In an attempt to control some of the more wayward members, such as Prince Pierre Bonaparte and Marie Letitia, descendants of Napoleon I's brother Lucien, the Emperor forbade them the Court.
In the case of Letitia, who had married an Irish baronet, Sir Thomas Wyse, her refusal to accept the Emperor's decision that she confine herself to being Lady Wyse, dropping all imperial pretensions by calling herself Bonaparte Wyse, led to her being expelled from France.
Added to the Bonapartes were the Murats, the Tascher de la Pagerie (relatives of Josephine) and descendants of the ‘Italian marriages’— the Primolis and the Bacciochis, some of whom held honorary positions at Court, Count Bacciochi, for example, being a Court Chamberlain.
To an extent, therefore, and inevitably, the presence of the names of the First Empire at the Court of the Second seemed to underline the fact of continuity between the two regimes.
But presence did not imply influence and such posts as were held by these people, with the exception of Prince Napoleon, were purely honorary.
The ‘Maison de l'Empereur’ was modelled on that of Napoleon I, which in itself had recreated certain features of the pre-Revolutionary court.
As Director of the newly established Household the Emperor appointed Achille Fould, of the banking dynasty, whose financial expertise would obviously be of use in the organization of  what could well be a costly affair.
The position carried with it the right to a seat in the Council and Fould combined it with the office of Minister of State.
He remained in this post until 1860, when he was replaced by Marshal Vaillant and the Ministry of State was hived off to become a separate office.
Vaillant had been since the beginning Grand Marshal of the palace, and as such actually responsible for the day-to-day running of the Household.
His appointment as Director in 1860 was therefore a logical one, particularly as he was also responsible for the control of the Military Household, which embraced almost fifteen generals as well as a dozen aides-de-camp and assorted administrative officers, varying in number between 12 and 15.
The Military Household was responsible for overseeing the personal safety of the sovereigns, which at the beginning was entrusted to the Guides, a cavalry regiment rigged out in green and gold, numbering 1,000, whose Colonel was Prince Joachim Murat.
Entry to this body was much sought after by wealthy young men, because of the prestige it conferred and because it guaranteed proximity to the Emperor.
In 1854 the Imperial Guard was reconstituted, a regiment which ultimately became the crack military force of the Empire.
The Cent-Gardes , also created in 1854, with their magnificent blue and silver uniforms, were picked for their stature — the minimum height was six feet — and their looks, since many of their duties involved them in Court ceremonial, including the lining of the stairways at the Tuileries during balls and official receptions.
These were the occasions which enabled them to display for hours the rigid immobility for which they were famous throughout Europe.
From its inception the Second Empire resembled a splendid military pageant, with its colourful regiments whose uniforms were ornamented with sabretaches, aiguillettes and gleaming leather.
Helmets in panther skins vied with shapkas of the hussars, while towering over all at military reviews were the bearskins of the Imperial Guard.
Even the ordinary infantrymen managed to look exotic on ceremonial parade, though the baggy scarlet trousers of the Zouaves tended to make almost anything else look dull.
Small wonder that military reviews became one of the favourite attractions of the populace between 1852 and 1870.
It was in fact the Military Household and establishment of the  sovereign with which the mass of people was most familiar.
The ordinary palace Household was rarely seen, except by those who had access to the Court, but it was no less splendid, though less exotic than the Military.
The Household was divided into six main sections, all, theoretically, under the direct control of the Minister of the Household.
The Grand Almoner was the Archbishop of Paris, who was assisted by a vicar-general and five chaplains who were responsible for the services in the chapels of the Imperial residences.
The Emperor heard Mass every Sunday in the Chapel of the Tuileries, a Low Mass but normally accompanied by music.
On special feast days a High Mass was sung to mark the occasion.
Later on the Empress installed a small private oratory in her apartments where a daily Mass was said by her own private chaplain.
The Grand Marshal of the Palace had at his disposal an adjutant, a superintendent of the palace, five prefects of the palace, responsible for the day-to-day administration, and three officers in charge of lodgings.
The palaces of the Tuileries and of St Cloud had each their own particular governor, who maintained small staffs of their own.
The Master of the Horse (Grand Écuyer)controlled a dozen chief assistants who in turn were overseers of a veritable army of coachmen, grooms, etc., responsible for the organization of horses and carriages.
The office was linked to, but separate from, that of Chief Huntsman (Grand Veneur ), whose staff consisted of Captains and Lieutenants resplendent in green and gold, whose duty it was to organize the Imperial hunts, particularly — during the autumn season — those which were held at Compiègne.
The Great Chamberlain wore one of the more spectacular Court uniforms consisting of a scarlet coat with gold embroidery on the front and around the collar, a waistcoat and knee breeches of nankeen, silk stockings and shoes with gold buckles.
All this was topped off by a tricorne hat decorated by a plume.
His badge of office, a large gold key, hung round his neck on a silk ribbon.
He had at his disposal a Master of Ceremonies, together with his aides, whose functions touched tangentially those of the Grand Master of Ceremonies, himself well provided with subordinates, and who was responsible for Court entertainments.
The ‘Legitimist’ nobility, that is those who remained loyal to the elder Bourbon branch which had been deposed by the Revolution of 1830, kept itself aloof from the court of the ‘parvenu’, just as it had shunned that of Louis-Philippe.
Since it preferred to sulk in its residences in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, it was inevitable that the posts at court were given to descendants of the Imperial nobility, either civil or military.
The 40-year gap between the First and Second Empires had in no way diminished the ability of these people to perform their functions properly and with dignity, and it should not be thought that the Court of Napoleon III had a sort of second-hand quality about it.
During her visit in August 1855 Queen Victoria remarked in a letter to her uncle, Leopold of the Belgians:
Everything is beautifully monté at Court, very quiet and in excellent order; I must say we are both much struck with the difference between this and the poor King's (Louis-Philippe's) time, when the noise, confusion and bustle were great.
What distinguished the Court of Napoleon III was its brilliance and verve, for he was determined that it should in no way resemble the moribund courts of Europe, stifling under the weight of tradition, except in so far as etiquette and good order must prevail.
For this reason there was, in several ways, a marked difference between the two Bonaparte Emperors.
Inspired by Talleyrand, the founder of the Dynasty had set up a number of high sounding offices such as Vice Grand Elector and Vice Constable, and to these gothic absurdities were added the ceremonies of the lever and coucher , echoes of the ancien régime .
To mark the hierarchy of the Court came also a restoration of the entrées, the petites entrées being in the apartments of the Empress.
This sort of nonsense could have been fairly innocuous had it not been for the fact that under Napoleon I, the frequent employment of courtiers in great and influential offices of state had led to a gradual isolation of the Emperor, which in turn gave too much power to those close to the throne, many of whom, it should be noted, actively worked against him in the last years of the reign.
Napoleon III had no intention of allowing this to happen and so he determined that the Court should never be more than a set-piece, a  backdrop in front of which the principal figures of the regime could be seen to advantage.
But it was to be completely apart from the real functions of government, and courtiers were neither expected nor permitted to be politicians.
While it is certain that it was always possible to approach Napoleon III via a courtier, the real intermediaries between the Emperor and the outside world, in so far as it necessitated his personal intervention, were those employed in what was called the Civil Cabinet.
Here the key personages were the secretary, until 1864 Mocquard, who had known Queen Hortense, and Thélin, former valet of the Prince, who had shared his imprisonment at Ham.
In contrast to the Court which was a public affair, the Civil Cabinet functioned privately and discreetly, disbursing sums of money from the Emperor's private purse, often for very private reasons.
At this level of intimate contact with the sovereign were to be found also his medical advisers, chief among them Dr Conneau, another one of the faithful who had accompanied the Prince at Boulogne and who had shared his imprisonment at Ham.
It had been Conneau who, in fact, had made possible the famous escape in 1846 by maintaining the pretence of his patient's illness on the appointed day, thereby preventing the prison governor from making his daily visit.
Conneau's reward was that of an appointment as chief physician, a post which he kept, in some form, until the Emperor's death in January 1873.
The other physician in attendance was Larrey, son of Napoleon I's great surgeon-general, who in 1864 was to diagnose with accuracy the cause of Napoleon III's declining health — a kidney stone.
By 1852 the Court was established in the form which it was to retain until 1870, and from its inception it became clear that this was not only a new Court but a new type of court.
Napoleon III was an innovator, not merely a man of his time but frequently one who was ahead of it, and so he was determined that his Court would deliberately eschew the rigid exclusivity which was the hallmark of the traditional European court structure.
As a result of this conscious decision the Court of the Second Empire was conceived of as a public spectacle which would not only shine in the eyes of the French people but would also become the envy of other peoples less  fortunate than they.
The Court, and by extension Paris, would become the focus of all Europe, and even for the whole civilized world, for the Emperor, conscious of the huge changes in the speed and ease of travel which were taking place, foresaw an influx of visitors not just from the Old World but also from the New.
There was no point in transforming Paris and making it easy of access for visitors if there was nothing to see or do when one got there, and so the Court was to be made open as well as brilliant.
It has been said that the Imperial Court was more successful in mounting great set pieces than in its day-to-day running, and indeed so successful was it in this field that an impression was created that the whole of the period was one long spectacle — the so-called fête impériale — whose only aim was entertainment, prodigality and licence.
These charges seemed to be validated by a comparison with other contemporary courts, such as that of Russia or Austria, where a more traditional pattern of behaviour and etiquette was the fossilized norm.
Looked at from this standpoint, the Court of the Tuileries seemed to be a tawdry affair governed by a spirit of careless frivolity where all was hugger-mugger.
If, however, one shifts the perspective, it can be convincingly argued that a ‘democratic monarchy’ with, at its head, an Emperor directly responsible to the people had need of a different set of values from those prevailing at St Petersburg or Vienna.
Unlike his fellow sovereigns, Napoleon III reigned by the Grace of God and the will of the people, to whom the Constitution made him directly responsible — a point which he himself stressed continually.
Given that the people had put him there, the Emperor envisaged it as his duty to be seen as the people's servant — not just in the matter of governing but in his behaviour as a Sovereign who must associate the people with all aspects of his life.
In playing the role in which the ruler is seen not only to be ruler but also responsive to the general life of his subjects, Napoleon III may be credited with being the founder, or certainly one of the founders, of the concept of ‘modern monarchy’.
It may be argued that this was not a new concept of the basic function of monarchy; perhaps so.
But it had fallen mostly into desuetude in mid-nineteenth-century Europe and it had certainly not  been evident in France during the reign of Louis-Philippe.
His Court had been notorious not only for its exclusivity and lack of responsiveness to the public at large but also, as experienced by those who frequented it, for its tedium.
The King's after-dinner receptions, limited to members of the diplomatic corps, ministers and a scattering of prefects or mayors from the Departments, ended at ten o'clock sharp.
The King then retired to his study to work while Queen Marie-Amélie withdrew to her apartments to embroider in the company of her ladies.
There was little to raise the pulse of public life in Paris and the only excitement provided by the monarchy came from the all too numerous attempts to assassinate Louis-Philippe.
The general opinion was that the court was ‘vulgar and in bad taste’, but interestingly enough it was not the King who was held responsible for this state of affairs.
Rather it was the whole ethos of the monarchy which was felt to be dowdy and second-rate.
That the King was an industrious sovereign was never disputed, but his efforts were confined to what he considered to be ‘royal business’— and this did not embrace an interest in the lives and welfare of his people at large.
Even this might have been bearable if the King had not been tainted with the vices of meanness and frugality.
Economic living is a splendid virtue when practised by the bourgeoisie, but the French neither liked nor respected it as a kingly attribute.
The traditions of their monarchy demanded something grander, or if not that something extraordinary like the saintliness of Louis IX.
Napoleon III had no desire to emulate St Louis by sitting under an oak tree in Vincennes dispensing justice to all comers, but in a more up-to-date version he went one better by donating the entire area of the park (which belonged to the Crown) to the City of Paris so that it might become for the poorer section of the city what the Bois de Boulogne was to the rich.
St Louis might well have felt that actually giving part of the domaine was going too far, but in the context of the urban problems of the 19th century the Emperor had undoubtedly judged correctly what the people needed.
Before everything else, it was essential for both the Emperor and the nation that an Empress be found who could provide an heir.
This would not only establish the dynasty but would also offer hope for its continuity, a factor of no little importance, given the instability of regimes  in France since 1815.
The Emperor was almost 45 years old and time was pressing.
The problem was, whom could Napoleon III marry?
Or to turn the question around, who could be found to marry him?
The experience of previous queens and empresses of France was not such as to reassure any possible candidates.
Discreet soundings were taken in European court circles by French representatives to ascertain if any Princess were disposed to risk a marriage with the new Emperor, and eventually a short list of two was put forward.
One was a Vasa Princess, descendant of the former Swedish ruling house; the other was the Princess Adelaide of Hohenlohe-Langenburg.
Neither Princess was of first rank in the European hierarchy of royalty and both were protestants.
While this latter disqualification had not prevented the marriage of the Duke d'Orléans, son of Louis-Philippe, with Helen of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, it had in practice proved to be inconvenient, as the duchess did not change her faith and had been accused of pushing ‘the Protestant interest’.
It did, in any event, provide an excuse for the father of the Princess Adelaide to turn down the proposal, although it seems likely that the dubious moral reputation of his putative son-in-law also played a part in the refusal.
Napoleon III was in no way put out by the rebuff.
He had always expected it, and in any case while his ministers were busy looking for a wife for him he had already made his own choice.
The future Empress, Eugénie de Guzman, Countess of Teba, had already met her suitor while he was still President of the Republic.
She and her mother, the Countess of Montijo, had been introduced to Louis-Napoleon by means of their acquaintanceship with Princess Mathilde, an introduction which the latter certainly lived to regret.
Daughter of a Spanish nobleman who had been an officer in the army of Napoleon I, and who had also held a post as Court Chamberlain, Eugénie had grown up in an atmosphere which was hopeful of, and sympathetic to, a Bonapartist restoration, her father having always remained faithful to the Bonaparte dynasty.
Educated in France, she was, as Napoleon III said, ‘French at heart not only by upbringing but by the memory of the blood which her father shed in the service of the Empire’.
He  went on to add that ‘as a Spaniard she had the great advantage of not having any family in France who would have to be given honours and rewards’.
As a further justification of his choice, the Emperor pointed out that new principles required new attitudes and these did not include:
…trying to insinuate oneself at any price into the families of the older European dynasties.
Rather is it that by not forgetting one's origins, in maintaining one's own identity and in adopting unhesitatingly before all Europe the position of parvenu — a glorious title when one has arrived there thanks to the votes of a great people.
All these considerations apart, and what could be better than a democratic choice by a democratic sovereign, Napoleon III was in love with Eugénie.
As he said to Count Walewski, his Ambassador in London (and himself the illegitimate son of Napoleon I), ‘Mon cher, je suis pris ’, and there seems no reason to doubt this.
Certainly he received no encouragement from his entourage, for court and ministerial circles were almost unanimous in their opposition to the marriage.
Very few of those who were initially hostile to Eugénie were to change their opinion in the next 18 years, and in the case of some, only death ended an enduring aversion to the Empress.
What inspired it?
Obviously, in spite of the Emperor's assertions to the contrary, many regarded the union as a mésalliance , although Eugénie's nobility was incontestable and her lineage impeccable, certainly on her father's side.
Her beauty was, of course, a matter of opinion, as these things often are, but her auburn hair and blue eyes, together with a fine complexion, made her extremely attractive.
In an age when décolletage mattered, her shoulders were said to be superb.
An elegant carriage and a vivacious manner must have added to her physical attractions.
Whatever they were, she had ‘caught’ the Emperor of the French who was determined to disprove the gibe of his cousin Prince Napoleon that ‘one does not marry Mademoiselle de Montijo’.
The Prince's opinion was shared by the rest of the Bonaparte family; only Princess Julie Bonaparte, granddaughter of Lucien and married to the Italian Marquis of Roccagiovine, found kind words for the future Empress:
The first time I saw Mlle de Montijo was at a reception given by Princess Mathilde for the Duchess of Hamilton; I was struck by the beauty, the grace of this foreign girl, and I asked who she was.
(Julie, like others, persisted in calling Eugénie Mlle de Montijo.
She was in fact the Countess of Teba in her own right.)
She is tall, and her arms, like her shoulders, are remarkable in their beauty.
Her teeth were equally so, and her fresh complexion was at that time glowing with good health; her blond hair is a beautiful shining blond colour.
She dresses marvellously well and I constantly remark that she has the gift of presenting herself well.
Unlike Princess Julie, the rest of the family spent their time in repeating malicious gossip about Eugénie's past life, hinting that she had a more than dubious reputation, but their attitude in no way influenced the Emperor, except perhaps in a contrary sense.
Napoleon III was mild and gentle in his manner and in his dealings with people, but once he had made up his mind, he was inflexible and he was resolved to marry Eugénie.
There remained one small personal matter that he had to attend to before he finally committed himself.
Since 1846 his faithful companion had been a Miss Howard, formerly of Brighton and London, who had discreetly accompanied the Prince through his various adventures.
Now, however, the time had come to part and Miss Howard was created Countess of Beauregard and established in a desirable residence in the country.
Having done the honourable thing, the Emperor now felt himself free and thus it was that on 15 January 1853 he wrote formally to Eugénie's mother, requesting the hand of her daughter in marriage.
The letter was brief and its reasons clear:
Madame la Comtesse, I have been in love with Mademoiselle your daughter for a long time and I wish to make her my wife.
I am therefore today asking you for her hand, for no one else is capable of making me happy nor more fitted to wear a crown.
A refusal was hardly to be expected, and a fortnight later at nine o'clock on the evening of 29 January 1853 the civil marriage between Eugénie and the Emperor took place in the Tuileries.
He had invited selected members of the family as witnesses to the ceremony, which  was held in the Hall of Marshals, but even careful selection did not prevent exhibitions of ill-bred behaviour.
When the time came to greet the newly-weds Prince Napoleon bowed to the Emperor but pointedly ignored the Empress, while Prince Pierre Bonaparte saluted neither the one nor the other.
For Eugénie it was a splendid introduction to family life among the Bonapartes.
She wrote to her sister about her feelings:
Yesterday's ceremony was splendid but I was almost overcome before entering the room where we signed.
I cannot describe to you, my dear sister, what I went through during those three quarters of an hour, seated was as pale as the jasmine I had about my head…
Since then I am called ‘Majesty’ and it seems to me as if I was part of a play.
The next day saw the religious ceremony at Notre Dame — which again led to family difficulties.
Princess Mathilde was obliged to travel in a carriage with Eugénie's mother since she so detested her brother, Prince Napoleon, and her father, ex-King Jerome, that she refused to travel with them.
Since she was not particularly enamoured of Madame de Montijo it is little wonder that she arrived at the Cathedral in a state of high discontent.
Since all the members of the family made no attempt to hide their feelings of antipathy, Mathilde's behaviour was in itself not particularly remarked on by those who packed the huge interior of Notre Dame:
Nothing could be more splendid than the decoration of the Cathedral — velvet and ermine — gold and silver — flags and hangings of all colours were combined and harmonized with the splendid costumes of the Clergy, the uniforms civil and military, and the magnificent dresses of the ladies.
The greatest mistake was the conflict of lights — the windows not having been darkened, though countless thousands of wax candles were lighted.
The music was very fine.
So wrote Lady Augusta Bruce to the Duchess of Kent, who passed the letter on to her daughter, the Queen.
Lady Augusta xenophobically added: ‘…a sort of national prejudice made me attribute the grace and dignity of the scene, for what there was of either came from her, to the  blood of Kirkpatrick !!!’, a reference to Eugénie's Scottish grandfather
The Parisian populace, displaying its usual unpredictability, was not overly enthusiastic in its reception of the Imperial couple — In contrast, noted Count Hubner, the Austrian Ambassador, with the enthusiasm they had shown at the Te Deum held the previous year to celebrate the coup d'état of 2 December.
The marriage also ended with a Te Deum as the Archbishop of Paris conducted the newly-weds to the west door, whence they emerged to a great pealing of bells, salvoes of artillery and fanfares of trumpets.
The crowd cheered the Empress who responded with a curtsy — that famous gesture which those who witnessed it never forgot and which became the hallmark of Eugénie's graciousness.
Then the couple entered the carriage, lined with white satin and drawn by eight bays, for the return to the Tuileries.
Here a vast crowd did display more enthusiasm than that before Notre Dame and the Emperor and Empress were obliged to appear frequently on the balcony of the palace to acknowledge the cheers.
Princess Mathilde was in attendance and recorded that at the palace:
…we congratulated one another, we embraced, and then the Empress went to change her dress in order to leave for Saint Cloud where she was to live en tête-à-tête with her husband.
She came back in a lively mood dressed in ruby velvet with her furs.
We watched them get into a small carriage which took them off to their new residence.
The ladies-in-waiting and the personnel of the household followed them.
Each one of us returned home worn out and with a heavy heart: we felt that the Emperor was lost to us.
The couple were not going to the palace of Saint Cloud, which would certainly not have provided an intimate setting for a honeymoon, but to a small house at Villeneuve l'Etang, which the Emperor had purchased himself.
It was adjacent to Saint Cloud, but it was of manageable proportions and it had great romantic charm.
Napoleon III had already found it useful as a place where a few quiet days might be spent with a friend.
On the night of 30 January they were not to reach this sought-after retreat without problems, for they had first to call at the Palace of Saint  Cloud itself where on arrival they found the entire Imperial Household drawn up to receive them and, equally clearly, determined to stay to dinner.
Because no one had been sure of what to do, since there was no prescribed etiquette, the leading members of the Household had decided that a small, but ‘Imperial’ dinner-party was the answer.
Napoleon III, who had a horror of offending anyone socially, said nothing and both he and Eugénie behaved graciously and warmly during the dinner, as though not in the least put out.
However, even when the dinner was over, their ‘guests’ showed no sign of leaving, at which point the Emperor began to pull on the ends of his moustache — one of the few signs of irritation he ever allowed himself.
Eugénie saved the situation: ‘Get up and leave the room’, she said to him, ‘I will follow you.’
Looking neither to right nor left, the Emperor rose and walked firmly towards the door followed by the Empress.
Neither said a word to the assembled company, but at the door Eugénie turned and gave them her famous curtsy.
It is probable that during the short drive from the palace to Villeneuve l'Etang both decided that certain aspects of court protocol would have to be looked into and that changes would have to be made.
The essence of any successful stage production is that it works so smoothly and efficiently that the audience is virtually unaware of the mechanism.
Although the Emperor had married for love it was expected that the union would, as soon as possible, produce a child which would, it was hoped, be male.
The Empress miscarried in April 1853 and as a consequence remained extremely unwell for months.
It was an alarming omen for the Imperial couple, but on 16 March 1856 Eugénie fulfilled her duty by giving birth to a son, thus securing the future of the dynasty, though The Times noted sombrely that since Louis XIV no direct heir had ever succeeded to the French throne.
The birth of the Prince Imperial had been so difficult — the Empress had been in labour for 18 hours — that no further child could be hoped for.
The birth of a healthy boy was therefore an event of great significance, for it removed from Prince Napoleon, the Emperor's cousin and heir designate, any hope of the succession.
This increased the dislike felt by the Prince for the Empress, a dislike which envenomed personal  and also political relationships, for Prince Napoleon seemed henceforth to take a delight in publicly opposing the Emperor's policies and in quarrelling with the Empress.
His residence at the Palais Royal became a virtual ‘court of disaffection’, while his sister, Princess Mathilde, ran her salon as a second centre of hostility.
None of this, however, could obscure the triumph of the Prince's baptism at Notre Dame on 14 June 1856, a long delay having been necessary because the Empress had been so weak after the birth that she was unable to leave her bed for months.
The pope, who had agreed to be godfather, had sent a Legate, Cardinal Patrizzi, to represent him at the christening, though the ceremony itself was performed by the Archbishop of Paris.
The godmother was the Queen of Sweden, also unable to be present in person, who was represented by Princess Stephanie Louise Napoleon, Grand Duchess of Baden.
The child was christened Napoleon, Eugène, Louis, Jean, Joseph, and after his name in the baptismal register of ‘the Imperial parish of Saint Germain l'Auxerrois’ the Emperor wrote ‘Son of France’, thus curiously reviving a custom of the ancien régime because, as he said: ‘When an heir is born to perpetuate a national institution, that child is the whole country's son: and this name will serve to remind him of his duties.’
The occasion was a splendid one, to be remembered afterwards as one of the high points of the Empire.
The route of the procession was crowded, and the appearance of the Imperial family was greeted with enthusiastic cries of ‘Vive l'Empereur, vive l'Impératrice, vive le Petit Prince .’
In all there were 12 state coaches, each drawn by eight horses caparisoned in red velvet, heavily embroidered in gold with the imperial bees.
The carriage containing the Imperial heir preceded that of the Emperor and Empress, the latter dressed in pale blue and wearing all the Crown diamonds, while the Emperor was in the uniform of a general of division.
Count Hubner thought that the Empress was ‘more beautiful than ever’, and Lord Cowley, the English ambassador, said: ‘I do not know that I ever witnessed a finer sight than the baptismal ceremonies.’
Prosper Mérimée, a long-time friend of Eugénie's family, wrote to her mother in Madrid:
The Empress was in great beauty…the Emperor also looked very impressive, and when after the ceremony he held up the child in his arms to present him to the multitude, the enthusiasm was genuine and great.
The City of Paris offered as its gift to the Prince a cradle which was fashioned in the shape of a Viking boat with the Imperial eagle at its prow, while above the infant's head the City of Paris, personified by a young woman, held aloft the Imperial crown.
The Pope's gift was a spray of golden flowers to complement the Golden Rose which he had sent to the Empress.
The infant Prince was entrusted to an English nurse, Miss Shaw, and until the age of eleven, apart from having a tutor he had no household of his own.
His gouverneur or chief guardian was General Frossard, but it was the wish of the Emperor and Empress that apart from obligatory public appearances, which were confined to a minimum, the child should grow up in a family atmosphere.
From 1867 onwards it became clear that the boy must begin to learn his métier as heir to the throne and so a small household was established.
Four aides-de-camp were appointed and apartments in the Tuileries were set aside for bedroom, study and play room.
These were situated on the first floor of the Pavillon de Flore which formed the angle of the Tuileries palace with the Quays and the Seine.
From his windows the Prince had views across the Pont Royal to the rue du Bac as well as those looking towards the Champs Elysées and the Arc de Triomphe.
As he grew older his favourite view was that of the omnibuses which descended the rue du Bac and crossed the Pont Royal, for it gave him a chance to see the people with whom, for most of the time, he was denied closer contact.
Years later, in exile, his former tutor, Augustin Filon, found him leaning against a window of the house in Chislehurst and asked him what he was looking at.
‘The omnibus coming down the rue du Bac,’ replied the young man.
As an only child, the Prince was fortunate in that his parents, in spite of their position and duties, maintained close contact with him.
When the Court was in residence at the Tuileries the child spent some hours every day with both his father and mother, usually in the Empress's  study, and during the periods of residence at Compiégne, Fontainebleau or Saint Cloud, he was with them most of the time.
From the age of eight onwards he was allowed to dine with his parents at the Bonaparte family dinners which took place every Monday at the Tuileries, and occasionally at more formal dinners which were held in the Galerie de Diane.
On Sundays, when various other children, sons of friends of the Imperial family, came to spend time with the Prince, the Emperor and Empress made a point of being with them, sometimes taking part in the plays which the children acted.
It may be, indeed, that their solicitude for the boy was slightly harmful, for the Prince was easily distracted from his studies to the extent that his tutor, Augustin Filon, later remarked: ‘It needed the effects of the revolution and exile in order to harden the Prince's will to work.’
What is clear is that behind the brilliance of the official Court there lay a core of family — one is tempted to say bourgeois — life, but this is not, of course, how the Second Empire is remembered, for few even of the courtiers were admitted to the intimacy of the Imperial family and the general public not at all .
It was one of the tragedies of the Second Empire that Napoleon III and Eugénie who were fond, perhaps over-fond, parents whose joy lay in their child, should be remembered not for their family virtues but for their public ‘vices’— real or supposed.
The Empress was held up to obloquy as an empty and frivolous woman while the Emperor was denounced as a degenerate debauchee, their only common interests being a desire for power and extravagant spectacle.
To some extent the very brilliance of the court life led by the sovereigns and its impact on public opinion was their undoing for the fête impériale is indelibly associated with them.
When the Empire collapsed this became a reproach, so that a deliberate policy designed to increase the prestige of France in the eyes of others was denounced as criminal extravagance.
‘A MAGNIFICENT COURT’
IN MARCH 1853 THE EARL OF MALMESBURY, recently Foreign Secretary in the cabinet of Lord Derby, paid a visit to Paris in a private capacity.
He had been a friend of the Emperor since the two had first met in Rome in 1829, a time when Malmesbury found him ‘a wild harum-scarum youth apparently without a serious thought of any kind’, who enjoyed galloping through the streets at full tilt on a fine thoroughbred.
The friendship continued between the two men, and indeed lasted until the Emperor's death in 1873, through all Louis-Napoleon's changes in fortune, providing Malmesbury with an entrée to French government circles whether in office or out of it.
He was thus in a position to observe closely not only the political reactions in Paris but also the establishment of the new Court.
On 20 March he had his first official invitation to dine at the Tuileries, where he was seated next to the Empress.
He found her:
…very handsome with a beautiful bust and shoulders and small hands and feet.
Hair auburn.
She spoke English easily, and talked to the Emperor in that language when they wished not to be understood.
This they did two or three times, forgetting my presence, and laughed heartily at the mistake.
After dinner the etiquette was very stiff, and we stood for two hours.
Clearly, serious efforts were being made to bring the new Court up to standard, though Malmesbury thought there was still a way to go before all would be consolidated:
Although the banquet and establishment of courtiers and servants was as splendid as possible, there was a feeling in the air which impressed me with the idea that the whole pageant might be ephemeral.
I cannot  explain this sentiment unless it was that I observed that the members of the household appeared not to have perfectly learned their parts and also that having seen and known the Emperor for so many years in such a totally different position, his present one looked like a dream or a play; but when each actor becomes acclimatized by time it will be a magnificent Court, with a Sovereign who will command the attention of all Europe.
But it was not going to be easy; some few years after Malmesbury's comments another accredited diplomat noted à propos of an evening at the Tuileries:
The whole of tonight's entertainment looked to me unreal, something like a banqueting scene of an opera, and I should not have been surprised to find the capon under my knife to consist of cardboard and my ‘goblet of sparkling wine’ full of emptiness with a rim of cotton wool to represent the foam of the champagne that was not there.
I fancy moreover that this feeling of unreality, which obtruded itself on me at intervals, exists permanently among the majority of the new Imperial household, and is not altogether absent from the minds of the Emperor and the Empress themselves though they play their roles with consummate skill and ease, particularly the Empress.
It was perhaps precisely because both sovereigns were well aware of the criticisms which might be made of their Court that in order to fulfil their public roles in accordance with the aims which they had set themselves, they worked to make of it a thing of great splendour.
As Lord Malmesbury had prophesied, it did become ‘a magnificent court’ which did indeed ‘command the attention of all Europe’.
Even such a jaundiced eye as that of the Austrian Ambassador, accustomed to the rigid etiquette which prevailed at Vienna, was charmed.
Of an official reception he wrote: ‘The magnificent room, the throne with Their Majesties, the number and brilliance of the uniforms, and the appearance of the ladies made an overwhelming impression.’
Count Hubner was referring specifically to the reception given for the members of the diplomatic corps on 1 January 1854, the first of these  occasions in which the Empress participated since her marriage.
It was also the first to be held since the redecoration of the Tuileries had restored the palace to its former splendour; this it had lost not only because it had been ransacked by the mob in 1848, but also because it had become shabby during the reign of Louis-Philippe.
In order to house his family the King had divided up many of the larger rooms, and the different floors had been connected by narrow spiral staircases which gave on to gloomy corridors badly lit by oil lamps.
There was virtually no comfort even in the royal apartments; none of the bathrooms had running water and everyone was forced to rely on servants whose sole duty it was to provide water for washing.
Given the miles of corridor which had to be traversed, this essential commodity left the kitchens boiling but often arrived either tepid or cold.
As a result of the major works carried out in 1853, supplemented by later improvements, the principal areas of the palace were now lit by gas, though this was augmented in the state apartments by huge crystal chandeliers.
Nevertheless, large areas of the Palace remained very ill-lit; servants who were responsible for the maintenance of the oil lamps, the only means of lighting the corridors and the small dark private staircases, were obliged to circulate day and night.
This was true even of the private apartments of the Imperial family, to such an extent that if the Emperor, while working late at night as he often did, wanted a book from his library, he had to take a lighted candle with him.
In spite, therefore, of the transformations, basic comfort was lacking.
Heating, for example, remained primitive; that is , there were open fires in the rooms except in the private Imperial apartments, where there was central heating.
Since the Emperor was always cold, he kept a fire burning in his own rooms even during the height of summer, so that ministers had to conduct business in an atmosphere of near suffocation.
When one recalls the Emperor's addiction to cigarettes — he was almost a chain-smoker — his rooms must have frequently appeared as places of torment to those who had business to transact there.
In the Imperial apartments, running water had been installed, but  this was the only place where it was to be found and all the other rooms were still dependent on the ministrations of servants.
In winter time the stoking of the fires required enormous quantities of wood, so that the Palace was filled with the constant coming and going of footmen, carriers of water or carriers of wood.
In this respect, of course, the Palace was no different from any other house of the period: It was simply a question of scale.
Contemporaries did note approvingly that attempts were made to keep it clean and well aired, which, it seems, had not always been the case in the days of Louis-Philippe.
Certainly the surroundings were more splendid, for the restoration had produced a rich décor of gilt and plush which reflected the over-ornate and eclectic taste of the period.
The furniture had all been renewed, upholstered for preference in red velvet, and in all the state rooms the great ceilings, which had become grimy through neglect, had been regilded and repainted.
One of these, the Salle des Maréchaux, the principal reception room whose first floor windows with their balcony gave on to the gardens (facing the Place de la took place within it could be watched by those who were not participating.
One of the Empress's Dames du palais , Mme de Carette, wrote of it:
The gilded cupola of the ceiling was supported by groups of caryatids and by trophies.
The panels were decorated with the portraits of the twelve Marshals of the First Empire, in their splendid uniforms; the tall windows were hung with red velvet draperies with golden fringes and they seemed but tiny openings in the enormous room.
It was here that the great receptions and gala balls took place, though it was not the setting for the traditional New Year's ambassadorial reception as described by Hubner, which was that of the Throne part played by the Empress, since this was her first appearance at such a function and it thus enables us to observe her on an occasion of high formality:
At nine o'clock the diplomatic corps gathered in the Salle de Louis XIV, next to the Throne Room, through which the Court passed in front of the diplomats and their wives.
Their Majesties mount the platform and remain standing under a canopy, having on their right the ministers, marshals, admirals and the Court officers; on their left are the Empress's ladies and facing them, the diplomatic body.
Everybody being assembled, the presentation of the ladies begins.
Mme Fould (wife of the Minister of State) at their head, they pass one by one before the Empress, dragging after them enormous trains and making their (more or less) deep curtsies.
The Princess d'Essling (Grand Mistress of the Empress's Household), who has great presence, calls out each name to Her Majesty.
When one thinks that in France the present generation has seen neither court gowns nor a ceremony of this sort and that, with very few exceptions, the ladies of high society do not come to the Tuileries, one is struck by the fact that everything should pass off so well and without lending itself to too much mockery.
There was one general's wife who looked like a peasant in disguise and another woman whose get-up produced ill-concealed mirth among the assembly, but an icy glance from the Empress soon punished us for it.
Eugénie had not long been an Empress, but she had always been a grandee of Spain, with all that implied in pride and good breeding.
She was certainly unlikely to be amused by ill-bred behaviour on the part of those who undoubtedly held themselves to be among Europe's finest aristocratic stock.
Well aware that before their present position both she and the Emperor would have been officially designated by the sclerotic European courts as ‘other persons who might be invited’, Eugénie had no hesitation in squashing what she considered to be behaviour unsuitable for the Court of Napoleon III, where ‘other persons’ were to be received with dignity and no hint of condescension.
Once official Court life had begun on 1 January with the reception for the foreign ambassadors, its high points between New Year and the beginning of Lent were the four Court balls, to which as many as four or five thousand guests would be invited.
The last ball preceding Lent coincided with Carnival and was generally a fancy dress affair.
It was at one of these that the Empress was provoked into a comment at the expense of  her husband's current favourite, the Countess of Castiglione, who had appeared at the ball dressed as the Queen of Hearts.
The identifying symbols had been placed all over her dress, and included one in an area which seemed anatomically surprising.
Congratulating the lady on the originality of her costume, the Empress added: ‘I notice that this evening the heart seems slightly lower than usual.’
This particular comment was too good to be kept secret and so did the rounds of Parisian society, but in general what everyone remembered about these gala occasions was the sheer splendour of it all, to which the guests themselves contributed by the richness of their uniforms or, in the case of civilians, the elegance of the men and the style of the women.
The guests normally included the Ministers, members of the Senate and the Legislative Body, generals and admirals together with other high-ranking officers and any visiting prefects or Mayors.
The foreigners resident in Paris were represented not only by their Ambassadors but frequently by non-official persons who had access to the Court, such as the American socialite Lillie Moulton.
She was impressed by her first state ball in January 1863, and wrote enthusiastically:
At the top of the staircase various Chamberlains, dressed in gold embroidered jackets, welcomed the guests and led them to the Grand Master of Ceremonies.
He passed them on to another colleague who led us finally to our places which were kept for us in the Grand Salon .
At one end stood the Imperial Throne over which hung a purple baldaquin at the top of which was a golden Imperial eagle.
Of the Empress on that evening she wrote:
I was overwhelmed by her beauty and the charm of her whole being; her beautiful skin, the tilt of her head, her marvellous shoulders produced the most perfectly harmonious picture.
She wore a ravishing dress of white tulle with a wide skirt embroidered with little knots of red velvet.
Around her neck she wore the famous ‘Regent’, the diamond beyond compare in its beauty which is part of the Crown jewels, while on her head sparkled a magnificent tiara.
Another American, Dr Evans, who was the Imperial dentist, was also  frequently invited together with his wife.
Often visitors to Paris used the good offices of their embassies or legations to procure an invitation, for on these occasions there were no formal presentations to the Emperor or the Empress, except for the Ambassadors and their wives.
The guests assembled in the Salle des Maréchaux, what Mme Moulton described as ‘the Grand Salon’, and at nine o'clock a small procession entered consisting of the Court officers, all in their evening costume of blue with velvet collars, followed by several attendants and then, in the middle, the Emperor and Empress.
Napoleon III wore the uniform of a general of division, suitably garnished with crosses and plaques, while Eugénie wore a dress either of velvet, satin or moiré silk, usually in one of her favourite colours, blue, white, or mauve.
Her jewels, since this was a Court ball, consisted of the Crown diamonds, including the famous tiara.
Having saluted the Ambassadors, who stood in a circle next to the door leading from the Galerie de Diane to the Salle des Maréchaux, the Emperor and Empress entered the Ballroom and mounted the dais which was set aside for them.
This raised area had chairs for the Prince and Princess Napoleon and Princess Mathilde in recognition of their rank as Princes français , as well as the two Imperial armchairs.
On reaching her place the Empress made three curtsies to the assembled company, at that moment the orchestra began a waltz and the ball was officially opened.
The Court left for supper at eleven o'clock and at midnight the Emperor and the Empress retired, leaving their guests to continue the ball.
Less crowded and more sought after than these official Court balls were the Empress's ‘Mondays’, known as the petits bals du lundi , which were held in the Salon Bleu of her own apartments.
On this occasion guests could use all the other rooms in Eugénie's suite, except for her library and study, and the atmosphere was easier and more agreeable because the number of guests was limited to five or six hundred:
Nothing could be more elegant or more brilliant than these smaller gatherings where the best of Parisian society could be found.
We had, above all, time to amuse ourselves without the problems imposed by the huge crowds at the State balls.
Those were for us a real burden.
For these evenings the Empress dressed more simply and the Emperor  wore the uniform of his own Household — blue coat, white breeches and white silk stockings.
Until the death of her sister, the Duchess of Alba, in 1860, Eugénie would herself occasionally waltz with her husband at these ‘Mondays’, but from 1860 onwards she rarely danced in public except as a duty.
When one considers the brilliance of the Court, the remark by Count Hubner that ‘ladies of high society do not come to the Tuileries’ perhaps needs some clarification.
He was of course referring to the members of the Legitimist aristocracy, still loyal to ‘Henry V’, the last of the elder Bourbon line, the grandson of Charles X who had been deposed by the Revolution of 1830 and who lived in exile at Frohsdorf in Bohemia.
Since the Revolution of 1830, this group had lived in a sort of internal emigration, rejoicing in the fall of one usurper and awaiting with undiminished confidence the inevitable departure of his successor.
They whiled away the years by maintaining salons in which the gibes against the ruling house were repeated, or had their origins, for even in such aristocratic surroundings wit was often confused with bad taste.
Attacks on Eugénie reached such a pitch that they provoked one lady to remark: ‘This unfortunate Empress has been so dragged through the mud that one feels almost compelled to defend her — on grounds of Christian charity alone.’
Shame, it is said, frequently leads to repentance, but the pious and noble ladies of the Faubourg Saint Germain seem, in this instance at least, not to have sought avidly for grace.
For such people any contact with the Court would have been the ultimate in defilement — though it should be noted that some of the husbands showed less scruple in accepting governmental places, even to the extent of standing for elections and taking the oath of loyalty to the Emperor and the Constitution.
By the middle of the reign, that is to say by 1860, 25 members of the Senate, a body nominated by the Emperor, were all members of the Old Nobility and included three dukes.
There were fewer in Court circles, though even here some took up appointments on the grounds that they were serving France and not the dynasty.
The effect of this was to make the personnel of the Court of Napoleon III somewhat heterogeneous, for many of the Orléanist nobility were prepared to use the Tuileries, consoling themselves with the thought  that the Emperor's half-brother, the Duke de Morny, was held still to be faithful to Orléanist principles.
Whatever these principles might mean in terms of constitutional or political structures, they had not implied an undying devotion to the House of Orléans, as Louis-Philippe's departure had proved.
It was not too surprising, therefore, that one of the King, s former ministers, the Count of Lezay-Marnésia, should allow his daughter to become one of the Empress's ladies, though he could not have known that his gesture would be immortalized, for she is one of those who figure in the famous painting by Winterhalter (now in the Musée National du Chateau de Compiègne).
In spite of this handful of ‘collaborators’, it was nevertheless inevitable that the majority of those serving in the Imperial household should be drawn from among the families which had been connected with the First Empire.
These people might indeed be said to have had a right to move once again centre stage, and so it is hardly surprising to find among them the great names of the first Napoleonic age.
The Grand Mistress of the Empress's Household was the Princess d'Essling (daughter of a general and married into the family of Marshal Masséna), who discharged her duties with a detached severity.
One of the Empress's ladies, the young Marie de Larminat, afterwards Countess des Garets, found the Princess awe-inspiring:
I have never seen anyone so completely absorbed in their role.
I do not know whether she had a heart or a soul or whether she could be moved by emotion; she was simply the Grand Mistress!
Her looks, her rare smiles, her attitude, her curtsies, the least remark — all were stamped with the dignity of her position.
She was, as well, a woman above reproach, avoiding involvement in all intrigues, keeping everyone at a distance and thus surrounded by universal esteem.
In her presence, no one ever indulged in either frivolous remarks or risqué conversation.
The Princess proved to be fitted for her post by her loyalty as well as her dignity, for she remained with the Empress until the end came on the morning of 4 September 1870, leaving her mistress only when so commanded.
Equally loyal and effective was the Lady-in-Waiting, the Duchess de Bassano, whose husband was Grand Chamberlain of the Court, and whose devotion to their sovereigns was such that they followed them into exile, remaining faithful unto death.
In overall charge of the Empress's Household was her Grand Master, General Count Tascher de la Pagerie, descendant of the family of the Empress Josephine, who had under his control the five court chamberlains plus a private secretary and a librarian.
As dames du palais , that is, ladies-in-waiting in the sense in which we would understand it, there were, in addition to the Countess of Lezay-Marnésia, the Duchess of Montebello, the Marchioness de Latour-Maubourg, the Baroness de Pierres (born Miss Thorne, an American), the Marquesa de Las Marismas (of the Aguado family), the Baroness Malaret and the Countess de la Poeze.
They are all to be seen with the Empress in the Winterhalter portrait.
Later on they would be joined or replaced by others whose services were equally important but who came too late to be captured on canvas.
Fortunately, two of these ladies, Mme de Carette and the Countess des Garets, have left their memoirs, which are invaluable contributions to the understanding not only of how the Court functioned but also how the Imperial couple lived on a daily basis when they were not on show.
Those who imagined that Napoleon III and his consort lived in a sort of perpetual Bacchanal would have been sadly disappointed by the reality, for off stage their life-style was as sedate as that of Victoria and Albert.
The Imperial family lived in the southern wing of the Tuileries, that is, between the Pavillon de l'Horloge and the Seine facing the Pont Royal.
The Emperor's apartments were on the ground floor and included as well as his bedroom those rooms set aside for work, for it was from here that Napoleon III governed.
Emile Ollivier, who was to move from a position of intelligent opposition to that of head of the last real ministry of the Empire, describes the apartments thus:
At the back of the imperial suite, on the ground floor, is situated the Emperor's enormous bedroom: on both sides of the bed are hung paintings of King Louis and Queen Hortense.
To the right in a sort of small chest, rather like a retable, is the reliquary of Charlemagne (the relic of the True Cross), the talisman which ensures the power of Empire to its  possessor.
Then comes an ante-room in which there is a staircase which gives access to the Empress's apartments, then comes the room where the Emperor's Chef de cabinet works, within call of the Emperor, whose own study and work room adjoin it…
The Emperor has access (to the room where the Council of Ministers meet) by going through two rooms, one of which is a library and the other containing a table on which are placed newspapers, documents, etc.
Of the rooms described by Ollivier, the most important was the Emperor's study.
There is a watercolour of this by Fortuné de Fournier, and so it is one of the few smaller but important rooms of the Tuileries of which we have a record.
It was dominated by three things; the Emperor's desk, a vast filing cabinet, and a large-scale map of Paris — the latter being essential to his plans for the transformation of the city.
It had been presented to him by the City of Paris and on it were traced the lines of the new streets and boulevards which Napoleon III had worked out in conjunction with Baron Haussmann.
Other walls had a map of Europe and a map of the world.
This was essentially a room for transacting business, though if Fournier's picture is reliable, the Emperor seems to have sat at an inconvenient height at his desk in a small chair, covered in green plush, so low that once seated in it, writing must have been difficult.
It was here that Napoleon spent his working day when in residence at the Tuileries and from this study France was governed, for, as his ministers knew: ‘The Emperor had no reason to fear that anyone doubted that he reigned; he was even more anxious that they should know that he ruled.’
Because of this, wherever the Emperor was, there also was the government, so that when the Court moved, changes of residence did not in any way affect the running of the Empire.
This was made easier by the fact that all the Imperial residences, with the exception of the small Villa Eugénie at Biarritz, were within easy reach of Paris and all of them were on a direct railway line to the capital.
On the first floor of the Tuileries, immediately above those of the Emperor, were the Empress's apartments.
Access was, for the visitor, via a staircase which opened to the right of the main entrance to the  Palace by the Pavillon de l'Horloge.
There were three reception rooms; the first, known as the Salon Vert because of the overall green motifs in its furnishings and decorations, was occupied by the Chamberlains and the Ladies in Attendance.
Then came an ante-chamber, the Salon Rose, and finally the audience chamber or Salon Bleu.
When not used for special audiences this room served as a drawing room for the Empress's ladies and was decorated with portraits of the ‘friends’ of the Empress, among them the Countess Walewska, the Duchess de Morny and the Countess de Noailles.
The Salon Bleu marked the end of the public apartments, for beyond lay the Empress's study, her library, and her bedroom, off which was a small oratory.
The study was somewhat cluttered with furniture and around the walls were various glass cases in which Eugénie kept her treasured possessions.
In an alcove, which could be shut off from the main room, near a window, was a small writing table which the Empress used for writing her personal letters.
On it were small framed photographs of the Emperor, the Prince Imperial, her sister and her mother, as well as other friends and relations.
By the fireplace, there was what was known as a ‘Turkish corner’, protected by a screen, in which the Empress normally sat either to read or to talk informally with someone who had come to see her.
Between the study and the library was the small spiral staircase which led directly to the Emperor's apartments, a staircase she was to climb on 3 September 1870, clutching in her hand the telegram announcing the capitulation at Sedan and crying out in grief at the horror of it.
In better days, however, it merely served to guarantee the privacy of the sovereigns and as a diversion for the Prince Imperial who enjoyed running up and down it when he came to play with his parents.
The library was a room which the Empress used constantly, for she was all her life an avid reader.
All the volumes were bound in dark morocco leather and stamped with an ‘E’ surmounted by the Imperial crown.
Her enemies implied that Eugénie read nothing but novels or lightweight ‘feminine’ books, but in fact her library revealed an interest in science and philosophy, though history predominated.
The  Empress once remarked to Emile Ollivier that she was well aware of her reputation ‘as someone who read only novels’, but added: ‘It doesn't really bother me.’
She had long since decided that, in her own words, ‘legend always triumphs over historical fact’.
Napoleon III: ‘An echo of the mighty Emperor, but an infinitely better man’(G.P. Gooch).
Prince Napoleon (Plon-Plon), the turbulent cousin.
The Prince Imperial, July 1870.
The Prince Imperial aged twenty-two, 1877.
Paris under reconstruction: part of the Boulevard Magenta, the link between the Gares du Nord and de l'Est, 1863.
L'Opéra: the last great architectural achievement of the Empire.
Beyond the library was a huge dressing room which contained the Empress's bath, used formerly by both Marie-Antoinette and the Empress Marie-Louise, which led directly to her bedroom.
This was actually smaller than the dressing room but was richly furnished and lit by a large crystal chandelier.
Next to the bed, on a small table, stood the Golden Rose sent by the Pope in 1856 to mark the birth of the Prince Imperial.
It had a curious history, for it miraculously survived the destruction of the Tuileries and turned up at Chislehurst in 1871 by unknown means.
Eugénie kept it with her in her house at Farnborough Hill until her death in 1920 and on her death she bequeathed it to the Abbey she had founded to house the tombs of the Emperor and the Prince Imperial.
It remained as one of the Abbey's treasures until it was stolen some years ago.
In her private apartments the Empress dressed simply, usually in black, with few or no jewels, for contrary to public belief, she was not particularly fond of clothes and dressed up only when her role demanded it.
The use of silk in large quantities, such as, for example , in the crinoline, was the result of a petition sent to the Empress by the silk workers of Lyons asking her to help maintain the output of the French silk industry and not because Eugénie wished to overdress.
In this, as in other matters, the private desires of the woman had always to yield to the duties imposed on the sovereign.
Residence at the Tuileries imposed on the Imperial family a pattern of life in which rare moments of private relaxation alternated with the exhausting obligations of public ceremonial.
It is little wonder, therefore, that during those parts of the year which were spent at Saint Cloud, Compiègne or Fontainebleau the emphasis should have been placed on greater informality.
Most informal of all were the periods spent at the Villa Eugénie at Biarritz, the house built by the Emperor for his wife at what was then a small fishing port which she had known long before her marriage.
Here everyone lived  en famille ; there were swimming parties, excursions by boat, and in the evening charades or drawing-room dances.
Eugénie loved the sea and was a strong swimmer even though at Biarritz she found that ‘the sea was very cold and it required great strength of mind to get in’.
While Eugénie swam, the Emperor, in later years accompanied by his son, walked on the beach — like any bourgeois couple at the seaside.
Eugénie always held Biarritz in special affection and it was a source of great pleasure to her when in 1880 she managed to recover the furniture from the Villa which she installed in her house in Farnborough.
If Biarritz represented the high point of informality, Saint Cloud and Fontainebleau were mid-way.
Both were summer residences, Saint Cloud being occupied in May and July, with Fontainebleau the favourite retreat for the month of June.
As the reign progressed the Imperial family became increasingly attached to the palace of Saint Cloud.
Residence here had always had a holiday atmosphere, since formality and etiquette were kept to a minimum and it was possible to relax.
Saint Cloud, situated on a hill dominating Paris, to which it was linked by a railway branch line which came right to the park of the palace, was certainly the — most delightful of all the Imperial properties.
It was surrounded by a splendid park, and its superb gardens ornamented with fountains and a magnificent cascade made of it a cool and airy summer residence.
It was away from the heat of Paris, yet close enough to enable the ministers to travel there without difficulty for the twice weekly Council meetings.
Since these took place only while the Chambers were in session, normally until mid-June, there were periods of leisurely days when the sovereigns could live quietly in a family atmosphere.
Except for rare official engagements there was no fixed routine such as existed at Compiègne, Fontainebleau or the Tuileries.
Both parents were able to devote a great deal of time to their son, walking with him in the park or going for carriage drives, sometimes as far as La Malmaison, for which Napoleon III had a special affection because of its links with his mother and grandmother.
Though always happy at Saint Cloud, the Emperor had a weakness  for the great palace of Fontainebleau, perhaps because of its associations with Napoleon I. Because of the magnificence of the palace it was impossible to live a quiet family life and so June was a month of great social activity, a sort of informal summer Court, at which was to be found the glittering society so indelibly associated with the regime.
The guests were given great freedom of movement, with etiquette reduced to a minimum, so that the whole affair had the air of a country house party in magnificent surroundings.
The enormous park was a source of delight to most visitors — though not all — for sometimes the Empress, an indefatigable walker, would set off with a group of people to tramp through the grounds, occasionally going part of the way in a carriage.
The Countess des Garets, in attendance on the Empress, dreaded these outings, for
…as soon as the Empress saw a place which was totally wild with virtually unclimbable rocks everyone got out of the carriage and she set out, armed with a stout walking stick, to beat a path over huge rocks, clumps of juniper bushes, enormous ferns as high as shrubs.
It was quite a sight to see the poor ladies who accompanied her, some of them quite stout, being pushed from behind or dragged from the front over these obstacles while the Empress laughed like a child to see their stricken faces and the piteous condition of their coiffures.
Not surprisingly, the Emperor preferred rowing quietly on the lake to scrambling up and down rocks, though sometimes both sovereigns would organize excursions, taking their guests in carriages on more decorous visits to the surrounding countryside.
Above all, use was made of the great lake in front of the palace, the famous Étang des Carpes , where some of the fish were reputed to have been swimming since the days of Francis I. All sorts of pleasure boats were at the disposal of the guests, ranging from a Venetian gondola to a miniature frigate of the French navy — the latter the pride and joy of the Prince Imperial.
The Princess Pauline Metternich, wife of the Austrian Ambassador, was a friend of the Empress and a frequent visitor at all the Imperial residences, but she preferred Fontainebleau because to her:
…nothing could equal the artistic splendour of its architecture and the beauty of its interiors…
Meals were taken in the large Galerie Henri II (and) the sight of the table in this splendid room was overwhelming…
Lunch was at midday as at Compiégne…and after dinner everyone went down to the garden, often entertaining themselves with boating on the lake, where all sorts of little craft, even a Venetian gondola with an authentic Venetian gondolier, was provided for the guests…
The Empress was particularly fond of the gondola and often spent an hour drifting about on the water accompanied by one of her guests.
At the end of the lake, furthest from the palace, was a small kiosk accessible only by water, where one evening Prosper Mérimée read poetry aloud to the Empress and her companions.
Rumour had it that on a less poetic occasion the Emperor had visited the pavilion accompanied only by Mme Walewska, his current favourite, embarking in a small rowing boat and returning with the lady only after a considerable lapse of time.
Most evenings at Fontainebleau were, however, marked by innocent pastimes; charades or parlour games with occasional improvised dancing to a tune picked out on a piano.
In the sixties a mechanical piano was added to the furniture of the Empress's drawing room, the famous Salon Chinois in which was displayed a portion of the loot which the French army had acquired when the Summer Palace at Peking had been sacked.
It was here that the young people danced to the sound of the ‘Blue Danube’ or the famous ‘Valse des Roses’by Offenbach.
At nine-thirty tea was served in the next room and conversation went on for a long time, above all if Mérimée or Octave Feuillet (the novelist who was librarian at Fontainebleau) were seated next to the Empress.
If by chance there were no illustrious literary figures to listen to, everyone went to bed early.
Lillie Moulton was invited to Fontainebleau in August 1866 on a day of ‘intolerable heat in a crowded train which made for a highly unpleasant journey’.
She and her husband were met at the station by a small open carriage which took them to the palace.
(There)‘we were met by the Viscount Walsh (Chamberlain of the Emperor) who led us to  the apartment of the Baroness de Pierres (ex Miss Thorne of New York) who is now a lady-in-waiting to the Empress’.
Poor Madame Moulton found that Princess Metternich had acquired a quantity of corn on the cob which she had persuaded the Empress to have cooked and served so that Mme Moulton could give a demonstration of how it should be eaten.
There is, of course, no elegant way to accomplish this and the poor woman was greeted with gales of laughter when she picked up her cob and began to eat.
The Emperor, who hated to see anyone embarrassed publicly, saved the day by rising to propose a toast ‘To the maize of America’.
Thus honour was saved and general good humour restored.
Although the atmosphere at Fontainebleau was much more relaxed than that of the Tuileries, it still presented problems for the sovereigns in that guests had to be entertained.
No matter how simple the programme, it still needed to be organized, and in such a way as not to give offence by seeming to slight a guest.
Each one had to be made to feel that they were noticed, for as Eugénie said, it is not so much that Princes are surrounded by flatterers as that they themselves must be ever ready to flatter others:
(Princes) do not have the right to say that they find the books dedicated to them atrocious or that the music which they play for them scorches their ears…
All the young girls are pretty, all the dresses are fashionable, all the artists are talented.
Princes are always reduced to banal and generalized admiration.
While Fontainebleau played an important part in the seasonal round of Court life, Compiègne was, and has remained, the Imperial residence most clearly identified with the Second Empire.
Here took place the famous séries, five to a season, each one lasting eight days, when 80 guests were invited at a time and it was in the drawing up of these guest lists that the Empress deployed all her social skills.
The groups were selected in such a way that each should contain a fairly equal proportion of aristocrats, diplomats, artists, men of letters and distinguished academics.
All of these had to be mixed with a suitable quota of pretty and elegant women to form some sort of homogeneous  gathering, so that the guests would, after a fashion, entertain themselves as well as be entertained.
As always in such an undertaking, the art of organization lay in the avoidance of offending those who were not asked at a particular moment and in the ability to remember enmities and jealousies which could cause friction and poison the atmosphere if the wrong people found themselves together.
This meant that the guest lists had to be scrutinized with great care and it required considerable awareness on the part of Eugénie to be able to decide who would match with whom.
The guests having been selected, there then came the problem of allocating rooms, since those who were jealous of their rank or susceptible to imaginary slights set great store by the nature of their accommodation within the Palace.
In fairness it should be added that for the female guests the question of rooms was as much an affair of space as of rank, since many arrived with anything up to 25 pieces of luggage, clear proof that at Compiègne, unlike Fontainebleau, style played a primary role.
By chance a list of dresses taken by Mme Moulton to Compiègne has survived and it gives a very good idea of what was expected to be worn.
The desire to outshine others provoked extravagance, such as that shown by a Marquise who wrote to a friend: ‘I have been invited to Compiègne for a week so I have sold a mill!’
Once arrived, the guests found themselves, for most of the time at least, caught up in a ritual of entertainment which was so smoothly organized as to be unnoticeable and, given the Empress's indefatigable energy, so tiring as to eliminate any possibility of boredom.
Many guests indeed complained not of ennui but of exhaustion brought on by accompanying Eugénie while she scampered up and down rocks, or by long walks and excursions in the area around the palace which took place most days after lunch.
A favourite outing was to the nearby medieval castle of Pierrefonds, which the Emperor had given his wife as a present and which was being restored by the architect Viollet-le-Duc.
If the weather was poor the Empress organized rehearsals for the play to be performed in the Palace Theatre, in which it was customary to allot roles to some of the guests.
At five o'clock tea was served to the Empress and about 20 of her guests, the groups being so organized that in the course of a week all of them enjoyed this privilege, thus avoiding  any outbursts of jealousy or recrimination.
In view of the afternoon's exertions, tea-time must have been a difficult moment for tired guests, for as Princess Metternich noted: ‘The Empress's teas seemed to us a little drawn out and I must frankly admit that we preferred to take it in our own rooms by the fire with our friends while smoking a quiet cigarette.
One imagines that not a few may actually have seized the opportunity to indulge in a quiet sleep in preparation for the evening stint, for the dinner was formal and the occasion for full ceremonial.
At seven o'clock all the guests assembled in an ante-room known as the Salle des fêtes , to await the arrival of the Imperial couple who were announced by the Grand Chamberlain.
The Emperor wore his Court dress of black coat decorated with the sash and star of the Légion d'honneur , white culottes courtes and white silk stockings.
The Empress wore an evening dress, usually of rich material, a tiara of diamonds and a collier of pearls.
On arriving in the Salle des fêtes , the Emperor bowed to the assembled guests and then made a rapid tour of the room finding a word for each of them; the Empress, having made her famous curtsy, did likewise until the tournée was complete.
The Grand Marshal then led the procession headed by the Imperial couple to the dining room.
This was quite a journey since the guests were obliged to traverse a large anteroom, the room occupied by the Cent-Gardes on duty, plus several other large rooms before reaching their destination.
The whole route was lined by men of the Cent-Gardes, whose immobility was such that according to one guest ‘they might have been statues’, but she felt unable to study them in detail, so terrified was she of slipping on the highly polished parquet that her whole mind was fixed on arriving safely at the dining room.
Dinner lasted one hour and, in spite of the impeccable and rapid service, guests were often caught in mid-mouthful when the Emperor and Empress rose to signal the end of the meal.
Everyone then processed back to the Salle des fêtes , where coffee was served; the Emperor left shortly afterwards to go to his study, where he could smoke his cigarette; the male guests who shared his habit were allowed to retire to the smoking room, while the Empress remained behind with the ladies.
The whole company reassembled towards nine-thirty and it was then the moment for charades, a theatrical performance, or dancing to  the sound of a mechanical piano — the handle being turned feverishly by one of the Court chamberlains.
The banality of this latter type of entertainment is said to have once provoked Napoleon III to remark: ‘Great God; they talk about the debauchery of the Court; they should be sentenced to an evening like this.’
All courts had their stretches of boredom, even that of the Second Empire, in spite of its reputation for brilliance and verve, though habitués of other royal palaces found the French Court infinitely preferable to those of other European sovereigns.
In a double-edged compliment, a form in which she excelled, Princess Pauline Metternich attributed this to the fact that Eugènie ‘was a woman of the world who became an Empress’ and therefore knew how to deal with disparate groups of people, many of whom had no experience of Court life or etiquette.
This may well be true, but it is clear that the somewhat unorthodox background of the Emperor himself was probably a factor.
Napoleon III in his capacity as sovereign had great personal dignity as well as charm, but as an individual his knowledge of human beings and their behaviour set him apart from other European monarchs, whose more cloistered and conventional upbringing had given them a less perceptive outlook on people.
The Emperor knew not only how to rule; he knew how to please.
PARIS: IMPERIAL CITY
‘THIS CITY DOES NOT BELONG TO A PEOPLE, but to peoples…the human race has a right to Paris.
France, with perfect detachment, understands this.’
So wrote Victor Hugo in 1867 in a guide book to Paris, thereby paying tribute to his enemy Napoleon III, for it was he who was in the process of transforming the city.
From the moment he had come to power, Napoleon III had made it plain that for him the problem of Paris was not simply one of creating prosperity for its inhabitants; rather it was one of transforming and embellishing the city in such a way as to make life better for its inhabitants while simultaneously making it worthy of the new France.
Paris would become a European capital to which all would look with envy and a desire to emulate its splendours.
Much of this he was to achieve, though he received little thanks for it from the Parisians who, in large part, remained hostile to the regime.
During his reign successive elections resulted in the defeat of governmental candidates by supporters of the opposition groups, either Republicans or Orléanists, looking to the future or the past but united in dislike of Bonapartism.
The Emperor, in sorrow rather than anger, deplored the perversity of the Parisians, but he was enough man of the world to know that gratitude is a scarce commodity, and the Parisian populace, professionally sceptic, had no regard for Imperial philanthropy.
What hostility did not do was deflect him from his purpose, so that by the time the regime fell in 1870 Paris had been altered for ever and bore the mark of Napoleon III.
This ‘Imperial city’ remained virtually intact until the great remodelling which began in the 1950s, and even today the basic outlines of the Emperor's plan remain.
While the Emperor's personal determination counted for a great deal in the redevelopment of Paris, the transformation was really made  possible by the general upsurge in the French economy which took place after 1850.
Indeed it was this economic growth which made the Second Empire so important for 19th- and even 20th-century France.
The regime would scarcely have been considered noteworthy, nor Napoleon III a remarkable sovereign, if all that had been achieved was the creation of a brilliant Court which succeeded in outshining those of the traditional European monarchies.
The Emperor, however, had not sought power simply in order to dazzle contemporaries with spectacle, but rather with the aim of putting France in the forefront of general progress and restoring her to what he considered to be her rightful place in Europe.
In furtherance of this goal the new regime immediately set about the modernization of the economy and the expansion of commerce, for Napoleon III, like most contemporaries, was convinced that the strength of Britain, the dominant power of the era, lay in her financial and commercial soundness.
Using Britain as an example, Napoleon III and the economists who advised him believed that the introduction of free trade would help to strengthen the French economy, since only by opening up French industry to greater competition would it be galvanized into accepting new methods of production.
In preparation for this, the first decade of the regime was devoted to the development of the infrastructure, in particular the railways and canals, so that by 1860 France had reached a point where it was felt she was capable of competing with the greatest economic power of the age.
The signing of the Free Trade Treaty of 1860 with Britain was as much an act of faith as of policy, for it created great opposition among French industrialists, but the faith was justified in that the economy, deprived of its protective barriers, continued to grow and expand.
The steady economic growth and the increasing level of wealth which it generated led to an expansion of commerce whose effects were visible throughout the whole of France, but nowhere more so than in the capital, making it more and more a commercial as well as a political centre.
Traditionally, Paris had always been in economic terms artisanal; the average manufactory employed no more than three or four people, usually engaged in the long-established trades of furniture making or of printing, and factory industry was a rarity.
Male employees predominated, though  some women were to be found, poorly paid, in these occupations; but the greater proportion were established, unsurprisingly, in the world of dressmaking and domestic service.
However, the industrial growth which took place throughout France changed the traditional patterns of work in Paris as elsewhere, and the introduction of machinery led to the establishment in the city of sugar refining, dyeing, and — around the railway yards — engineering.
The actual physical growth of the city helped this process, for many newer industries had been established in areas which lay outside the official boundaries but which became incorporated into the municipal administrative areas by the 1860s.
While it appears beyond dispute that ‘a massive immigration and a strong economic upsurge (meant that) all sections of the economy profited from this growth’, Paris nevertheless remained during the whole of the period an area in which ‘hand industry’ predominated; it was a capital associated with the production of articles of high fashion and luxury goods rather than a centre of heavy industry.
In whatever form it took, the economic health and prosperity of Paris was of fundamental importance to all French governments, as the revolutions of 1830 and 1848 had proved, since both were associated with hard times for the mass of the population.
Given the turbulent nature of the city's politics, even in good times, its well-being and contentment needed to be given careful attention and the city's problems were being exacerbated by the continual and rapid growth of its population.
Between 1831 and 1870 the number of inhabitants rose from 833,000 to 2,000,000, an increase due mainly to immigration from the provinces, for within the city marriages were few and late.
In the 1860s, for example, 70 per cent of men between 21 and 36 years of age were bachelors and this by choice, for the ratio of men to women was virtually equal.
This meant that there were few domestic circles, particularly among the poorer classes, a factor which tended to increase social and political instability, as well as provoking problems of housing.
This last was exacerbated by the overcrowding which existed in the old, foetid and disease-ridden central area, where cholera made sudden savage attacks and typhoid was endemic.
Convinced that no amount of prosperity could compensate for appalling living  conditions, Napoleon II resolved to sweep away this insalubrious heartland in order to create light, air, cleanliness and ease of movement.
Other regimes had made tentative steps towards amelioration; what distinguished the Emperor's plan from the preceding ones was its all-over view of the problem — urbanization based on urban planning.
The man who associated himself with the Imperial ideas, and who remains for ever identified with them, was Baron Haussmann.
Born a Parisian, in 1809, Haussmann came of protestant stock from Alsace.
His father had been an officer in the armies of Napoleon I and thanks to his maternal grandfather, General Dentzel, he had as his godfather Prince Eugène Beauharnais, the uncle of Napoleon III.
An administrative career, and after 1848 his Bonapartist background, had led him in 1852 to the important prefectorate of Bordeaux, where he had hosted the famous reception in November of that year at which Louis-Napoleon in the course of his official speech had virtually inaugurated the Empire.
He was transferred in 1853 to the prefectorate of the Department of the Seine, which included Paris, and he remained there until 1870; for the whole of this period he remained the Emperor's man, charged with executing his master's projects and doing them quickly.
In 1840 Louis-Napoleon had written: ‘The Napoleonic Idea only attaches importance to concrete things; it despises useless words.
The measures which others discuss for ten years, it carries out in one.’
Allowing for exaggeration, it is nevertheless true to say that the Emperor lived up to the Idea in so far as the re-ordering of Paris was concerned.
The speed with which immense transformations took place became legendary — and an occasion for wry humour; a cartoon of the period shows a respectable man looking at a heap of rubble and saying: ‘But this is where I live and I can't even find my wife.’
The Emperor provided the will and the authority; Haussmann carried out the schemes for which the stability of the regime, linked to its economic growth and prosperity, provided the money.
Faced with the crisis of inner city decay, for that was really the problem of mid-19th century Paris, many of today's governments could wish for so favourable a conjuncture.
Once the decision had been taken, no time was wasted in defining the areas of the city to be dealt with and in actually measuring  the ground, for Haussmann's first task was to draw up a plan of Paris measured to an exact scale.
Parisians saw the shape of things to come in the wooden triangulation towers which were set up throughout the city.
As soon as the area had been measured and surveyed, the work of cutting the new streets through the old teeming and tortuous maze of the centre had never before been attempted on such a scale, though Christopher Wren had made such a plan for 17th-century London.
There was one great and essential difference, however, between Haussmann and Wren; the Great Fire of 1666 had given the English architect a head-start when it came to demolition of existing buildings.
In Paris Haussmann had no such tabula rasa , so that demolition meant displacement of established communities, a circumstance which gave rise to bitter complaints, many justified, by those caught in the upheaval, as well as a great deal of sordid speculation by those who could buy run-down property cheaply and sell dear for compensation.
In an attempt to keep the line of the proposed new streets a secret, only two copies of the map delineating the routes existed, one in the Emperor's study at the Tuileries and the other kept by Haussmann.
But so vast was the scale of the enterprise and to a certain extent so obvious the direction of the streets, that it was difficult to prevent would-be profiteers from benefiting.
The basic plan was simple; straight, wide thoroughfares would connect the main points of the city to provide easy movement of traffic, and would also, given their dimensions, provide light and air:
As links the streets functioned in two directions: they provided rapid access from the railway stations at the city's then periphery to the key points at the center (government buildings, central markets, hospitals, business and entertainment districts), and in turn linked the central organs of administration and business (fire department, riot police, ambulance services, department store deliveries) with the focal points of the city's various quarters.
The intersections of two or more such arteries would clearly become major nodes of traffic and urban activity.
Translated into actual streets, this meant the creation of two main axes, one North-South and the other East-West.
Today's visitor to  Paris knows them as the boulevard Saint-Michel and the boulevard Sébastopol running from North to South, with the rue de Rivoli and the rue Saint-Antoine making the East to West traverse.
Where necessary, new bridges, such as the Pont Saint-Michel, were built to cross the Seine, whose quays were developed at the same time as arteries for traffic.
A series of peripheral boulevards was begun, though not finished before 1870, which were designed to provide easy access to the central area at the desired point of entry.
Along the new streets came new housing, the apartment buildings which are so closely identified with their originator that they are stylistically described simply as ‘Haussmann’.
They followed a pattern which was virtually invariable, for Haussmann decided what the optimum height should be in relation to street width and perspective, a feature which was most noticeable in the avenue Napoleon III (now avenue de l'Opéra), which had as its focal point Garnier's great Opera House, the epitome of Second Empire architectural style.
Critics complained of the ‘drab uniformity’ of such seemingly endless streets, which frequently concealed behind them a network of older and certainly less well ordered thoroughfares.
But in a sense such criticism misses the point, for Napoleon III and his prefect were well aware of the nature of Parisian society as it then existed and wished to take account of it.
Each quartier felt, and wanted to feel itself, self-sufficient, which indeed it often was, since many of its residents both worked and lived in it.
When it came to shopping, which is after all one of the main features of urban living, the average Parisian was a provincial who liked to choose his butcher and baker and who wanted them to be near at hand.
It was in these smaller and older streets that urban life existed in all its jostle and bustle.
The great boulevards, in contrast, were places of elegance for self-display; smart shops and smart cafés with pavement extensions in fine weather provided permanent street theatre of Paris and formed part of its entertainment.
‘Normal’ life was not lived there, but it continued to exist in surroundings which were less elegant, while remaining better suited to the everyday needs of the city's inhabitants.
It would seem that in many areas of the city the population adjusted to the new conditions surprisingly well: ‘thanks to (the inhabitants') capacity for adapting to a  modernized economy and the conditions of life dictated by a transformed city, It was possible to maintain areas which were working class and artisanal.’
The very changes which were taking place in the physical environment appear to have facilitated the transition to a newer rhythm of urban life.
The government, well aware that the feeding of a great city is of prime importance, since political, social, economic, and even humanitarian interests combine in this one problem, tackled it with vigour and imagination.
It was decided to build a huge central market, the construction of which was entrusted to Baltard, a man who was as much an engineer as an architect, on a site which had existed since the reign of Napoleon I. Succeeding regimes had neither had the will nor the drive to carry out the project as originally planned, but the Emperor was determined that this new market should be one of the earliest major building projects of his reign.
He indicated to Haussmann that the form of the railway station, a huge open space covered by glass, had impressed him as a possible model and as a result of the Emperor's predilections, and Baltard's skill, the great new market of Les Halles was built in a light, airy combination of iron, stone and glass.
Its ten pavilions were to serve Paris for over a century and to take their place in the city's folklore.
From its inception, the new market was gas-lit, thus permitting night-time operations, so that the area became one of nocturnal rendez-vous — its cafés and bars open when all else was closed.
Les Halles had not, however, been built to add to the city's entertainments; they had a severely practical purpose in which light, air, and water for cleanliness were the key elements, plus, of course, ease of access.
It was ultimately the inability of the access streets to cope with a hugely increased traffic problem which choked the markets to death in the 1960s and led to their demolition.
Perhaps the greatest achievements of Haussmann in his transformation of the city were the least visible, for the provision of sewers, gas, and water probably did more to enhance the city's life than almost anything else.
For too long water and sewage had been, quite literally, inextricably mixed in Paris, for seepage from cesspools and cemeteries rendered much of the water supply lethal.
Backed by the Emperor, Haussmann planned  to bring fresh water to supply fountains and reservoirs by means of aqueducts, in preference to the use of the Seine which was itself becoming more and more contaminated.
Haussmann's success can be measured in gallons: in 1860 27,000,000 gallons a day poured into Paris (in one form or another), by 1870 it was some 80,000,000.
‘Three quarters of a century later, London had yet to achieve that abundance.’
An increased flow of water not only led to greater purity of the commodity, but also permitted a rebuilding of the entire sewage system.
When Edwin Chadwick, the great English public health expert, was visiting Paris, he met the Emperor who asked him what he thought of the improvements in Paris, to which he replied: ‘Sir, it was said of Augustus that he found Rome brick and left it marble.
May it be said of you that you found Paris stinking and left it sweet.’
It would be too much to say that by 1870 Paris had become a fragrant bower — few cities ever manage that — but it certainly was less odorous and pestilential than it had been.
Not before time, as travellers pointed out:
Nuisances and abominations of all sorts are without scruple committed to the streets at any hour of the day of night, to await the morning visit of the scavenger to remove them: and happy indeed is it for the humble pedestrian if his eye and nose alone suffer from these ejectments; happy indeed if he comes not in contact with them, as they make their unceremonious exit from window or door…
It really appears to me that almost the only thing in the world which other men do but which Frenchmen cannot, is the making of drains and sewers.
It was not, of course, merely the noisome aspect which needed to be dealt with; Asiatic cholera made its appearance in 19th-century Europe because it found virtually Asiatic conditions in the open sewers and cesspits of the great cities.
In keeping with the grand design, the sewers designed by Haussmann and his great engineer Belgrand were so magnificent that to this day they form part of the tourist's Paris, for it is possible to cruise through these huge well-lighted caverns in a boat.
Let us be precise, however.
What these sewers carried was not sanitary ordure — that continued to be collected or even — illegally — dumped in cesspits: for the cost  of separating out the effluent so frightened the Municipal Council of the city that even by 1870 nothing much had been done.
Individual householders, faced with the prospects of a water rate, showed as little enthusiasm for the benefits of water (and with it sewage disposal) in the home, so that when the Empire ended only half the city's houses had running water.
Where individuals had the choice, they preferred to save money even at the risk of continuing to live in fairly insanitary and certainly uncomfortable dwellings.
The same people, however, demanded a high standard from public works and nowhere more so than in the domain of street lighting.
In the 1830s Paris was plunged after dark in Stygian gloom:
…the profound darkness of every part of the city in which there are not shops illuminated by the owners with gas…there is not a little country town in England which is not incomparably better lighted than any street in Paris which depends for its illumination upon the public regulations of the City.
Such lighting as did exist consisted of feeble oil lamps suspended above the pavement, which not only gave poor light but frequently went out, making the streets both difficult to negotiate and dangerous to be abroad in.
Before Haussmann attempts had been made by various small companies to provide street lighting by gas, but once again it required the drive and determination of the new regime to bring all these together and to create one large company charged with the responsibility of lighting the whole of the city.
By 1870, 1,500 kilometres of pipes served the whole of Paris and its inner suburbs and the city was illuminated by nearly 40,000 gas lamps, which in most of the central area were not only efficient but ornamental.
Not only that: ‘Nearly all the new houses have gas today; it lights the courtyards and the staircases though it is still rare in private apartments.’
Once again, as with water, the parsimony of individual householders and landlords prevented a more widespread domestic usage, so that by 1870 there were only 87,000 subscribers — and this in spite of the opportunities offered by gas for heating and cooking as well as lighting.
The municipality and the Imperial Household, less inclined for one reason or another to be parsimonious, added gas lighting to public spectacle by illuminating the city's monuments on state occasions and holidays.
Electric lighting too, though disliked by Haussmann because of its coldness and considered by him as suitable only for illuminating building works at night, was nevertheless used for decorative purposes.
The Tuileries gardens were not infrequently decorated by electric lights and the palace itself, when there was a state ball, added electric lamps to the exterior illuminations.
If Napoleon III and Haussmann failed to make Paris an entirely sweet-smelling city, they certainly succeeded in making it a brighter and safer one.
The Emperor, however, envisaged a city which was not only light and clean but also full of air.
For this, it had to be given lungs, in the shape of open spaces, squares, parks and gardens.
It has been argued that Napoleon III was influenced by the example of London, a city which at the beginning of his reign he knew better than Paris, for he had lived longer in it, and that the Bois de Boulogne and the Bois de Vincennes were the equivalent of London's Royal parks.
There is probably some truth in this, but it should be remembered that both Haussmann and his master were essentially builders and planners in the classical tradition, which was not by any means new in France.
Areas like the Place des Vosges, the Place des Victoires, and above all the Place de la Concorde testified to the efforts of preceding French rulers to emulate the classical model.
What Napoleon III did was to bring in ‘greenery’, in the sense that the word was understood in England, and here, without doubt, his experiences in London were important.
As well as the transformation of the Bois de Boulogne and Vincennes into real parks, as opposed to an ‘arid waste covered by trees’(the words were the Emperor's), an attempt was made to endow all the areas of the city with small squares, which were in essence miniature parks ranging in size from one-quarter of an acre to six acres.
These were furnished with fountains, seats, grass and trees and were so organized that nearly every quartier of Paris could give its inhabitants a place for relaxation.
As well as enjoying local amenities, excursions could be made to the more famous and extensive Bois with their artificially created lakes, waterfalls and grottoes.
Anxious that the  poorer areas in the east of Paris should have the same facilities as those in the west, the Emperor gave the land at Vincennes to the city and a huge park was constructed at the expense of the privy purse.
It was never quite so successful an undertaking as the Bois de Boulogne, because the army insisted on retaining part of the area as a training ground and artillery range, but it had lakes, waterfalls, grottoes and cafés in the same way as its more chic counterpart.
If the Emperor encouraged Haussmann by taking a personal interest in his plans, it was the Empress who worked with Alphand, a man who might well be called the gardener of Paris, for it was he who was responsible for the landscaping and planting of all the new parks.
In his famous and beautifully illustrated book Les Promenades de Paris (2 vols, 1867 — 73) Alphand talks not only of his landscaping but also of the flowers, shrubs, and trees which he used to ornament his creations, while his illustrations show details of the furnishings and small kiosks and pavilions which were established in the parks.
Eugénie's interest and influence were noticed by Edouard Gourdon who wrote:
I remember seeing an early plan (of the Bois de Boulogne) on which the rivers and other parts of the park had been painted green, in watercolour, by the august consort of the Emperor.
As you see, it was a rather exalted collaboration, and the work which was to ensue could not fail to be remarkably beautiful.
Although the Bois became notorious as the place where the respectable of society met the less respectable, it was nevertheless, in some sense, an extension of the Court itself, for the carriage outings of the Emperor and the Empress formed part of the spectacle:
Do you remember?
A hundred years ago — or was it yesterday?— the promenade in the Bois was a fairy tale.
Crowds of eager spectators were massed along the paths on either side from the grand cascade to the middle of the place de la Concorde.
And in the thick of the coupés, the victorias, phaetons and landaus…the carriages from the Tuileries.
The press of carriages represented an increasing desire of those with money to display it rather than hoard it, determined to keep pace with  the fashion: ‘The dreary bourgeois of Balzac have become vain.
Their wives take as their model the beautiful Eugénie….
Fashions change every month by a decree of the Court.’
Thus wrote George Sand in critical vein.
Even more bitter were the attacks on the behaviour of the demi-mondaines who did not hesitate to parade ‘the profits of their vice’ in front of decent folk and whose example, so it was said, influenced young women of good society: ‘Among young women who count amongst the best bred and the best brought up, there are those who do not hesitate to copy the manners and behaviour of girls of easy virtue.’
It was ridiculous to blame the Court, and by implication the sovereigns themselves, for this state of affairs, but the opponents of the regime were not selective in their targets.
In reality most of the complaints came from those whose nature made them dislike change at any time, while the comments of other critics had a political bias.
The Republic was associated with virtue and austerity, so that society could not hope to be improved until the regime responsible for this fearful debauching of the public mind was overthrown.
The salons of those ladies who were devoted to republican ideals (and quite often, one could add, to the person of individual republicans) were careful to maintain a reputation for plain living and high thinking.
The Countess d'Agoult, better known perhaps under her nom de plume of Daniel Stern, presided over a republican circle in her fine house on the Champs Elysées, while Juliette Adam, married to a rich banker and later to become the mistress of the republican politician Gambetta, maintained an equally republican salon in her (less grand) apartment on the Boulevard Poissonière.
To these self-appointed custodians of public morals it was even more appalling that those very classes who should in theory be the hope and backbone of republicanism were equally infected by the general tone of light-mindedness:
All this is to be found even in the lower classes.
The women dress themselves on credit and without their husbands' knowledge, they sign bills which, when they fall due, are fatal to their virtue.
It was, as usual, a fallen world.
What made Parisian life particularly nauseous to its critics was the  fact that not only was it vicious, it was also well stocked with foreigners.
In their libretto for Offenbach's opéra bouffe, Gaieté Parisienne , which was first given on the Paris stage in 1867, Halévy and Meilhac summed it up:
…
We are coming, arriving from every country in the world,
Arriving by sea and by land,
Italians, Brazilians, Japanese and Dutch,
Spaniards, Romanians, Egyptians and Prussians.
The train brings us here, we plan to invade
The sovereign city, the centre of pleasure.
…
Foreigners all, delighted
To throw ourselves on Paris.
Adding a touch of xenophobia to censorious morality, Louis Veuillot, the Catholic journalist, in a work significantly entitled Les Odeurs de Paris , poured scorn on the city:
…a flood which drowns French civilization and carries everything away as debris…a city which is a huge hotel where everyone has been and where no one remembers having seen anyone.
A city of rootless hordes, a moving heap of human dust…
In the great Rougon-Macquart series of novels which he began during the Empire, Emile Zola misses no opportunity of denouncing the new Sodom, ‘where pleasure is sold freely under the stars’.
No wonder that in 1871 contemporaries, stupefied with horror as the city burned, saw in the excesses of the Commune a judgement of God.
That, however, lay in the unknown future.
The less critical saw a city which was indeed made for pleasure — though as always it did not pay to be poor — and which was above all beautiful.
It was not just the new layout of wide avenues and boulevards, the greenery, the light and the air.
It was also the ‘grandness’ of it all.
The long-proposed project of joining the Palais du Louvre to that of the Tuileries was finally accomplished, while the railway stations, the new Palais de Justice, the great new Hôtel-Dieu (the public hospital) and the Opéra provided impressive testimonies to the spirit and imagination of  the regime.
It was these brilliant architectural triumphs which so much impressed foreign visitors, many of whom had a professional interest and who came to learn as well as admire.
‘Second Empire style’ was copied and transplanted to other European capitals, and even to the New World and it was so closely identified with the Emperor himself that it was sometimes referred to as Style Napoléon III.
When the Goncourt brothers noted in their Journal in the 1860s that the new Paris resembled ‘some future American Babylon’, they were nearer to the truth than they knew, though they got it the wrong way round, for it was in many of the cities of the United States that French influence was predominant.
There was an ironical twist to all this, for the United States government never concealed its hearty dislike of Napoleon III and his regime.
French intervention in Mexico, which was seen by the Americans as an affront to the Monroe Doctrine, coupled with the Emperor's known sympathy with the Confederacy during the Civil War, had served to reinforce American prejudice against the Empire and all its works.
Nevertheless, it was this detested regime which managed to make its mark in the New World, for the successful urban renewal of Paris combined with the great prestige which the city enjoyed as a centre of art and culture drew to it Americans of all kinds.
The increasing rapidity of the transatlantic crossing meant that the number of Americans who visited Paris increased steadily, many wealthy enough and important enough to penetrate high society and the Court, though not all of these visitors were won over.
Mark Twain, for example, who went to see the Great Exhibition of 1867, wrote: ‘(I saw) Napoleon in military uniform — long-bodied, short-legged man, fiercely moustached, old, wrinkled, with eyes half-closed and such a deep crafty scheming expression about them.’
However, one group of Americans which had few social aspirations and lacked political prejudice was that of the young architects, less critical of the man than they were impressed by the buildings and the city he had created, and they returned to the United States inspired by what they had seen.
Drawing upon their experiences they produced in their own country buildings which echoed those of Imperial Paris, as anyone familiar with the architecture of, say, Philadelphia and Washington, will readily admit (in the autumn of 1978 the city of Philadelphia recognized its debt by staging, in its Museum of  Art, an exhibition devoted to the Second Empire).
The Town Hall in Philadelphia and the Treasury Building in Washington DC show only too clearly the debt which their architects owe to Paris and while there is, of course, no Paris on the Potomac or the Delaware, there is, just the same, a scent of France in the air — and it is the France of Napoleon III.
IMPERIAL POLITICS
BY HIS DECISION TO SEPARATE THE COURT from the machinery of government, Napoleon III had erected a barrier against all court influence on the making of policy.
He nevertheless remained acutely aware that the Court could be used to provide facilities for meeting other crowned heads, meetings which, in the context of 19th-century Europe, were essential to the maintenance of good relations between states.
Since the Emperor wished to retain ultimate control of foreign policy in his own hands, he was able to meet other European sovereigns in a suitable setting in which both parties could feel at ease.
Quite often these royal summit meetings produced as little as their much-vaunted 20th-century counterparts, but, like them, they did at least keep open channels of communication.
While they could not prevent crises from occurring, there were often occasions when détente was made easier by discreet use of royal connections.
In the years since the fall of the First Empire in 1815, the Bonaparte family had, by marriage, enlarged its connection with other Royal Houses in Europe, as a result of which Napoleon III could, in spite of his own unorthodox background, claim kinship with the majority of European rulers.
The Habsburgs, the Wittelsbachs, the Royal Houses of Baden and Württemberg, even the Romanovs, all had direct or tenuous connections with the Bonapartes, while through the descendants of Eugène de Beauharnais they were related to the Royal Houses of Sweden and Portugal as well as to the Emperor of Brazil.
The network of family connections in Italy, though not in itself either a reason or motive for the policy which Napoleon III was to pursue in the peninsula, was nevertheless a help in that it did provide a useful information service and helped to create a feeling of sympathy for French policy.
Contrariwise, of course, the hostility of the former ruling dynasties, the Bourbons and Orléans, together with their connections, frequently  expressed itself in adverse manoeuvres designed to embarrass, if not actually to weaken, the ‘Fourth dynasty’ in France.
Indeed it could be argued that a dynastic conflict involving the interests of the Houses of Orléans, Bourbon, Bonaparte and Hohenzollern was the means chosen to bring down the Empire, even if it was not really the cause.
One of the reasons why Napoleon wished to retain close supervision of France's foreign policy was his understanding of the difficulties which would arise once he began to probe the weaknesses of the European system established in 1815 and designed as a check to French ambition.
From the beginning of his reign, the Emperor made plain his conviction that only by drawing England to him in a firm and fully functioning understanding, an entente cordiale , could France hope to regain her position in European affairs.
The idea was not new; it had been first put into operation in the preceding reign of Louis-Philippe, but during that period it was made clear to France that she must play second fiddle in the European concert otherwise Britain would turn her out of the orchestra.
This attitude had provoked two serious crises in the 1840s, in both of which France was virtually humiliated, and while Napoleon III was resolved on bringing about an understanding, he was equally resolved that it should be on a basis of equality.
However, given the weakness of France's position since 1815, the task was not going to be at all easy.
The basic problem for the Emperor was that while France needed Britain it was not at all clear to British statesmen that their country had any need of France — except when it suited British interests.
Napoleon III is reputed to have said: ‘Other countries are my mistresses, but England is my wife.’
True or not, the marriage was, like most, full of ups and downs, and illustrated the French maxim that in an embrace, one kisses while the other offers the cheek.
If the Emperor was to make any progress in pursuing the English alliance, it was essential that some way be found to produce a common enemy against whom a common front could be established and in the mid-19th century Britain's only apparent enemy, that is the only one which seemed to threaten her interests, was the Russian Empire.
The seemingly extensive ambitions of Tsar Nicholas I in the Near East alarmed British statesmen who feared that a collapse  of the large and decaying Ottoman Empire would be followed by Russian expansion into the areas formerly controlled by the Sultan.
Well aware of English fears, Napoleon III decided that a joint Anglo-French approach to the problems of the Near East would be popular in Britain and would provide him with the lever he sought to hoist France into place in the European system.
It is highly unlikely that he envisaged anything more than joint diplomatic pressure on Russia which would bring Nicholas to the conference table to discuss the problems at issue, which explains why he used as a pretext the totally ridiculous question of the keys to the Holy places in Jerusalem, whose custody was disputed between the Latin Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches.
Those who accuse Napoleon III of having gone to war on a frivolous pretext, that of siding with the Latin Catholic monks against the Greek Orthodox monks in this dispute, miss the point.
He chose to take up the issue precisely because he thought it could not possibly lead to war, in that neither the Tsar, nor the Sultan in whose Empire Jerusalem was, would see the issue as of such importance.
He miscalculated badly, forgetting the Tsar's pride, which made him unyielding in his claim to be protector of the Greek Christians, and the reaction of the Sultan, who was weary of being pressured by the Powers and who feared for the security of his Empire.
As a result of Napoleon III's grave error of judgement, the affair of the Holy places became so inflamed that it set the powers on a collision course which led to the Crimean War.
The Emperor, who had set out to find a partner in a European congress found himself instead with an ally engaged in a European war.
Not only was he engaged in a war, but, as soon became clear, it was a war which was going badly and which threatened to become unpopular in both France and Britain.
In these circumstances it seemed to Napoleon III that the Entente needed a boost and so came the first essay in Court diplomacy, the state visit to England in 1855 at the request of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
Napoleon III's ministers had worked hard to bring about the visit — not merely because it was in support of the Emperor's policy but also, it was hoped, to distract him from his privately announced intention of himself going to the Crimea.
It was assumed in Paris, rightly as it turned out, that Queen Victoria would add her powers of dissuasion to all those  who opposed the idea and that the combined opposition would convince Napoleon III that his plan was dangerous and unnecessary.
It would also have provoked a military crisis in that once in the Crimea, the Emperor must become virtually Commander-in-Chief of all the forces, including the British.
That was unthinkable to the British generals, even though Napoleon III made it clear to Lord Palmerston that he did not intend to usurp the command and so the problem would not arise.
In the event the idea was allowed to drop because the Emperor realized it would strain relations with Britain.
Apart from that, the Empress had announced that if her husband went, she would accompany him — possibly using this as a means of persuading him not to go.
By the time the Imperial couple arrived in England on 16 April 1855, the matter seemed to have been settled and so the visit was an enormous success.
The Queen informed her uncle, King Leopold of the Belgians:
There is great fascination in the quiet, frank manner of the Emperor and she is very pleasing, very graceful, and very unaffected, but very delicate.
She is certainly very pretty and very uncommon looking…
The reception by the public was immensely enthusiastic.
Both Victoria and Albert were delighted with the Emperor's charm and amiability, but above all they were captivated by Eugènie ‘the dear, sweet Empress’, though the Queen confided to the Emperor that she realized how difficult her role must be for someone who had not been brought up to it.
It is worth noting that what began for Victoria as admiration, tinged with a degree of condescension, developed over the years into genuine friendship and a respect for Eugénie's character which was to link both sovereigns ever more closely until the Queen's death in 1901.
The State Visit included the investing of Napoleon III, at Windsor, with the Order of the Garter and a State ball held in the Waterloo Gallery.
The Queen thought it strange that such an event should be taking place; the Emperor, ever tactful, made no comment.
As well as these purely ceremonial occasions, the Emperor attended two councils of war which were held to discuss the Crimean campaign.
Since the Queen presided, accompanied by Prince Albert, this was an occasion when Court and diplomacy were quite clearly combined.
The Imperial couple returned to Paris with a promise that their hosts would make a return visit to Paris in August.
It was clear that the London meeting had strengthened the Entente and, as a bonus, hopes for an end to the war seemed well founded.
The accession of the new Tsar, Alexander II, in January 1855, was followed by an outburst of diplomatic activity in Paris and London, since it was known that the new sovereign was inclined to peace and the allies were more than willing to bring the conflict to an end.
Napoleon III was occupied not only with these diplomatic endeavours but also with the mounting of the first great Universal Exhibition to be held in the French capital.
Based on the example of the Great Exhibition of 1851 at the Crystal palace, the Paris venture was an enormous success and the splendid summer season was brought to a brilliant close by the State Visit of Victoria and Albert.
Of her nine-day stay the Queen expressed herself:
…delighted, enchanted, amused and interested , and I think I never saw anything more beautiful and gay than Paris — or more splendid than all the palaces.
Our reception is most gratifying — for it is enthusiastic and really kind in the highest degree…
The Emperor has done wonders for Paris, and for the Bois de Boulogne.
Everything is beautifully monté at Court — very quiet and in excellent order…
The children are so fond of the Emperor who is so very kind to them.
He is very fascinating , with that great quiet and gentleness.
He has certainly excellent manners and both he and the dear and very charming Empress (whom Albert likes particularly) do the honneurs extremely well and very gracefully and are full of every kind of attention.
In view of the Queen's reactions it is little wonder that Lord Clarendon, the Foreign Secretary, should have half-jokingly accused the Emperor of ‘making love to her’.
He was certainly wooing her, and with success, for the Queen felt that as a result of the visits:
…the complete Union of the two countries is stamped and sealed in the most satisfactory and solid manner for it is not only a union of the two governments — the two sovereigns — it is that of the two nations !
Time would show that it was not quite, perhaps, such a close union as  the Queen thought and that mutual esteem between sovereigns, while useful, was no substitute for hard and fast agreements between states.
Nevertheless, it was certainly an improvement on the preceding 40 years of Anglo-French relations, and the Emperor could for the moment feel reasonably proud of his achievement.
To add to his triumphs came the peace conference which began in Paris in February 1856 and which ended not merely with the signing of a peace treaty but also coincidentally with the birth of a son on 16 March 1856.
This was the occasion for further expressions of friendship on the part of the two sovereigns, for Queen Victoria had taken a personal interest in the Empress's accouchement and had sent Lady Ely, one of her ladies-in-waiting, to be present at the birth.
In the event, Eugénie had a long and difficult labour — over 12 hours — as the Emperor told the Queen in a letter of 17 March, which followed his personal telegram of the previous day.
The Queen noted in her journal that it would all have been much better had she had chloroform, which had been used by Victoria's physicians in similar circumstances.
As for the Treaty of Paris, which had ended the Crimean War, this was less liked by the French than by their ally.
It was felt that the Clauses which neutralized the Black Sea and prohibited Russia from maintaining warships within its confines were more advantageous to Britain than to France and that once again France was playing second fiddle.
The Emperor himself shared this view, but took pains to conceal it, because his ultimate designs for the rehabilitation of France in Europe envisaged a tripartite understanding with Britain and Russia.
In 1856 he needed Britain too much to thwart her desires over the Black Sea Clauses of the Treaty and so he accepted them, hoping that it would still be possible eventually to bring about an entente with Russia.
Whether he had perceived that by acceding to British demands he had permanently estranged himself from Russia is debatable.
If he had not so perceived it, the Tsar lost no time in pointing it out, for on each subsequent occasion when an attempt was made by Paris to draw closer to St Petersburg the Russians raised the question of the Black Sea Clauses.
It was to be the stumbling block; for if the Emperor abandoned the Clauses he would antagonize Britain, while so long as they remained, Russia would not  respond to his requests for an alliance.
In short, ‘marriage’ with England was showing itself to be a severely limiting factor when other courtships were envisaged.
In order to allay British suspicions and fears about his policies, the Emperor decided to use the friendship and apparent understanding which existed between himself and Queen Victoria.
To this end an unofficial courtesy visit was arranged and in August 1857 the Imperial couple came to Osborne.
Once again the meeting was a great success; the Emperor had long conversations with the Prince Consort, Lord Palmerston and the Foreign Secretary, Lord Clarendon, while the Empress devoted herself to the Queen and the royal children.
The atmosphere was cordial and relaxed — the Emperor even entertained the children with conjuring tricks — and when the time came to leave he assured the Queen that ‘If we stayed longer we should end up by forgetting France altogether.’
At a personal level the visit had obviously been a great success, but Napoleon III came away without any specific extension of the Entente and he left the British Ministers unconvinced of his desire for peace and stability in Europe.
They were well aware that before the English visit, and in an attempt to give himself some room for manoeuvre, Napoleon III had wooed the Tsar.
He had done this by sending his half-brother, the Duke de Morny, to St Petersburg in order to sound out Alexander II on the prospects of a Franco-Russian entente.
Morny was himself a partisan of a Russian rather than a British alliance, but a combination of the Tsar's refusal to move from his position on the Treaty of 1856 and the Emperor's fear of offending Britain made the attempt useless from the outset.
In September 1857, shortly after the return from Osborne, the Emperor arranged to meet the Tsar in person at Stuttgart, clearly hoping that a face-to-face encounter might be more productive than acting through an intermediary.
Through a misunderstanding about the Tsarina's intentions, Eugénie did not accompany her husband, who was thus left at a slight disadvantage when Alexander appeared accompanied by the Empress Maria.
It is doubtful if Eugénie's presence would have much affected the outcome, which was, almost inevitably in the circumstances of the power-game, inconsequential.
The conversations with Alexander and his Foreign Minister, Prince Gorchakov, only served  to underline the problems and did nothing towards providing a solution.
The Austrian Ambassador in Paris, Count Hubner, summed it up:
…it could have no real importance after the visit to Osborne in the course of which Napoleon III having tightened the alliance with England had nothing much to say to the Emperor of Russia, his enemy of the day before yesterday, his friend of yesterday — but not his ally of today, which he might have become had it not been for the recent drawing together of the Courts of the Tuileries and St James.
Continuing his tour of crowned heads, Napoleon III went from Stuttgart to Weimar, where he met Franz-Joseph of Austria, but the encounter seems to have been no more than a routine courtesy call between sovereigns and the fact that it did not even take place in Vienna underlined the private nature of the meeting.
In any case Napoleon III was not worried by Austria; economically weak and diplomatically isolated as a result of her erratic policy during the Crimean War, she was no threat to France.
What mattered was Russia.
Fortunately for Napoleon III, Alexander II was so involved for the next six years with the internal reconstruction of his Empire, which the Crimean War had shown to be lamentably weak, that he had no time for a ‘forward’ policy in Europe which might thwart French designs.
Taking advantage of this situation, Napoleon decided that the time had come to redraw the map of Italy, which, since 1815, had been either directly or indirectly ruled by Austria.
French interests in Italy were based on both political and economic considerations — both, in a sense, strategic.
It was clearly to France's advantage to advance her south-eastern frontier by the acquisition of Savoy and Nice, while the building of railways in the region would give her a strong economic and strategic position in northern and central Italy.
To achieve this, Austria must be dislodged from Lombardy and Venetia, held by her under the terms of the 1815 settlement, which would inevitably lead to a weakening of her influence throughout the entire peninsula.
The question was: if France began to threaten Austria's position, would the other signatories of 1815 come to Austria's aid?
Having calculated the odds, Napoleon III decided that at the moment this was unlikely.
Britain  appeared to have little interest in the area, Russia was preoccupied with her domestic problems, and in any case the Tsar had never forgiven Austria for her lack of support during the Crimean War.
As to Prussia, she had her own grudges against Vienna because of friction resulting from Austrian policy within the German Confederation.
Having by her haphazard diplomatic behaviour dug a pit for her own feet, Austria needed only a push to send her tumbling.
Napoleon III had a personal reason for wishing to intervene in Italian affairs.
In January 1858 an attempt was made to assassinate him as he drove with the Empress to the Opera in Paris.
The narrowness of their escape was a frightful reminder not only of their human vulnerability, but also of the fragility of the regime, for had they died, the heir was only two years old.
This was the third serious attempt to kill the Emperor and, as in the other two, the perpetrators were Italians.
The most recent outrage was the work of Count Orsini, who had been moved to his attempt by the hatred he felt for Napoleon III, whom he blamed for his failure to help the Italian national movement.
French public opinion was enraged by the attempt and was further inflamed when it became known that Orsini's bombs had been made in Birmingham and the conspiracy hatched in London.
Anglo-French relations were put under a severe strain at all levels, particularly when one of the conspirators arrested in London was acquitted at his trial.
The Emperor, who incidentally had wanted to pardon Orsini and his accomplice, only yielding to his ministers' demand for execution when they pointed out that innocent people had been killed, tried to repair the damage done to the Entente.
In a public demonstration of his fidelity to the alliance he invited the Queen and Prince Albert to visit France, hoping once again that a meeting between sovereigns would dampen down public hostility on both sides of the Channel.
The meeting took place at Cherbourg in August 1858, coinciding with the opening of a vast new deep-water dock and the unveiling of a statue of Napoleon I, the Queen and Prince Albert having crossed in the Royal Yacht accompanied by the Prince of Wales and escorted by 140 private English yachts.
Both couples tacitly agreed to make the maximum number of public appearances together, the Emperor escorting the Queen while the Empress walked with the Princes.
The crowds were cool, ostentatiously limiting their cries to ‘Vive l'Empereur!
Vive l'Impératrice !’, until at one moment the Emperor stopped and addressed himself to those nearest saying courteously: ‘If you want to please your Emperor, I would ask you to cry ‘Vive la Reine ’.’
Although the Emperor had been slightly cool at the first meeting —boutonné was how the Queen described it — Eugénie was full of charm, ‘so amiable, so clever and agreeable’ that the atmosphere soon warmed and there was, apparently, a frank exchange of views between Napoleon III and Victoria about the various strains in the Anglo-French Entente.
It all ended well, undoubtedly helped by the fact that one positive feature could be highlighted, namely the support and sympathy shown by the Emperor during the Indian Mutiny, when he had offered to allow passage through France to British reinforcements so that they could embark at Toulon, thus cutting down the time required for the voyage to India.
At no time had there been any hint that France should try to benefit from the British embarrassment during this critical period, though the press published sharp attacks on the British policy of reprisals after the Mutiny was over.
The Emperor authorizes Haussmann to rebuild Paris.
The Imperial couple arrive at Dover for the state visit to Queen Victoria, 16 April 1855.
The new Paris: the Boulevard de Sébastopol, inaugurated by the Emperor, 5 April 1858.
St Cloud: the favourite summer residence.
A dynastic match: the marriage of Prince Napoleon to Princesse Clotilde of Piedmont, January 1859.
The Salle des Maréchaux: scene of the great receptions and balls at the Tuileries.
Although neither party knew it, the Cherbourg visit was to be the last state meeting between the sovereigns.
From 1859 onwards there was a decline in Anglo-French relations brought about largely by Napoleon III's Italian policy, which, after much manoeuvring, resulted in a war between the Italian Kingdom of Piedmont and the Austrian Empire.
France was pledged to support Piedmont, as a result of an agreement made in 1858, though only if Austria was the aggressor.
Thanks to Piedmontese provocation, Austria did declare war and so France came to her ally's support.
From the outset, as in 1854, it may well have been that Napoleon hoped to coerce Austria into negotiating a settlement by underlining her isolation in Europe, and thus avoiding an armed conflict.
What is certain is that the results of the Italian war of 1859, though wildly popular in France, were far from being what the Emperor desired.
He did acquire Savoy and Nice, but he lost control of events in the peninsula, so that the Italian Kingdom which emerged in 1861 was far from being the entity he had originally envisaged.
Worse still was the fad that his apparently aggressive policy had upset the other European  powers, not least Britain.
Well aware of the danger of losing British goodwill, the Emperor had instructed the Empress, who was acting as Regent during his absence at the head of the French Army, to write to Queen Victoria in an attempt to mollify her alarm and, if possible, to enlist her support for his policies.
The Empress wrote that:
He (the Emperor) hopes to localize the war, for a general conflagration would be an unrelieved evil for everyone.
We have great hope that your Majesty who always has at heart anything that can be useful for the peace of the world, will use her personal influence, as well as that of Prince Albert whose influence is so great in Germany, in order to achieve this end.
The Queen's reply was friendly — and totally negative, indicating clearly that personal feelings of friendship had nothing to do with affairs of state:
’ Alas’, she wrote, ‘my power is, in this respect, very limited and it is surely the Emperor who is all powerful in this domain (working for peace).
If Austria is attacked, Germany will be alarmed and all Europe will be in a fright to see the treaties (of 1815) on which her peace and stability are based, put in question.’
The bloom was, to put it mildly, off the rose, for as the Queen was to tell Lord Palmerston:
’ It is most important that the French should be aware of the united action of England with the other powers, the knowledge of it will have a most wholesome influence on the French government.’
There is no doubt that Napoleon III's Italian policy, which seemed the prelude to a new era of French expansion, had alarmed the other European powers.
Austria's defeat and the unpicking of part of the 1815 Treaty system had, it was felt, begun to alter the whole balance of power in France's favour.
Such a shift was viewed with real apprehension and had led to a movement by Prussia to rally to Austria's support, in spite of their internal differences about the running of Germany.
Prussia was not a power to be ignored and so, well aware of this, the Emperor decided that a further bout of personal diplomacy was called for — this time in Germany.
In June 1860 he invited William, the Prince Regent of Prussia, to meet him at Baden, whose Grand Duke agreed to act as host.
Prince  William, who had no intention of allowing Napoleon III to separate Prussia from the rest of the German states, accepted only on condition that all the other German sovereigns attended the meeting.
The result was that on his arrival at Baden Napoleon III found himself surrounded by all the German rulers: the Kings of Württemberg, Bavaria, Saxony and Hanover, the Grand Dukes of Hesse-Darmstadt and Saxe-Weimar plus the Dukes of Nassau and Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.
Faced with this united German front, Napoleon III realized that for him nothing of substance was likely to emerge from the meeting and so he turned it into an exercise in public relations.
He went about the town on foot, called on various of the sovereigns at their hotels, used his charm and affability on all whom he met — and returned to Paris.
He had accomplished nothing and he may well have meditated on the difference between his situation and that of his uncle at the Erfurt meeting with the German Princes in 1808.
Then France had commanded without question, while Kings and Emperors had been only too eager to please.
Now France was regarded with suspicion but not feared, and her Emperor forced to seek co-operation rather than able to impose his will.
Since he had little choice but to pursue a policy of conciliation, Napoleon III tried again with William, now King of Prussia since his brother's death in 1861.
In October of that year the King came to Compiègne as the guest of the Emperor and Empress, who both deployed all their charms in an attempt to woo him into a declaration of support for France.
The King, however, was disinclined to anything other than an exchange of courtesies, once again making it quite clear that any attempt to detach Prussia from the rest of Germany was a fruitless exercise.
At the time of King William's visit in 1861, Prussian policy had been simply that of holding to the treaties of 1815 with no thought of altering the status quo.
Within a year all that had changed, for the appointment of Bismarck as Minister-President of Prussia in September 1862 signalled the beginning of a new orientation in policy.
Bismarck's aim was simply defined: to make Prussia the dominant state in Germany by putting her at the head of the vague movements for some form of unification which had arisen within the Confederation.
Lacking form, these movements had failed in 1848 — 50, but now they would be given shape and direction by a monarchical revolution from above which would establish Prussian pre-eminence in Germany.
The realization that such a policy would almost certainly involve war, for Austria would have to be driven out of the Confederation and France might be unwilling to acquiesce in the creation of a powerful new Germanic state, did not worry Bismarck.
Unlike Napoleon III, who believed that diplomacy could, if skilfully handled, bring results without war — and this in spite of his failures to make this work in 1854 and 1859 — Bismarck held with Frederick the Great that: ‘Diplomacy without war is like music without instruments.’
Not speeches and resolutions but ‘blood and iron’ would solve the problems.
Such an attitude precluded agreements which were not backed by force, and it sounded the death-knell of ‘court diplomacy’, even supposing that this had ever been effective.
In a tacit admission of this new state of affairs, Napoleon III, faced with an increasingly powerful Prussia which had seized the diplomatic initiative in Europe, tried a face-to-face meeting with Bismarck and not his sovereign.
The two men met at Biarritz in September 1865, by which time the general situation in Europe had altered to the disadvantage of France.
The Emperor's appeal in 1863 for a general European congress to settle ‘outstanding problems’ had been rejected all round, Queen Victoria dismissing it as ‘an impertinence’.
France's position had been further weakened by the dispatch of a substantial portion of the army to Mexico in support of the Emperor Maximilian, for whom Napoleon III was trying to win an empire.
Although this had begun as a joint Anglo-French operation, Britain had withdrawn her forces, leaving the French either to carry on alone or to withdraw.
The only hope of saving prestige lay in victory, but this proved more and more elusive in spite of the sending of reinforcements.
Bogged down in Mexico and denied any support from Britain, Napoleon III had been unable to exercise any influence during the war which Prussia had forced on Denmark in 1864 and Bismarck was determined that there should also be no interference in the war which he now planned with Austria.
At Biarritz he tested the reactions of Napoleon III and found, as he hoped, that there was little chance of active intervention by France in  the event of an Austro-Prussian war.
As a result of the Biarritz meeting it was clear to Bismarck that Napoleon III saw himself as ultimately acting as mediator in the event of such a conflict.
A further inducement to non-intervention was the knowledge that Austria would cede the Italian province of Venetia, which she still held, providing France kept Italy neutral.
The cession of this province to the Kingdom of Italy would help to complete the work of unification begun in 1859 and by so doing would ease Napoleon III's conscience about an unfulfilled pledge.
As had happened before, military events made nonsense of Napoleon III's diplomatic subtleties.
Austria was so totally defeated by Prussia at the battle of Sadowa in July 1866 that any attempt at mediation by France would have been rejected out of hand at Berlin, where it was known that such mediation would be a paper exercise with no military back-up.
For Napoleon III the defeat was doubly fatal in that it not only revealed France's weakness but also underlined the extent to which Prussia had now become a major power.
From now until the catastrophe of 1870 the Emperor's foreign policy was to be one of expedients and compromises, all of which only served to demean him in the eyes of Europe, while simultaneously underlining how feeble was any form of ‘court diplomacy’ faced with the reality of Bismarck's ‘blood and iron’tactics.
Weakened abroad, the Emperor was harassed at home.
His policy of moving towards a more liberal regime led to the usual situation which such changes produce, that is, for the reformers he did not go far enough, for the conservatives he went too far.
The result was a period of internal instability which did nothing to facilitate the attempts which were being made to strengthen France's external position by a policy of military reform and rearmament.
The parliamentary opposition defeated the plans for military reform which were proposed in 1867, with the result that the army remained well below the level which it needed to confront the newly enlarged and well-armed Prussian state.
The rewards of this parliamentary victory were to come with the defeat of the French armies in 1870, but at the time opponents of the Emperor saw only a means of forcing him further along the path of change.
Opposition to official policy was not confined to parliamentarians, but extended even  to members of the Imperial family.
The Prince Napoleon-Jerome had from the inauguration of the Empire been a constant, and public, critic of his cousin's policies, proving himself to be at best an embarrassment, at worst a threat to the regime.
His hatred of the Empress, whom he never forgave for producing a male heir and thus depriving him of the succession to the throne, together with his inveterate hostility to what he considered to be the ‘reactionary powers’, led him at times into very deep waters indeed.
In 1866, after the Prussian victory over Austria, French public opinion clamoured for war against Prussia and for a time even the Emperor appeared to hesitate.
While the debate about possible military intervention was going on, Prince Napoleon, through the intermediary of a Prussian friend, got a message to Bismarck saying that:
They will grumble but they won't make war; tell Bismarck not to be in any way bothered about this.
I guarantee it — and I know what I say.
Let him amuse the Emperor (Napoleon III) with evasive replies and let him annihilate Austria for ever.
Bismarck must indeed have been impressed by this example of family loyalty.
Perhaps in the spirit of the man threatened with bankruptcy who throws a lavish party to confuse his creditors, Napoleon III, confronted with this array of difficulties, organized a second spectacular Great Exhibition in Paris for the summer of 1867.
Once again the capital played host to the major, and minor, royalties of Europe, including the Tsar and the King of Prussia.
Queen Victoria, in mourning since the death of Prince Albert in 1861, did not attend.
Neither did the Emperor of Austria, who preferred to nurse his griefs at home.
It was all fun, frolic, and magnificent display — apart from an attempt to assassinate the Tsar, who at the time was seated beside the Emperor in an open carriage.
The assassin missed both; not so the firing squad in the Mexican city of Querétaro where the dream of empire ended with the shooting of the Emperor Maximilian.
The news reached Napoleon III just before he left the Tuileries to distribute the prizes to the successful exhibitors, and observers noticed, without at that stage knowing the reason, that during the ceremony he seemed even more abstracted than usual.
If the gathering of sovereigns in Paris represented an attempt to revive a policy of ‘business between sovereigns’, it failed.
In political and diplomatic terms nothing came from the meetings, which, given the absence of the Austrian Emperor and the unfortunate incident involving Alexander II, is hardly surprising, and it is doubtful if Napoleon III really expected anything concrete to emerge.
Aware of how precarious his position was, and still clinging to the Entente as the only hope in the shifting pattern of the European system, he had taken the unusual step of sending Eugénie to visit Queen Victoria at Osborne in the July of 1867 in order to find out the Queen's reactions to the situation.
While the visit was, of course, an unofficial one, it had a serious purpose which was made clear by the discussions about the problems facing France.
The Queen ‘took the opportunity of urging peace (mutually on the side of France and Prussia) and no arming, laying all the blame on Prussia’.
Eugénie was able to bring this message back to the Tuileries where it must have pleased the Emperor to know that the Queen was sympathetic to France's difficulties.
What was needed however was a concrete demonstration of support by the British government, and this was most unlikely to be forthcoming, no matter how much the Queen might personally have hoped for it.
Given that constitutional proprieties hampered Victoria, the Emperor thought that a less restricted monarch might be more responsive to a diplomatic initiative.
With this hope, he and Eugénie set out in August 1867 on a state visit to Austria to meet the Emperor Franz-Joseph at Salzburg.
The journey was so organized that on their way they passed through several German states, clearly hoping to find indications of pro-French feeling on the part of the South German sovereigns, who, it was thought, would be alarmed by the seemingly inexorable rise of Prussia.
All these rulers, however, with the exception of the King of Bavaria, confined their greetings to the minimum demanded by courtesy, indicating how far anti-French attitudes had developed since 1860.
More reassuring, at least superficially, was the welcome at Salzburg.
Franz-Joseph met the Imperial couple, accompanied by his wife the Empress Elizabeth, and there followed the usual round of banquets, receptions and country excursions.
Whatever serious business was discussed by the two Emperors remains unrecorded, but it is unlikely to have been of much substance, for Napoleon III found that his host was constrained by the new constitutional structure which had emerged after the defeat of 1866.
Since the Hungarians had forced him to accept the famous ‘Compromise’ of June 1867 which divided the Austrian dominions, Franz-Joseph's field of action in foreign policy was limited by pressures from the Hungarian half of the Empire.
Well aware that it was Bismarck's victory which had brought them their independent status in the new state of Austria-Hungary, the parliamentarians at Budapest were determined resolutely to oppose any diplomatic moves which might seem to threaten Prussia.
The resulting Berlin-Budapest axis prevented any real hope of a rapprochement between Paris and Vienna and thus completed the virtual isolation of France in Europe.
By the summer of 1869 Napoleon III's position, in terms of the European states' system, was therefore one of military and diplomatic weakness.
In an effort to recoup some of his lost prestige, he attempted to do by negotiation what he dared not attempt by force and so conceived a plan for the purchase by France of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the acquisition of which would strengthen France's eastern frontier.
The territory belonged to the King of Holland who was quite willing to part with it, and although the transfer would have meant the removal of a Prussian garrison which had been installed there since 1815, Bismarck at first seemed indifferent to the transaction.
All appeared to be on the point of settlement when Bismarck suddenly unleashed a vicious press campaign, reinforced by his own parliamentary speeches, in which this shameful cession of ‘German land’ was denounced.
Mortified by this double-dealing and realizing that Bismarck had tricked him —‘I trusted him and he betrayed me’— Napoleon III had no option but to submit the question to an international conference which produced a solution by neutralizing Luxembourg.
Although this meant the withdrawal of the Prussian garrison, it did not give Napoleon III the territory he had sought, and with it the frontier rectification in France's favour.
In an attempt to recover prestige and to circumvent the Chancellor he tried for personal contact with King William, hoping desperately that, as he  said, ‘between sovereigns things can be arranged’.
The intermediary was to be Queen Victoria, whose eldest daughter had married the Prussian Crown Prince, and in the hope of enlisting the Queen's support Eugénie was once again despatched to England in August 1869.
Although there was no meeting with William, it would seem that Victoria did use her influence, as is clear from a letter which she wrote to the Empress after her visit.
In it she declared how glad she was to think: ‘…that the letter written by me to the King of Prussia at a critical moment had been of some use’, though quite what effect the letter may have had is unfortunately not spelt out.
In any event the time for sovereigns meeting was long past and in the particular case of Prussia Napoleon III was not being stalked by the King but by Bismarck, who had no intention of allowing his quarry to elude him.
In Bismarck's view, power politics reflected the law of the jungle, and in the jungle tigers do not feed on grass.
THE DÉBÂCLE
IN SEPTEMBER 1868 A REVOLUTIONARY JUNTA in Spain, led as usual by an army general, decided that the only way forward for the country lay in the removal of Queen Isabella, whose political incompetence, combined with a certain laxity of morals, made her unfit to continue to rule.
At the time of the revolt, the Queen and the Court were in residence for the summer at San Sebastian on Spain's northern coast and once it became clear that her reign was at an end, Isabella crossed the frontier into France, asking Napoleon III for political asylum.
The Emperor accepted the request with good grace and his habitual courtesy, but there can be no doubt that he viewed the events in Spain with alarm.
Because of the common frontier between the two countries, and also because of considerable French economic interests which had grown during the period of the Second Empire, whatever happened on the far side of the Pyrenees could not be ignored by the government in Paris.
Napoleon III therefore feared that he was bound to find himself involved in Spanish affairs even if he tried to ignore them.
In Madrid, the new government of General Prim was equally aware that their actions would need to avoid giving offence to France and that this was particularly the case when it came to choosing a new monarch to replace the dethroned Isabella.
In spite of this awareness, it seems extraordinary that the candidate in Madrid favoured by Prim and his government was one who was bound to be unacceptable to Napoleon III for the simple reason that he was a son of King Louis-Philippe and so represented the Orléanist dynasty.
Given the Emperor's dislike of Orléanism as a political creed and his aversion to the family as a whole, there was no possibility that he would willingly consent to the establishment of an Orléanist King on the Spanish throne — an event which it was feared might well raise hope among French Orléanists of a restoration of the dynasty in France.
Apart from this, the Emperor was afraid that if the Duke de Montpensier, who was married to Isabella's sister, became King there would be a civil war in Spain as there had been in 1830, when ‘a sister had dethroned a sister’.
Napoleon III's objections to Montpensier were well known in European diplomatic circles and so the candidature was unlikely to find favour with the other governments, as was indeed the case — with one exception.
In Berlin, Bismarck let it be known that he saw nothing wrong with the proposed solution, though he backed away from too openly supporting it in the face of a general outcry from the other European courts.
His retreat was, however, purely tactical, for the hunter had got wind of his quarry and from early 1869 he began to lay his traps, with the certain knowledge that he was on the right track.
Napoleon III was well aware of the danger posed by prolonged disputes about the Spanish succession and in an attempt to bring the problem to a quick end, he proposed as a ‘neutral’ candidate the Portuguese Prince, Fernando, husband and former King-Consort of Queen Maria.
Ferdinand, as he was originally named, was of the house of Saxe-Coburg and Napoleon III may well have felt that this candidacy would be pleasing to England and that it would at a personal level strengthen his ties with the English Royal House.
In addition, the Emperor had always had a vague idea that an Iberian union between Spain and Portugal would be advantageous to both countries.
Unfortunately for Napoleon's schemes, Fernando proved reluctant and when in the summer of 1869 he contracted a morganatic marriage with a German-born actress, Elisa Hensler, he virtually put himself out of court.
He finally torpedoed his chances, already slender, by demanding that the French government underwrite his candidacy to the tune of 12,000,000 francs, in case the Spanish wearied of him as King.
The Quai d'Orsay (the French Foreign Office) and the Emperor found the idea of such a transaction ‘outrageous’ and Fernando disappeared from the short-list.
Next the Emperor made an attempt to push for the accession of Isabella's son Alfonso, Prince of the Asturias.
The boy being a minor, there would have to be a Regency, but the acceptance of Alfonso would provide dynastic continuity and at the same time prevent the appearance of further candidates.
This proposition was also rejected  by the revolutionary junta in Madrid, who were therefore obliged to continue their efforts to find someone willing to wear what the English Foreign Minister had described as ‘that crown of thorns’.
As their search became more frantic they found themselves aided by Bismarck, who in February 1869 gave his support to a Prince belonging to the Catholic branch of the House of Hohenzollern.
Leopold could be said to have some qualifications for the throne; he was Catholic, descended directly from the families of the Beauharnais and the Murats and he was married to a sister of the King of Portugal.
All of this it seemed might make the Prince less unacceptable to France and so would give the candidacy an air of reasonableness to the rest of Europe.
In fact there was nothing ‘reasonable’ about it, and Bismarck knew this, for at the first whisper of Leopold's appearance on the scene the French Ambassador had, officially, let it be known to Berlin that this candidacy would never be accepted by Napoleon III.
The Ambassador, Count Benedetti, had been personally informed by the Emperor that ‘…the candidacy of the Prince of Hohenzollern is anti-national, the country will not put up with it, and it must be prevented’.
The firmness of the French reaction was probably inevitable, given the circumstances, but it was also highly dangerous for it meant that if and when Bismarck sought to provoke France he knew that he had exactly the cause he needed.
For the moment, however, he allowed the affair to subside, partly because Spain herself appeared to be on the verge of civil war, and as a consequence even less attractive to any possible monarch, and partly because he was awaiting developments in France where the regime appeared to be entering a moment of crisis.
This crisis had come about as a result of the Emperor's determination to carry through a series of far-reaching reforms which had actually been begun in a tentative fashion some years previously.
The Empire was to be set on a ‘new course’ by a process of increasing the parliamentary content of the constitutional structure with a view to producing a more ‘liberal’regime.
True to his maxim that ‘Liberty crowns the edifice’, Napoleon III now felt that the time was opportune and, as a first step, had granted virtually total freedom of the press and the tight of public meetings.
From the summer of 1869 onwards the process was carried forward by a combination of the Emperor's will  and by its own momentum.
The result was that events moved perhaps too quickly and brought with them, almost inevitably, an element of confusion.
As generally happens, the traditionalists were frightened and therefore unsympathetic to the new course, while the radicals found that the new broom was not sweeping clean enough, leading to a cry for more vigorous strokes.
Since the press was now free to publish and comment on all aspects of political life, strident debates took place in the columns of the newspapers and even, though more timidly, within the Legislative Body itself.
To outsiders it seemed that the regime was becoming unstable and that its survival appeared more and more doubtful.
In Berlin Bismarck followed events in France with increasing interest and, judging the moment precisely, began once again to push forward the candidacy of Leopold of Hohenzollern to the still vacant Spanish throne.
In February 1870, while the new French government of Emile Ollivier tried to hammer out a revised constitution for the reformed Empire, Bismarck opened up his campaign to persuade Leopold that he ought seriously to consider becoming King of Spain.
This time, the Prussian Royal House became involved officially in the affair and on 15 March at a Crown Council in Potsdam a decision to accept the candidature was taken.
In view of subsequent denials by all concerned that the King of Prussia had been directly involved in events leading up to Leopold's decision, it is worth noting that not only was the King present but also the Crown Prince of Prussia, Leopold, and his father Prince Anthony.
Representing the Prussian general staff were the generals von Roon and von Moltke, and perhaps most importantly, Bismarck, who later described the occasion as a ‘simple family dinner’, a description of which it could be said that those who believe it will believe anything.
All of this was, of course, unknown in Paris, where the attention of the Emperor was for the moment almost totally taken up with his domestic problems.
These did, in fact, seem to be settled by a plebiscite held in May 1870 in which the people were asked to approve ‘…the reforms carried through since 1869 by the Emperor with the assistance of the major organs of state (i.e. the Senate and the Legislative Body)’.
The result was a resounding victory for the regime and for its new Constitution.
Seven and a quarter million voted, yes, and only one and a half million ‘no’ out of an electorate of roughly ten million.
As one of the opponents of the regime admitted: ‘It is a disaster; the Emperor is stronger than ever.’
Not as strong as all that, however; for if the internal difficulties were eased because the government's hand was strengthened by the plebiscite, the problems of making the new Constitution work did not go away.
Ollivier had already been forced to remake his Ministry, which was now weakened by the presence of many who gave him only grudging support, and this in turn forced him to rely more and more on the Emperor's personal intervention when difficulties arose.
Inevitably this led to confusion as to where the centre of power and decision-making really lay and seemed to preclude the maintenance of a coherent policy.
In Berlin, Bismarck pretended to believe that the internal instability affecting France presented a danger to the peace of Europe, remarking to the British Ambassador that: ‘If the present Constitutional Government in France had been three years instead of three months in existence, there would be some chance for its duration and the maintenance of peace.’
He further intimated that one could never be certain what sort of action a feeble government might take in an attempt to solve its problems.
What he did not, of course, add was that he intended to exacerbate that instability by every means in his power while making certain that external isolation was added to internal dysfunction.
Just as aware as Napoleon III that royal connections could be made to serve a diplomatic turn, Bismarck had used Princess Victoria, wife of the Crown Prince Frederick, as a means of sounding out the British government as to its possible reactions to Leopold's candidature.
Victoria had written to her mother, the Queen, in March asking her to inform the Foreign Secretary, Lord Clarendon.
It seems that there was a lukewarm response from Britain, where the feeling was that since a legitimate heir existed (the Prince of the Asturias), the best solution would be to take up Napoleon III's former proposal for a regency.
This was, indeed, the policy still being pursued by the Emperor, who, on 25 June, had finally persuaded Isabella formally to abdicate, thus leaving the throne officially vacant.
The gesture, if it could ever have had any importance, was now certainly much too late, for it was no longer in Paris but in Berlin that  events would be decided, as Bismarck had begun to make clear.
Taking steps to ensure that Queen Victoria was informed of Leopold's candidature while ignoring Napoleon III was in itself an insult, for France was certainly more directly concerned in the matter than England and the Emperor had better need than the Queen to be told directly.
By snubbing Napoleon III, Bismarck made the provocative nature of his policy quite clear and it is a measure of how confident he felt that he scarcely bothered to conceal it.
Convinced, and quite rightly, that nothing had or would come of Napoleon III's attempts to drum up an alliance with Italy or Austria-Hungary, dismissing such a possibility as ‘idle gossip’, the Prussian Chancellor prepared to spring his trap.
On 2 July 1870, the candidacy of Leopold was made known publicly to all European courts and the French government reacted immediately by asking for a clear and positive statement by the Prussian government as to their attitude to Leopold's acceptance of the Spanish throne.
The Ambassador, Benedetti, was on leave and so the First Secretary of the Embassy was entrusted with seeing Bismarck in order to put the question to him.
Bismarck was ‘unwell’ and the French emissary was reduced to seeking an interview with First Secretary Thile, who pretended to be totally ignorant of the whole business, which was a flagrant lie, and who said: ‘In any case there are quite a few Princes…which one is it?’
This insulting behaviour had the desired effect in that it raised tempers in Paris, where all political groups, together with virtually the entire press, broke out in a clamour of hostility to Prussia, at the same time castigating their own government for refusing to take a strong line.
Confronted with this (rare) expression of public unanimity, Napoleon III and his Ministers were obliged to read both quickly and sharply.
The Court, together with the Emperor, had moved to Saint Cloud for the summer and it was there, at ten o'clock on the morning of 5 July, that Ollivier as head of the Ministry, together with Gramont, the Foreign Minister, met the Emperor to decide on a suitable response to Prussian provocation.
A declaration of French hostility to the candidature was drawn up, which, on the next day, was approved by the full  Council of Ministers, and was then read out in the Legislative Body.
It seems that, carried away by the feverish and bellicose atmosphere which was evident both on the streets of Paris and in the Assembly, Ollivier and Gramont strayed from the prepared text, firm but non-provocative in tone, and proceeded to make its content more aggressive.
Gramont ended his speech, which all the way through had been punctuated by applause and cries of ‘Vive l'Empereur ’, by saying:
We count on the wisdom of the German people and the friendship of the people of Spain.
If that is not the case, strengthened by your (the Assembly's) support, and by that of the Nation, we shall know how to fulfil our duty without either weakness or hesitation.
The Emperor deplored the bellicosity of language and continued to work for a peaceful settlement, using the King of the Belgians as an intermediary, at the same time maintaining close contact with the Spanish Ambassador in Paris.
Napoleon III let it be known to both men that a simple withdrawal of the candidature would suffice and that France would then be glad to consider the whole affair closed.
That the Emperor did not want war is beyond dispute, for the evidence from all sides makes this clear.
Lord Lyons, the British Ambassador in Paris, told the Foreign Office on two separate occasions that ‘I do not believe that either the Emperor or his Ministers either wish for war or expect it.’
But he went on to add, significantly, that he feared ‘In this matter the French government were following not leading the nation.’
Even Prince Anthony of Hohenzollern, the father of Leopold, wrote to the King of Prussia:
Of Napoleon's PERSONAL (in capitals in original) desire to keep the peace I have striking proof.
Namely he has expressed his wish to King Leopold of the Belgians and requested him to press us for a withdrawal.
The problem was, however, as the Emperor saw only too clearly, that this was a contrived situation, as he bluntly told the Spanish Ambassador:
It is clear that if the Hohenzollern candidature were out of the way, peace would be assured.
But how can you imagine that Count von Bismarck who has engineered all of this de longue main to provoke us, will let the opportunity slip?
The Emperor's analysis was, as we know, quite correct — though Bismarck admitted his guilt only in 1894 when he published his Reflections and Reminiscences — but in the middle of the carefully engineered crisis the Prussian Chancellor suffered a sudden check to his plans.
This came about because the general feeling in the European capitals was that France was a victim of Prussian provocation and that the candidature should be withdrawn.
Since it was essential to Bismarck's plans that France should appear as an aggressive power, threatening Prussia in particular and the peace of Europe in general, the situation was not developing as he had hoped.
As a consequence, after consultation between King William, Bismarck, Prince Anthony and Leopold, it was announced on 12 July that the candidacy had been withdrawn.
It was a tremendous diplomatic triumph for France, and hailed as such by even the most resolute enemies of the Imperial regime, as well as by the other European Powers.
Why then, in view of this spectacular success, did France find herself within a week declaring war on Prussia?
The short answer is that the French government demanded guarantees from the Prussian government that the candidature would not be renewed in any circumstances, implying that since the government in Berlin was officially involved, only an official denial would satisfactorily end the affair.
Here, however, lay the crux of the matter, for the King of Prussia and his government maintained that they had never been officially associated with Leopold, whose activities were purely personal, and that the King was concerned with the matter only as head of the House of Hohenzollern.
Whether anyone in Berlin seriously expected the French government to believe this is certainly open to question in view of the preceding events.
But even if it had been believed in Paris, there was a further complication in that the actual renunciation had come not from Leopold but from his father (whom the Paris papers now labelled ‘Father Anthony’), which in itself seemed a curious procedure.
Since the Prince had accepted in his  own name, should he not, in his own name, now renounce his claim?
So much for the diplomatic niceties.
The other question raised by the demand for guarantees is inspired by the view that the Emperor was the victim of a Court cabal, who were resolved on war, and who were led and inspired by the Empress.
This view is based upon a phrase which the Empress is supposed to have uttered ‘It's my pretty little war’, which in fact she never pronounced and which indeed was a newspaper invention appearing only in 1874.
It would seem to be on a par with the famous ‘Let them eat cake’ attributed to Marie Antoinette.
If it had been only the Empress and a Court clique who desired war, things might have turned out differently, but given the wave of bellicosity which swept the entire nation, it would have required a miracle to produce a peaceful end to the crisis.
The war of 1870 was popular and all the reactions of the public, the press and the parliament bear this out.
It was this fact which led Lord Lyons to comment that the government did not lead so much as follow when it came to the last stages of the crisis.
Even the Emperor himself was struck by this outcry, for in the last remaining days of peace his every appearance on the streets, driving from the Tuileries to Saint Cloud, provoked cries of ‘A bas la Prusse!’,
‘A Berlin !’
How could a sovereign who reigned by the will of the people resist totally such overt manifestations — confirmed as they were by the reports of similar sentiments being expressed the length and breadth of France?
In any event, and this is the real answer, Bismarck had not yet given up hope of bringing his scheme to a successful conclusion and even though it seemed difficult to envisage just how this could be done, he waited for his moment.
It came on 14 July, a day on which the French Ambassador had asked for an audience with King William, who was taking the waters at the spa town of Ems, and had been twice refused, courteously but firmly.
In a telegram which he sent to Bismarck, which he authorized his Minister to publish, the King gave an account of what had happened at Ems.
The consequences are best described by Bismarck himself.
He begins his account at the point where he is considering handing in his resignation and has invited his friends, the generals von Roon and von Moltke, to dine with him in order to discuss the situation.
The dinner  was a gloomy affair —‘…my guests' dejection was so great that they turned away from food and drink’— but then came the telegram from the King.
In its original form this telegram was not in itself offensive or bellicose, but says Bismarck:
I made use of the royal authorization to publish the contents…and I reduced the telegram by striking out words, but without adding or altering…
After I had read out the concentrated edition to my two guests, Moltke remarked: ‘Now it has a different ring; it sounded before like a parley; now it is like a flourish in answer to a challenge.’
Bismarck then announced that he would communicate this text to the newspapers, which meant it would be known in Paris by midnight and would:
…not only on account of the manner of its content but also on account of the manner of its distribution, have the effect of a red rag upon the Gallic bull;…it is important that we should be the party attacked and this Gallic overweening and touchiness will make us if we announce in the face of Europe…that we fearlessly meet the public threats of France…
The guests cheered up immediately, discovered their appetite…and spoke in more cheerful vein.
Von Roon said: ‘Our God of old lives still and will not let us perish in disgrace.’
Unaware of the provocation which was about to confront them, the French government, in particular the Emperor and Ollivier, were still hopeful of a peaceful outcome.
To both men it seemed that a way out for all parties might be found in an international conference, such as that which had settled the Luxembourg question in 1867.
This would avoid any further deterioration of Franco-Prussian relations, while at the same time the succession to the Spanish Throne might also be resolved multilaterally.
The idea was sound, but events of 14 July made it futile, for Bismarck's telegram had the desired effect.
When, in the face of mounting war fever the Emperor still, though half-heartedly, talked of the congress, Ollivier, himself far from bellicose, warned him that the Ministry would be overthrown and the Ministers stoned in the streets.
By now, war was inevitable for as Lord Lyons informed the Foreign Office: ‘It is clear that the war party has gained the upper hand.’
The Emperor would have been saddened to know that Bismarck's manoeuvring had deceived Queen Victoria, who wrote to her daughter, the Crown Princess of Prussia, about ‘…the unjustifiable conduct of the French…and need I say what I feel?
My whole heart and fervent prayers are with beloved Germany!’
It would have been small consolation to him to know that later, on 22 August, she wrote: ‘Odiously impertinent, insulting and boastful as the French have always been, one cannot help feeling for them.’
The fact that the Queen was pro-German would have been particularly hurtful to the Emperor personally, for only he had not succumbed to the general enthusiasm for a war he had never wanted and for which he feared the country was ill-prepared.
Ill-prepared not only militarily but also politically, for on the eve of the actual declaration of war on Prussia, 18 July, he had to use all his personal influence to prevent a vote of no confidence in the Ministry being put forward in the Legislative Body, ‘…an act which would be both highly unwise and unconstitutional in the present circumstances’.
On 28 July, having nominated Eugénie as Empress-Regent, Napoleon III left Saint Cloud to take command of the army.
It was a very discreet, even sombre, departure, for the Emperor wanted to avoid the chauvinistic effervescence of the Paris streets.
By taking the little branch line which had been built in the park of the palace of Saint Cloud, the imperial train could go around Paris and then rejoin the main line to the eastern frontier, where the army was assembling at Metz.
On the morning of the 28th the Emperor arrived at the tiny railway station accompanied by the Empress and by the 14-year-old Prince Imperial, who, like his father, was wearing military uniform, since he was destined also to go to Metz.
It was unthinkable that a Bonaparte, the heir to the throne, should not receive a baptism of fire and the Prince was held to be old enough to face up to this.
The Ministers and the Court dignitaries were on the platform to make their farewells, which the Emperor had insisted be short and restrained, so that within a few minutes of his arrival he and his son were on board and the train left to cries of ‘Vive l'Empereur !’
As it pulled away the Empress called out to her son ‘Louis!
I hope you  will do your duty’, and then collapsed in tears to be led weeping back to the palace and to her new role as Regent.
It was not, of course, the first time that she had exercised the powers of Regent, but on this particular occasion she knew that she would have to deal with a new constitutional structure in which it was envisaged that she would merely be informed by the Ministers and would take no decisions on her own.
For this reason she remained at Saint Cloud while the Ministers remained in Paris, since it was possible for them to consult the Regent if they thought it necessary.
From the outset it was clear that the war would be difficult and its outcome uncertain: indeed the Emperor wrote to Eugénie from Metz saying, ‘Nothing is ready.
We haven't enough troops.
I believe we are already lost’, an analysis which the Empress kept to herself, but which soon proved to be all too correct, for in the early days of August the French armies suffered three defeats at the battles of Spicheren, Wissembourg and Froeschwiller.
News of these defeats was received by telegram at Saint Cloud on the night of 4 — 5 August, to be followed the next day by news of two further defeats at the battles of Reichshoffen and Forbach.
Suddenly the palace was haunted by the terrible spectre of total defeat: ‘…anguished cries could be heard throughout the darkened building such as those which a group of women would utter at the sight of some terrible phantom’.
The Empress, who lacked neither intelligence nor courage, immediately understood the import of what had happened.
Convinced that the dynasty was lost, she felt that her duty was now to do everything in her power to save the country.
She had already tried, without success, to press Franz-Joseph and the King of Italy to intervene on the side of France by at least bringing diplomatic pressure to bear on Berlin.
It was now clear to her that France was alone and must do the best it could by its own efforts.
Since she represented the Emperor and the government, her task was to serve as a sheet-anchor and a symbol around which could rally the national will to resist the enemy.
As a first step she must go to Paris to meet the Ministers and in the early hours of the morning she left by carriage for the Tuileries, where, on arrival, she immediately sent messages convoking a Council of Ministers.
The Ministers arrived at first light to find the palace dark and empty, the huge rooms barely lit by a few lamps placed here and there showing the furniture covered in drapes.
Only in the Empress's own apartments was there any sign of normality, where Eugénie had installed herself with her personal maid, her secretary and a handful of courtiers who had come from Saint Cloud to be with her.
It was in these few rooms that the last act of the drama took place, for the rest of the building remained unused except for those rooms near to the Empress's apartments where her few attendants camped out, sleeping on improvised beds and working, when necessary, on the corners of tables hastily cleared to provide space on which to write.
Even finding food was difficult, as Filon, the Empress's secretary, discovered when he went to find some soup for her in an attempt to make her eat after nearly 36 hours with virtually nothing:
I went by the Galerie de Diane and then down the stairs leading to the basement in the Pavillon de Flore where I followed the underground passage, badly lit — but where were the kitchens?
I hadn't the remotest idea, but I followed the little rails which were used by the tiny railway to carry food up to the dining rooms…
The kitchens were, in fact, under the rue de Rivoli and there I found a cook-boy, fast asleep, whom I wakened.
…My return journey with the soup took twenty minutes; the soup was cold, and the Empress had fallen asleep in her chair.
Nothing could, perhaps, convey better the collapse of a regime than this picture of a faithful attendant carrying a cup of soup through a deserted palace, to an Empress asleep in a chair.
The glittering courtiers were as scattered as the bodies of the soldiers in their bright Second Empire uniforms who lay in the fields of Eastern France.