

The origins and scope of our proposals
In April 1988 the Secretaries of State for Education and Science and for Wales appointed a Working Group to advise them on appropriate attainment targets and programmes of study for English.
The Group was asked to report in two phases.
Its first report, on English 5 to 11, was published in November 1988.
Following consultations, the Secretaries of State made an Order on 31 May 1989 covering the targets and programmes in English for key stage 1 only.
The Group's final report, submitted in May, builds on that and covers key stages 2 to 4, including a revision of its earlier recommendations for key stage 2 in the light of consultations on the key stage 1 Order and of the NCC's advice.
The completion of the Group's work represents a considerable achievement, and it is on the basis of the Group's advice on attainment targets and programmes of study that we now make jointly our formal proposals for key stages 2 to 4 in accordance with the provisions laid down in the Education Reform Act.
The full text of the Working Group's Report is attached.
References in this document are to chapter and paragraph numbers in the Report.
Our proposals are confined to attainment targets and programmes of study.
They do not relate to assessment arrangements, although these are covered in the Working Group's Report.
We are grateful to the English Working Group for the thought it has given to assessment issues.
We are asking SEAC to take these into account in advising us in due course on the Orders specifying assessment arrangements covering English.
But our present proposals relate only to Orders under section 4(2) (a) and (b) of the Act for attainment targets and programmes of study.
The report makes a number of comments on other matters, for example in relation to the resource and teacher training implications for English in the National Curriculum, and the need for non-statutory guidance for teachers based on its observations.
We are grateful for the Group's advice on these points, which will be duly considered, together with any comments on them.
Objectives of the consultation exercise
The objective of the processes for statutory consultation in England and Wales is to produce clear recommendations in a form which can be put into a draft Order under section 4(2) (a) and (b) of the Act covering key stages 2 to 4.
Our proposals for attainment targets and programmes of study are those recommended by the Working Group.
We are satisfied that the Group's recommendations represent a sound basis for legislation and we propose no changes.
THE PROPOSALS
Attainment targets
The Report outlines five attainment targets in English for pupils in key stage 2, and four in key stages 3 and 4.
These are grouped for assessment and reporting purposes into three profile components — for speaking and listening (attainment target 1), reading (attainment target 2) and writing (attainment targets 3, 4 and 5).
For each attainment target there are statements of attainment which define up to ten levels of attainment specifying what pupils should know, understand and be able to do, appropriate for pupils of different ages and abilities.
The Report also recommends the ranges of levels of attainment which should apply to pupils at the end of each of key stages 2, 3 and 4 — ie at the ages of 11, 14 and 16.
These are:
Key stage 2 — Levels 2 to 5
Key stage 3 — Levels 3 to 8
Key stage 4 — Levels 3 to 10
We propose that the attainment targets, the associated statements of attainment at each level and the ranges of levels appropriate to each of key stages 2 to 4 should be included in the Order to be made under section 4(2) (a) of the Act.
Programmes of study
The purpose of programmes of study is to establish the matters, skills and processes which pupils should be taught in order to achieve the attainment targets.
The programmes of study in chapters 15 to 17 of the Report offer a sound and comprehensive coverage of the essential content which pupils will need to tackle.
We therefore propose that the Group's recommended programmes of study should form the basis for the Order to be made under section 4(2) (b).
Application of the Order — special education needs
In chapter 12 the Group makes recommendations concerning the disapplication of some parts of some attainment targets and programmes of study for certain groups of pupils with special educational needs.
We propose that these recommendations should form the basis of modifications made to attainment targets and programmes of study in the Order under section 4 of the Act and that, subject to those modifications, the attainment targets and programmes of study should apply to all pupils.
Application of the Order — Wales
In chapter 13 the Group suggests that, for pupils taught mainly through the medium of Welsh, the programmes of study but not the attainment targets for English in key stage 2 will need modification, to accommodate the matters, skills and processes which have been included in the English programmes of study for key stage 1 but have been disapplied in respect of such pupils in key stage 1.
The Secretary of State for Wales proposes that these recommendations should form the basis of modifications made to the programmes of study for key stage 2 in the Order under Section 4 of the Act.
Commencement dates
We propose to introduce the attainment targets and programmes of study for all pupils in England and Wales in the first year of each of key stages 2 and 3 in autumn 1990, and of key stage 4 in autumn 1992.
Appendix
Summary of attainment targets
Profile Component 1 — Speaking and listening
Attainment target 1
The development of pupils' understanding of the spoken word and the capacity to express themselves effectively, in a variety of speaking and listening activities, matching style and response to audience and purpose.
Profile Component 2 — Reading
Attainment target 2
The development of the ability to read, understand and respond to all types of writing, as well as the development of information-retrieval strategies for the purposes of study.
Profile Component 3 — Writing
Attainment target 3
A growing ability to construct and convey meaning in written language matching style to audience and purpose.
Attainment target 4
Spelling (up to level 4)
Attainment target 5
Handwriting (up to level 4)
Attainment target 4/5
Presentation (level 5 and above)
Speaking and listening
‘Where children are given responsibility they are placed in situations where it becomes important for them to communicate — to discuss, to negotiate, to converse — with their fellows, with the staff, with other adults.
And of necessity they are likely to develop oral skills.
This basically is how oracy grows: it is to be taught by the creation of many and varied circumstances to which both speech and listening are the natural responses.’
‘We learnt that it is hard to build models to scale from a drawing as they are not very accurate in size.
We learnt that working together was a lot easier than going solo; but arguing brought out the better ideas.’
Introduction
Our inclusion of speaking and listening as a separate profile component in our recommendations is a reflection of our conviction that they are of central importance to children's development.
The value of talk in all subjects as a means of promoting pupils' understanding, and of evaluating their progress, is now widely accepted.
For instance, the Cockcroft Report (1982) on the teaching of mathematics drew attention to the importance of learning through talk.
This emphasis has been endorsed by the mathematics and science teachers' associations, and by the National Association for the Teaching of English as well as by cross-subject movements such as the Association for Primary Education.
In Better Schools (1985) the Government drew attention to the need to reconsider traditional teaching techniques in order to promote and encourage the development of oral skills: ‘In the majority of primary and middle schools there is an over-concentration on practising skills in literacy and numeracy…much work is too closely directed by the teacher and there is little chance for oral discussion.’
In addition to its function as a crucial teaching and learning method , talk is now widely recognised as promoting and embodying a range of skills and competence — both transactional and social — that are central to children's overall language development.
In 1982 and 1983, the APU carried out surveys of standards in oracy among pupils of 11 and 15.
The theoretical framework underlying the APU's oracy tests is echoed in the GCSE national criteria for assessing oral communication.
For the first time in this country, for many pupils, the assessment of oracy has been made compulsory: by GCSE.
We set out, in chapter 2 of this Report, the broad purposes — individual and social, educational and cultural, in school and in adult life — that underlie the curriculum and attainment targets that we recommend.
Recent surveys have drawn attention to the importance of talking and listening both in obtaining employment and in performing well in it.
The surveys report the significant finding that in interviews employers attached importance to candidates' answers to open questions which invited them to express and develop ideas in a sustained way, and to their ability to engage in discussion and to exchange views.
Conversely, they attached little value to questions to which there were simply short right or wrong answers.
Employers also identified the ability to relate to the interviewer as a key factor.
Howe, reflecting on the result of his survey in Marks & Spencer, drew attention to the importance of employees' being able to cope — in both work and other activities — with a variety of complex situations through talk.
He emphasised the consequent need for schools to ensure that adequate opportunities were provided for improving accomplishments in speaking and listening.
Employment apart, there are very many other areas of adult life in which teenagers will need increasingly sophisticated competence in speaking and listening.
Through such media as TV, radio and the cinema, for instance, they will see and hear an abundance of information which they will need to evaluate and use judiciously for their own purposes.
As consumers, they will need to know how to conduct oral transactions effectively — how to seek information, how to negotiate, how to complain.
As potential jurors or witnesses, voters or representatives of political or interest groups, they will need to know how to judge or present a spoken case, how to recognise emotive language and arguments that are specious or selective, and how to marshall facts with clarity and precision.
As members of smaller groups within a larger community — a trade union or residents' association, for instance— they will need to be able to function collectively through discussion, for example to represent or protect their interests.
English departments in secondary schools should take some of the responsibility for preparing pupils for such purposes of spoken language in public life by providing firm foundations on which they will be able to build as adults with increasing maturity and experience.
Moreover, as patrons or practitioners of the arts and as future adult learners in all spheres of life, pupils should be given every opportunity to become familiar with — and derive pleasure and understanding from — the widest possible range of oral presentations: from plays, films and broadcasting to debates and public lectures.
Assumptions underlying the attainment target and programmes of study
The assumptions set out in the following paragraphs are central to the recommendations on attainment levels and programmes of study in paragraphs 15.24 to 15.41.
Social and transactional language
The development of children's spoken language in the English curriculum is concerned with the relations between language, speaker and listener.
Some talk (eg casual conversation) is predominantly listener-related: it is social or interpersonal in its functions, rather than aiming to convey particular information in a precise way.
No particular outcome may be expected from such talk at all: it does not have a definable purpose, beyond maintaining social relations.
Clarity and efficiency are, for example, not criteria by which we judge social talk, and the world would be a very unpleasant place if they were.
But in some other types of spoken language, it is predominantly the content which matters: it is information-related or transactional in its functions, and characteristically has a definable purpose.
Communication will have failed if the listener does not discover which platform the train leaves from or how to load the program into the computer.
These two orientations are not entirely separate: most speech involves some information and it is couched differently according to the audience.
But in most circumstances, the focus will tend to be either more on the maintenance of social relations, or more on the conveying of information clearly, concisely and unambiguously.
Under normal circumstances, children's social talk will develop naturally, without teacher intervention.
But not all children will automatically acquire all the forms of transactional spoken language which are necessary and highly valued in education and in society.
Most children will need the skilled and active support of their teachers, in all subjects, in building their confidence and developing the transactional skills and language which are necessary both across the curriculum and in adult life.
An adequate transactional competence should be a real achievement of lasting value.
Talking and listening skills
The effectiveness of talking and listening is determined not only by the ability to use speech appropriately, but also by the ability to listen actively.
The former includes being able to adjust ways of speaking — such as tone and vocabulary — according to audience, context and purpose; the latter involves skills of concentration and assimilation.
The use and interpretation of silence can also be important.
The structure and patterns of spoken language are distinct from those of writing: it is rare, for example, for a speaker continuously to use complete sentences as we understand them in writing — particularly in a situation where interruption is both accepted and expected.
Similarly, oral language differs significantly from written language in its complex interactive nature: non-verbal communication, such as body language, is also a part of the process.
Dialect
Teachers should never treat non-standard dialect as sub-standard language but should recognise the intimate links between dialect and identity and the damage to self-esteem and motivation which can be caused by indiscriminate ‘correction’ of dialect forms.
All children should be supported in valuing their own dialects and in using them where they are appropriate to context and purpose, but they should also be able to use Standard English when it is necessary and helpful to do so in speaking as well as writing.
We do not, however, see it as the school's place to enforce the accent known as Received Pronunciation.
Development of oral skills
Development of oral skills will involve increased sensitivity to the nuances of language and presentation, and to the implications of context.
We would expect pupils to demonstrate their growing competence as both speakers and listeners by:
developing increasing clarity and precision in describing experience and expressing opinions, and sensitivity in articulating personal feelings;
formulating — and making appropriate responses to — increasingly complex instructions and questions;
developing an increasing capacity to organise or sequence information and response;
demonstrating an increasing ability to evaluate and to reflect;
increasingly adjusting language and delivery to suit audience and purpose, and being able — as an audience for others — to understand, respond to and reflect on correspondingly wider modes of address;
showing an increasing ability to function collaboratively — eg involving others in a discussion; listening to and giving weight to the opinions of others; perceiving the relevance of contributions; timing contributions; adjusting and adapting to feedback;
showing an increasing ability to be explicit about how written and spoken language can support each other.
The attainment target
The range of communication purposes for the spoken word is extensive.
It may be used, for example, to persuade; to explain; to instruct; to entertain; to narrate; to speculate; to argue a case; to report; to describe; to find out; to clarify or explore an issue; to solve a problem; to interpret; to summarise; to evaluate; to reflect; to announce; to criticise and to respond to criticism.
Our proposed attainment target is therefore deliberately broad and the associated programmes of study should enable children to develop confidence and competence as speakers and listeners in a wide variety of situations.
We propose the following single attainment targets for the speaking and listening profile component:
The development of pupils' understanding of the spoken word and the capacity to express themselves effectively in a variety of speaking and listening activities, matching style and response to audience and purpose.
Strands within levels of attainment
In defining the statements of attainment we have, wherever possible, grouped speaking and listening skills into broad strands:
the skills enabling pupils to put forward (and interpret) clear and properly supported statements of personal feeling, opinion or viewpoint;
the skills enabling pupils to give accurately — and to assimilate and act appropriately on — information, explanations and instructions;
the skills enabling pupils to communicate imaginatively and effectively as performers or readers;
the skills enabling pupils to function collaboratively and to participate positively and with understanding in general discussion;
the skills enabling pupils to develop and express an awareness of varieties of spoken language and of the relationship between spoken and written language.
The separation of skills into these groupings is simply an organisational device.
We would stress that the broad lines of development which we propose in our description of the 10 levels under this attainment target will require flexible interpretation since we recognise that language development is not linear but recursive, with pupils returning repeatedly to the same aspects of competence and reinforcing their skills on each occasion.
In addition, what is difficult will vary for different individuals and according to circumstances: some topics will themselves vary in difficulty; some people will perceive the difficulty of the same task very differently; and circumstances may make an otherwise easy task seem very hard.
Beyond level 6 there are no statements of attainment which relate to dramatic performance; we believe it is at level 7 and beyond that the claims of drama as a separate subject become specific.
We also believe that it would be inappropriate for performance in drama at those levels to detract from a higher level of performance for spoken English as a whole.
Programmes of study
The range of activities recommended for programmes of study is drawn up in general terms and, for the most part, gathered in clusters to enable schools to match their particular planned activities to our specifications.
In suggesting programmes according to level we have taken account of a range of dimensions of difficulty.
Topics will vary in difficulty in a variety of ways according especially to their familiarity, their controversial or uncontroversial character, in degrees of abstraction and complexity and much else.
Similarly, the challenges of talking and listening may increase as one's audience ranges outwards from intimates to strangers and upwards in group size.
What we may expect, know or not know about our audience can present other dimensions of difficulty and challenge.
This is a condensed account of the factors which complicate the business of speaking and listening — readers will easily add for themselves their own accounts of the personal and emotional features which make for vulnerability or call for sensitivity.
In drawing up the list of activities below we have aimed to recommend programmes of study that reinforce the links between English and drama, and between English and media education, which we seek to emphasise throughout this Report as well as in chapters 8 and 9. •We see role-play as a valuable means of broadening pupils' mental and emotional horizons and of developing social and personal confidence: it provides an ideal medium for much of the exploratory and/or performance-based elements of programmes of study.
•Media work has a particular significance, leading naturally to discussion of how spoken language and visual accompaniment are interpreted; this leads to an understanding of the processes of selection, omission and editing which take place when any programme is prepared.
For example, in advertising can pupils distinguish the aesthetic from the transactional?
In news broadcasts, panel discussions or documentaries can they distinguish how fair or balanced are the points of view presented?
15.24 ATTAINMENT TARGET 1: SPEAKING AND LISTENING 
The development of pupils' understanding of the spoken word and the capacity to express themselves effectively in a variety of speaking and listening activities, matching style and response to audience and purpose.
From level 7, pupils should be using Standard English, wherever appropriate, to meet the statements of attainment.
LEVEL
DESCRIPTION
Pupils should be able to:
1
i
Participate as speakers and listeners in group activities, including imaginative play.
ii
Listen attentively, and respond, to stories and poems.
iii
Respond appropriately to simple instructions given by a teacher.
2
i
Participate as speakers and listeners in a group engaged in a given task.
ii
Describe an event, real or imagined, to the teacher or another pupil.
iii
Listen attentively to stories and poems, and talk about them.
iv
Talk with the teacher, listen and ask and answer questions.
v
Respond appropriately to a range of more complex instructions given by a teacher, and give simple instructions.
3
i
Relate real or imaginary events in a connected narrative which conveys meaning to a group of pupils, the teacher or another known adult.
ii
Convey accurately a simple message.
iii
Listen with an increased span of concentration to other children and adults, asking and responding to questions and commenting on what has been said.
iv
Give, and receive and follow accurately, precise instructions when pursuing a task individually or as a member of a group.
4
i
Give a detailed oral account of an event, or something that has been learned in the classroom, or explain with reasons why a particular course of action has been taken.
ii
Ask and respond to questions with increased confidence in a range of situations.
iii
Take part as a speaker and listener in a group discussion of straightforward issues or in a group activity, commenting on what is being discussed.
iv
Participate in a presentation,eg of the outcome of a group activity, a poem, a story or a scene .
5
i
Give a well organised and sustained account of an event, a personal experience or an activity.
ii
Contribute to and respond constructively in discussion or debate, advocating and justifying a particular point of view.
iii
Use transactional language effectively in a straightforward situation,eg an eyewitness account of an event or incident; reclaiming an article which has been lost .
iv
Plan and participate in a presentation,eg of the outcome of a group activity, a poem, story, dramatic scene or play .
v
Talk about variations in vocabulary between different regional or social groups,eg dialect vocabulary, specialist terms .
6
i
Contribute considered opinions or clear statements of personal feelings to group discussions and show an understanding of the contributions of others.
ii
Understand and use transactional language effectively in a variety of relatively straightforward situations where the subject is familiar both to the pupil and to the audience or other participants.
iii
Participate in simple presentations or performances with some fluency.
iv
Talk about some grammatical differences between spoken Standard English and a non-standard variety.
7
i
Express a point of view cogently and with clarity to a range of audiences and interpret with accuracy a range of statements by others.
ii
Understand and use transactional language effectively on occasions where the situation or topic requires more than one outcome and is less readily familiar to the pupils and/or their audience.
iii
Take an active part in group discussions, contributing constructively to the development of the argument in hand.
iv
Talk about appropriateness in the use of spoken language, according to purpose, topic and audience,eg differences between language appropriate to a job interview and to a discussion with their peers .
8
i
Express a point of view on a complex subject cogently and with clarity, and interpret alternative viewpoints with accuracy and discrimination.
ii
Understand and use transactional language effectively in a variety of situations which involve a range of audiences.
iii
Take part in group discussions, actively and critically, showing an ability to summarise and evaluate arguments effectively.
iv
Talk about the contribution that facial expressions, gestures and tone of voice can make to a speaker's meaning,eg in ironic and sarcastic uses of language .
9
i
Give a presentation involving a personal point of view on a complex subject cogently and with clarity, integrating talk with writing as appropriate,eg using hand-outs or visual aids , and respond appropriately to the presentations of others.
ii
Take an active part in group discussion, displaying sensitivity, listening critically,eg to attempts to persuade , and being self-critical.
iii
Talk about ways in which language varies between different types of spoken communication,eg joke, anecdote, conversation, commentary, lecture .
10
i
Express a point of view on complex subjects cogently and with clarity, applying and interpreting a range of presentational strategies and assessing their own effectiveness accurately.
ii
Take a leading role in group discussions,eg by taking the chair , listening with concentration and understanding, noting down salient points, summarising arguments and, where appropriate, formulating a consensus.
iii
Talk about some of the factors that influence people's attitudes to the way other people speak.
PROGRAMMES OF STUDY FOR SPEAKING AND LISTENING
General provisions for all four key stages
15.25 Through the programmes of study pupils should encounter a range of situations and activities which are designed to develop their competence, precision and confidence in speaking and listening, irrespective of their initial competence or home language.
15.26 These planned situations and activities should cover:
working with other pupils and adults — involving discussion with others; listening to, and giving weight to, the opinions of others; perceiving the relevance of contributions; timing contributions; adjusting and adapting to views expressed;
development of listening (and, as appropriate, reactive) skills in non-reciprocal situations;
development of speaking and listening skills, both when role-playing and otherwise — when describing experiences, expressing opinions, articulating personal feelings and formulating and making appropriate responses to increasingly complex instructions and questions;
development, by informal means and in the course of purposeful activities, of pupils' powers of concentration, grasp of turn-taking, ability to gain and hold the attention of their listeners, and ability to voice disagreement courteously with an opposing point of view.
15.27 All activities should:
help to develop in pupils' speaking and listening their grasp of sequence, cause and effect, reasoning, sense of consistency, clarity of argument, appreciation of relevance and irrelevance, and powers of prediction and recall;
by informal and indirect means, develop pupils' ability to adjust the language they use and its delivery to suit particular audiences, purposes and contexts and, when listening to others, to respond to different ways of talking in different contexts and for different purposes.
Pupils should therefore be encouraged to reflect on and evaluate their use of spoken language and to reformulate it to help the listener;
draw on examples from across the curriculum, and in particular those existing requirements for mathematics and science which refer to use of spoken language and vocabulary, asking questions, working in groups, explaining and presenting ideas, giving and understanding instructions;
include provision for pupils to talk and listen in groups of different sizes and to a range of audiences;
emphasise the importance of clear diction and audibility.
Detailed provisions for key stage 1
15.28 The range of activities designed to develop pupils' ability to speak and listen should include:
listening and responding to stories, rhymes, poems and songs — familiar and unfamiliar.
These should include examples from different cultures and authors and from pupils' own work;
securing responses to visual and aural stimuli,eg pictures, television, radio, computer, telephone , making use of audio and video recordings as appropriate;
discussion of their work with other pupils and the teacher;
collaborative planning of activities in a way which requires pupils to speak and listen;
talking about experiences in or out of school,eg a school trip, a family outing, a television programme seen ;
telling stories, and reciting poems which have been learnt by heart;
collaborative and exploratory play;
imaginative play and improvised drama;
giving and receiving simple explanations, information and instructions; asking and answering questions.
General provisions for key stages 2 to 4
15.29 Pupils should be given the opportunity to develop the ability to:
express and justify individual feelings, opinions and viewpoints with increasing sophistication;
discuss an increasingly complex range of issues;
assess and interpret the arguments and opinions of others with increasing precision and discrimination;
present their ideas, experiences and understanding in a widening range of contexts which require an increasing awareness of audience and purpose;
give increasingly precise instructions;
ask increasingly precise or detailed questions;
respond to increasingly complex instructions and questions;
present factual information in a clear and logically structured manner in an increasingly wide range of situations — discriminate between fact and opinion, and between relevance and irrelevance;
listen and respond to the presentation or performance of an increasing range of fiction, poetry and plays;
recite and read aloud in a variety of contexts, with increasing fluency and awareness of audience;
work with or devise an increasing range of drama scripts, taking on an increasing variety of dramatic roles;
use, and understand the use of, role-play in an increasingly broad range of teaching and learning situations;
interact positively with other group members in an increasingly wide range of situations,eg collaborating on an assignment where a specific outcome is required ;
discuss a variety of issues in small and large groups, listening to — and taking account of — the views of others, and negotiating a consensus as appropriate;
report and summarise effectively in a range of contexts;
reflect on their own competence in the use of the spoken word;
in the course of group activity, engage constructively in prediction, speculation and hypothesis.
15.30 Teaching about language through speaking and listening, which should start for pupils working towards level 5, should focus on:
regional and social variations in English accents and dialects; and attitudes to such variations;
the range of purposes which spoken language serves;
the forms and functions of spoken Standard English.
15.31 Pupils should have increasing opportunities to develop proficiency in spoken Standard English, in contexts where it is evidently appropriate.
Detailed provisions for key stage 2 (ages 7 to 11)
15.32 For pupils working towards levels 2 and 3, teachers should refer to relevant material in the programme of study for key stage 1.
15.33 Pupils working towards level 4 should, where possible, be given the opportunity to work in single sex and mixed groups of various size, with and without direct teacher supervision.
They should be encouraged to express their opinions and argue a point of view, to be receptive to the contributions of others and be helped to make their own contributions confidently and effectively.
The range of activities should be widely varied, including the preparations of presentations,eg to the class, the school assembly or to parents , planning and problem-solving activities across the curriculum, undertaking assignments where specific outcomes are required, talking about stories and poems and taking part in shared writing activities.
In addition, pupils at this level should be encouraged to contribute individually in class discussions and, where practicable, with wider audiences,eg in representing the views of a group, or taking small parts in group or class presentations.
15.34 (i) Pupils working towards level 5 should be encouraged to make more extended contributions to group or class discussions and to informal or formal presentations,eg dramatic improvisation, role-play activities or scripted scenes .
They should be encouraged to make their questions more probing, and their contributions to discussion more closely reasoned.
(ii) Teaching about language should encourage discussion of vocabulary that is specific to local communities — words for local places, buildings, institutions etc, and local usages such as bairn (cf child ),baps (cf rolls ),outwith (cf outside ); or to particular age groups,eg frock (cf dress ),wireless (cf radio ); or to certain occupations eg the specialist terms and acronyms used by groups such as doctors, lawyers, builders, computer experts and mechanics .
Detailed provisions for key stages 3 and 4 (ages 11/12 to 16)
15.35 For pupils working towards level 3, teachers should refer to relevant material in the programme of study for key stage 1.
15.36 For pupils working towards levels 4 and 5, see level related material in detailed provisions for key stage 2.
15.37 (i) Pupils working towards level 6 should be encouraged to work in a wider range of situations in which their individual contributions are given greater emphasis.
These might include the giving of instructions to others in a group, problem-solving activities related to the school or local community, role-play and simulation work and, where feasible, the undertaking of small representative roles on behalf of a group, a class, or the school,eg with visitors to the school .
Teachers should be starting to guide pupils towards the use of spoken Standard English in public or formal situations.
Presentations at this level might include memorised scripts for minor parts in school productions — though this will not be feasible for all pupils.
(ii) Teaching about language should draw attention to people's sensitivity to quite small features of pronunciation that differentiate the speech of one area from others; and to any grammatical differences between the speech of the area and spoken Standard English,eg in verb forms, pronoun use, prepositions .
15.38 (i) Pupils working towards level 7 should continue to participate extensively in widely varied group work in a range of groupings where they should now be encouraged to take on an increasingly responsible and, as appropriate, individual or independent role,eg by taking notes of the discussion and checking them with the group, representing group views in plenary sessions .
The discussions themselves should vary widely in topic, but should be so planned as to involve the display of evidence, and the development and probing of both argument and evidence.
Literary texts (including drama scripts), the use of language, responses to the media, pupils' own written work and the use of information technology might furnish many of the materials and topics for discussion for which planned outcomes,eg in written work or presentations might emerge.
Where possible, some work at this level should also be directed beyond the confines of the school and individual pupils should be encouraged to undertake real transactions on behalf of others,eg by making use of the telephone , or in representative roles.
(ii) Pupils should consider the notion of appropriateness to situation, topic, purpose and language mode and the fact that inappropriate language use can be a source of humour (either intentional or unintentional) or may give the impression that the speaker or writer is pompous or inept or impertinent or rude.
Pupils should learn that Standard English is the language of wide social communication and is particularly likely to be required in public, formal settings.
Teaching should cover discussion about the situations in which and purposes for which people might choose to use non-standard varieties rather than Standard English,eg in speech with friends, in a local team or group, in television advertising, folk songs, poetry, dialogue in novels or plays .
(iii) It is important that pupils working towards level 7 and beyond have increasing opportunities to use spoken Standard English, and in particular that those who do not speak it as a native dialect should be helped to extend their language competence so that they can use Standard English with confidence.
15.39 Pupils working towards levels 8 to 10 should be involved in much the same programmes of work as those for level 7, but will need increased opportunities, where feasible, for undertaking individual, responsible and formal roles.
At level 8, this might include some debating activities within a formal structure, opportunities to give talks on a topic of individual interest or expertise, leading a group activity towards a planned outcome or presentation (which might include a wider audience than the class).
At levels 9 and 10, the activities themselves will not differ significantly in kind, but pupils will require teaching which helps them to act with increasing confidence and fluency, to take a leading role in discussions, to be supportive of the contributions of others, to prepare presentations effectively (including the use of audiovisual aids and handouts), to be rigorous in argument and the use of evidence, and to take effective account of audience and context.
15.40 For pupils working towards level 9, teaching should demonstrate how speech ranges from intimate or casual spontaneous conversation,eg jokes, anecdotes, banter, gossip, argument , through discussion, commentary and debate to more formal forms — lectures, sermons, and formulaic utterances such as toasts, oaths, and banns .
15.41 Pupils working towards level 10 should learn that attitudes to Standard English and to non-standard varieties,eg as expressed in letters to newspapers , can be based on stereotypes and prescriptive judgement.
Teaching should show how language can be a bond between members of a group, a symbol of national pride, a barrier and a source of misunderstandings, and can be used to alienate, insult, wound, or offend, to be polite or rude.
Pupils should be encouraged to respect their own language(s) or dialect(s) and those of others.
ASSESSMENT
15.42 The list of activities suggested in the programmes of study, combined with the variety of suggested groupings, is wide in its implications.
Assessment in individual areas through SATs will necessarily be a sampling process.
The SATs should nevertheless include as much speaking and listening, in as wide a range of representative activities, as is practicable.
But the bulk of assessment in speaking and listening should be conducted locally, recorded by teachers in a common format devised by SEAC in consultation with NCC and CCW.
15.43 We list below five important criteria, in addition to those specified in paragraph 15.16 which have informed our recommendations and which we would expect those constructing internal and external assessment arrangements to take into full account.
These criteria are:
the assessment of speaking and listening should, where possible, be informal, continuous and incidental, applied to tasks carried out for curricular purposes;
the tape recording of individual children's oral performance for assessment purposes might not be part of normal classroom activity and thus not in line with TGAT recommendations.
Given the technical and administrative problems that such a method would present in many classrooms and the artificiality which would be introduced, we recommend that tape recording (audio or video) should not be used to moderate the assessment of oral performance for SATs (though it may, of course, be used by teachers or pupils, as part of their planned activities).
We are aware of the implications of this recommendation regarding the moderation of assessment, but urge that alternative means of establishing common standards of oracy should be explored (in line with current developments in GCSE oral assessment);
although there are some widespread non-reciprocal speaking and listening situations (such as radio, television, public address systems and lectures), the processes of listening and speaking are primarily reciprocal and integrated.
The ability of a listener to respond appropriately to instructions is heavily dependent on the ability of the instructor to speak plainly.
Tests of listening which by their nature place all responsibility for comprehension upon the listener should therefore be avoided;
oral assessment methods should both reflect and promote the variety of classroom activities recommended in this Report;
particular attention should be paid, by task-setters, teachers and moderators alike, to the danger that oral assessment might be influenced by cultural or social bias.
There are differences in the verbal and non-verbal behaviour of members of different social groups, whether defined by ethnicity, gender or social class; and consequently assessors' own expectations may vary.
End note
15.44 We wish to stress that what we have suggested in this chapter treads some new ground.
It will undoubtedly need further refinement and modification in the light of consultations and of experience.
We recommend that teachers should be given training in the assessment of speaking and listening and in moderation methods.
We also recommend that there should be a central bank of specially compiled examples for training in the moderation process.
Reading
‘…learning to read is a satisfying activity.
What encourages children to read and thus to learn to read is not some ‘intrinsic reward’ like praise or high marks or a special treat, but being able to read.
Watch children engrossed in a book from which they are learning about reading, and there will be no need to ask where the fundamental satisfaction lies’.
Introduction
16.1 Our proposals for attainments in reading cover three related forms of development:
the development of the ability to read, understand and respond to all types of writing;
the development of reading and information-retrieval strategies for the purpose of study;
the development of knowledge about language.
16.2 Reading is much more than the decoding of black marks upon a page: it is a quest for meaning and one which requires the reader to be an active participant.
It is a prerequisite of successful teaching of reading, especially in the early stages, that whenever techniques are taught, or books are chosen for children's use, meaning should always be in the foreground.
16.3 Reading takes pupils beyond first-hand experience: it enables them to project themselves into unfamiliar environments, times and cultures, to gain sympathetic understanding of other ways of life and to experience joy and sadness vicariously.
Much of this imaginative experience stems from literature whose quality influences the depth and range of the pupil's imaginative experience.
In addition, literature provides examples of different kinds of language use and may be used as a stimulus for a variety of learning activities (see chapter 7).
16.4 Pupils can be helped to develop emotionally, aesthetically and intellectually by means of the pleasurable activity of reading.
The pleasure principle should motivate the programmes of study, and always be given high priority.
There is a danger, particularly in the final years of compulsory schooling, that little time is given to promoting reading for fun.
Too much concentration on set texts for assessment purposes can turn pupils against reading.
16.5 The requirements to make time for independent reading, not least as a source of pleasure, remains crucial, whatever the total curriculum demands.
It should be seen as a definite part of a school's total reading programme in English: it is not an interruption of it.
Indeed, if necessary, it can be integrated into other classroom activities.
Independent reading need not be solitary, but it can include reading silently a book selected by personal preference.
Such reading in the classroom may still be the only occasion when some pupils experience this activity: in which case, they may well value it very highly indeed.
16.6 There should be opportunities for individual and group reading activities, which might lead to ‘performance readings’ of texts of different genres, especially drama and poetry.
Teachers should continue the practice of reading aloud in class; there is plenty of evidence that this simple activity can interest and enthuse.
It is a valuable means of conveying the pleasure of reading, and as valid at secondary as at primary level.
The widespread enjoyment derived from hearing stories well read is clearly apparent in the continuing popularity of programmes devoted to this on radio and television.
16.7 Reading is also one of the means by which we interact with the society in which we live.
The transactional uses of print can differ sharply in style and form from the various genres of imaginative writing and may, indeed, vary extensively themselves according to type and purpose.
These variations can include the use of signs and diagrams to replace, or partly replace, written text.
Pupils need to be able to respond to such forms, and schools have an obligation to help them to read everything from labels and slogans to the subject textbooks of the secondary school curriculum.
Reading in the primary school
16.8 We hope parents will share books with their children from their earliest days, read aloud to them, and talk about the stories they have enjoyed together.
Many parents will also have shown by their own reading of newspapers, periodicals, lists, calendars, instructions and leaflets and by their sending and receiving of letters and cards that reading plays an important role in their daily lives.
Many pre-school children will have played spontaneous games in which the pretended reading (and writing) of stories, lists, letters and so on shows their own recognition of the pleasurable and purposeful nature of reading.
Reading is best taught in the classroom when teachers build on this basis.
16.9 A prime objective of the teaching of reading must be the development of the pupil's independence as a reader.
But ‘there is no one method, medium, approach, device, or philosophy that holds the key to the process of learning to read…
Simple endorsements of one or another nostrum are of no service to the teaching of reading’.
In their quest for meaning, children need to be helped to become confident and resourceful in the use of a variety of reading cues.
They need to be able to recognise on sight a large proportion of the words they encounter and to be able to predict meaning on the basis of phonic, idiomatic and grammatical regularities and of what makes sense in context; children should be encouraged to make informed guesses.
Teachers should recognise that reading is a complex but unitary process and not a set of discrete skills which can be taught separately in turn and, ultimately, bolted together.
16.10 The environment provided by the school should promote the reading development of all pupils.
Examples of purposeful and pleasurable uses of print should be displayed in classrooms, foyers and school libraries.
Well chosen picture books, poetry collections, folk tales, stories, novels, reference books and non-fiction should be available for use in all primary classrooms.
Well presented notices, labels and children's own work should also be displayed to stress the communicative character of the written word.
16.11 As independence is strengthened, pupils should be encouraged to read more difficult texts and to look not only at what is said, but at how meaning is expressed and how effects are achieved in writing.
Progress will be shown by increased fluency; an increase in the range of types of text which the pupil can tackle without frustration; an increase in the range of approaches which readers can apply to particular texts according to their own purposes and those of the texts — skimming, scanning, close reading and so on.
On these points, teachers need clear and agreed guidelines.
They also need well-informed assessment procedures for recording pupils' progress; the support of well chosen and well supplied book stocks in classrooms, in school libraries and from local authority school library services.
Reading in the secondary school
16.12 In the secondary school, pupils should continue to read, understand and respond perceptively to an increasingly wide range of texts.
Pupils learn to read, in the deepest sense of that word, by reading widely and often.
It remains very important at secondary level that reading should also be encouraged outside the classroom, at home, in libraries at school or in the locality.
This will help pupils to develop a personal love of reading which will continue after compulsory schooling.
We have already stressed the importance of silent reading in the classroom.
In addition, reading programmes should certainly include shared experiences, whether in small groups, or within a whole class.
The shared fun, or criticism, of a text can bring its own satisfaction.
16.13 At secondary school, pupils should be increasingly encouraged to think critically about the texts they encounter, as a means of enlarging their understanding of the worlds of others, and in this way to examine and develop their own responses.
They should also analyse, through a variety of approaches, the form and style of a writer as the method of conveying meaning.
Learning to read involves recognising that writing is made: poets were originally called ‘makers’, craftsmen and women.
Pupils should be encouraged to question the intentions behind a text, the reasons for choice of vocabulary, image or genre, and to become increasingly aware of the richness and complexity of literature.
They should be aware of the importance of refining and substantiating their opinions by the use of precise textual reference.
16.14 In chapter 7 we say that literature plays an important role in improving abilities in speaking and listening, and in writing, as well as in reading.
We particularly urge that children should be encouraged to write fiction, poetry, plays, diaries, book reviews and so on, in response to the literature they have enjoyed and shared and discussed with their teacher and classmates.
This applies just as much at secondary as at primary level.
16.15 Poetry needs to be a central part of the reading programmes throughout the secondary sector, and this assumption needs reinforcing especially at 14 to 16.
Evidence suggests that some teachers are least happy about teaching poetry to this age group, in comparison with the other main literary genres.
Clearly, pupils will sense a teacher's unease in presenting poetry to them, and are then likely to respond negatively.
It is crucial that teachers' attitudes to poetry communicate enthusiasm for it.
In our chapter on literature and appendix 6 we describe ways of bringing literature to life for pupils of all abilities.
We hope that these methods will help teachers themselves to enjoy poetry and to share their pleasure with their pupils: ‘Poetry needs to be at the heart of work in English because of the quality of language at work on experience that it offers to us.
If language becomes separated from moral and emotional life — becomes merely a trail of clichés which neither communicate with nor quicken the mind of the reader — then we run the risk of depriving children of the kind of vital resource of language which poetry provides’.
The attainment target
16.16 In our first Report we proposed two attainment targets for reading for ages 5 to 11.
We agree with the National Curriculum Council's conclusion, in the light of consultation, that they should be combined and had in fact already decided on one target for the secondary stages.
We propose the following single attainment target for the reading profile component:
The development of the ability to read, understand and respond to all types of writing, as well as the development of information-retrieval strategies for the purposes of study.
Strands within levels of attainment
16.17 At level 3 there are statements of attainment that refer to the ability to read silently with sustained concentration, and to listen attentively to stories read aloud.
These strands do not continue throughout the levels because it is not possible to specify further measurable stages of development in these abilities, and it would be cumbersome to repeat them unchanged throughout the remaining seven levels.
Nevertheless, it is clearly important that pupils should have opportunities both to read silently and to listen to well-written books read aloud throughout their school years.
16.18 Strand (i) at levels 3 and 4 refers to the ability to read aloud fluently and expressively.
Again, this strand is not continued into the higher levels because further development of this ability would move into areas such as acting and public speaking, which are not appropriately assessed within a reading component.
16.19 From level 5, the statements of attainment are presented in five strands: the range of literature read, responses to literature, understanding and interpreting non-literary and media texts, study skills and information-retrieval strategies, and knowledge about language.
16.20 From level 5, strand (i) in the statements of attainment describes in broad terms the kinds of literature that pupils will read at successive levels, taking into account the various dimensions of text difficulty described in paragraph 7.17.
By level 8, the reading material is as demanding as it can be.
Therefore, levels 8, 9 and 10 are identical since there can be no differentiation in the material itself.
The same argument applies to strand (iv)(from level 5 onwards), which deals with study skills and information-retrieval strategies, which is repeated from levels 8 to 10.
16.21 ATTAINMENT TARGET 2: READING 
The development of the ability to read, understand and respond to all types of writing, as well as the development of information-retrieval strategies for the purposes of study.
LEVEL DESCRIPTION
Pupils should be able to:
1
i
Recognise that print is used to carry meaning, in books and in other forms in the everyday world.
ii
Begin to recognise individual words or letters in familiar contexts.
iii
Show signs of a developing interest in reading.
iv
Talk in simple terms about the content of stories, or information in non-fiction books.
2
i
Read accurately and understand straightforward signs, labels and notices.
ii
Demonstrate knowledge of the alphabet in using word books and simple dictionaries.
iii
Use picture and context cues, words recognised on sight and phonic cues in reading.
iv
Describe what has happened in a story and predict what may happen next.
v
Listen and respond to stories, poems and other material read aloud, expressing opinions informed by what has been read.
vi
Read a range of material with some independence, fluency, accuracy and understanding.
3
i
Read aloud from familiar stories and poems fluently and with appropriate expression.
ii
Read silently and with sustained concentration.
iii
Listen attentively to stories, talk about settings, story-line and characters and recall significant details.
iv
Demonstrate, in talking about stories and poems, that they are beginning to use inference, deduction and previous reading experience to find and appreciate meanings beyond the literal.
v
Bring to their writing and discussion about stories some understanding of the way stories are structured.
vi
Devise a clear set of questions that will enable them to select and use appropriate information sources and reference books from the class and school library.
4
i
Read aloud expressively, and with fluency, from a range of familiar literature.
ii
Read a range of fiction and poetry and talk about reasons for their preferences.
iii
Demonstrate, in talking about stories and poems, that they are developing their abilities to use inference, deduction and previous reading experience,eg by recognising that authors provide clues about the outcome of their stories .
iv
Locate books or magazines in the class or school library by using the classification system or catalogue, and use simple information-retrieval strategies when pursuing a line of enquiry,eg use ‘search’ reading, contents lists, indexes, to find a particular fact or piece of information .
5
i
Read a range of fiction and poetry, explaining their preferences in talk and writing.
ii
Demonstrate, in talking about fiction and poetry, that they are developing their own views and can support them by reference to some details in the text,eg when talking about characters and actions in fiction .
iii
Recognise, in discussion, whether subject matter in non-literary and media texts is presented as fact or as opinion.
iv
Select reference books and other information materials,eg in classroom collections or the school library or held on a computer , and use organisational devices,eg chapter titles, subheadings, typeface, symbol keys , to find answers to their own questions.
v
Recognise and talk about the use of word play,eg puns, unconventional spellings etc , and some of the effects of the writer's choice of words in imaginative uses of English.
6
i
Read a range of fiction and poetry, including works not written specifically for children, explaining their preferences in talk and writing.
ii
Demonstrate in talking and writing about literature that they are developing their own views and can support them when appropriate by reference to the text,eg in making judgements of characters and their actions, or when building upon those characters and events in their own writing .
iii
Recognise, in discussion, whether subject matter in non-literary and media texts is presented as fact or as opinion, identifying some of the ways in which the distinction can be made —eg in newspapers, advertisements, magazines and in news or documentary broadcasts , where the distinction is clear.
iv
Make a selection from a range of reference materials, using their information retrieval skills to identify key points.
v
Talk about examples (from their own experience or from their reading) of changes in word use and meaning over time, and about some of the reasons for these changes,eg technological developments, euphemism, contact with other languages, fashion .
7
i
Read a range of poetry, fiction, literary non-fiction,eg letters, diaries, autobiographies , and drama, including some works written before the 20th century and works from different cultures.
ii
Talk and write about their responses to literature, taking account of matters such as the development of the plot, interactions between characters, central themes, and the use of language.
iii
Recognise, in discussion, some features of presentation which are used to achieve identifiable purposes, such as to inform, to regulate, to reassure or to persuade, in non-literary and media texts —eg enhancement or suppression of colour, page layout, illustration, style and size of print, verbal emphasis through repetition, exclamation, vocabulary .
iv
Make an independent selection from a comprehensive range of reference materials,eg encyclopaedia, adult dictionary or data bank , retrieve information from them using techniques such as skim-reading; and synthesise information from different parts of a text or different texts.
v
Talk about some of the effects of sound patterning,eg rhyme, alliteration , and figures of speech,eg similes, metaphors, personification , in imaginative uses of English.
8
i
Read a range of poetry, fiction, literary non-fiction and drama, including works written before the 20th century and works from different cultures.
The range should include some works that make demands on the reader in terms of content or length or organisation or language.
ii
Talk and write about their responses to literature, taking account of matters such as dramatic, poetic or fictional structure, complexities of plot, development of character and theme, and the use of poetic or stylistic devices.
Make comparisons, where appropriate, between different works, in terms for example of theme or characterisation or style.
iii
Write about some features of presentation which are used to achieve identifiable purposes, such as to inform, to regulate, to reassure or to persuade, in non-literary and media texts, showing some ability to form a considered opinion —eg when comparing two reports of the same event .
iv
Make an independent and discriminating selection from a range of reference materials; retrieve information from them using techniques such as skim-reading; evaluate and synthesise information from different parts of a text or different texts.
v
Identify in their reading, and talk and write about some of the changes in the grammar of English over time,eg in pronouns (from thou and thee to you), in verb forms, in negatives, etc.
9
i
Read a range of poetry, fiction, literary non-fiction and drama, including works written before the 20th century and works from different cultures.
The range should include some works that make demands on the reader in terms of content or length or organisation or language.
ii
Make more knowledgeable spoken and written responses to literature, taking a more perceptive account of matters such as dramatic, poetic or fictional structure, complexities of plot, development of character and theme, and the use of poetic or stylistic devices.
Make comparisons, where appropriate, between different works,eg in terms of theme or characterisation or style .
iii
Recognise and write about some of the techniques and conventions of presentation in non-literary and media texts, and the effectiveness of their use in specific instances —eg structure of news stories, or the way television programmes and newspapers match style and content to targeted audiences .
iv
Make an independent and discriminating selection from a range of reference materials; retrieve information from them using techniques such as skim-reading; evaluate and synthesise information from different parts of a text or different texts.
v
Demonstrate some understanding of the use of special lexical and grammatical effects in literary language,eg the repetition of words or structures, dialect forms, archaisms, grammatical deviance etc.
10
i
Read a range of poetry, fiction, literary non-fiction and drama, including works written before the 20th century and works from different cultures.
The range should include some works that make demands on the reader in terms of content or length or organisation or language.
ii
Make well-informed spoken and written responses to literature, taking sophisticated account of matters such as dramatic, poetic or fictional structure, complexities of plot, development of character and theme, and the use of poetic and stylistic devices.
Make comparisons, where appropriate, between different works,eg in terms of theme or characterisation or style .
iii
Show that they are beginning to adopt a critical stance towards some of the techniques and conventions of presentation used in non-literary and media texts.
iv
Make an independent and discriminating selection from a range of reference materials; retrieve information from them using techniques such as skim-reading; evaluate and synthesise information from different parts of a text or different texts.
v
Demonstrate some understanding of attitudes in society towards language change and of ideas about appropriateness and correctness in language use.
PROGRAMMES OF STUDY FOR READING
Programme of study for key stage 1 (ages 5 to 7)
General Introduction
16.22 •Reading activities should build on the oral language and experiences which pupils bring from home.
Teaching should cover a range of rich and stimulating texts, both fiction and non-fiction, and should ensure that pupils regularly hear stories, told or read aloud, and hear and share poetry read by the teacher, and each other.
•Reading should include picture books, nursery rhymes, poems, folk tales, myths, legends and other literature which takes account of pupils' linguistic competences and backgrounds.
Both boys and girls should experience a wide range of children's literature.
Non-fiction texts should include those closely related to the world of the child and extend to those which enable children to deepen an understanding of themselves and the world in which they live,eg books about weather, wildlife, other countries, food, transport, the stars .
Pupils should encounter an environment in which they are surrounded by books and other reading material presented in an attractive and inviting way.
The reading material should include material which relates to the real world, such as labels, captions, notices, children's newspapers, books of instructions, plans and maps, diagrams, computer print-out and visual display.
•Pupils' own writing — either independently written, or stories dictated to the teacher or composed in collaboration with other pupils — should form part of the resources for reading.
•Teachers should take account of the important link between home and school, actively encouraging parents to participate and share in their child's reading and supporting pupils where this is not possible.
Detailed provisions
16.23 (i) Activities should ensure that pupils:
hear books, stories and poems read aloud or on radio, tape or television and take part in shared reading experiences with other pupils and the teacher, using texts composed and dictated by the pupils themselves, as well as rhymes, poems, songs and familiar stories (including traditional stories from a variety of cultures);
read in the context of role-play and dramatic play,eg in the home play corner, class shop, or other dramatic play setting such as a café, hospital or post office.
Such reading might include a menu, a sign on a door, a label on a packet, or a sign above a counter.
For pupils working towards level 1, the settings should include individual letters,eg ‘P’ for Parking , and individual words,eg ‘Exit’, which pupils can be encouraged to recognise;
re-tell, re-read or dramatise familiar stories and poems;
make their own books about particular experiences, areas of interest or personal stories,eg guide books, instructions, favourite poems or stories ;
talk to the teacher and each other about the books and stories they have been reading or listening to;
widen their range of reading, turning readily to books, choosing those which they would like to hear or read and saying why;
ask and answer questions about what has been heard or read — how characters feel, their motives, the endings of stories;
talk about the ways in which language is written down, in shared reading or writing sessions or in discussion with the teacher, identify words, phrases, patterns of letters and other features of written language which they recognise, and notice how words are constructed and spelled;
refer to information books, dictionaries, word books or simple data on computers as a matter of course.
Pupils should be encouraged to formulate first the questions they need to answer by using such sources, so that they use them effectively and do not simply copy verbatim;
talk about the content of information texts.
(ii) Through the programme of study pupils should be guided so as to:
appreciate the significance of print and the fact that pictures and other visual media can also convey meaning,eg road signs, logos ;
build up, in the context of their reading, a vocabulary of words recognised on sight;
use the available cues, such as pictures, context, phonic cues, word shapes and meaning of a passage to decipher new words;
be ready to make informed guesses, and to correct themselves in the light of additional information,eg by reading ahead or looking back in the text ;
develop the capacity to convey, when reading aloud, the meaning of the text clearly to the listener through intonation and phrasing;
develop the habit of silent reading.
Programme of study for key stage 2 (ages 7 to 11)
General provisions
16.24 Pupils should read an increasingly wide range and variety of texts in order to become more experienced readers.
Teachers should encourage them to develop their personal tastes in reading and to become more independent and reflective.
16.25 The reading materials provided should include a range of fiction, non-fiction and poetry, as well as periodicals suitable for children of this age.
School and class libraries must provide as wide a range as possible.
The material available must pose a significant challenge to pupils; for example, poetry should not be confined to verse written for children; folk tales and fables might include translations from original sources.
Pupils should discuss with others and with the teacher what has been read.
16.26 Pupils should:
hear stories, poems and good non-fiction read aloud;
have opportunities to participate in all activities related to reading,eg preparing and reading a selection of poems, or reciting some from memory, or taking part in storytelling sessions or dramatic activities ;
select books for their own reading and for use in their work in school;
keep records of their own reading and comment, in writing or in discussion, on the books which they have read;
read aloud to the class or teacher and talk about the books they have been reading;
be encouraged to think about the accuracy of their own reading and to check for errors that destroy meaning;
be shown how to read different kinds of materials in different ways,eg ‘search’ reading to locate a particular fact ;
learn how to locate information in books and, where available, databases, sometimes drawing on more than one source, and how to pursue an independent line of enquiry.
Programmes of study for key stages 3 and 4 (ages 11/12 to 14 and 14 to 16 respectively)
General provisions
16.30 Teachers should encourage pupils to read a variety of genres:eg autobiographies, letters, diaries or travel books, as well as short stories, novels, poetry and plays , and introduce them to literature written in English from different countries.
16.31 Pupils need to be aware of the richness of contemporary writing, but they should also be introduced to pre-20th century literature.
Teachers should introduce pupils to some of the works which have been most influential in shaping and refining the English language and its literature — for example, the Authorised Version of the Bible, Wordsworth's poems, or Dickens's novels.
In particular, they should give pupils the opportunity to gain some experience of the works of Shakespeare.
Using sensitivity and tact, teachers should help pupils to tackle texts of increasing difficulty.
16.32 Teachers should encourage pupils to read independently in their own time, and to discuss with others their own favourite reading.
16.33 Pupils should be taught how to handle, and be given experience in using, information and media texts of a variety of kinds.
Teachers should use texts of increasing difficulty to develop pupils' powers of discrimination and perseverance so that they become confident and efficient in their use and interpretation of such material.
16.34 The texts used should include some of the following: guide books, consumer reports, text books, sets of instructions and manuals, stage directions, brochures, forms, contracts, information leaflets from a variety of sources, the highway code, publicity materials, newspapers and magazines, dictionaries, thesauruses, atlases, and encyclopaedias.
Pupils should be taught how and when to adapt the speed and closeness of their reading for specific purposes,eg finding a fact, getting the gist of a passage or making a summary .
16.35 Pupils should also be introduced to a range of media texts, and be encouraged to consider their purpose, effect and intended audience.
16.36 Teaching of knowledge about language through reading should focus on:
some of the main characteristics of literary language and how it conveys meanings;
some of the ways in which English is constantly changing between generations and over the centuries; and people's attitudes to such change.
Detailed provisions
16.37 For pupils working towards level 3, teachers should refer to relevant material in the programme of study for key stage 1.
16.38 For pupils working towards levels 4 and 5, see level specific material in detailed provisions for key stage 2.
16.39 (i) Pupils working towards level 6 should be reading some texts not written specifically for children or young people,eg short stories with a contemporary setting .
They should be taught to use the evidence in a text to interpret and form judgements about characters' motivations, and be able to quote that evidence in support of their views.
They should be taught to recognise that the attitudes and behaviour of a character or narrator are not necessarily to be identified with the attitudes or beliefs of the author.
They should continue to read aloud, highlighting meaning in a sensitive way.
(ii) Pupils should be taught how to respond to the way information is structured and presented so that they are able to identify key points.
The texts used should include reference books, brochures and consumer reports.
Pupils should be taught how to select these texts for themselves and how to use them effectively.
(iii) Discussion should bring out examples of words and expressions which tend to undergo very rapid change in use or meaning —eg terms of approbation (wicked, brill); differences in the use and meanings of words as used by pupils, their parents and grandparents —eg wireless, radio, tranny, receiver ; and new words that have become part of the English vocabulary during the last 50 years or so,eg computer, astronaut, macho .
Teachers should also discuss with pupils, and encourage them to analyse, the reasons why vocabulary changes over time —eg contact with other languages because of trade or political circumstances, fashion, effects of advertising, need for new euphemisms, new inventions and technology, changes in society .
They should also consider where new words come from,eg borrowings from other languages such as glasnost , coinages, acronyms etc.
16.40 (i) Pupils working towards level 7 should read some texts written for adults, including pre-20th century fiction, drama and poetry, including Shakespeare.
They should discuss the themes, settings, characters and literary styles of the texts in order to make a personal response to them.
(ii) In both fiction and non-fiction texts, they should be taught to use information or contextual clues to infer authorial points of view that are not explicitly stated.
Non-literary texts used should include persuasive writing,eg advertisements, leader columns from newspapers, campaign literature from pressure groups , and reference books,eg where the subject matter has a logical structure rather than following a chronological order .
(iii) They should be taught how to skim-read so that they are able to discover the structure and gist of a text quickly.
They should be shown how to put together material from a number of different sources and to make a synthesis.
(iv) Teachers should discuss a variety of works so as to bring out the range and effects of different types of sound patterning,eg alliteration, assonance, rhymes, onomatopoeia , and of figures of speech,eg similes, metaphors, personifications .
16.41 Pupils working towards levels 8 to 10 should be reading from a wide range of literature written for adults.
16.42 (i) Pupils working towards level 8 should be taught how to scrutinise a text for details of characterisation, settings and attitudes, and how to quote appropriately from a text to support their opinions.
They should be shown that many texts make assumptions about knowledge shared by the author and reader.
They should be taught how to recognise authorial viewpoint and — where relevant — persuasive or rhetorical techniques in a range of texts, and how to use evidence when explaining their conclusions.
(ii) They should be shown how to locate material from a range of sources,eg subject-specific reference books, adult encyclopaedias and databases , how to select material by deploying the appropriate reading strategy, how to evaluate it and how to draw it together into a coherent package.
(iii) From their reading of pre-20th century literature, pupils should be encouraged to identify some of the major changes in English grammar over the centuries,eg the loss — except in some dialects and in religious uses — of thee and thou; the simplification of the verb system eg from have, hast, hath, to have and has; the change in the structure of negatives eg from I know not to I don't know .
16.43 (i) Pupils working towards level 9 should be taught that the texts they study can be read at a number of levels, and how to compare the surface meaning with an implied sub-text.
They should be shown how to interpret and evaluate characterisation, ideas and themes across the range of texts, how to cross-refer between texts, and how to make comparisons.
(ii) Pupils should be taught to show flexibility in reading —eg skimming, reading closely or backtracking as necessary .
The texts used should include information texts of different kinds, articles on the same subject from different newspapers, short stories and poems.
(iii) They should be taught how to analyse transactional documents critically.
Teachers should discuss the cogency and clarity of such documents and should encourage pupils to improve them.
Pupils need to be made aware of the subtler uses of language, and of the appropriate uses of figures of speech.
(iv) Discussion should focus on the effects, in context, of different types of vocabulary,eg archaic, literary, figurative, emotive, dialectal, colloquial, scientific etc. ; of grammatical features such as structural repetition,eg in scripted speeches, advertisements, literary prose, poems etc ; of lexical and grammatical ambiguity; of the use of grammatical deviance for special effect,eg in advertisements, slogans, poems etc.
Teaching should also bring out the structural characteristics of different types of verse and poetry,eg nursery rhymes, concrete poetry, haiku, limericks, ballads, sonnets etc.
16.44 (i) Pupils working towards level 10 should discuss the possibility of multiple meanings in the texts studied and be taught how to recognise and describe some of them.
(ii) They should be taught, over a wide range of texts, how to analyse with some sophistication the differences between attitudes or assumptions displayed by a character and those of the author.
They should be encouraged to select appropriate reading strategies for various types of task.
(iii) Pupils should consider not only the extent to which English has changed since Shakespeare's day but also some of the ways in which it is changing now.
From this, they should come to recognise that judgements about what is appropriate or correct cannot be immutable.
They should learn to recognise when people's attitudes to language use,eg as expressed in letters to newspapers , reveal misunderstandings about the nature of language change.
ASSESSMENT
General
16.45 As indicated in chapter 14, we recommend that assessment be both internal and external, with suitable moderation arrangements.
Internal assessments should be continuous, conducted through a variety of methods and contexts, and based on structured observation by the teacher.
External assessment, in the form of SATs, should: generally be conducted by the pupils' own teachers; observe the principle of fitness for purpose; be intrinsically rewarding and enjoyable for pupils and accord with good classroom practice.
Assessment in primary school
16.46 For internal assessment, a common national format for record-keeping should be devised and employed.
We recommend that SEAC, in consultation with NCC and CCW, develop an assessment format and handbook and that the approach exemplified by the ‘Primary Language Record’(1988: Centre for Language in Primary Education) be adopted as a starting point.
We urge that what is devised should not make excessive demands upon time or resources.
We also suggest that the continuous assessment element should commence when the child starts school, and continue throughout the primary phase.
16.47 Within this continuous assessment, the teacher's structured observation should have regard to all the strands in the attainment target and should look for children's growing confidence and independence as readers; the ways they read aloud; the reading and information-retrieval strategies they employ; their responses to reading; and the range and difficulty of the texts they are able to handle and comprehend.
It could include the use of miscue analysis based on a passage of narrative, drawn from a selection of varying levels of difficulty.
Miscue analysis entails a systematic record and evaluation of children's ‘errors’ when reading aloud from texts which are not well known to them and which are not at their reading frustration level.
A four-fold procedure could be used: first, the text should be read silently; second, it should be re-told or described by the child to the teacher; next the text should be read aloud, with the teacher marking miscues on a duplicate copy; finally the text should be discussed in more detail with the teacher.
Miscues should be marked and evaluated, with ‘positive’ errors distinguished from ‘negative’ones.
Suitable evaluation techniques may be specially devised.
16.48 The record of the continuous assessment should cover what the child has read; the child's reading strategies and approaches when handling a familiar text, levels of comprehension; retrieval of information; and the child's reading tastes and preferences.
16.49 External assessment through the SAT should cover reading comprehension.
There are many types of reading test currently used in primary schools; most of them, however, are norm-referenced rather than criterion-referenced, and so do not relate directly to the levels of attainment described above.
In addition, many existing tests are decontextualised approaches which do not adequately assess children's understanding of meaning.
We believe it will be necessary to develop new methods of testing reading comprehension which build on the experience of the best of the existing tests and of the APU's work, but which should also meet the following criteria.
16.50 First, they should be designed to arise naturally out of good primary practice.
The choice of texts should draw on reading material of the kind children will encounter in school through the programmes of study we have recommended.
If extracts rather than complete texts are used, they should be free-standing and coherent in structure and content.
The test questions should be what experienced teachers would be likely to ask, taking account of the character of the reading material, its context and the purposes for which it would normally be encountered.
The texts should be practicable to administer in the classroom context, and to mark and moderate.
The marking should give credit for children's grasp of meaning and allow ‘positive’ errors to be distinguished from ‘negative’.
The results should be capable of being used formatively and to indicate any particular need for support for the child, or for more specific diagnostic assessment.
For more able readers, the test results may point to the need for further enrichment.
16.51 At age 7, the pupil's response to the SAT might be mainly but not exclusively oral.
At age 11, the SAT should be of greater length and complexity, and the pupil's response might be mainly but not exclusively written.
Assessment in secondary school
16.52 Internal assessment of pupils in key stages 3 and 4 should be continuous and record their progress across all aspects of the attainment target.
The record should build upon those which have been maintained for pupils in key stages 1 and 2.
The principles we advocate in paragraphs 16.46 to 16.48 for record-keeping at the primary phase are also applicable for the record for pupils in key stages 3 and 4.
We recommend that SEAC be invited to design and pilot national guidelines and a format for assessing and recording pupils' reading attainments, which can be readily administered and maintained by teachers.
16.53 For external assessment, we recommend that the SAT or SATs at key stages 3 and 4 should sample all the strands.
They should cover in particular the pupils' response to literature, and their competence in using information and reference materials, and should meet the general criteria described above.
At the end of key stage 3 the pupils' response should be mainly in written form but may include some oral work.
At the end of key stage 4 the response should be in written form only.
As with external assessment in the primary phase, we believe that new methods of testing pupils' reading skills may need to be devised, building on the best of GCSE practice.
Writing
‘The evidence gathered from successive surveys of pupils' attitudes to reading and writing suggests that the language experiences of many pupils is concentrated in a relatively narrow range of types of writing.’
Introduction
17.1 The term ‘writing’ is ambiguous: in the first place, it can refer either to the process of writing or to the written product.
The term is also ambiguous between the composing aspects of writing and the secretarial aspects, such as good handwriting and spelling.
For example, it is possible now for word processors with spelling checkers to take over some of the proof-reading aspects of writing and to produce impeccable print-out.
17.2 Attainment targets and programmes of study must therefore cover both these aspects of writing, here called for convenience ‘composing’ and ‘secretarial’.
The main principle is that the secretarial aspect should not be allowed to predominate in the assessment while the more complex aspects of composition are ignored.
It is evident that a child may be a poor speller, but write well-structured and interesting stories, or be a good speller, but write badly structured and boring stories.
Functions of written language
17.3 Written language serves many purposes both for individuals and for society as a whole, and is not limited to the communication of information.
17.4 For the individual author, writing can have cognitive functions in clarifying and supporting thought.
(Spoken language also allows thoughts to be formulated in one's own words, but written language has the added advantage of making a detached reflection on them possible.)
Such writing is essentially private.
At the level of whole societies, written language serves the functions of record keeping and of storing both information and literary works.
It therefore supports and transmits the culture.
Such writing is essentially public and intended for an audience.
17.5 These points are relevant both to programmes of study and to assessment, since they show that linguistic forms cannot be corrected or assessed independently of their purpose.
The nature of the assessment should be geared to the purpose of the writing.
For example, it is perfectly appropriate to demand neatness, correct spelling, and features of Standard English in work which has a public purpose.
But this may be less appropriate for work with essentially private purposes.
The different functions of written language are an important topic for knowledge about language and part of an understanding of how society works.
The relations between spoken and written language
17.6 There is no simple transition from spoken to written language.
In the development of their writing, children have to move from casual to formal language, from spontaneous to planned language; and from a known to an unknown audience.
Further, some children have to add the forms of Standard English to their own non-standard forms, and others have to move from their mother tongue to English.
In each case, the language competence acquired is additive: it does not replace earlier competencies.
Children also have to acquire forms of written language which are rarely or never used in spoken English, since written language is not just spoken language written down.
17.7 Children cannot be expected to learn everything at once.
A measure of tolerance of errors in different language tasks is essential.
For example, children will characteristically have better control over features of written language such as spelling when the task is easier to perform (as defined in paragraph 17.24 below).
17.8 Spoken and written language are closely related both developmentally and theoretically.
Spoken language tends to be informal, spontaneous and interactive with the speakers face-to-face, whereas written language tends to be formal, edited and non-interactive, with writer and reader separated.
But these are only the most typical configurations.
All combinations are possible.
For example, a letter to a friend may be informal; a telephone conversation is not face-to-face; interactive written communication is possible via computer terminals; a speech may be a carefully edited and rehearsed monologue; etc.
17.9 Even so, the various features characteristically associated with casual conversation and with formal writing provide a way of organising programmes of study.
The basic principle is so to organise teaching that children have experience of producing written language across these various forms.
Language experiences which will ensure this are set out in the programmes of study.
Assumptions
17.10 When children first come to school they have a large body of language experience to draw on.
This will differ according to the richness of the environment provided by the home and the wider community, but all children live and grow up in a print-rich world full of writing and people who write.
17.11 Just as many young children come to school believing that they can read, so they will come willing to try to be writers.
The very youngest children, given the opportunity to use what they know, are able to demonstrate considerable knowledge of the forms and purposes of writing.
This may at first be simple ‘draw writing’ but as they develop and learn more about how written language works, their writing comes increasingly close to standard adult systems.
It is normal for their early attempts to consist of strings of letters, with words represented by the initial letter or by clusters of consonants.
Children's early invented spellings often demonstrate logical consistency; this grasp of regularity should be recognised as an initial achievement and children should be helped to be confident in attempting to spell words for themselves without undue dependence on the teacher.
17.12 In early writing we see errors of letter formation, spelling and composition occurring as children make hypotheses about the rules that govern the writing system.
Teachers provide the greatest encouragement for children to communicate in writing when they respond more to the content of what is written than to such errors, and when they share a child's writing with other children.
17.13 Through increasing encounters with a range of examples children make sense of literary experiences and it is the responsibility of the teacher to provide and foster that range in the classroom.
Teachers will have diverse roles to play in the development of young writers: they will be observers, facilitators, modellers, readers and supporters.
Through these roles the teacher intervenes in the child's learning, most often by a careful structuring of the contexts for writing.
(See programmes of study.)
17.14 During the early years of the secondary school, and as they grow into adolescence, pupils will increasingly be able to take a more objective view and develop greater understanding of the writing process.
In so doing they will be building on their earlier writing experiences which should have given them a positive view of themselves as writers who are capable of making and receiving meanings using a variety of forms depending on audience and purpose.
17.15 The programmes of study should, above all, enable pupils to exercise more conscious and critical control over the writing process.
It is possible to identify a number of strands which should feature in their development as writers during these years; these are to do with an increasing ability to:
write in different forms for different purposes and audiences;
write coherently about a wide range of issues, ideas, incidents, etc; organising different kinds of text in ways which help the reader;
craft writing which is significantly different from speech, showing a developing control of grammatical structure and of a differentiated vocabulary; and write in a style which is appropriate for the purpose, audience and subject matter;
know when and how to plan, draft, redraft, revise and proof-read their work;
understand the nature and functions of written language.
17.16 It is important that teachers should help pupils in this process by recognising the interrelatedness of writing, reading and speaking and listening.
We stressed the need in paragraph 17.13 for younger pupils to have increasing encounters with a range of examples through which they make sense of literary experiences and this should continue into the secondary stages.
By careful planning of schemes of work to integrate programmes of study for speaking and listening, reading and writing, teachers should be able to foster the writing development of their pupils, helping them to develop an ear for language through reading or listening to works in a wide variety of styles written by really fine authors.
Both literary and non-literary writing will often develop from the interaction between the pupils' own insights and what they have read (or heard read) in the classroom.
17.17 An essential aspect of development in the secondary stages is that pupils should increasingly make their own decisions about their writing — what it is about, what form it should take and to whom it is addressed.
It is a fact that the written essay — usually of 400 to 500 words long — has dominated the English language and literature curriculum for many years because it has been seen as the main vehicle for the transmission of knowledge in written examinations.
The advent of GCSE and the more widespread development of continuous assessment of coursework in all English examination syllabuses have provided opportunities for pupils in secondary schools to use writing for a much wider range of purposes and audiences.
We believe this is a development to be welcomed and encouraged.
17.18 All pupils should be expected to keep a file containing work in progress, as well as completed pieces, which may need to be selected and filed separately for the purposes of moderation and final assessment.
It is most important that teacher assessment should take account of the way pupils tackle writing tasks — that is, it should be sensitive to the writing process as well as to the finished product.
Consequently, pupils should keep in their files the necessary range and variety of types of writing, including where appropriate any rough notes, plans or early drafts.
They should play an active part in assessing their own progress through discussion with those who read their writing — their peers, teachers or other adults.
17.19 Much writing in English will be attempts by pupils to record their thoughts on topics of personal or public importance.
Through discussion or role-play, teachers should seek to provide frequent opportunities for this type to writing to occur, and should respond to the meanings that their pupils strive to convey.
17.20 Pupils should know that their writing need not always be formal or follow literary models; it can also effectively capture and record first thoughts and immediate responses and be used for note-making, collecting and shaping information etc.
Equally, however, it should be recognised that some writing is about communicating with the outside world and having a say in that world.
‘People need expertise in language to be able to participate effectively in a democracy.
There is no point in having access to information that you cannot understand, or having the opportunity to propose policies which you cannot formulate.
People receive information and misinformation in varying proportions from, among others, family and friends, work mates, advertisers, journalists, priests, politicians and pressure groups.
A democratic society needs people who have the linguistic abilities which will enable them to discuss, evaluate and make sense of what they are told, as well as to take effective action on the basis of their understanding.
The working of a democracy depends on the discriminating use of language on the part of all its people.
Otherwise there can be no genuine participation, but only the imposition of the ideas of those who are linguistically capable.
As individuals, as well as members of constituencies, people need the resources of language both to defend their rights and to fulfil their obligations.’
17.21 Teachers should both create and respond to opportunities to focus on aspects of knowledge about written language and about some of the differences between speech and writing.
17.22 The full development of both reading and writing in the secondary years requires a broad definition of text to encompass both literary and non literary forms.
Pupils should continue to develop in their dual roles as makers of meanings in their own texts and as receivers and makers of meaning in the texts of others.
Attainment targets and strands within levels of attainment
17.23 We propose the following attainment targets.
Attainment target 3: A growing ability to construct and convey meaning in written language matching style to audience and purpose.
Attainment target 4: Spelling (levels 1 to 4 only).
Attainment target 5: Handwriting (levels 1 to 4 only).
Attainment target 4/5: Presentation (levels 5 to 7).
17.24 If proposals for assessment are to have coherence, they must be based on a theory of difficulty.
Bearing in mind some caveats below, it is possible to predict the relative difficulty of a writing task (and of a language task more generally).
Other things being equal, a writing task is easier if the organisation is chronological; if the subject matter is drawn from personal experience; if the subject matter is concrete rather than abstract; and if the audience is known to the writer.
The first distinction is usually clear-cut: the organisation is either chronological or not.
(Texts which are typically chronological are narratives and reports; texts which are typically non-chronological are descriptions and arguments for a point of view.)
The other distinctions are relative rather than absolute; for example, the subject matter may be more or less abstract, the audience may be very well known or less well known.
17.25 As we point out in paragraph 14.5 children do not learn particular features of written language once and for all at a particular stage.
Development is recursive.
This means that writing development must be defined in broad terms and cannot be measured solely by one-off tests at particular ages.
As paragraph 14.12 acknowledges, language competence is dependent on the task: children will show different ability on tasks of different kinds.
Therefore only a relatively broad range of tasks can hope to assess children's performance.
The general line of development extends from emergent writing, through the early stages of composition towards growing fluency and control and finally to full independence.
We share the view of the National Writing Project that ‘To try to put ages against these expectations produces great problems’.
However, bearing these caveats in mind, it is still reasonable to expect children to have made demonstrable progress along the developmental path when they reach key stages in the education system.
17.26 The attainment targets proposed in this chapter fall into two main categories.
One covers the composing aspects and concerns language meaning, use and structure: the organisation, form and patterns of writing.
The other is secretarial, as defined above and concerns the pupil's competence in spelling and handwriting.
The reason for separating these two aspects in the attainment targets is that they are independent abilities: people with good spelling and neat handwriting are not necessarily good writers, and vice versa.
Attainment targets form the basis of assessment.
For assessment purposes it is clearly important that independent abilities should not be grouped under the same target.
For example, if both composing and secretarial abilities were included in one global writing attainment target, a pupil who had achieved level 6 in the composing aspect but only level 3 in the secretarial would have to be recorded as being at level 3 in writing.
17.27 In the primary school, children have a great deal to learn about both spelling and handwriting.
Some will be noticeably better at the one than the other.
For this reason, we recommend that there should be two separate targets, one for spelling and the other for handwriting, covering ages 5 to 11 (levels 1 to 4).
By the time they reach the secondary school, the majority of children will have developed their own style of handwriting.
To extend statements of attainment for handwriting beyond level 4 would entail entering the field of calligraphy.
Therefore, we do not recommend that there should be a handwriting attainment target after level 4.
Nevertheless, fluent and legible handwriting continues to be important, so the one secretarial attainment target that we propose from level 5 onwards is called presentation and includes both spelling and handwriting.
17.28 One aspect of development as a writer is the growing ability to handle successfully different forms such as stories, poems, accounts, reports, instructions, essays, etc.
In order to learn the conventional ways in which subject matter is organised and presented in these different forms, it is necessary for children to have plenty of opportunities to read or hear read good examples of a range of different types of texts.
Young children hear stories either told or read from a very early age and, as soon as they have the skill, they read them themselves.
In this way, they internalise the elements of story structure — the opening, setting, characters, events and resolution.
Similarly, they come to realise that, in satisfying, well-structured stories, things that are lost will be found, problems will be solved, mysteries will be explained, and so on.
It is partly because of this early extensive experience of stories that so much writing in primary schools is in story form.
In responding to children's writing, teachers are well able to distinguish between an embryonic attempt at a story and a more developed example; indeed, there is substantial research available on the stages of story-writing through which young writers progress.
So, because children know and use the story form and because it is possible to discern a sequence of development, we have specified various aspects of story structure in the statements of attainment from level 2 to 4.
From the beginning, though, children should be learning to write in other forms and for other purposes.
In the early stages we distinguish between ‘other chronological writing’ and ‘non-chronological writing’, for the reasons given in 17.24.
We have not continued the story strand in the statements of attainment beyond level 4, although many pupils will continue to write stories of increasing complexity throughout the secondary school, because by then it will be just one of the many types of writing that pupils might undertake.
17.29 We believe that, throughout the school years, all children should have ample opportunities to write poetry, either singly or in groups; this is made explicit in the programmes of study.
However, we have not included a poetry strand in the statements of attainment because we do not feel that any pupil should be required to write a poem in order to achieve a particular level of attainment.
17.30 An important part of the composing process is the choice of appropriate and lively vocabulary.
Nevertheless, we have not included vocabulary in our statements of attainment until level 7.
This is partly because vocabulary is the most individualistic part of a person's knowledge of language, and continues to develop throughout life, although its growth is clearly fastest in early years.
It is also because the choice of vocabulary is determined by the subject matter.
It can be assessed only by its appropriateness, but this depends entirely on what the pupil is writing about and for what purpose (and so has a cross-curricular dimension).
The main line of development is that vocabulary becomes increasingly differentiated according to the purpose of the writing (eg whether it is everyday or technical) and to its style (eg formal or informal).
There is also growing differentiation between colloquial and literal vocabulary.
This aspect of writing development is one in which it is relatively easy to specify the direction of development, and achievements at higher levels, but where the precise specification of intermediate levels is much more difficult.
It makes little sense, for example, to require that children have a command of formal vocabulary before they are competent in technical vocabulary or vice versa .
17.31 The best writing is vigorous, committed, honest and interesting.
We have not included these qualities in our statements of attainment because they cannot be mapped on to levels.
Even so, all good classroom practice will be geared to encouraging and fostering these vital qualities.
17.32 Development in attainment target 3 is marked by: increasing control over the structure and organisation of different types of text; a growing ability to handle complex or demanding subject matter; a widening range of syntactic structures and an expanding vocabulary as the pupil begins to use language that is characteristic of writing rather than speech and to strive for a style that is appropriate to the subject matter and the readership; a growing capacity to write independently and at length; an increasing proficiency in re-reading and revising or redrafting the text, taking into account the needs of the audience; a developing ability to reflect on and talk about the writing process.
Punctuation is included in this attainment target because it helps the reader to identify the units of structure and meaning that the writer has constructed.
17.33 With regard to spelling, the aim should be that by the end of compulsory schooling pupils should be able to spell confidently most of the words they are likely to need to use frequently in their writing; to recognise those aspects of English spelling that are systematic; to make a sensible attempt to spell words that they have not seen before; to check their work for misspellings and to use a dictionary appropriately.
The aim cannot be the correct unaided spelling of any English — there are too many words in English that can catch out even the best speller.
For this reason, the Presentation attainment target stops at level 7 (the level that should be achieved by the average 16 year old) because there is no way of extending it to level 10, other than by specifying lists of increasingly irregular and unusual words — which would be absurd.
17.34 ATTAINMENT TARGET 3: WRITING 
A growing ability to construct and convey meaning in written language matching style to audience and purpose.
LEVEL DESCRIPTION
Pupils should be able to:
1
i
Use pictures, symbols or isolated letters, words or phrases to communicate meaning.
2
i
Produce, independently, pieces of writing using complete sentences, some of them demarcated with capital letters and full stops or question marks.
ii
Structure sequences of real or imagined events coherently in chronological accounts.
iii
Write stories showing an understanding of the rudiments of story structure by establishing an opening, characters, and one or more events.
iv
Produce simple, coherent non-chronological writing.
3
i
Produce, independently, pieces of writing using complete sentences, mainly demarcated with capital letters and full stops or question marks.
ii
Shape chronological writing beginning to use a wider range of sentence connectives than ‘and’ and ‘then’.
iii
Write more complex stories with detail beyond simple events and with a defined ending.
iv
Produce a range of types of non-chronological writing.
v
Begin to revise and redraft in discussion with the teacher, other adults, or other children in the class, paying attention to meaning and clarity as well as checking for matters such as correct and consistent use of past tenses and pronouns.
4
i
Produce pieces of writing in which there is a rudimentary attempt to present simple subject matter in a structured way,eg by means of a title and paragraphs or verses ; in which sentence punctuation (capital letters, full stops, question marks and exclamation marks) is generally accurately used; and in which there is some evidence of an ability to set out and punctuate any direct speech in a way that makes meaning clear to the reader.
ii
Write stories which have an opening, a setting, characters, a series of events and a resolution; produce other kinds of chronologically organised writing,such as instructions and accounts .
iii
Organise non-chronological writing in orderly ways.
iv
Show some competence in the structures of written Standard English and begin to use some sentence structures different from those which are characteristic of speech,eg a wider range of subordinate clauses, expanded noun phrases etc.
v
Attempt independent redrafting and revision of their own writing and talk about changes they have made.
5
i
Write in a variety of forms,eg notes, letters, instructions, stories, poems , for a range of purposes,eg to plan, to inform, to explain, to entertain, to express attitudes or emotions.
ii
Produce pieces of writing in which there is a more successful attempt to present simple subject matter in a structured way,eg by layout, headings, paragraphing, verse structure ; in which sentence punctuation is almost always accurately used; in which any direct speech is clearly set out and punctuated; and in which simple uses of the comma,eg in lists, after long adverbials , are handled successfully.
iii
Write in Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes,eg in dialogue, in a story or playscript ), and show an increasing differentiation between speech and writing,eg by using constructions which reduce repetition .
iv
Assemble ideas,eg for a story, poem or description , on paper, or on a computer screen, or in a discussion with others, and show some ability to produce a draft from them and then to redraft and revise as necessary.
v
Talk about variations in vocabulary according to purpose, topic and audience and according to whether language is spoken or written,eg slang, formal vocabulary, technical vocabulary .
6
i
Write in a variety of forms for a range of purposes, showing some ability to present subject matter differently for different specified known audiences.
ii
Produce pieces of writing in which simple subject matter is organised and set out clearly and appropriately; in which sentences and any direct speech are helpfully punctuated; in which a wider range of uses of the comma,eg around appositional or parenthetic constructions , is evident; and in which brackets or pairs of dashes are used where necessary.
iii
Make some use of literary stylistic features,such as alteration of word order for emphasis or the deliberate repetition of words or sentence patterns , and of those features that characterise an impersonal style when required, using Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes,eg in dialogue, in a story or playscript ).
iv
Show some ability to recognise when planning, drafting, redrafting and revising are appropriate and to carry out these processes either on paper or on a computer screen.
v
Demonstrate some knowledge of straightforward grammatical differences between spoken and written English.
7
i
Write in a wider variety of forms,eg notes, personal letters, formal letters, instructions, essays, newspaper articles, reviews, biographies, stories, poems, playscripts, radio and TV scripts,for a wider range of purposes,eg to plan, to formulate hypotheses, to inform, to explain, to compare and contrast, to persuade, to entertain, to express attitudes or emotions, to shape experience imaginatively , and for a range of audiences.
ii
Produce well-structured pieces of writing, some of which handle more demanding subject matter,eg going beyond their own firsthand experience.
Punctuate their writing so that meaning and structure are clear to the reader.
iii
Make a more assured and selective use of a wider range of grammatical and lexical features, characteristic of different styles, that are appropriate for topic, purpose and audience,eg in impersonal writing choosing vocabulary that does not betray attitudes or feelings; in poetic writing choosing vocabulary that conveys attitudes, responses or emotions .
Use Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes,eg in dialogue, in a story or playscript ).
iv
Show an increased awareness that a first draft is malleable, eg by changing the form in which the material is cast,eg from a story to a playscript , or by moving text around (either on paper or on a computer screen), or by altering sentence structure or choice of vocabulary.
v
Comment on examples of appropriate and inappropriate use of language in written texts with respect to, for example , purpose, topic and audience.
8
i
Write in a wide variety of forms with a more assured sense of purpose, organising and presenting subject matter appropriately for specified audiences, both known and unknown.
Present subject matter from a point of view other than their own.
Produce a sustained piece of writing when the task demands it.
ii
Produce well-structured pieces of writing.
Provide some evidence that the function of paragraphing (ie to separate distinct ideas, events, etc and to unify related ones) has been grasped.
Punctuate their writing so that meaning and structure are clear to the reader.
iii
Make a more assured and selective use of a wide range of grammatical constructions that are appropriate for topic, purpose and audience,eg alterations of word order, lexical or structural repetition, passive constructions, adverbial connectives ; and of a varied and appropriate vocabulary,eg colloquial, formal, technical, poetic or figurative .
Use Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes,eg in dialogue, in a story or playscript ).
iv
Demonstrate some knowledge of organisational differences between spoken and written English.
9
i
Write in a wide variety of forms with an assured sense of purpose and audience.
Show some ability to judge the appropriate length for a given task.
ii
Show some ability to organise and present complex subject matter,eg putting forward a number of conflicting points of view, or weaving two strands into a story .
Link sentences within a paragraph coherently.
Punctuate their writing so that meaning and structure are clear to the reader.
iii
Make an assured and selective use of a wide range of grammatical constructions that are appropriate for topic, purpose and audience, and that enable the writer to vary sentence beginnings, achieve the desired emphasis etc,eg alterations of word order, lexical or structural repetition, passive constructions, adverbial connectives, elliptical constructions, non-finite subordinate clauses , and of a varied and appropriate vocabulary,eg colloquial, formal, technical, poetic or figurative .
Sustain the chosen style consistently.
Use Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes,eg in dialogue, in a story or playscript ).
iv
Demonstrate some knowledge of ways in which language varies between different types of written text,eg personal letter, formal letter, printed instructions, newspaper report, playscript .
10
i
Write, at an appropriate length, in a wide variety of forms with an assured sense of purpose and audience.
ii
Organise complex or demanding or extended subject matter clearly and effectively.
Produce well-structured pieces of writing in which the relationships between successive paragraphs are helpfully signalled by appropriate connective words or phrases.
Punctuate their writing so that meaning and structure are clear to the reader.
iii
Make an assured, selective and appropriate use of a wide range of grammatical constructions and of an extensive vocabulary, producing a suitable variety of, eg sentence length, sentence structure, sentence openings.
Sustain the chosen style consistently.
Achieve felicitous or striking effects,eg by the choice of unusual, apt and vivid vocabulary , showing some evidence of a personal style.
Use Standard English (except in contexts where non-standard forms are needed for literary purposes,eg in dialogue, in a story or playscript ).
iv
Demonstrate some knowledge of criteria by which different types of written language can be judged,eg clarity, coherence, accuracy, appropriateness, effectiveness, vigour, etc.
17.35 ATTAINMENT TARGET 4: SPELLING 
LEVEL DESCRIPTION
Pupils should be able to:
1
i
Begin to show an understanding of the difference between drawing and writing, and between numbers and letters.
ii
Write some letter shapes in response to speech sounds and letter names.
iii
Use at least single letters or groups of letters to represent whole words or parts of words.
2
i
Produce recognisable (though not necessarily always correct) spelling of a range of common words.
ii
Spell correctly, in the course of their own writing, simple monosyllabic words they use regularly which observe common patterns.
iii
Recognise that spelling has patterns, and begin to apply their knowledge of those patterns in their attempts to spell a wider range of words.
iv
Some knowledge of the names and order of the letters of the alphabet.
3
i
Spell correctly, in the course of their own writing, simple polysyllabic words they use regularly which observe common patterns.
ii
Recognise and use correctly regular patterns for vowel sounds and common letter strings.
iii
Show a growing awareness of word families and their relationship.
iv
In revising and redrafting their writing, begin to check the accuracy of their spelling.
4
i
Spell correctly, in the course of their own writing, words which display other main patterns in English spelling, including the main prefixes and suffixes.
17.36 ATTAINMENT TARGET 5: HANDWRITING 
LEVEL DESCRIPTION
Pupils should be able to:
1
i
Begin to form letters with some control over the size, shape and orientation of letters or lines of writing.
2
i
Produce legible upper and lower case letters in one style and use them consistently (not randomly mixed within words).
ii
Produce letters that are recognisably formed and properly oriented and that have clear ascenders and descenders where necessary.
3
i
Begin to produce clear and legible joined-up writing.
4
i
Produce more fluent joined-up writing in independent work.
17.37 ATTAINMENT TARGET 4/5: PRESENTATION 
Pupils should be able to:
5
i
Spell correctly, in the course of their own writing, words of increasing complexity, including words with inflectional suffixes,eg -ed, -ing , where consonant doubling,eg running , or -e deletion are required,eg coming .
ii
Check final drafts of writing for misspellings, using a dictionary when appropriate.
iii
Produce clear and legible handwriting in both printed and cursive styles.
6
i
Recognise that words with related meanings may have related spellings, even though they sound different,eg sign, signature; medical, medicine; muscle, muscular;recognise that the spelling of unstressed syllables can often be deduced from the spelling of a stressed syllable in a related word,eg history, historical; grammar, grammatical; manager, managerial .
ii
Check final drafts of writing for misspellings, using a dictionary or computer spelling checker when appropriate.
iii
Write fluently and legibly.
iv
Show some ability to use any available presentational devices that are appropriate to the task,eg handwriting, typewriting, computer printout, artwork, computer graphics, desk-top publishing , so that their finished work is presented clearly and attractively.
7
i
Spell (and understand the meaning of) common roots that have been borrowed from other languages and that play an important role in word-building,eg micro-, psych-, tele-, therm-.
Recognise that where words have been borrowed in the last 400 years, there are some characteristic sound-symbol relationships that reflect the word's origin,eg ch- in French words like champagne, chauffeur, charade, and ch- in Greek words like chaos, chiropody, chorus, compared with ch- in long-established English words like chaff, cheese, chin .
ii
Check final drafts of writing for misspellings, using a dictionary or computer spelling checker when appropriate.
iii
Write fluently and legibly.
iv
Show an increased ability to present their finished work appropriately, clearly and attractively.
PROGRAMMES OF STUDY FOR WRITING
Programme of study for key stage 1 (ages 5 to 7)
General provisions
17.38 (i) Pupils should have frequent opportunities to write in different contexts and for a variety of purposes and audiences, including themselves.
(ii) Pupils should write in a wide range of activities.
Early ‘play’ writing,eg in a play house, class shop, office, hospital , should be encouraged and respected.
(iii)Pupils will have seen different kinds of writing in the home — their names on birthday cards or letters, forms, shopping lists and so on.
Those whose parents are literate in a language other than English may have observed writing in their own first language, for which there may be a different writing system.
Such awareness of writing in any form can help pupils to understand some of the functions of written language and should be used to promote their understanding of the functions of the English writing system.(iv) Pupils should see adults writing.
Teachers should write alongside pupils, sharing and talking about their writing,eg in journals, notes and diagrams , so that the range of uses of writing is brought out.
Pupils should be made aware of how pieces of work they have produced relate to adult uses of writing.
Detailed provisions
17.39 (i) Pupils should be taught the conventional ways of forming letter shapes, lower case and capitals, through purposeful guided practice in order to foster a comfortable and legible handwriting style.
(ii) Pupils should be enabled to compose at greater length than they can manage to write down by themselves, by:•dictating to their teacher or another adult, into a tape recorder; or •working with other children; or •using a word processor.
Pupils should be able to produce copies of work drafted on a computer, and encouraged to incorporate the print-out in other work, including displays.
(iii) As they become familiar with the conventions of writing, pupils should be introduced to the most common spelling patterns of consonant and short vowel sounds.
Pupils should be taught how to spell words which occur frequently in their writing, or which are important to them, and those which exemplify regular spelling patterns.
They should be encouraged to spell words for themselves, and to remember the correct spelling,eg by compiling their own list of words they have used .
They should be taught the names and order of the letters of the alphabet.
(iv) Pupils should:
undertake a range of chronological writing including some at least of diaries, stories, letters, accounts of tasks they have done and of personal experiences, records of observations they have made,eg in a science or design activity , and instructions,eg recipes ;
undertake a range of non-chronological writing which includes, for pupils working towards level 2, some at least of lists, captions, labels, invitations, greeting cards, notices, posters and, for pupils working towards level 3, plans and diagrams, descriptions,eg of a person or place , and notes for an activity,eg in science or designing and making ;
play with language, for example by making up jingles, poems, word games, riddles, and games which involve word and spelling patterns.
(v) Pupils should write individually and in groups, sharing their writing with others and discussing what they have written, and should produce finished pieces of work for wider audiences,eg stories, newspapers, magazines, books, games and guides for other children .
(vi) Pupils should be asked to write in response to a range of well chosen stories, poems, plays or television programmes.
(vii) Pupils should discuss their writing frequently, talking about the varied types and purposes of writing,eg list, poem, story, recipe .
Teachers should talk about correct spelling and its patterns, about punctuation, and should introduce pupils to terms such as punctuation, letter, capital letter, full stop, question mark.
(viii) Pupils should be taught to help the reader by leaving a space between words and by ending sentences with a full stop or question mark and by beginning them with a capital letter.
17.40 (i) Pupils working towards level 3 should be taught to recognise that writing involves:
decision making — when the context (the specific situation, precise purpose and intended audience) is established;
planning — when initial thoughts and the framework are recorded and ordered;
drafting — when initial thoughts are developed, evaluated and reshaped by expansion, addition or amendment to the text.
They should be taught to look for instances where:
ideas should be differently ordered or more fully expressed in order to convey their meaning;
tenses or pronouns have been used incorrectly or inconsistently;
meaning is unclear because of insufficient punctuation or omitted words;
meaning would be improved by a richer or more precise choice of vocabulary.
(ii) They should be taught, in the context of discussion about their own writing, grammatical terms such as sentence, verb, tense, noun, pronoun.
Programme of study for key stage 2 (ages 7 to 11)
General provisions
17.41 (i) Pupils should continue to have varied and frequent opportunities to write.
They should know who their writing is for,eg themselves (to help in their thinking, understanding or planning of an activity), their classmates, their teacher, younger children in the school, their parents or other trusted adults .
In writing for others they will learn that writing for a public audience requires more care to be taken with the finished product than writing for oneself as an aid to memory.
(ii) By this stage, pupils will be using writing to learn and to record their experiences in a wide range of classroom activities.
They should undertake chronological writing:eg reports of work carried out in science and mathematics, instructions for carrying out a task, and accounts of personal experiences, as well as imaginative stories .
(iii) They should learn that, whereas chronological writing has a straightforward pattern of organisation, non-chronological types of writing can be organised in a variety of ways and so, generally, require more planning.
By reading good examples of descriptions, explanation, opinions, etc and by being given purposeful opportunities to write their own, they should be helped to plan and produce these more demanding types of writing.
(iv) They should have opportunities to write personal letters to real, known recipients and should be shown how to set them out.
Through their wide experience of the stories they have read and hear, they should be helped to increase their control of story form, recognising, for example, that events take place in a setting, which needs to be described, and that the outcome has to be made explicit for the reader.
(v) They should have plenty of opportunities to write poetry (whether individually, or in small groups or as a class) and to experiment with different layouts, rhymes, rhythms, verse structures, and with all kinds of sound effects and verbal play.
(vi) They should have opportunities to create, polish and produce (individually or collaboratively, by hand or on a word processor) extended written texts, appropriately laid out and illustrated,such as class newspapers, anthologies of stories or poems, guidebooks, etc. (vii) Pupils will write in response to a wide range of stimuli, including stories, plays and poems they have read and heard, television programmes they have seen, their own interests and experiences, and the unfolding activities of the classroom.
(viii) They should be encouraged to be adventurous with vocabulary choices and should be taught how to use a children's thesaurus.
As children become more fluent and confident as writers, there should be increased attention to the punctuation that demarcates sentences (capital letters, full stops, question marks and exclamation marks) and to the conventions of spelling.
These orthographic conventions should be taught in the context of the children's own writing and should always be related to their function of making the writer's meaning clear to the reader.
Once pupils can produce a printed style of handwriting fluently and confidently, they should begin to develop a comfortable joined-up style.
Detailed provisions
17.42 For pupils working towards levels 2 and 3, see level-related and other relevant material in detailed provisions for key stage 1.
17.43 (i) Pupils working towards level 4 should be introduced to the idea of the paragraph and encouraged to notice paragraph divisions in their reading.
They should be shown how to set out and punctuate direct speech, using inverted commas and commas.
They should begin to learn explicitly about the uses of the apostrophe and the exclamation mark.
(ii) Teachers should explain how Standard English has come to have a wide social and geographical currency and to be the form of English most frequently used on formal, public occasions and in writing.
They should help the children to make an account of any differences in grammar or vocabulary between the local dialect of English and Standard English, recognising that local speech forms play an important part in establishing a sense of group identity.
They should then provide some simple writing tasks which have formal or public purposes so that there are valid reasons for encouraging the pupils to use the forms of Standard English in their writing.
(iii) Pupils should learn about the history of writing and consider some of the ways in which writing contributes to the organisation of society, the transmission of knowledge, the sharing of experiences and the capturing of imagination.
(iv) In the context of their own writing and reading, pupils should learn the meaning (or grammatical function) and the spelling of some common prefixes and suffixes,eg un-, in- (and im-, il-, ir-), -able, -ness, -ful, etc .
(v) In redrafting their writing, pupils should be encouraged to think about ways of making their meaning clear to their intended reader.
In revising and proof-reading they should be shown how to check the spelling of difficult words in a dictionary.
(vi) Pupils should have opportunities to develop a comfortable, flowing and legible joined-up style of handwriting.
17.44 (i) Pupils working towards level 5 should consider features of layout,eg headings, side-headings, the use of columns or indentation , in the materials they read, so that they can use some of these features to clarify structures and meaning in their own writing.
They should improve the use of inverted commas and apostrophes and should learn some of the simple uses of the comma,eg in lists, after long adverbials .
(ii) They should have continuing opportunities to write for formal or public purposes so that they increase their command of the structures of written Standard English.
In the context of their own writing they should be encouraged to find ways to reduce repetition,eg by replacing a noun phrase by a pronoun, or a verb phrase by…did too .
(iii) In the context of their own writing and reading pupils should be introduced to the complex regularity that underlies the spelling of words with inflectional endings,eg bead-ing, bead-ed, bed-d-ing, bed-d-ed. (iv) Teaching should encourage discussion of the range of vocabulary,eg from informal to formal, everyday to specialist , its use in different settings and for different purposes and the effect of particular choices of words,eg the kinds of topics slang is used for; the situations in which slang is used; the need for specialist terms and the effects of their use outside the specialist group .
Discussion should bring out contrasts in how vocabulary is used in speech and writing.
Programmes of study for key stages 3 and 4 (ages 11/12 to 16)
General provisions
17.45 During the next two key stages, pupils' development as writers should be marked by:
increasingly conscious control over the structure and organisation of different types of text;
the matching of form to subject matter and readership and a growing capacity to write independently and at length;
a widening range of stylistic features more characteristic of writing than speech;
an increasing proficiency in re-reading and revising or redrafting the text;
an ability to reflect on and talk about the writing process.
17.46 By building on the experiences of earlier key stages pupils should be made aware of the following range of functions of writing:(a)— primarily to communicate meaning to others: reporting, narrating, persuading, arguing, describing, instructing, explaining;(b)— for thinking and learning: recollecting, organising thoughts, reconstructing, reviewing, hypothesising;(c)— using language in aesthetic and imaginative ways.
Clearly (a),(b) and (c) are not always watertight categories and there will sometimes be natural overlap according to the task in hand.
17.47 The programmes of study for knowledge about language in writing should focus on:•some of the main differences between speech and writing;•the range of purposes that written language serves.
General provisions for key stage 3 (ages 11/12 to 14)
17.48 (i) Pupils should have opportunities to write in a range of forms including a number of the following: notes, diaries, personal letters, chronological accounts, pamphlets, book reviews, advertisements, comic strips, poems, stories, playscripts. (ii) Building on experiences of a range of different stories that they have read and heard, and/or through discussion of their work with the teacher or their peers, pupils should learn to handle the following elements of story structure with increasing effectiveness: an opening, setting, characters, events and a resolution.
(iii) Building on their experience of reading and hearing a wide range of poetry, they should have opportunities, both individually and in groups, to use poetic features such as rhythm, rhyme and alliteration in verse forms such as jingles, limericks, ballads, haiku, etc. (iv) Pupils should have opportunities to write for a range of communicative or informative purposes including describing, explaining, giving instructions, reporting, expressing a point of view.
They should learn to use writing to facilitate their own thinking and learning, recognising that not all written work will lead to a polished, final product.
They should be able to record their first thoughts, capture immediate responses and collect and organise ideas so that they are available for reflection.
They should also have opportunities to write in aesthetic and imaginative ways.
(v) Pupils should learn how to organise and express their meaning appropriately for different specified audiences, eg their peers, their teacher, known adults, younger children, unknown but designated adults,eg a planning officer, a road safety officer, a novelist or poet .
(vi) In the context of their own writing, pupils should learn to organise subject matter into paragraphs, recognising that these enable readers to identify relationships between ideas, events, etc and to follow the structure of a story, account or argument, etc. (vii) Through reading, listening to and talking about a wide range of texts, pupils should gradually be enabled to use, in their own writing, those grammatical structures that are characteristic of written language and an increasingly varied and differentiated vocabulary.
(viii) Pupils should begin to learn explicitly the different stages in the writing process, ie drafting (getting ideas on to paper or computer screen, regardless of form, organisation or expression); redrafting (shaping and structuring the raw material — either on paper or screen — to take account of purpose, audience and form); rereading and revising (making alterations that will help the reader,eg getting rid of ambiguity, vagueness, incoherence, or irrelevance ); proof-reading (checking for errors,eg omitted or repeated words, mistakes in spelling or punctuation ).
Detailed provisions for key stage 3
17.49 For pupils working towards level 3, teachers should refer to level-related and other relevant material in the detailed provisions for key stage 1.
17.50 For pupils working towards levels 4 and 5, see level-related material in detailed provisions for key stage 2.
17.51 (i) Pupils working towards level 6 should learn that it is easier for the reader to recognise the relationship between essential and subsidiary information if parenthetical constructions are separated by brackets or pairs of commas or dashes.
They should learn other uses of the comma,eg around appositional constructions .
(ii) By reading and discussing good examples, pupils should come to understand the functions of the impersonal style of writing used in much academic — and particularly scientific — writing and to recognise the linguistic features,eg the passive, subordination , that characterise it.
(iii) In the context of their own writing and reading, pupils should be helped to recognise that words with related meanings may have related spellings and that this can sometimes be an aid in the spelling of words where the sound alone does not provide sufficient information.
(iv) In proof-reading any work produced on a word processor, pupils may have access to a computer spelling checker. (v) Pupils should be encouraged to use whatever presentational devices are appropriate for a given piece of work — particularly work that is to be displayed or made public.
(vi) Teaching should bring out the fact that as speech typically takes place in a situation where both speaker and listener are present, it can be accompanied by gestures, and words like this, that, here, now, you etc, whereas writing generally requires greater verbal explicitness.
Pupils should come to understand that because writers are not able to use the voice to emphasise key points in a sentence, they have to use a wide range of grammatical structures (such as the passive, or other alterations of word order) to bring about the desired emphasis.
They should also recognise that writing is often more formal and more impersonal than speech: lexical and grammatical features of language both reflect and create these contrasts.
17.52 (i) Pupils working towards level 7 should develop a sensitivity to the different styles of vocabulary that are used in different types of writing.
(ii) In redrafting their work they should be encouraged to think of the first draft as tentative so that they are prepared to rethink their whole approach in the light of their own critical appraisal or of their discussions with their peers or teacher.
(iii) In the context of their own writing and reading, they should learn about some of the frequently occurring words and roots that have been absorbed into English from other languages, so that they become familiar with the common word-building processes and spelling patterns that derive from them.
(iv) If they use a computer spelling checker, they should learn about its limitations, for example in not distinguishing homophones,eg fair, fare,or different parts of speech,eg their, there .
(v) Pupils should be taught about the different functions of written language: that writing can be for the writer alone; it can be addressed to a known reader; or it can be written for a large and unknown audience.
They should be shown how it may primarily be either an artefact in its own right or a means of conveying information; how it functions as a tool of thought and as a creator of human relationships; how it can be stored and readily transmitted across time and distance.
They should learn to think of appropriateness in written language in terms of these functions and of the range of audiences that writers address, considering the effects, for example, of inappropriately formal vocabulary in personal letters or of colloquial expressions in impersonal writing.
17.53 (i) Pupils working towards level 8 should consider explicitly the functions and possible structures of paragraphs.
They should learn when to use semi-colons and colons. (ii) Pupils should come to understand that at its most characteristic, speech is interactive, spontaneous and informal which means the topics of conversation emerge in an unplanned and unstructured way; in contrast, writing typically needs a more tightly planned overall structure signalled both by the organisation of topics into paragraphs and by words and phrases such as meanwhile, in the same way, on the other hand .
They should learn about the patterns of organisation of formal expository writing:eg the introduction, development and conclusion of the academic essay; the use of illustrations and examples in persuasive writing and of comparison and contrast in argument .
General provisions for key stage 4 (ages 14 to 16)
17.54 (i) Pupils should have opportunities to write in a wider range of forms, including a number of the following: notes, diaries, personal letters, formal letters, chronological accounts, reports, pamphlets, reviews (of books, television programmes, films or plays), essays, advertisements, newspaper articles, biography, autobiography, poems, stories, playscripts. (ii) Through experience of a wider range of literature they should learn to produce stories which are more consciously crafted, for example, using some detail in the portrayal of characters or settings or with some attempt to introduce elements of suspense or surprise with a skilfully managed resolution.
(iii) Through experience of a wider range of poetry, they should have the opportunity to select verse forms appropriate for their own choice of subject matter and purposes.
(iv) Pupils should have opportunities to write for a wider range of communicative or informative purposes, including: describing, explaining, giving instructions, reporting, expressing a point of view, persuading, comparing and contrasting ideas, arguing for different points of view.
They should have increasing opportunities to use writing for private purposes, such as reviewing their own experiences, reflecting on their own ideas and formulating hypotheses.
They should have continuing opportunities to write in aesthetic and imaginative ways.
(v) Pupils should learn how to organise and express their meaning appropriately not only for different specified audiences (as for key stage 3) but also for generalised unknown audiences,eg in producing instructions for a game, letters to a newspaper, publicity campaigns, etc .
(vi) In the context of their own writing, pupils should learn to construct different types of paragraph,eg a general statement followed by examples, illustrations followed by a conclusion, cause followed by effect, etc. (vii) Pupils should learn,eg by presenting the same material for different purposes or audiences, or in different forms , how they can achieve different stylistic effects in their writing by a conscious control of grammatical structures and lexical choices.
(viii) Pupils should extend and refine their competence in drafting, redrafting, rereading and revising, and proof-reading and should learn to judge the extent to which they need to use any or all of these processes in specific pieces of work.
Detailed provisions for key stage 4
17.55 For pupils working towards level 3, teachers should refer to level-related and other relevant material in the detailed provisions for key stage 1.
17.56 For pupils working towards levels 4 and 5, see level-related material in detailed provisions for key stage 2.
17.57 For pupils working towards levels 6 to 8, see level-related material in detailed provisions for key stage 3.
17.58 (i) Pupils working towards level 9 should be encouraged to make their own decisions about the appropriate length for a piece of work and to recognise that there can be merit in brevity.
(ii) They should be given opportunities to write on topics that are intrinsically demanding in terms of their subject matter.
(iii) They should be encouraged to craft their writing so that they achieve a readable, pleasing style.
(iv) Pupils should learn how to recognise and describe some of the lexical, grammatical and organisational characteristics of different types of written texts,eg letters, tabloid and broadsheet newspapers, teenage magazines, specialist hobby periodicals, holiday brochures, travel books, instructions, playscripts .
They should learn about the nature and purpose of impersonal styles of writing, and the vocabulary and grammar characteristic of those styles,eg the use of the passive voice and of other ways of depersonalising text — such as not using pronouns .
17.59 (i) Pupils working towards level 10 should learn about the uses (and misuses) of inverted commas for purposes other than direct speech,eg enclosing slang or technical terms, or conveying an idea of falseness .
(ii) In the context of their own writing and that of a range of published writers, pupils should learn that, in evaluating the success of a piece of writing, different criteria need to be applied to different types; for example, a personal letter may be valued for its warmth and humour, a report for the clarity of its organisation, and so on .
ASSESSMENT
General
17.60 The attainment targets suggested above should be assessed through a variety of writing using a combination of internal and external assessment.
17.61 Those aspects of the targets which relate to the writing process, as distinct from the product, should be covered by mainly internal assessment — for example, probing pupils' ability to reflect upon and discuss the organisation of their own writing.
For these purposes teachers will need to keep samples of children's writing in order to monitor its range and development over the course of a key stage; and they will need systematic means of recording and appraising the ways in which pupils approach writing tasks, including talking about what they are doing and why.
As part of the internal assessment process, some self-assessment should be involved, through children's discussing a piece of writing with the teacher or with their peers, and then redrafting it.
The children could use a standard pro forma to assess their own performance against the relevant parts of the attainment targets.
We therefore recommend the development by SEAC of a national format and guidelines for internal assessment of these aspects of writing, to parallel our similar recommendation in the case of reading.
17.62 Extended tasks in external assessment SATs may also however be capable of monitoring aspects of the writing process, as well as the product of composition and its physical presentation: we recommend that SEAC should commission development work with this in mind.
Assessment in primary school
17.63 Assessment in the primary school should incorporate internal assessment as above from the outset.
In addition, chapter 14 suggests an extended task for the SAT at age 7, sampling each of the individual attainment targets.
Within this task, we suggest that pupils should be asked for three contrasting pieces of writing, for example a short narrative based on a personal experience, a poem, a list of some kind (eg for a recipe), or a factual account based on observation.
All of the writing attainment targets should be assessed in the context of those pieces of work; we do not believe that spelling or handwriting should be assessed through decontextualised tests or exercises.
17.64 At age 11, the same requirements should apply, but with the addition of two short timed tasks, one perhaps consisting of a factual account or description and the other of a short imaginative piece of prose.
Assessment in secondary school
17.65 Internal assessment and recording in the secondary school should build on that of the primary school.
More particularly, pupils should compile a folder of coursework containing writing of a range of types on a variety of topics for different and clearly specified audiences.
In both key stages 3 and 4 they should have the opportunity to present an extended piece of work that has been planned, drafted, revised and polished over a period of time.
17.66 The SATs at ages 14 and 16 should provide pupils with a wide choice, but should require them to produce a number of contrasting pieces of writing within both long and short timed tasks and spanning the range from imaginative literary uses of language to the clear and orderly presentation of information and argument.
As in the earlier key stages, we recommend that where the ‘secretarial’ aspects (presentation, spelling, handwriting) apply, they should not be assessed in isolation but through purposeful writing activities.
Marking policy
17.67 We have referred in paragraphs 17.60, 17.61 and 17.65 to the process of continuous assessment, and to the function of the samples of children's work in providing a basis for further development.
In this context we feel it may be helpful to include a section here on the teacher's response to children's written work, and in particular to the marking policy adopted.
17.68 As James Britton and his colleagues put it: ‘very close reading of children's writing is essential, because that is the best means we have of understanding their writing processes.
Children value perceptive comments, responses and questions on their writing, but they quickly see through perfunctory approval and generalised faint praise.
And it's worth remembering that for very many children, for many years, their teachers are the only readers of the bulk of their work.’
17.69 It is axiomatic that the context of children's learning is significant.
The teacher's ability to react sympathetically, to welcome a pupil's contribution, written or spoken, in a supportive manner, is especially important.
Such a response nurtures trust in the relationship.
‘The encouraging comment, sincerely meant, however brief, is the English teacher's most powerful weapon.
It is utterly at variance with this to adopt what Andrew Wilkinson has nicely described as the role of ‘the teacher as self-appointed proof-reader…
GRowling and SPitting and hiSSing from the margin’.’
Negative methods of responding in marking are likely to produce sterile, cumulative consequences in a child's writing: pupils quickly discern what is acceptable to the teacher and merely aim to fulfil those expectations.
17.70 The teacher's response to written work should aim to foster a child's confidence in the exploration of ideas and the manner of their presentation.
Pupils benefit from the opportunity to shape and reformulate their thinking in a helpful, non-threatening atmosphere, where experiments in language are not only acceptable, but encouraged.
The marking response can play a vital part in promoting this linguistic growth through establishing a dialogue, and not merely concerning itself with surface features of the writing, or the routine correction of technical errors.
‘Assessment is not in question; it is when it becomes an automatic and unvaried process that it loses its value both for teacher and pupil.’
The process should encourage the pupils to play an active role in learning.
17.71 Schools should formulate marking guidelines, as one feature of a cross-curricular language policy.
These might establish:
the purpose, style and tone of written comments;
the basis for pointing out technical errors, and the manner of their correction;
the techniques to encourage successful examples of language use;
the part played by discussion with individual pupils in marking their work;
the way marking will be used in connection with further learning, and hence as a crucial link in a coherent programme of study;
the contribution of the assessment to a pupil's record of achievement.
Such guidelines can help to clarify aims and objectives in setting, and responding to, written work, for the benefit of pupils, staff and parents.
Pupils, especially, might increase their understanding of how they learn.
In addition, the clarification of such issues could well provide the initial stimulus for a whole school language policy.
Introduction
Our task
1.1 The National Curriculum English Working Group was set up on 29 April 1988 by the Secretaries of State for Education and Science and for Wales to advise on attainment targets, programmes of study, and associated assessment arrangements for English in the National Curriculum for the period of compulsory schooling.
English was defined as including both language and literature and we were to take into account relevant aspects of drama, media studies, information technology and information handling.
The framework for the National Curriculum is set out in the Education Reform Act 1988 (the 1988 Act).
1.2 Our terms of reference define attainment targets as:‘clear objectives for the knowledge, skills, understanding and aptitudes which pupils of different abilities and maturity should be expected to have acquired at or near certain ages’and programmes of study as:‘describing the essential content which needs to be covered to enable pupils to reach or surpass the attainment targets’.
Our full terms of reference and supplementary guidance given to us by the Secretary of State for Education and Science are contained in appendices 2 and 3.
1.3 This is our second Report.
Our first Report, submitted to the Secretaries of State for Education and Science and for Wales on 30 September 1988, made recommendations for attainment targets and programmes of study for English for the primary stages, and also contained a number of chapters relevant to the whole of the compulsory school age range.
In order to make available a single comprehensive Report covering the English curriculum for the whole period of compulsory schooling, we have included in this Report material from our first Report — revised and extended to reflect the needs of the secondary curriculum or to present our arguments more clearly.
Sources of information and advice
In preparing our Reports, we have taken account of the recommendations of the Kingman Committee and of the large amount of written evidence from many sources.
We are grateful to all those who submitted evidence; they are listed in appendix 5.
Members of the Working Group visited ‘Lessons in English Teaching and Learning’, the special conference of the National Association for the Teaching of English, and ‘Making Changes’, the celebration of the work of the National Writing Project.
Visits were also made to Canada, to see how the implementation of a national curriculum there was affecting work in English, and to Denmark and France, to look at the teaching of Danish and French respectively, and at those countries' arrangements for bilingual children.
We are very grateful to the British Council for arranging these visits, and to all those who so willingly gave of their time to talk to and entertain us.
We have also drawn on members' experience of a range of schools, on the Bullock and Swann Reports and on the work of the Assessment of Performance Unit (APU).
Assessment framework
1.5 In formulating attainment targets we have followed the recommendations of the TGAT Reports as endorsed by the Government and now in the process of development by the School Examinations and Assessment Council (SEAC).
The Government's response to the TGAT recommendations, given in the Parliamentary statement by the Secretary of State for Education and Science on 7 June 1988, is set out in appendix 4.
1.6 The assessment framework adopted by the Government requires that:(a) attainment targets are set for the knowledge, skills, and understanding normally expected at the ages of 7, 11, 14 and 16;(b) pupils' performances in relation to attainment targets should be assessed and reported on at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16.
Attainment targets should be grouped for this purpose into profile components to make assessment and reporting manageable;(c) ten different levels of attainment should be identified within each target covering all the years of compulsory schooling.
Pupils' progress should be registered against these levels: level 2 should be assumed to represent the performance of the median 7 year old; level 4 that of the median 11 year old; the boundary between levels 5 and 6 that of the median 14 year old; and the boundary between levels 6 and 7 that of the median 16 year old;(d) assessment should be by a combination of national externally set Standard Assessment Tasks (SATs) and assessments by teachers.
In order to safeguard standards, the latter should be compared with the results of the SATs and with the judgement of other teachers.
At age 16 the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) should be the main form of assessment, especially in the core subjects;(e) the results of assessment should be used both formatively to help better teaching and to inform decisions about next steps for a pupil, and summatively at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16 to inform parents in simple and clear terms about their child's progress.
Aggregated results should be published to enable informed judgements about attainment in a school or local education (LEA) to be made.
The TGAT Reports made a number of detailed recommendations about matters to be considered by individual subject working groups.
These have informed our thinking throughout this Report.
Chapter 14 addresses some specific issues on assessment in primary and secondary schools, including SATs and GCSE.
That chapter also makes a brief reference to the desirability of further work towards a double GCSE award in English.
In chapters 15 to 17 we apply to the individual profile components the principles set out in chapter 14.
In formulating our recommendations we have taken heed of the point that development in the four language modes is complex and non-linear.
Profile components, attainment targets and programmes of study
1.7 TGAT recommended that the attainment targets should be grouped in a small number of profile components in order to make the reporting of results comprehensible and manageable.
Although other schemes are possible, we concluded that a grouping based on the language modes — speaking, listening, reading and writing — would be most appropriate and practicable.
1.8 The three profile components we recommend are as follows:•speaking and listening — with one attainment target: the development of pupils' understanding of the spoken word and the capacity to express themselves effectively in a variety of speaking and listening activities, matching style and response to audience and purpose.
•reading — with one attainment target: the development of the ability to read, understand and respond to all types of writing, as well as the development of information-retrieval strategies for the purposes of study.
•writing — with three attainment targets in the primary stages: a growing ability to construct and convey meaning in written language, matching style to audience and purpose; spelling; and handwriting; but two in the secondary stages, with spelling and handwriting merged into an attainment target called presentation.
We allocated speaking and listening to one profile component since they are essentially reciprocal, interacting activities and, as such, best taken together.
We believe that all three profile components are equally important and should therefore receive equal attention in the classroom.
For the purpose of reporting assessment, we also believe that the profile components should have equal weighting at key stages 1 to 3, but that in key stage 4 heavier weighting should be given to reading and writing — in the ratio of approximately 40:40:20 for Reading, Writing, Speaking and listening respectively (see chapter 14).
1.9 We deal with attainment targets and programmes of study for each profile component in turn in chapters 15 to 17.
For each attainment target we have recommended statements of attainment and programmes of study at up to 10 levels.
Those for levels 1 to 3 are the same as those specified by Order for key stage 1, which will have been published in statutory Documents by the time this report is made public.
For levels 4 and 5, our recommendations are based on those of the National Curriculum Council (NCC) following the consultations on the Secretaries of State's proposals for English 5 to 11.
In some cases we have amended the NCC versions to improve continuity between levels 1 to 3 as they appear in the statutory Documents and our newly formulated statements of attainment and programmes of study for levels 6 to 10.
1.10 The profile components are interrelated.
For example, group discussion may precede and follow individual writing; writing may be collaborative; and listening to stories is often a preparation for reading.
In constructing our programmes of study we have tried to avoid overlap and to make clear what we consider to be associated with which attainment targets, but some points will inevitably appear more than once.
Because of the interrelationships between the language modes, in good classroom practice the programmes of study will necessarily and rightly be integrated.
1.11 Knowledge about language and the cross-curricular themes specifically referred to us are incorporated in those attainments targets and programmes of study where they fit most naturally.
We describe in detail our proposals for knowledge about language in the secondary curriculum in chapter 6.
1.12 We recommend attainment targets for those areas of English which we consider essential for every pupil.
They are intended to provide an opportunity for pupils of all abilities to show what they can do in realistic activities that themselves contribute to learning.
They cannot, however, describe all the accomplishments in English that may be interesting or worthwhile.
We have striven to avoid statements of attainment that require assessment which might have undesirable effects in the classroom, for example the use of language exercises out of context or other activities of an arid kind.
1.13 Our fundamental assumption is that all pupils are entitled to an education that will provide the opportunity for them to develop to the best of their abilities a competence in and appreciation of English.
We have therefore developed our recommended attainment targets and programmes of study from our view of the knowledge, skills and understanding within English that are necessary to meet young people's personal and social needs.
These aims and objectives are set out in chapters 2 and 3.
1.14 The programmes of study delineate the ground which must be covered if pupils are to achieve their best in relation to the attainment targets.
Pupils may achieve other worthwhile things as well as those specified in the targets, and we would not wish teachers to feel limited by them.
Across the curriculum
1.15 We were pleased to find references to the importance of English and to the need for co-operation across disciplines in the Reports of the National Curriculum Working Groups on Science and on Mathematics and in the interim report of the National Curriculum Design and Technology Working Group.
In England, English is the language in which other subjects (apart from foreign languages) are usually taught and learned.
Every teacher who seeks to raise pupils' levels of attainment in another subject makes a valuable contribution to the teaching of English.
There is much in the structured thinking, the imagination and the symbolism in mathematics and science and in other subjects that can extend the pupil's capability in English.
1.16 Much has been written on ‘English across the curriculum’, a phrase which, for some, conjures up an unacceptable vision of English reduced to a service subject, and for others an equally unacceptable vision of subject specialists burdened with responsibilities that should rightly be carried by teachers of English.
The Reports of the various Working Groups, taken together, should allay these misgivings and reveal possibilities for collaboration across disciplines in ways that have not yet been widely recognised, with each making its distinctive contribution.
Issues in the teaching of English
1.
17 Throughout our work we were acutely aware of the differing opinions that are held on a number of issues that lie at the heart of the English curriculum and its teaching.
Our Report would not be credible if it did not acknowledge these differences and explain our response to them.
They are considered in chapters 2 to 7 and elsewhere.
The Kingman Report
1.18 We were asked in paragraph 3 of our terms of reference to take the Kingman Report into consideration.
The Report itself and the debate that followed its publication have helped us considerably.
We agree with the underlying assumptions of the Kingman Report and, in essentials, with its conclusions.
We draw attention in the appropriate chapters to a few differences between our analysis and recommendations and those of the Kingman Committee.
We deal with grammar and Standard English in chapter 4, linguistic terminology in chapter 5, and with knowledge about language in chapter 6.
1.19 The Kingman Committee's remit was confined to knowledge about language.
Our remit is much wider, covering all the elements of the English curriculum, so we deal with, for example, literature in chapter 7, drama in chapter 8, and media education and information technology in chapter 9.
But we deal at somewhat greater length with the language aspects of the English curriculum than with those concerned with literature, because language, including such matters as Standard English, the use of linguistic terminology, the teaching of grammar and knowledge about language, has recently been a more contentious subject than the teaching of literature.
1.20 The terms of reference of the Kingman Committee required it:
‘1.
To recommend a model of the English language, whether spoken or written, which would:(i) serve as the basis of how teachers are trained to understand how the English language works;(ii) inform professional discussion of all aspects of English teaching.
2.
To recommend the principles which should guide teachers on how far and in what ways the model should be made explicit to pupils, to make them conscious of how language is used in a range of contexts.
3.
To recommend what, in general terms, pupils need to know about how the English language works and in consequence what they should have been taught, and be expected to understand, on this score, at ages 7, 11 and 16.’
The Kingman Committee had to pay considerable attention to what both teachers and pupils need to know.
The model of language set out in its Report is constructed with that in mind.
It has provided a valuable structure for our thinking and discussions, but, because we have had to focus less on teachers and more on pupils, we have not found it appropriate to map programmes of study directly on to the model.
In any case, as the Kingman Report made abundantly clear, no one model could encompass all aspects of the English language.
Literature
1.21 In chapter 7 we rework and develop our rationale on the place of literature in the English curriculum 5 to 16.
It subsumes many of our recommendations for literature in our first Report, but does not repeat the list of authors given there nor attempt an equivalent for pupils ages 5 to 16.
Despite our firm statements to the effect that the list was purely illustrative and that there were no doubt omissions, media attention centred on this list to the detriment of the other, more important recommendations in the Report.
Furthermore, such a list would be impracticable, given the wide range of books written for adults which are suitable for older and more able pupils.
We do, however, state our criteria for the selection of books, and we refer to some book guides which teachers may find helpful.
Pupils whose first language is not English
1.22 We have paid particular attention to the needs of those children whose first language is not English: these are discussed in paragraphs 2.7 to 2.12 and in chapter 10.
Equal opportunities
1.23 In our first Report we made only brief comments on equal opportunities.
In this Report we draw these comments together, and expand on them in chapter 11.
Pupils with special educational needs
1.24 Some pupils have a statement of special educational needs, made under the Education Act 1981.
These statements specify the educational and other provisions that are necessary to meet the pupil's particular needs.
Under the 1988 Act, such a statement may disapply or modify the application of any or all of the provisions of the National Curriculum for the pupils for whom the statement is made.
Other pupils with special educational needs will not have statements.
The National Curriculum will apply to such children unless some or all of its requirements are temporarily disapplied by the headteacher in accordance with regulations made under Section 19 of the 1988 Act, or unless the pupils fall within any of the cases or circumstances entailing modified requirements which may be specified in Orders dealing with individual foundation subjects.
In chapter 12 we discuss these points further.
Our guiding principle is that pupils with special educational needs should, as far as possible, have the opportunity to experience the full range of the English curriculum, but we make some broad recommendations for modifications to attainment targets, programmes of study and assessment arrangements which we feel may nevertheless be necessary.
The need for examples and revision
1.25 In our first Report, we included an appendix with samples of pupils' work which illustrated some early stages in the development of writing.
As we said then, these were indicative in character and not comprehensive as to the levels or to the range of performance which might emerge at any one level or from a particular child.
We have not attempted a similar exercise for this Report: we felt that such samples needed very careful selection which would take time we could not afford, and that, unless samples were numerous and lengthy, they would inevitably illustrate only a few aspects.
We do however, consider, illustration to be essential, and recommend that the National Curriculum Council (NCC) in conjunction with the Curriculum Council for Wales (CCW) and, as appropriate, with SEAC, commission the compilation of an extensive collection of pupils' work in relation to the statements of attainment we have recommended.
1.26 The 1988 Act requires the Secretaries of State to revise the curriculum from time to time; we assume that NCC and CCW, among others, will advise them on this, and that such revision will include attainment targets, the allocation of statements of attainment to levels, programmes of study and methods of assessment.
Because the recommendations in our Report have been prepared in a relatively short time, some changes will almost certainly prove necessary in the light of experience.
We therefore attach great importance to flexibility in arrangements for revision.