

Introduction
IN 1939, the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London published a survey of nationalism in the world.
It was possible to do this.
Nationalism was still the concern of a relatively small part of the globe.
Since then, the vast European world empires which so simplified the political map have gone, leaving behind something over 170 governments and well over 170 nationalisms.
It would not now be possible in one volume to do any kind of justice to so many.
Even after listing the existing States and their associated nationalisms, there would still be the nations without States whose warriors and militants occasionally fill the daily newspapers with their exploits — the Basques and Bretons, Scots and Welsh, Kurds, Catalans, Crimean Tatars, Corsicans, Québecois, Baluchis, Balts and Georgians, Tibetans, Serbs and Albanians of Yugoslavia, Timorese, Gurkhas, Biafrans, Eritreans, Pushtos, Shans and Karens, and countless others.
At the outer rim of awareness, the known and declared nationalists fade into a host that have still to declare themselves.
And there are yet others to be invented.
Even where the media report sightings of what are apparently other phenomena, they often turn out to be the same species.
The Polish Solidarnosc, an unequivocal worker movement, opposed the regime not only as a class force but as the authentic voice of the Polish nation.
In Angola and Mozambique, there are strange creatures called ‘Marxist-Leninist States’ when Marx and Lenin had both spent much time denouncing the State as intrinsically oppressive, but the media mean no more by this phrase than radical nationalists.
In Iran, the regime that replaced the Shah appears as militantly Islamic (and, in theory, internationalist, for Shi-ism acknowledges no secular boundaries), and yet is more easily seen as the spearhead of Iranian nationalism.
In Nicaragua — like Cuba — the overthrow of the local dictatorship was national liberation.
And the demand of American black people for equality appears as black nationalism.
There has never been a time, it seems, when the world has been so dominated by the politics of nationalism.
The idea has become axiomatic to politics, so much so that people are hardly conscious of it any longer.
For many, their own loyalty to a particular nation is so much an unspoken element of personal identity (as opposed to the public world of politics) that it is impossible to discuss; nationalism is only what foreigners believe in.
National loyalty becomes a component of personal honour, and any analysis is as much an affront for many people as a discussion of any other items of the sacred.
In such a perception, the world is not physical geography but an arena inhabited by individual countries.
Each supposedly embodies a nation with a unique culture and language, its people the product of a common ethnic descent.
The characters of the world drama are unified vertical slices of the globe's inhabitants —‘the United States’, ‘Guatemala’, ‘Burma’— not horizontal ones (beekeepers, engineers, bird lovers etc.).
Thus have governments and their interests pre-empted perception, even to the point of dragooning the commodities of the world's markets into nationality — Japanese cars, Pakistani cricket bats, German steel.
The simplifications convert all concepts into issues of national power and prestige.
They allow us to escape the vast and growing area of ambiguity — for that ‘Japanese car’ is assembled in the United States by Mexican and Korean workers, from parts made in twenty other countries, by a corporation whose parent is registered in Tokyo but owned by a consortium of companies registered in five other countries, and the general manager is a German.
Such complexities tire the mind.
The nationalist knee-jerk is easier and orders the world into the good and the bad.
Two car bombs in Karachi kill 72 and injure 250; the authorities blame ‘saboteurs of foreign origin’(in the presence of such disasters, it takes a certain frivolity to care whether those who perpetrated the act were natives or not).
Opinion takes a world of countries so much for granted, it is mildly shocking to discover how recent the concept is.
The overwhelming majority of the world's people have lived until recently without the need to be members of national groups.
Most West Europeans and North Americans found no need for strict national alignments up to the late eighteenth century; the East Europeans the late nineteenth century,; much of the rest of the world, the present century.
There were those who promoted the idea much earlier, but they had a limited following.
The idea of a nation, however, is not very helpful.
In real circumstances, the ‘nation’ summarizes very complicated social and economic interests and classes which are not the same at different times, nor in different places.
Knowing that a conflict is about nationalism tells one very little — whether Ukrainian peasants face Polish landlords, French grape growers Algerian wine exporters, Chinese workers British employers.
This specificity and complexity often robs general discussions of nationalism of much sense — the concept is not just a chameleon, but a different creature altogether in different contexts and times.
Indeed, the national is often a concept used deliberately to conceal conflict over the issues, to force one kind of unity around an existing status quo (and if the arguments do not achieve unity, troops can be used to enforce it on the recalcitrants).
Of course, nationalism is not all simple illusion, for real material differences do exist and have existed for a long time between different countries.
This was particularly so in late-nineteenth-century Europe among workers — levels of employment, income, education, trade union organization, social insurance, political rights and so on were very different, and what country a worker belonged to could be of vital importance.
Thus, the defence of the superiority of one nation against another had then a material dimension.
The same is true today, nowhere more starkly, for example, than on the border between Mexico and the United States (where the inhabitants on both sides are of the same origin, culture and language).
Peasants were much less differentiated, and thus in the past always less engaged in nationalist alignments.
As more and more peoples have become involved in the modern world, the perception of the unevenness of social and economic conditions has grown more extreme.
However, many discussions of nationalism assume that the topic remains the same regardless of time and place, so that explanations are equally applicable to all cases.
Such an approach does not usually analyse nationalism so much as confirm the claims of the nationalist.
Often, anti-nationalists are, in fact, opposed only to new nationalisms that threaten the position of the old, those of the Great Powers.
The critics are thus half in love with the concept — in condemning anti-British nationalism, by implication they accept British nationalism.
Yet others may deplore British nationalism while taking it for granted that there is some homogeneous group called the British, thus conceding the basic premise for a British nationalism.
Even on the supposedly internationalist Left, the same problem arises.
From Otto Bauer to Tom Nairn, the claims of the nationalist to the unequivocal existence of nations are honoured without challenge.
Consider the argument of Nicos Poulantzas who asserts that nations are as old as or older than class society (as if the two modes of analysis are not mutually reinforcing), will persist after the State disappears, and possess a ‘transhistorical irreducibility’.
Nations are, he says, the basis of the State, and national struggles derive not from social classes but from historical entities called nations.
The case can make no pretension to scientific detachment: it is a declaration of nationalist  faith, a recommendation of how we ought to see the world, not how it is.
Régis Debray does something similar in an even more pretentious form:
We must locate the national phenomenon within general laws regulating the survival of the human species…against death.
Against entropy.
Why must we do this?
How does nationalism relate to human survival?
There are no answers, for this is not analysis, but a manifesto.
It is part of the nationalist fantasy world where, as Zubaida, commenting upon Nairn and Gellner, puts it:
‘Nations’ seem to be historically supersubjects with attributes of agency and action: they ‘mobilize’, ‘aspire’, ‘propel themselves forward’, ‘react’and they even have atavistic, irrational ‘ideas’with traumas which explode periodically.
The nationalist presses the case to encompass all the world's people.
Thus, by now, no one is supposed to exist without being firmly bonded to one or other nation, or, in legal terms, State.
It is a kind of modern serfdom: all are tied, usually by the accident of birth, to the national abstraction.
Having achieved this enormous distribution of people (with all its many and continuing cruelties), the nationalist can point proudly to the result as itself the evidence for the prior existence of nations.
All that has been achieved, he or she now claims, is no more than a revelation of some primordial ordering of humanity.
A legion of policemen and border officials are required to preserve this happy feature of a benevolent nature.
Culture and nationalism
There are several criteria proposed for the ordering of mankind in national groups.
One of the most important is culture, the proposition that the world's peoples are divided by discrete cultures.
The value of the proposition is the greater because, outside anecdote, the word is sufficiently vague to give room for any prejudice.
Approached systematically, however, it would be difficult to show that, before the coming of States which enforced degrees of uniformity upon their citizens, what was common to a people living in a particular territory was greater than what they had in common with people outside the territory.
The criteria of sameness and difference offer few ways of separating out peoples once we rise above the level of locality.
Moreover, we also know that what modern nations identify as their national culture is a quite recent invention.
For Europe, the nineteenth century was the great time when languages were identified and codified in single forms, minority languages in part eliminated, consciously national literatures and musics invented, and the territory mapped (appropriately described as a ‘father’ or ‘mother’land, even though very few peoples have occupied the same territory for more than a thousand years).
Above all, the historians were inspired to carve out of the record of the past an exclusive nationalist slice.
Suddenly, the common achievements of unknown people in the past were seized as the artefacts of a national genius, part of a struggle to invent and impose a cultural consistency both on the past and on the present inhabitants, in contrast to the heterogeneity of benighted foreigners.
It is the work of minorities, not nations.
What becomes the English language starts as the dialect of a minority and is imposed upon the majority, usually by force, with legal punishments for those who refuse the schooling which will induct them in the national language.
Thus, the definition of what is the national culture is the result of a preemptive strike by only one group of people.
In India, a tiny minority of caste Hindus, usually Brahmins, appropriated ‘Indianness’ in one narrow form, thus rendering, for example, Muslims and, to a lesser extent, scheduled castes and tribes, foreign.
A pre-emptive strike by a minority of non-Jewish Germans turned German Jews into foreigners in their own homeland.
In a similar way, the white newcomers to South Africa turned the older Bantu newcomers into aliens.
Force is the precondition for compelling the majority of people to accept this pretension.
Thus, the appearance of the nation is not the revelation of some continuous culture, but an invention of the struggle for power and prestige.
The struggle does not end, for each age must reaffirm the continuity of the nation in the face of powerful discontinuities and the appearance of striking similarities between members of different nations.
An English grocer in south London, for example, seems to have more in common with a grocer in Berlin or Delhi or Yokohama than one in sixteenth-century London; such common sense is politically dangerous in a nationalist world.
Thus, governments are endlessly seeking to shore up the erosion of the national idea which a world economy inflicts upon them.
The British must refine a new history curriculum to show the national genius and thus the inferiority of all others, and do so in the face of the sleepy yawns of the poor pupils.
The Education Deliberation Committee on Textbooks of National History has submitted guidelines to the South Korean Ministry of Education on how the history of the inhabitants of the Korean Peninsula can be doctored into a saga of the heroic descent of a single people from time immemorial, the overture to an entirely modern symphony.
In sum, culture provides no secure foundation for defining a national group.
Insofar as there is uniformity between the members of a nation, it is the result of nationalism (and usually the creation of a State to enforce uniformity) not the cause.
A common descent
Culture is so often used to justify nationalism today perhaps because people are a little embarrassed to give the more traditional grounds for believing in the existence of nations: the idea that nations are characterized by common biological descent, ethnic origin or race.
Each nation is seen as a kind of family, clan or tribe, assuming these entities denote common descent.
This common descent transmits an historical genius, the membership of which — like that, in theory, of the old nobility of Europe — is by birth, and so beyond the striving of those without the required descent.
By now, this essentially moral theory controls citizenship and who is admitted across borders, and the rights accruing to the ‘sons of the soil’.
However, the claim to a common ethnic descent is in principle very unlikely for all except the most tiny and isolated groups.
Where the information is available, it shows that each modern nation is descended from a wide diversity of peoples, leaving aside all those who have joined or left down the years.
There can be no serious defensible pedigrees here (even if we could decide what characteristics had to be inherited to ensure pure descent).
Most ancient peoples have disappeared.
Consider the fate, for example, of the Jutes, Scythians, Medes, Phoenicians, Etruscans, Gauls, Picts, Arameans, Babylonians, Sumerians, Akkadians, Elamites, Canaanites, Philistines, Alamans, Burgondes, Franks, Lombards, Normans, Cahorsins, Mercians and innumerable others.
The names that survived provided no evidence of past links; and the fact of disappearance shows no inferior civilization.
On the evidence, assimilation, constant making, unmaking and remaking of groups, appears to be the norm — nations are, before the coming of the modern State, the precise opposite of those indestructible building blocks of humanity.
And what we have today are entirely modern creations, syntheses, the result of countless unrecorded accidents rather than the national spirit seeking to realise itself.
The idea of the organization of peoples according to descent was one of the most common in the past.
But even then, the claim to ethnic identity was more often fictional.
Groups were created by political or material need, and once created, granted each other quasi-familial status (complete, for literate societies, with swiftly constructed  genealogies; thus, the descendants of the prophet in Islam have down the ages offered much work for the imagination and ingenuity of the genealogical archivists).
Take, for example, David Morgan's comment on the Mongols, just prior to their advance to domination in the Middle East:
We shall misunderstand nomadic society if we think of it as composed of tribes whose membership is determined exclusively by blood relationships.
Theoretically, they were so determined and this is no doubt the explanation of the plethora of patently spurious genealogies that litter the contemporary and later literature.
In reality, however, the tribe was rather an ‘open’ institution, its membership created more by shared political interests than by descent from a common ancestor.
It is only in this way that it is possible to explain the fact that Chingis Khan was able to organize the nomads of Central Asia, an extraordinarily disparate collection of groupings whether considered ‘racially’ or ‘linguistically’, into a unified and effective war machine.
Something similar seems to have occurred among the tribes of East Africa.
They were pre-eminently political formations which families joined and left, and by no means exclusive (families could claim simultaneously to belong to more than one tribe).
It was the Europeans who, in establishing their power, made tribes into exclusive and ethnic descent groups, the basic building blocks of empire.
John Breuilly provides interesting examples of the way in which this happened in certain parts of central Africa under British and Belgian rule.
The French did something not dissimilar by inventing a people, the Berbers, from the groups that inhabited the highlands of north Africa.
However, regardless of the fictional character of the claim to a common ancestor, the concept had and continues to have a powerful hold on people's perceptions.
At its most extreme, it leads to their protesting against those who marry foreigners (and discriminating against the resultant offspring).
Furthermore, the same attitudes can become attached to concepts which, in origin, laid no claim to common ethnicity.
In a north Indian town recently, a Hindu woman was prevented from marrying a Muslim and forced to marry a Hindu by an alliance of Hindu and Muslim militants.
Confessional status had become the basis for an exclusive descent group.
In China, during the Cultural Revolution, something similar happened to class membership.
The child might never have known his or her grandfather nor seen the small piece of land that made him a landlord, yet the child remained stubbornly a landlord in official eyes decades after land  reform.
Landlords, like workers, peasants and capitalists, had become translated into parallel descent groups, not functional elements of a single social structure.
Why is a common descent so frequently suggested, when the claim can scarcely ever be substantiated?
The fiction of the family is the most powerful one in terms of unquestioned loyalties — children, parents, grandparents, siblings and spouses are traditionally expected to conform to codes of duty and right without question or gain.
Of course, in practice, things are more complicated, as the Moroccan Swasa saying has it on brothers running a grocer shop:
We are brothers.
But when we evaluate the inventory,
We are enemies.
The moral code remained an ideal even if the performance was inferior, and for tribes and clans the aspiration was what counted: those who fought, sacrificed and died together became brothers, their leaders fathers.
The modern State is no less opportunistic in seeking to hijack the fiction of the family as a model for national loyalty, making all citizens brothers and sisters, and the territory a parent.
However, once detached from the tangible relationships of a real family, there is nothing to discipline the imagination.
Aristocratic families in Europe defended the purity of their descent (the basis of their legitimate right to rule), and now, by an heroic leap of imagination, racial purity comes to be attached to whole peoples for certain political purposes.
Ex-Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone recently, in all innocence, explained that Japan was an ‘intelligent society’, in contrast to the United States, because ‘in America there are many Blacks, Puerto Ricans and Mexicans’.
‘Homogeneity’ was the source of Japan's high level of literacy; peoples, like animals in the wild, should live in separate locations (that is, different peoples are different species, and, presumably, should not miscegenate).
Nakasone was unmoved in this breathtakingly preposterous nonsense either by common sense, the protests of the many minorities living in Japan (Ainu, Okinawans, Koreans, Chinese, Filipinos and others), or the judgements of historians on the melange of different peoples who provide the ancestors of the modern Japanese.
On the contrary, at government expense, he set up a Kyoto institute of nationalist historical anthropology to demonstrate the spiritual civilization that supposedly provides the source of the modern Japanese.
Nakasone thus hijacked the concept of ‘Japanese’ for his private — or rather, class — definition.
Other Criteria
Culture and common descent provide the main claims for national differences, but other criteria have also been used.
If nations imply national States, there can be no State without a territory to administer, so a common territory is the precondition for asserting a claim to the right of national self-determination.
However, the occupation of territory is very recent for most peoples, and very often has entailed excluding the inhabitants already there.
Thus, a certain historical myopia is required to substantiate territorial claims.
When the Malay leaders of Malaysia assert that the Malays are ‘bumiputras’, sons of the soil, and therefore to be accorded privileges as against the Chinese and Indian Malaysians, only the unkind would point out that the Malays were also immigrants from an earlier period, and that no-one has paid attention to the claims of the real indigenous peoples, the Dayak and other tribes of the forestland.
Where a minority lacks a territory — for example, the Jews for much of their history, black people in the United States, the Indian Dalit Panthers (an organization of untouchable caste members)— then the practical struggle can be only for equality of treatment, not national independence.
Some jews went in the opposite direction by expropriating a territory in Palestine (on the grounds of an historical occupation) to substantiate their claim to being a nation.
The national claim came before the land to which the claim related.
Some of India's Muslims followed the same course in migrating to Pakistan in 1947.
America's black nationalism, on the other hand, was an identification with independence struggles in Africa, not a demand for a separate territory.
The nationalism is by way of analogy.
Some writers have stressed the importance in the struggle to create an independent national State of the use — or the attempt to establish the use — of one language in a given territory, ‘unified fields of exchange, as Benedict Anderson puts it.
Gellner stresses that nationalism becomes important when linguistic communication becomes vital for the State.
This may be true in the rise of European nationalism, although the need for a uniform language arises also because of the competition between States and therefore the drive to establish single national markets.
More often, the establishment of a uniform language is not the motive so much as the result — and not invariably so — of national independence.
Today there are numerous multi-lingual States, without this necessarily weakening national unity.
The use of a particular language does not necessarily coincide either with a group that claims common descent, or a geographical area or what is supposedly a culture.
The black inhabitants of Haiti speak French, as do the Indians of Mauritius.
The French speak a language  derived from that small group of speakers of Latin who conquered Gaul at the beginning of the first millennium AD, although they suppose they are descended more from the Gauls than the Romans.
The use of one language rather than another has always been a highly political matter.
The use of Latin in medieval Europe excluded the laity, just as the use of English in India today excludes the majority of Indians.
Thus the use of the vernacular is a great step forward in permitting participation by the majority.
On the other hand, establishing the vernacular as the main medium of government and instruction can be a way of excluding competition by outsiders for public employment.
The ban on other languages operates like import controls to give a domestic monopoly to local people.
The reverse phenomenon, forcing a language on people, can be a different means to eliminate competition by establishing linguistic inequality.
In India, the northern language, Hindi (spoken by the largest number of Indians, but all in the north), has the effect of disqualifying southerners from public employment.
The small current campaign in California to prevent the use of Spanish is probably less about jobs, more about enforcing a single uniformity to the advantage of those who regard themselves as of English descent.
During the French revolution, the revolutionaries tried to eliminate the minority languages (Provençal, Basque, Corsican, Flemish, Alsatian, Celtic) as the instruments of reaction and superstition.
The Tsars, as we shall see, tried something similar: if nations required linguistic uniformity, then the power of the State should be used to create it.
In the nineteenth century, religion was not admitted as a legitimate basis for national independence.
Today, it has become an important one.
Yet it was often an element in earlier national struggles — in the Low Countries, between the Protestant north and the Catholic south (where the Spanish Crown ensured, through the Inquisition, that the Catholic faith remained the religion of the loyalists).
In our own times, in Northern Ireland, Protestant vigilantes and a Catholic IRA confront each other, Christian Armenians and Bulgars face Muslim Turks and Azeris; Muslims in south Thailand and the south Philippines face Buddhist and Christian majorities.
In Lebanon, a patchwork quilt of religious loyalties paralyses the State.
In India and Cyprus, the religious divide broke the old British territory in two.
However, it is as naive to regard religious divisions as self-explanatory as it is to see nationalisms so.
Both summarize complicated interests and classes, and we need constantly to remind ourselves that the overwhelming majority of people of different religions live together in peace.
Religion per se is rarely the cause, rather the language, of strife.
States and ruling orders continually seek to manipulate religion to  political advantage.
Furthermore, the activists in political movements that fly religious banners are rarely religious in any serious sense; indeed, they may have only the haziest idea of the doctrines they claim to champion.
Many other forces of much more secular significance are at stake.
In sum, it seems, the principle which is supposed to underlie the formation of groups, of which nationalists are one, is of much less importance than the existence of the groups.
That the grounds claimed are fictional, matters little compared to the fact that the group exists; the symbols do not explain its existence.
The question of membership
Let us look at the issue of national and other groups from a different angle: how do people join them?
Most people today are members of a nationality without choosing it, and that membership in the short term usually excludes by law the possibility of belonging to another nationality.
People are born and raised within one country, without considering the question of choice.
But this is a relatively new situation.
In the past, choice was more important, and then national groups were much like many other groups of which one might be a member.
For people are members of many groups — by inheritance, adherence, occupation, residence, origin, language, appearance and so on.
Adding a generation or two can vastly extend the possible claims.
The choice of which group it is relevant to claim membership of turns on specific circumstances.
Sometimes, we are forced to be members of one group rather than another; in the British colony, Kenyans were ill those inhabitants excluded by the British from a share in political and administrative power, or at least that was the appearance.
In practice, the ambiguities of class blurred the theory; rich Kenyans had privileges that made them virtually equal to the British, and a large number of the British — including the instruments of power, the soldiers — were not accepted as equals by the Establishment.
In conditions of disorder, the alignments became sharper and memberships inescapable.
Even more sharply, it is impossible for the majority of people to be other than black in South Africa as it became impossible to be other than Jewish for Jews in Nazi Germany.
When the former ruling order of Ethiopia defined itself as Amhara, it thus imposed on all other Ethiopians non-Amharaness.
For the subordinate, then, the definition may be inescapable.
For the dominant, there may be a more flexible perimeter, depending upon the political tactics of the time.
In up-country British Nigeria, the  British proper were too small a group to be British, so they became ‘Europeans’ and let in the Lebanese traders.
Where politics forces one identification, it also dissolves others — prior social groupings that may be of much greater age.
The struggle for independence forced the ‘homogenization’ of the national liberation movement relative to the imperial power.
For example, the Guinean leader, Amilcar Cabral, notes how the Guineans created their own nationality:
Ten years ago we were Fula, Mandjak, Madinka, Balante, Pepel and others.
Now we are a nation of Guineans.
Thus, in a colonial situation, subordinate peoples have a particular group identity forced upon them by the operation of power, rather than by some prior common features.
Quite often, this forced identity does not fit those prior features.
Take, for example, the invention of the ‘Muslims’ as a political force in British India.
The British expressed a fear of the Muslims since the imperial dynasty which they had replaced had been Muslim.
However, the overwhelming majority of those inhabitants of the subcontinent who adhered to Islam had no sense of identification with the dynasty (even when they knew it existed) and the fact that the dynasty was Muslim had little to do with its exercise of power.
Nonetheless, it was British fears that began the process of creating a political group (rather than a religious one), and British political tactics to safeguard their continued power that gave it national significance.
However, in other circumstances, people also choose to claim membership of one group rather than another for specific purposes — from the trivial (jumping the queue because the shopkeeper is from the same village) to the momentous.
The choice may be quite temporary and for limited purposes — using contingent loyalties as strategies for action.
But while the choice is individual, it does not take place in isolation, but within a framework of given options.
Thus, the individual is undertaking a gamble about what action is required to defend or advance an interest: what is the right way to describe the problem, what is to be done, and who are the most appropriate allies; whether to say that the Ministry of Education has not provided enough school places (and all ‘parents’ should unite to press the government for more) or there are not enough places because the Ammanites have stolen them (so all non-Ammanites must unite to resist the theft).
The choice of label, of group, is a strategic one, not a passive recognition of ancient primordial alignments.
Whether I decide to be, for current purposes, pre-eminently a parent or a child, a woman, a teacher, a part-time seamstress, a member of the  Patel family or caste, a Gujerati, a Briton or an Indian, a citizen of Leicester, a taxpayer, a chess player and so on depends upon the task in hand rather than some inherent singularity, for I can be all these things simultaneously and without discomfort.
In general, opportunism rather than predetermination is the key.
However, to repeat, the historical context presents the options, not a solitary individual freely sorting the name cards of group membership.
but choice it is, choice of alignments with the social or political forces presented at the time.
Take, for example, the class struggle in Bohemia-Moravia (what later became the core of Czechoslovakia) between the end of the last century and the 1930s.
The conflict between nationalism and socialism aligned different classes.
The urban lower middle class was broadly nationalist, while class-conscious workers, with the support of the majority, were deliberately anti-nationalist (the Czech Communist Party declared itself the party of Czech, German, Slovak, Hungarian, Ruthenian and Polish workers).
There was no inevitable alignment with nationalism but the choice, for and against, involved a choice of many other things, including revolution and classes.
The options which define the framework of choice are closely related to the available leadership and organization.
In the anti-colonial struggle, the speed with which these options were created was remarkable.
The nationalist leader often had to invent a unifying culture as well as lead.
He played the role of a kind of intellectual version of Levi-Strauss’bricoleur .
A bricoleur was a handyman who, by using bits of machinery or equipment, the original purpose of which had been forgotten or never known, was able to solve immediate mechanical problems.
The nationalist leader did something similar with the cultural detritus of the past to create a new national group.
In doing so, he pre-empted the choice of others on what the nation was.
But also he learned the parameters of what was acceptable.
Consider the case of Abdellatif Sbili who led the first Moroccan nationalist campaign against the French in 1930:
Soon he saw that his way of presenting the threat in terms of a single territory that should not be torn apart was not understood by the people.
For them, he had to say: ‘Islam is being violated in its very being.’
The creation of a new culture, in this case a kind of Islamic secularism, is easiest for those slightly alienated from the customs of the society.
It was the educated and Westernized who were most important as nationalist leaders, and these were almost invariably drawn from the urban middle class or the Western-educated children of rural  landlords.
Many were adventurers, seeking any opportunity to advance themselves, and little constrained by either principle or higher political commitment: slogans and culture were means to advancement.
But for much of the time, without the right circumstances, they remained hungry, prophets without followings.
Even the demand for independence might be advanced as primarily a bargaining counter.
In the fluid political context, nationalism was not necessarily an overriding objective, but a tentative foray, a provisional objective that, in the right circumstances, might be relinquished.
The struggle for national independence was thus a peculiar context where the normal sets of interests and classes appeared not to bind the leaders: the skilful adventurer could almost create his or her own outcome.
Furthermore, the creation and leadership of a movement against a colonial power required different abilities from those needed to run a new State.
The vision of the future country mixed the aim of liberating the new State (and those who would direct it) with the emancipation of the inhabitants of the country: an end to exploitation, hunger and hardship.
In power, the second part of the programme usually needed radical revision.
It was one thing to lead an alliance of interests and classes for independence, another to run a system consisting of interests and classes in conflict.
The utopian vision of Gandhi ceased to have practical significance with the formation of the Government of India, and he handed power to the practical man of affairs, Nehru.
Partha Chatterjee notes the layers of contradiction in 1947 India between
a nationalism which stood upon a critique of the very idea of civil society, a movement supported by the bourgeoisie which rejected the idea of progress, the ideology of a political organisation fighting for the creation of a modern national State which accepted at the same time the ideology of ‘enlightened anarchy’.
Internal and external pressures
The degree to which ‘internal’ factors — as opposed to external pressures — lead to the emergence of a separate nationality obviously varies in emphasis between cases, and the first were possibly of greater significance in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in the emergence of the first national groups in Europe.
But in the anti-colonial revolutions and the Soviet Union today external oppression is as commonly the fundamental source of the creation of a national group, no matter how much that group defines itself in relationship to inherited cultural symbols or a supposedly common past.
National liberation is thus reactive.
Nigerian nationalism in the first instance  was a reaction to British imperialism and took its form from the nature of British rule, as mediated by different social strata.
For those preoccupied with culture, the defence of a brand new African culture arose because the British denied the validity of all except British culture.
A defence of indigenous languages flows from a rejection of all except English, and so on.
But even this overestimates the degree of homogeneity: some Nigerians were rich enough to escape being ‘black’; some whites were always too poor ever to be ‘white’.
The nationalists do not see the emergence of nationalism in this way.
They ‘discover’ what is supposedly pre-existing, an ancient collective identity.
In the same way, in religious conversion people ‘discover, God, a pre-existing reality.
For the nationalist, the voyage of discovery is a profound spiritual experience.
A nineteenth-century German writer observes:
In the whole history of a people its holiest moment is when it awakens from its unconsciousness and for the first time thinks of its old holy rights.
A people which grasps its sense of nationality with pleasure and love can always celebrate its rebirth.
A rebirth, a rediscovery, a reawakening: the imagery of a predetermined reality persists.
Nehru, at the declaration of Indian independence, doubly stressed the image, with an awakened India and a sleeping world:
Long years ago, we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very substantially.
At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom.
A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long oppressed, finds utterance.
It was appropriate that, given India had no indigenous language accessible to all Indians, English should be used for the solemn and archaic style of this speech.
Once awakened, as in religious conversion or falling in love, the nationalist finds a new family from which he or she derives pride, dignity, the opportunity for unimagined courage, contact with a supposed eternity, and ‘humanity’(as opposed to the mechanical arrangements of an alien bureaucracy and the market).
Above all, war inspires the simplification of normal complexities into the heroism of folklore.
A suddenly discovered national identity can indeed be  what Marx described religious belief as, ‘the heart of a heartless world’.
But this is at the level of nationalist discourse.
It leaves out place and circumstance, the powerful and unconscious drive of material interests and class identity.
In reality, for a Chinese peasant, his sons conscripted for forced labour in the Japanese army, his women seized for their brothels, his land destroyed, the power of nationalism does not add an extra dimension to his anguish and anger.
In isolation from these underlying realities, we are tempted to fill in the explanatory gap with imagination:
The tremendous emotional energies released when men break their bonds with the village, the kin group and the family are all available for a new focus on politics.
More frequently, this focus is nationalism.
Do people search for emotional attachments when they migrate to cities?
Many of the nationalists had long since passed beyond the kin-village axis.
On the other hand, many millions of people have left and are leaving villages, kin and family without becoming either emotional or nationalist.
Only a small minority correspond to the image.
They may be willing to die for the motherland; conscription or the threat of sanctions may be required for everyone else.
Nationalism creates a morality.
It offers criteria to decide who is rightfully a member of the nation, and the duties and rights which attach to membership.
It lays down that loyalty to the nation — and in established States, the State — ought to take priority over all other loyalties, including that to the family, and that the crime of disloyalty is treason, the punishment for which is frequently death (that is, the nation has the power of life and death over its members).
National interest also allows a member to disregard moral principles in defence of the nation — it is permissible to lie, to steal and to murder.
Foreigners are, as an abstract category, enemies.
In established States, less serious forms of bad behaviour are also permitted.
Nationalism encourages a collective vanity, paeans of self-praise (‘We are the greatest’), which would be considered childish in an adult.
It also promotes a neurotic insecurity, reflected in the sillier newspaper headlines —‘Briton insulted on the Costa Brava’ or vicarious triumphs of infantile egotism (‘Krauts firmly put down’).
It is difficult to identify the personality that might give rise to this energetic emotional life, so full of fears and petty triumphs; it is a kind of vainglorious fool, a miles gloriosus .
Nationalism provides an alter ego and an id , a means to export all anger and frustration on to outsiders.
Thus is the status quo preserved.
The paradox of national liberation
The nationalism of national liberation thus includes, for the minority of the national group involved, a paradox: a loyalty to the idea of the national group which is most intense, emotional and committed, to the point of sacrificing one's life, but which is also, on other criteria, quite shallow, apparently founded upon intellectually erroneous grounds.
The paradox arises partly because the emotional force derives from external oppression, not internal unities, but the external oppression seems to identify an internal essence, the junction point between what is imagined as a national group and personal integrity, self-respect.
There are more mundane explanations, as we have suggested earlier.
The national summarizes complex social and economic issues where the sources of fury are more obvious.
However, for much of the time, these violent commitments are relatively rare.
The majority at best are passive and, given the opportunity, may well be happy or at least indifferent about shedding their membership of a national group.
The massed emigrants to the United States were (and still are) in many cases American patriots well before they arrived or could speak English.
So it has been with other countries of immigration — the immigrants embraced a new nationality with, if the nationalist fictions are to be believed, unseemly eagerness.
Perhaps the child or the grandchild will invent a nostalgia, a personal explanation of current unhappiness, which will make of special significance the origin of the parent or grandparent.
But these private fictions are rarely of much significance, nor do they affect most people — despite much American talk of ‘roots’.
Nor do they survive the passing of many generations.
The ease of shedding national identity is more impressive than its retention.
If nationality is so speedily abandoned, it is also — as we shall see later — no less speedily invented.
Contrary to European perceptions, it takes months rather than centuries (as European emigrants to the United States demonstrated).
Passionate national commitment seems rather like falling in love — obsessive, emotional, violent, but often swiftly forgotten.
Fickle it may be but, while in its intense form, it can lead to the greatest heights of courage and self-sacrifice.
What provides stability to the fickleness of love is the material framework of marriage.
What turns national liberation into a stable nationalism is the accomplishment of State power.
As a political, rather than psychological, phenomenon, national liberation and nationalism concern first and foremost the State — the aspiration to create a State, or the defence or expansion of an existing State.
Once created, the State enforces on all a common nationalism, so that in the end the ‘nation’ becomes a kind of ideational shadow to the operation of  public power; what the government decides defines the will of the nation.
For national liberation, greater emphasis must fall upon the independent existence of a nation.
But even here, the creation of an armed wing — or the fact that the nationalists are armed guerrillas — is a kind of proto-State.
The armed bodies of men and women indicate that national liberation is no longer a world of private sentiment but a serious aspiration.
It is the first step on the road to the creation of a new State.
But it is still very far.
The militants of national liberation, single-mindedly focused upon the conquest of State power, see their end as opening the doors to freedom.
But States in general— and new poor States in particular — are part of a competing system and one marked by profound inequalities.
The defence of a newly won national independence against actual or potential threats from other States imposes an entirely new discipline upon society.
Military power requires the capacity to purchase the equipment abroad and usually a measure of industrialization at home.
Ensuring the loyalty of the population entails all-round development.
To achieve these goals usually entails a much higher degree of centralization and a much more interventionist role for the government in focusing national resources.
Economic development imposes upon society unprecedented social strains.
Thus, what begins in the springtime of national liberation as a great sense of popular emancipation becomes a range of new and often heightened oppressions, those required for economic development.
The reality of independence is distant from the hopes of national liberation.
For, it becomes apparent, the terms of the competition between States are constantly changing, and therefore the struggle for national independence is never complete.
In earlier times, the pressure of a system of competing States was perhaps less all-encompassing, and the agenda of economic development much more sketchy.
There was time for domestic forces to shape a new nation without the same constant vigilance of the behaviour of neighbours.
Since the later years of the nineteenth century, however, national liberation has become defensive, reactive, and the new States continually aware of their vulnerability and therefore of the necessity, at whatever tolerable speed, of economic development.
The transition perhaps partly explains why representative democracy is so much less associated with national liberation today than in the late eighteenth and the first half of the nineteenth centuries.
Participation in the affairs of State and open discussions of political matters must now be tempered by the need for survival between the testing conditions of competition abroad and what results from the State's reactions to these conditions, the resentments of the population at home.
The national  liberationists of Jharkhand may cry: ‘What kind of Jharkhand do we want?
We want a Jharkhand free of exploitation, a Jharkhand where those who work will eat and those who loot will go.'
But the terms to achieve this end are not in Jharkhand, and not within the grasp of an independent Jharkhand State.
Many people, of course, do gain in the achievement of independence.
Those that inherit the new State and come to constitute its new ruling order are some.
The ragged guerrillas become a new regular army with housing and pensions.
Capital may flourish from limitations on imports, curbs on, or the expropriation of, foreign companies, and the expansion the State may initiate to secure its power.
The intelligentsia has an enhanced role in creating and transmitting the new national culture through a national educational system.
In certain circumstances, cultivators may gain some land from the break-up of large estates, and often workers are rewarded with new regulations on conditions and pay.
But once the State settles to the task of development, the majority of people may find conditions distant from the rhetorical promise of independence.
Class struggle emerges from the supposed common interest, and the invitation to sacrifice for the nation is directed by one class at another.
Ultimately, the government says, all will benefit from development, but that is a remote promise for the present generation.
As we shall see subsequently, many of the revolts that become nationalist start as a reaction to increased centralization — administrative (with increased taxation) by the State and economic, by external markets.
The pressures that force these two processes do not cease after a national liberation movement attains power.
On the contrary, they may increase.
Thus the new State finds it necessary to accommodate precisely those processes which were one of the sources of the original movement of national liberation.
The cry of ‘neocolonialism’ attacks a real issue: the persistence of a world economy and political order that imposes upon its constituent elements quite strict forms of behaviour.
To refuse to conform is to risk threats to national independence.
The theme of resistance to increased centralization is persistent, linking the formation of both European States and those in the rest of the world.
We shall note cases later in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, in the Russias of the Tsars, in British India.
Benedict Anderson notes another case in the Spanish empire of the late eighteenth century.
Madrid was driven by its competition with the more advanced States of north-western Europe (and shortly to be overwhelmed by the Napoleonic wars), and failed to draw salutary lessons from Britain's loss of its North American colonies.
The Spanish Crown endeavoured to rationalize the administration of its dependencies, to tighten control, centralize and increase taxation.
Its clients who bore the brunt of administering Spanish America, the creoles, reacted with fury and resisted.
It was an important starting point for the anger which under later pressures inspired movements of independence.
Thus, the enlightenment of the enlightened despot, the attempt to modernize and make the administration more systematic (as well as relieve the royal purse), produced precisely the opposite reaction.
The empires have gone (with the exception, as anti-Communists have since the 1940s been fond of saying, of the Soviet Union).
The world is now parcelled up in independent States which claim a monopoly in the employment of nationalism.
The system of States does not now easily permit further fracturing, even though the associated processes of national economic development and administrative centralization continually stimulate forms of resistance, some of which are nationalist.
Thus, national liberation today is usually defensive, resisting the domestic effects of greater integration in, or competition with, a world order, rather than itself being the spearhead of ‘modernization’.
Furthermore, what is meant by economic development has also changed.
Since the mid-nineteenth century, the content of development — creating the capacity to defend national independence — changed radically.
But today it is again radically different.
Formerly, the process was supposed to focus upon national accumulation, capital held in local hands, production focused upon the domestic market and designed to displace all imports.
The nation was thus both a discrete political and economic concept.
Today, it seems, domestic development is much more effectively promoted by integration in a world economy: accepting foreign capital into the domestic economy, with production specialized for a world market (and relying upon imports).
Thus the national economic programme departs from the political; national independence does not include economic independence.
The nationalists promised to end the drain of resources out of the country, to industrialize in order to supply home consumption.
Yet the current logic implies a greater role for foreign capital (and greater repatriation of profits), directing output to foreign consumption, greater dependence upon the rest of the world.
The argument that there is no long-term viability for a country which is economically isolated from the rest of the world is not new.
Before the First World War, many Marxists believed, as we shall see, that world capitalism had become so internationalized that even the political struggle for national independence made no sense (or worse, it was reactionary).
The elements of national life which were consistent with the new world order were solely cultural, not political or economic.
Even the existing States were too small for the emerging economy.
Thus, for example, Leon Trotsky described the First World  War as ‘at bottom, a revolt of the forces of production against the political forms of the nation and the State’.
The War heralded ‘the collapse of the national State as an independent economic unit’; henceforth, the nation would be only ‘a cultural, ideological and psychological fact’.
Yet the high tide of nationalism was still to come, from two World Wars and the colonial revolution.
The error was to project the growth trends of the world economy from 1870 to 1914 and see the political order as not much more than a reflex of these trends.
Modern empires, it was thought, showed the internationalization of a world economy in a distorted form; once the empires could be overthrown, the world's productive forces would create a single economy.
The reality was far different.
The long-term stagnation and the Great Depression of the interwar years, not to mention the two World Wars themselves, separated the Great Powers economically in clear-cut economic empires.
The imperial States, as political entities, seemed to dominate all economic matters.
The economic separation itself then did profound damage to the world payments and trade systems.
Even if this outcome had not occurred, and by some miracle the world economy had continued to grow after 1918, it is not possible that States would merely have accommodated to the requirements of growing world trade.
Their rivalries were not washed away by the flows of commerce and finance.
Indeed, as we shall see, in certain circumstances economic integration can heighten nationalism.
The real outcome was at striking variance with Marx's original prognosis.
There, capitalism dissolved social differentiation — families, castes, clans, tribes, provinces, religions, gender, nationality.
Capitalism forced all into equality, the equality of a common subordination.
Only functional distinctions would remain.
In the end, the sociology of a world economy would find a world bourgeoisie confronting a world proletariat.
Yet reality went in the reverse direction; the world cake was sliced vertically, not horizontally.
Daily life might lead people to interact internationally — through the goods they handled, collaborative work, consumption patterns, even culture.
But the shadow of the national State fell over all these items, dividing humanity into the territorial patches administered by national governments.
The Marxists were wrong.
But their error was more fruitful than those who might have been right.
It was precisely their uncompromising, simplistic internationalism which collided so directly with growing nationalism and so illuminated the sources of national feeling in a way nationalists could not.
The first part of this book is therefore preoccupied with the case that Marx developed, what later Marxists made of it, and how this tradition was transformed in the history of the Soviet Union.
From there, we move to examine the inheritance  China received from the Soviet Union, before looking at a series of other cases in South Asia and Israel.
The argument then returns to the starting point — the conditions for the survival of nationalism in an integrated world economy.
In summary, the main points this chapter has attempted to make are the following:(i) In the European origins of the formation of modern States, nationalism was a means to establish the loyalty of populations and enforce some measure of homogeneity (against the local particularisms of earlier times).
However, with the spread of European imperial power throughout the world — and the fierce competition of the Great Powers — in the late nineteenth century, national liberation became essentially defensive.
Imperialism forced all to be nationalist in response.
(ii) National liberation was thus a reaction both to the political domination of the Great Powers and to integration into a wider capitalist system (the two were not always distinguishable).
The movement thus required economic programmes to parallel political ambitions, which would end what was seen as the domination of capitalism.
In the post-1945 period, national liberation has been seen as the first line of rebellion against capitalism.
(iii) National liberation invariably takes its form from the nature of the force oppressing those to be liberated.
Thus, the traditional grounds for identifying genuine nationalisms are either derived from the oppressive context or established by the independent State (even if, in both cases, symbols are borrowed from the past, albeit transformed to modern purposes).
(iv) Individuals choose to belong to national groups (even if the oppressing force reduces the range of choice to a very narrow one) and do so as the selection of a strategy for action, not the passive recognition of some primordial ordering.
They are opportunistic, and national identification is simultaneously intense and shallow.
(v) National claims summarize complex economic and social interests and classes, a coalition that is rarely the same in different times and places; so ‘nationalism, does not, in and of itself, indicate any self-evident aims.
(vi) In conditions of rapid social change, the role of adventurers, guided by the search for power without being committed in loyalty to any interest or class, is important in the creation of a national liberation movement.
(vii) The achievement of a new State transforms a national liberation movement into something quite different, necessitating quite often a change of leadership, of support groups, of style and programme.
This is because the central disciplines over a new State derive from the world  system of competitive and unequal States and the continuing struggle to preserve national independence.
(viii) Finally, the terms under which economic development can be undertaken by new States have been radically changed, so that today the programme of economic liberation has become separated from that of political freedom.
The rest of this book is an extended exploration of these themes.
MARXISM AND NATIONALISM
THE EUROPEAN ORIGINS OF THE NATIONAL IDEA
THE social order of the European high Middle Ages was characterized by an immense number of local subsistence economies, with relatively little intercommunication for much of the time.
Villages and towns might occasionally war with each other, but the fundamental basis of life was local.
There was intense suspicion of the ‘foreigner’(although he was as likely to be a trader from the nearby town as a native of another land), but the ordinary inhabitants of the territories which were to become the modern States of Europe had no sense of common identity, of membership of national groups.
Above this local base, there were all-European social groups — nobles, knights, priests, lawyers, with changing sets of loyalties to their overlords and to different dynasties.
None of this included identification with a national entity; indeed, ‘a French knight, like a French priest, had more in common with a knight or a priest from Italy or Germany than with a French peasant’.
In fact, even this formulation is doubtful, since, at the time, the concepts of ‘French’, ‘Italian’ or ‘German’were insecurely anchored in reality.
Even the great diversity of dialects did not allow linguistic grouping; it took the nineteenth century to invent the demarcations that created separate languages corresponding to the nations which had by then been created.
Furthermore, power — the subsequent basis of the national State — was personal, attached to the person of the ruler, not to an impersonal agency like the State.
Loyalty had to be reaffirmed each time it was required; it could not be assumed merely by reason of inhabiting a particular locality.
Treason therefore was a crime no greater than being  disloyal to one who claimed to be an overlord.
Since it was perfectly possible for an individual to have loyalties to several overlords, betrayal was not uncommon.
There were no ‘international affairs’, only relations between ruling dynasties (who were not members or representatives of different nations, but part of a single class).
Kings had ‘possessions’ and ‘subjects,; the majority of subjects were not citizens and had no automatic rights.
Of course, this description is very schematic, covering not only a variety of situations but differences at different times.
There were also rebellions, the creation of groups that cut across localities — from religious heresies to occupational strata (fishermen, peasants, artisans).
Oppressed groups — the Welsh, for example— possibly retained some sense of a common group experience.
The Lombard bankers, when they were abroad, also did, and the jews were obliged to do so.
Wars, famine, plagues were catastrophes that tore people out of their local niches.
Nonetheless, for much of the time and for many places, local particularism was a dominant motif.
What changed the picture were two related processes: commercialization and the formation of modern States, the second of which has most immediate importance for nationalism.
(i)Commercialization .
The growth of merchant and banking capitalism, as well as the spread of rural manufacturing (from 1400), began processes of change in a series of connected districts — from the leading area, northern Italy, to Flanders and the Baltic.
It was a development taking place outside the immediate purview of the great all-European social strata and, to some extent, establishing the sinews of economic life which cut across the areas of dynastic concern.
Trading stimulated urbanization, and thus a population less trapped in village particularisms and dealing geographically with much more distant areas.
Capital came to provide rulers with sources of power other than direct taxation, and this introduced a new factor into political affairs, allowing overlords to put down rivals and oblige priests to anoint them as rulers.
Interactions over longer distances encouraged the development of common conventions, of measures of security, of a lingua franca in which business could be conducted.
(ii) The modern State .
Outside the immediate area of commercialization, however, another phenomenon appeared.
Stretching over a long period, a number of important rulers began to seek to secure much greater power over their dominions as the means to extend their power abroad — particularly in what was to become known as France, but also in England, Sweden, Spain and, somewhat later, Brandenburg-Prussia.
The creation of a powerful State thus preceded the creation of a popular nationalism for these countries (in contrast to most later cases), and, indeed, one could say that the manufacture  of a popular patriotism was an instrument for the consolidation of State power here.
The process was driven by intensified competition between the participants.
In particular, the two separate processes of State formation in France and England, and the rivalries between France and the Habsburg empire (with, simultaneously, the rivalry between the Habsburgs and the Ottomans, with the French on occasions allied to the Ottomans), were important constituents.
Unlike much of Europe, England had long been a territory ruled by one dynasty, and was protected by the Channel from invasion by the great land powers of the Continent.
France, with four to five times as many people in the late Middle Ages and twice the territory (when unification was complete), consisted of a series of virtually independent and equal principalities — Normandy, Brittany, Burgundy, Gascony, Aquitaine, each capable of entering into dynastic relationships with other powers.
Furthermore, the open land borders made France subject to direct attack.
The two contexts produced two remedies.
France created a powerful centralized bureaucracy to override local power and ensure a direct supply of resources to sustain the armies of the Crown; England's monarchy was dependent upon a gentry that supplied the armed forces, administered local justice, sat in Parliament and paid the taxes upon which the royal armies depended.
The only limits to the capacity of the French Crown to tax its inhabitants was the capacity to pay (and the means to appropriate the surplus); between 1537 and 1642, the per capita fiscal burden in France was ten times that in England.
The English Crown was trapped at every stage by the gentry, to the point where the king was beheaded and a military dictatorship established (with, for the first time, a standing army, accompanied by a five-fold increase in the tax burden).
However, the Channel still allowed the English to escape what was forced upon the French kings, continual modernization of the military forces; in its place, the English concentrated on naval power.
The French State was fashioned in a Europe with a wide variety of political forms but, once it was created, it changed the terms of competition and of survival for lesser powers and for the ramshackle empires that in part covered these principalities.
The creation of States posed an immediate threat to the freedom of action of lesser rulers.
The political entities of the twentieth century are the survivors of a ferocious rivalry.
Most of the 500 or so independent political units of Europe in 1500 disappeared, absorbed by their more powerful neighbours, leaving some 25 or so victors.
The outcome of this process was in no way predetermined.
No French nation was waiting in 1500 to emerge in the concept of France; and it could just as well have been Burgundy which assumed that role.
In the first and longest phase, those who directed the process had no sense of the final outcome.
They were driven by domestic challenge and external threat to build a powerful State, with the mechanisms for raising resources to finance it, but without a powerful State being the intention (let alone what was to come later, popular participation and a general nationalism).
Rivalries and domestic threats meant war: ‘War made the State, and the State made war’.
War, whether against domestic rebels or external threats, meant armed forces and armaments, and the financing of these prodigious costs meant that much of the time and energy of the Monarch's developing bureaucracies were devoted to raising funds for this purpose, securing access to the surplus generated within society.
In the first instance, this was exceedingly difficult.
Labour productivity in the overwhelmingly preponderant sector of society, subsistence agriculture, was very low, so any net surplus was small.
Furthermore, it was difficult both to secure part of the surplus from self-supporting peasant households (with a rather low participation in any monetary economy) and to do so on a fair basis, that is, one which did not provoke revolt.
In the early days, transport was difficult and expensive, markets too constrained to dispose of taxes in kind, and there were few outside sources of funding (external borrowing, assets to be expropriated).
Moreover, even when funds were available, the peasantry refused to fight for the monarch: and this was true even with the growth of an expropriated landless labouring class.
Royal armies thus depended upon mercenaries — even as late as the battle of Waterloo in 1815, over half the army of Napoleon was not French, and half that of Wellington (excluding the forces of Blücher) was not English.
The growth of labour productivity and commercialization eased some of these problems.
But it was the industrial revolution which transformed the situation, by its effect on the size of the surplus, by the completion of a monetary economy (so making the surplus accessible to State appropriation), and also by making possible a popular participation in which people resented tax-paying less and were willing to fight.
Arms spending and the size of armies soared.
The process of securing resources for war obsessed monarchs and their officers in the earlier periods.
It was an unremitting struggle that led to the overriding, abolition, co-optation or subordination of the inherited liberties and assemblies of society — vested in manors, villages, communities, provinces and estates — to achieve an unprecedented degree of centralization in the leading power in this respect, France.
The State allied with different segments of the population against the rest, all the time increasing its control, until it had funds sufficient to exercise direct coercion.
Where it could, it expropriated resources by  simple edict.
It promoted economic activities to free or create resources for its own purposes, bribed and was bribed, all with the continuing preoccupation of creating an independent public force, loyal solely to the Crown, and of an effectiveness capable of matching any rival force in Europe.
Innovations in military and naval technology — of which there were an increasing number as time passed — further increased the burdens to be imposed upon the population at large.
The alliances and compromises, the sales of offices and titles, all the shifts and feints required of the Crown to secure a continuing coalition had, however, an important adverse effect: corruption, the leakage of the resources garnered with such painful persistence (and often brutality) into private hands.
Trevor-Roper puts it in this way:
The Renaissance State consisted, at bottom, of an ever-expanding bureaucracy which, although at first a working bureaucracy, had by the end of the sixteenth century become a parasitic bureaucracy; and this ever expanding bureaucracy was sustained on an equally expanding margin of ‘waste’: ‘waste’ which lay between the taxes imposed on the subjects and the revenue collected by the Crown.
Since the Crown could not afford an absolute loss of revenue, it is clear that this expansion of the waste had to be at the expense of society.
It is clear that it could be borne only if society itself were expanding in wealth and numbers.
Although kings made sporadic efforts to reform, to Purge and reorganize, again ultimately only the nineteenth century brought the abundance which permitted a system to organize the State and curb some of the worst excesses.
People resisted these attempts.
Increases in taxation and steps in the centralization of royal power (which usually went together) were the most important factors promoting rebellion.
Thus, the English Tudors faced six major rebellions and countless minor revolts.
The pace then slackened, perhaps because rising prosperity eased some of the burdens (and Henry VIII's expropriation of the Church lands and assets eased the constraints on the king).
After 1600, there was a pause before the same issues emerged even more violently in the Civil War and led to the beheading of the king.
In France, the bloody religious wars of the sixteenth century were fought partly against the arbitrary exercise of the royal prerogative.
Richelieu faced some hundreds of mutinies and riots against royal innovations.
Indeed, rebellion was intrinsic to the growth of State power up to the nineteenth century.
There were times, however, when the difficulties were eased — when religious inspiration or tangible threats from abroad led people to  commit both their resources and their persons to fight.
But for most States, that only became feasible in the nineteenth century with the development of popular participation.
Then resources and manpower became available on a scale coercion could never match — and one of government's major preoccupations became to control and guide popular attitudes and the process of socialization in order to ensure an adequate tax base and flow of manpower.
What began as a blind struggle to stabilize and expand the power of a small group of competitive monarchs in Western Europe threatened the rest of the principalities.
The contest forced all to copy the process in part or whole sooner or later; State formation spread eastwards.
The more power in Europe lay in the hands of a few strong States, the more a State system emerged in which the position of each was established through the recognition of the others.
Perhaps the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia which ended the Thirty Years War was the first to acknowledge the emergence of an international order which legitimated State sovereignty.
By the time of the Treaty of Vienna and the Concert of Europe, such a system had become formalized, and the Treaty of Versailles following the First World War brought in many more participants (and took power to create new States, like Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia).
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the European powers forced the State system on the rest of the world, scooping up all available territories into empires.
They did so, in the main, by mutual agreement, despite the simultaneous fierce rivalries.
Finally, in the mid-twentieth century, the empires fragmented into a new and much wider State system.
Thus, one could almost describe the period since the Roman Empire as one of alternating fusion and fission, each phase extending the geographical reach of the system more and more widely.
The later the process of formation of States, the less the importance of domestic factors in determining their creation.
The aggressive creation of nation-States as part of a blind process of self-modernization, that ultimately produced popular nationalisms, could not be repeated.
All others, in Europe and the rest of the world, reacted to this first step — national liberation became defensive, reactive.
In the first phase, nationalism emerged as the result of State formation; in the second, the State was created as the result of a nationalist opposition to external competition or oppression.
In the first phase, States created themselves in, as it were, a vacuum, a State-less environment.
In all subsequent cases, national liberation was the route to enter an established system of States (which sanctioned the newcomer).
In the end, the State system of our own times scarcely permits the fashioning of new territorial entities.
The whole burden of competition now takes the form of rivalry for military and economic  superiority and — with some exceptions — political domination short of expropriation.
Origins in Europe
The process of creating a nation was not simply the imposition of a single political authority over a territory.
The sinews of political and economic integration required to enable the expanded raising of resources by the Crown took a long time to create.
They included the extension of land communications, the establishment of an exchange economy, with markets and a single accepted currency, the standardization of the law and of a single language.
The language had to be one accessible to more than the ruling elite, so it became one or other dialect of the vernacular.
While this permitted access to public life by more of the natives (standard national education was required to give access to all), it excluded the Europe of Latin-speakers and the immediate inheritance of religion.
The unity of medieval Catholicism began to dissolve in sub-European States and national churches.
New commercial and urban classes emerged with a view of markets and polities going well beyond the district and, with the king's changing need for allies and finance, a degree of participation in public affairs.
The stage was set for some alignment between the individual, a single political authority, and a single territory, culture and language; a passive patriotism that was defined by the existence of clear enemies abroad.
Whether the king's subjects were patriotic or not was, for the king, of marginal significance.
What changed passive patriotism, an incidental by-product of the emerging political and economic order, into an important political factor was the need for popular support to wage war.
This seems to have emerged with greatest sharpness in an area marked simultaneously by the most advanced commercial wealth in Europe and the absence of an established State: the seventeen provinces of the Low Countries, the possessions of the Habsburg dynasty.
The long struggle of the provinces against the most powerful ruler in Europe has perhaps the best claim to be the first war of national liberation.
It was half defeated for, in the end, only the seven northern provinces secured national independence in the Dutch Republic.
The eighty years of war in the Netherlands were a turning point in European history.
For they created, through struggle, something approaching a nation.
Philip II, whose most important possession was Spain, endeavoured to reform his administration through greater centralization and to raise much greater funds from the prosperous trading cities of the Low Countries (particularly for his continuing  struggle against the Ottoman Sultans, and secondarily, against the French monarchs).
This task entailed a reduction — and even abolition — of the traditional corporate liberties of the cities.
Philip thus forced upon the Netherlanders a degree of unity which had hitherto not existed.
Part of the process was interwoven with the Counter-Reformation: Philip's Catholicism, his court and his Spanish armies and administrators became a further instrument of oppression that unified and heightened the Protestantism of the rebels (the Inquisition was thus a means of imposing a homogeneity upon Philip's subjects, the better to subordinate them to a uniform governance).
Finally, the exigencies of the struggle forced the conservative burghers of the Netherland cities to involve an increasing number of people in the provision of manpower and funds, so that they in turn claimed the right to participate in political life.
The nature of the conflict obliged the city fathers to extend the membership of the ‘nation’ far beyond those who would customarily have been considered.
In turn, this inhibited the power of the aristocracy and the urban oligarchies.
Thus was a popular nationalism created, not by intention or design, but out of the exigencies of the struggle.
In the end, to general astonishment, Europe's most powerful ruler was defeated by the vulgar city mobs.
Even before the struggle in the Low Countries was complete, yet another type of revolt took place in economically much more backward England (but an England closely preoccupied with the revolt across the sea since it affected the position of Protestant England relative to Catholic Spain and France).
Once again, the immediate issues were the royal prerogative and the high tax burdens entailed by the monarch's profligate spending.
Under the leadership of part of the gentry, the forces of parliament, the urban classes and part of the better-off peasantry defeated — and executed — the king.
More than ever before, this was a war in which one side was strongly supported by the mass of the population at large, sufficiently so for the New Model Army to be recruited from the mass of the peasantry in selected regions and to aspire to a meritocratic, rather than aristocratic, officer corps.
The struggle for unification of the opposition in the Netherlands had been difficult, but at least there a much more substantial commercial class could simultaneously fight the Habsburgs and prevent the outbreak of class war.
In England, a military dictatorship was required to protect the existing social order.
It left no heirs.
Only a king could inherit what Cromwell had defended, albeit a king under much closer restrictions than ever before.
The revolts in the Low Countries and in England challenged the nature of dynastic power and the modernizing State.
They also raised the issues of religious freedom and popular participation (although the  participation was limited to the propertied).
The struggle, however, was most often seen as a defence of traditional liberties, not of ‘liberty’ itself.
Over a century later, in Britain's American colonies, what began as a defence of traditional rights against the attempts by the British Crown to impose new taxation, became an affirmation of universal and secular liberty — the rights of man.
The doctrine of now universal liberation received its most dramatic affirmation in the French revolution of 1789.
Its prophet, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, proclaimed the right of all people to express their national character through the exercise of political sovereignty in a government of their own.
The nation existed prior to the State, was the source of its authority and the independent judge of its actions.
Of course, by ‘nation’ Rousseau meant no more than the people in a locality as opposed to what the word came to mean, the inhabitants of an established State.
However, the claim to universal liberty was the justification of Napoleon's attempt to conquer Europe, not the right of France to control the Continent (on the other hand, Napoleon's armies did little to change the inherited social structure of the areas they conquered).
In the French revolution, as in its American and English forerunners, a new revolutionary current was emerging in the opposition to the dynasty.
This was opposed, not simply to kings and aristocrats, but to the propertied minority.
In all three revolutions, however, the established order was able to curb such communist aspirations.
In practice, it was not the majority of the people who were to inherit power, but those who qualified by the ownership of property; the ‘people’ had not yet come to include all inhabitants.
And by 1830 in France the two currents had parted — the powerful and propertied recognized the unpropertied as a graver threat than what was left of the old order.
The causes of bourgeois democracy and socialism parted company.
In the principalities of what, under the hegemony of Prussia, was to become Germany, the impact of the French Revolution and of Napoleon was considerable.
On the one hand, the doctrine of the rights of man raised high hopes of universal freedom.
On the other, the French threat made urgent the need to create a united German State, regardless of popular freedom.
Indeed, Herder could argue for a popular State without democratic mechanisms.
Almost simultaneous with the outbreak of the French revolution, the three Great Powers of East and Central Europe, the Tsar, the Austro-Hungarian Emperor and the King of Prussia, repartitioned Poland.
For the tiny minority of nationalist rebels in Europe at that time, this was a horrifying act of dynastic power, imposed on what had been an ancient and important State with no reference to the  wishes of the inhabitants.
The French revolution and the Napoleonic armies helped to spread the concepts and values required to constitute a Polish nationalism among a section of the Polish nobility in exile.
Throughout the nineteenth century, the struggle to reconstitute Poland was a touchstone for liberals and socialists alike, a focus for national liberation in general.
Lord Acton, writing much later in a significant nationalist metaphor, deplored a partition which created a nation demanding to be united in a State, ‘a soul, as it were, wandering in search of a body in which to begin life over again’.
The truth was a little more prosaic.
When, in 1846, the Polish aristocracy in Western Galicia, pre-eminent representatives of the ancien régime , endeavoured to interest their peasant tenants in the national struggle, the latter rose in revolt and slaughtered nearly one thousand of the nobles.
For them class remained the decisive issue.
The contradictory currents of national liberation reached a crescendo in the great European upsurge of 1848.
The challenge to the accepted claims of the major national liberation movements came not only from the unpropertied, but also from lesser movements; the Germans, the Poles, the Hungarians, the Italians found their claims undermined by those who felt themselves oppressed by these dominant peoples.
Many of the nationalists abandoned the hopes of a popular movement, and in subsequent years came to rely upon forces other than popular struggle: Bismarck and the rulers of Prussia, and the House of Savoy.
Thus, at what seemed its moment of greatest triumph, popular national liberation foundered.
The Frankfurt Assembly showed less the strength of the German middle class, more its vulnerability to the demands of the unpropertied and therefore its equivocation on the issue of democracy and its dependence on the armed power of Prussia and Austria.
The princes of the German principalities saw no reason why a shared set of dialects should be grounds for superseding their sovereignty.
Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia refused the German Crown offered him by the Frankfurt Assembly because it was offered by ‘Liberals and Jews’ and because he felt his cousin in Vienna had a better claim.
After 1848, the popular movement declined.
Ambitious princes began to recognize the value of nationalism for an extension of their own claims, rather than those of popular democracy.
Thus, German unification was achieved not by revolution, but by the political ingenuity of Bismarck and the arms of Prussia.
The Realpolitik of Berlin detached the definition of the new Germany from Germanism — it did not include all Germans nor did it exclude non-Germans.
The Reich, the Lesser Germany, was primarily a concept of Power, unified by the Hohenzollern dynasty, not of language, culture or any supposed common descent.
For much of the period and up to the First World War, the targets of the largest movements of national liberation were the two great empires of Eastern and Central Europe — that of the Romanovs in the Russias and of the Habsburgs in Austro-Hungary.
In both cases, the nineteenth century witnessed movements for the cultural identification and assertion of many of the subject peoples, without these inevitably producing demands for secession.
That was almost invariably provoked by the actions of the dynasts themselves.
One can thus trace the development of the first waves of nationalism in Austro-Hungary to the reforms of Joseph II (reigning from 1760 to 1790).
With heightened competition between the Great powers, the emperor, in an effort to rationalize his ramshackle domains, instituted a greater degree of centralization by overriding traditional claims, and enhanced the tax base of the imperial government.
Part of the process of creating a modern State was to replace the lingua franca , Latin, with a vernacular, and German, the language of Vienna, was selected.
But German was the speech of the ruling minority and therefore coincided with power and privilege.
In particular, the Magyar gentry saw themselves placed at a disadvantage compared with German-speakers at the same time as their historic liberties were threatened.
Thus, the reforms started a course which was the precise opposite of the emperor's intention — moves to resist centralization, indeed, to secure greater decentralization, a process which ultimately led to the division of the empire in a Dual Monarchy, and ultimately its disintegration in the first World War.
The Magyar gentry itself ruled many peoples whose native tongue was not Hungarian.
It also ruled a Hungarian peasantry whose tongue might be Hungarian, but whose material conditions were no less wretched than those of their Croat, Serb, Slovak and Romanian counterparts.
The Magyar response to Vienna's imposition of German was to try to enforce upon their non-Hungarian-speaking subjects the use of Hungarian.
Louis Kossuth (1802–94), the Magyar leader, combined, in Seton-Watson's words, ‘unrealistic benevolence and national intolerance’: since the non-Hungarians possessed a culture inferior to the Hungarian, they could not be accorded the same privileges as the Magyars; however, they should be encouraged to become Hungarian as swiftly as possible.
The non-Hungarians, inspired by a considerable and ancient hostility towards their Magyar overlords, were obliged to defend the use of their own languages against the Magyar attempt to eliminate them.
Kossuth in turn endeavoured to create a much stronger popular nationalist alliance of classes on the basis of radical reforms.
He promised an end to serfdom, reform of landholdings and an extension of the suffrage, a programme which in turn alienated an important part of  the Magyar gentry and rendered them much more favourably disposed to suspending national demands in favour of outside intervention to protect existing social relationships.
The intervention of the Tsar's armies closed the issue, and despatched Kossuth to exile.
There was a further intervention — by the Prussians — in 1866.
It achieved the worst of all worlds, paralysing the empire without liberating new forces.
The Dual Monarchy provided the Magyar gentry with self-government under a Habsburg ruler, leaving the subject peoples — the southern Slavs — as before.
The class issues at stake in Hungary were only one illustration of the conflict throughout the empires and in Europe generally.
The middle classes led a host of new national movements — the large ones of the Germans, poles, Magyars, Italians, but also now including a host of smaller peoples: Irish, Schleswig Danes, Czechs, Slovaks, Croats and Ruthenians.
Other classes — peasants and now workers — were accepted only on the terms laid down by the leaders.
Few peasants became involved, and the workers were frequently indifferent — or positively hostile, feeling that national struggles were ways of evading their own class demands.
Class-based social democracy also grew during the period.
In the last two decades of the century, the context changed.
The rivalry of the Great Powers now led all contenders to pursue the British, French and Dutch to the world beyond Europe, spreading empires to the limits of the globe.
The right of national self-determination in Europe now rested upon the emphatic denial of that right to all lesser peoples.
Nationalism now became imperialism.
Furthermore, within the Great Powers the contest coincided with the process of incorporating wider and wider sections of the population in the nation.
The new methods of production now emerging required an educated labour force, who participated consciously in the process of production rather than playing the role of brute labour.
Advance in labour productivity was beginning to depend upon the quality and involvement of the worker.
Mass education, a popular press for the much larger literate audiences, extensions of the suffrage, the increasing political influence of trade unions and social democratic parties (with resulting public regulation of social and working conditions, health and safety), all drew the working classes into the mainstream of national life.
Workers had to push hard to win these advances, but they could be won short of revolution.
Right-wing social democrats drew the conclusion that material advances could be won indefinitely and therefore nothing extra was to be gained by open class struggle.
A growing proportion of politically active workers were no longer without a country, as the Communist Manifesto had proclaimed.
While this change was not the immediate source of the popular jingoism that  swept the lower middle classes in Britain at the time of the Boer War, or later in all the Great Powers in 1914, nonetheless popular nationalism and imperialism were becoming factors in national politics.
The social democrats generally were not isolated from these changes.
Despite disclaimers, Social Democracy in Germany was German Social Democracy, not simply a German component of an international class organization (as theory and the French maintained).
It had come to represent important sections of socialized nations, mass societies, and in this responsible role social democrats were required to do their patriotic duty when war threatened ‘their’ ruling order.
Thus did the social democrats betray their promise of a new world without war, and come to act as instruments for each ruling order: nationalism was the key ideological means of breaking the workers’ challenge to the status quo .
In fact, the social democrats secured the compliance of workers rather than their zealous support, but that was enough to safeguard the Establishments of most of Europe.
However, before the First World War it was not at all clear how far the social democratic movements had been subverted.
The outbreak of war exposed the reality.
The shock was greatest for those socialists who had believed the rhetoric of the International.
Even elementary fraternity, the demand of the French Revolution, let alone class solidarity, proved no match for loyalty to one or other State.
Only on the ill-colonized perimeter of Europe were there exceptions (Russia, Bulgaria, Serbia, Ireland).
In the empire of the Tsars, the twin revolutions offered such a strikingly different alternative that they overshadowed the remarkable changes elsewhere — the disintegration of the Habsburg and Ottoman empires, and the appearance of a host of new States.
With those States came new nations, languages, and lovingly created cultures.
For a moment, the world seemed less heartless.
MARX-ENGELS: THE SPRINGTIME OF NATIONALISM
IN comparison with our own times, Marx and Engels lived in a pre-nationalist age.
(For the sake of simplicity, the two will be referred to here as ‘Marx’ unless otherwise specified.)
European movements of national liberation were the most important forms of popular rebellion during their lifetime, but the intellectual atmosphere of mid-nineteenth-century London as well as their own convictions made it seem that nationalism was a temporary phase, and that internationalism was the norm, or at least the force that would grow most powerfully in the future.
For capitalism daily unified the globe and created an international working class.
Marx's internationalism paralleled what was identified by him as the leading sector of capitalism, the international.
However, he assumed that capitalism could not finally achieve an integrated world, that the bourgeoisie could never transcend nationality.
That required the end of existing property relations which were national (and which involved ‘the exploitation of some nations by others’).
At most the bourgeoisie could embrace the ‘hypocritical private cosmopolitanism of free trade’.
Only the proletariat had no material interest in nationality; they possessed a ‘brotherhood of the oppressed against the oppressors’:
the proletarians of all countries have one and the same interest, one and the same enemy, and one and the same struggle.
The great mass of the proletarians are, by their nature, free from national prejudice and their whole disposition and movement is essentially humanitarian, anti-nationalist.
Only the proletarians can destroy nationality.
Marx's starting point for both analysis and strategy was a world system, not one or other country.
National movements were never ends in themselves, only stepping-stones to a liberated world order.
The task of the proletariat was to emancipate humanity, not a particular country.
And the progress of capitalism itself eliminated all intermediate divisions between the individual and his or her world class; nations, like estates, provinces, religions, families, would all be superseded:
only then will the separate individuals be liberated from the various national and local barriers, be brought into practical connection with the material and intellectual product of the whole world and be put in a position to acquire the capacity to enjoy this all-sided product of the whole earth, the creations of man.
All-round dependence, this natural form of the world historical co-operation of individuals, will be transformed by this communist revolution into control and conscious mastery of these powers.
However, much of Europe, let alone the world at large, was economically backward.
Neither bourgeoisie nor working class was significant.
Here the immediate struggle was to establish the political form, the national State, within which capitalism could flourish.
This required the break-up of the multinational empires of East and Central Europe which not only controlled their own peoples but intervened throughout Europe to protect the ancien régime .
The aim, therefore, was both to create new centres of national capitalism and to neutralize the capacity to obstruct this process of the three dominant powers of backward Europe — the Tsars, the Habsburg emperors, and the monarchs of Prussia (the three were interlocked in the tripartite division of Poland).
To stand against the old order, the new national States would have to be strong —‘The very first conditions of national existence (are) large numbers and compactness of territory,’ along with resources, ability and a favourable social organization.
Engels elaborated:
There could, indeed, be no two opinions as to the right of every one of the great national subdivisions of Europe to dispose of itself, independently of its neighbours in all internal matters, so long as it did not encroach upon the liberty of others.
The right was, in fact, one of the fundamental conditions of the internal liberty of all.
Thus, the right of national self-determination applied only to ‘the large and well-defined historical nations of Europe…
Italy, Poland, Germany, Hungary’.
No such right generally applied to the rest.
The selection of those who might have the right varied according to immediate tactics but, in general, Engels reserved his most withering scorn — and violent prejudice — for ‘non-historical peoples’,
the ruins of peoples which are still found here and there and which are no longer capable of a national existence, are absorbed by the larger nations and either become part of them or maintain themselves as ethnographic monuments without political significance.
Thus, the right of the large nation could deny that of the small.
In the same way, the capacity of the British to accelerate development vindicated their expropriation of India (the same principle justified the French seizure of Algeria and the North American annexation of northern Mexico).
Marx was merciless in his indictment of the horrors inflicted upon subject peoples by British imperialism, but without repudiating the general right of the more advanced to develop the backward.
However, he also argued that, under imperial initiative, the process of social transformation in India could not be complete without either a proletarian revolution in Britain or ‘the Hindoos themselves…grown strong enough to throw off the English yoke altogether’.
The viable nations of Europe were constituted by a line of cultural or linguistic descent, without this being an overriding principle or implying complete ethnic homogeneity.
For Poland to be effective and block the Tsar's advance on Central Europe, it needed to be large.
If restored to its 1772 boundaries, it would encompass a plurality of peoples (including some millions of Ukrainians and White Russians).
Lands historically occupied by Germans would be included, but in time they would become Polish.
In fact, all European countries were likely to have more than one nationality within their frontiers and often people of the same nationality would live in several countries.
There were no grounds for redrawing borders; ‘The Germans of Switzerland and Alsace do not desire to be reunited to Germany any more than the French in Belgium and Switzerland wish to become attached politically to France’.
Indeed, on occasions, the word ‘nation’ was used by Engels to refer to the inhabitants of a State regardless of language, culture or ethnicity.
Furthermore, while the support for the national claims of the large peoples of Europe might imply supporting social forces quite  other than those of the proletariat — for example, the Polish aristocracy or the Magyar gentry — the national claims could not be won without revolution:
The great agricultural countries between the Baltic and the Black Sea can free themselves from patriarchal-feudal barbarism only through an agrarian revolution which will transform the peasants from their condition of serfdom or of subjection to the corvée into the free owners of the land — a revolution which will be exactly the same as the French revolution of 1789 in the countryside.
Moreover, insofar as a nationalist aristocracy fought for democracy, so they undermined their own privilege:
The men who led the Cracow revolutionary movement (the Polish insurrection of 1830) were deeply convinced that only a democratic Poland could be independent, and a democratic Poland was impossible without the abolition of feudal rights, without the agrarian movement which would transform the tied peasants into free proprietors.
This emphasis upon the revolutionary character of the struggle for national liberation raised other questions.
Initially, Marx saw the establishment of proletarian power in Britain as the means to prosecute reforms in all other fields.
The Chartist movement was therefore vital not just for power in Britain but throughout Europe and in India —‘Hence, Poland must be liberated not in Poland, but in England’.
Marx and Engels were initially unsympathetic towards the cause of Irish freedom.
The Chartists would liberate the Irish as a byproduct of their struggle for power in British.
The English might have created the form of Irish oppression, Engels wrote in 1848, but the poverty was due to the temperament of the people.
Thus the agitation to end the union with Britain would not achieve useful results:
Irish distress cannot be removed by any Act of Repeal.
Such an Act would, however, at once lay bare the fact that the cause of Irish misery, which now seems to come from abroad, is really to be found at home.
Continuous oppression had made the Irish a completely wretched nation, and now, as everyone knows, they have the job of providing England, America and Australia etc. with whores, day labourers, pimps, pickpockets, swindlers, beggars and other wretches.
Even in 1848, the prejudice of the Irish — rather than the behaviour of the British — is blamed for their reluctance to see the Chartist movement as the means to their liberation:
there is a better chance now than ever before to break down that prejudice which prompted the Irish people to confound in one common hatred the oppressed classes of England with the oppressors of both countries.
There was, however, another principle at work.
In 1843, Marx — writing on the Jewish question — argued that ‘we must emancipate ourselves before we can emancipate others’.
He applied the same principle to the Germans, who had participated through the Prussians in the dismemberment of Poland.
And it applied also to the Chartists —‘A nation cannot become free and at the same time continue to oppress other nations’.
Once admitted, however, the principle could then also be applied to the Magyar treatment of the Croats, the Polish of Ruthenians, etc.
The door was opened to a much more generalized right of national self-determination.
In the specific case of Ireland, the Chartists failed, but the Fenian movement for Irish independence burst out anew in the 1860s.
Now, it seemed, the Irish struggle might ignite the British rather than vice versa.
Marx reversed his position:
The English workers…must make the Repeal of the Union …an article of their pronunziamento .
This is the only legal and therefore only possible form of Irish emancipation which can be admitted in the programme of an English party.
This was not primarily a gesture of support for, or solidarity with, the Irish.
It was necessary if the English were to emancipate themselves:
the English working class…can never do anything decisive here in England until it separates its policy with regard to Ireland in the most definite way from the policy of the ruling class, until it not only makes common cause with the Irish, but actually takes the initiative in dissolving the Union established in 1801, and replacing it by a federal relationship.
And, indeed, this must be done, not as a matter of sympathy with Ireland, but as a demand made in the interest of the English proletariat.
Or again:It is in the direct and absolute interest of the English working class to get rid of their present connection with Ireland…
For a long time, I believed that it would be possible to overthrow the Irish regime by English working class ascendancy…
Deeper study has convinced me of the opposite.
The English working class will never accomplish anything before it has got rid of Ireland…
The lever must be applied in Ireland .
Thus the more backward could liberate the advanced (a point subsequently of great importance for the Bolsheviks), a ‘non-historical, people an historical one.
Now the national and agrarian revolution, the transition to capitalism, could set off the proletarian revolution, the transition to socialism.
The change was profound.
The reasons for it were several — the overthrow of world capitalism depended upon an English proletarian revolution which, it was now argued, could only be initiated at Britain's weakest point, Ireland.
Here, the agrarian issue was explosive, a matter of life and death for the Irish peasantry and crucial for Anglo-Irish landlordism.
Thus, revolution on the land was interwoven with the issue of Irish liberation from the English gentry.
However, it was also vital to free the English workers from the effect of the British control of Ireland:
The ordinary English worker hates the Irish worker as a competitor who lowers his standard of life.
In relation to the Irish worker, he feels himself a member of the ruling nation and so turns himself into a tool of the aristocrats and capitalists of his country against Ireland , thus strengthening their domination over himself .
He cherishes religious, social and national prejudices against the Irish worker.
His attitude towards him is much the same as that of the ‘poor white’ to the ‘niggers’in the former slave states of the U.S.A….
This antagonism is the secret of the impotence of the English working class, despite its organisation.
It is the secret by which the capitalist class maintains its power.
And that class is fully aware of it.
Thus Marx identified the already well-advanced process of the ‘nationalization’ of English workers which was to cause such a shock in 1914.
In sum, ‘any nation that oppresses another, forges its own chains’.
Colonialism enslaved the colonialist.
Or as Engels meditated, ‘Irish history shows one what a misfortune it is for a nation to have subjugated another nation.
All the abominations of the English have their origin in the Irish Pale’.
Poland and Ireland were therefore the two key points for the transformation of the European system of power, each a battering ram against the most backward and the most advanced Great Power, at opposite ends of Europe.
Internationalism required that two thoroughly nationalistic and non-socialist movements be given complete support.
For, as Engels wrote to Kautsky in 1882, both movements had ‘not only the right but even the duty to be nationalistic before they become internationalistic…they are most internationalistic when they are genuinely nationalistic’.
The attitude to national liberation, however, remained entirely instrumental.
Support for the Irish as a means to liberate the English remained consistent.
But not so for the Magyars who had been so praised in 1848, ‘an obscure semibarbarous people…still standing in the half-civilization of the sixteenth century’.
And even the Polish issue was a contingent one:
The Poles are une nation foutue who can only continue to serve a purpose until such time as Russia herself becomes caught up into the agrarian revolution.
From that moment Poland will have absolutely no raison d'être any more.
The Poles' sole contribution to history has been to indulge in foolish pranks, at once valiant and provocative.
Nor can a single moment be cited when Poland, even if only in comparison with Russia, has successfully represented progress or done anything of historical significance.
Engels always found it difficult to control the wild swings of his enthusiasms.
In the same light, Marx opposed national independence when it came through non- or anti-revolutionary means.
Thus, despite all the effort he had devoted to the cause of German unification, he opposed it when it came through the force of Prussian arms and Bismarckian diplomacy.
For the Kaiser's Germany, he said, would strengthen both the position of the Tsar and reaction in Europe generally
Marx was also sensitive — as in the case of the English and Irish — to the affirmation of Great Power nationalism in the guise of internationalism.
It was, as we shall see, a recurrent problem among social democrats.
Thus, at one stage in the meetings of the first International (September 1864), the followers of the French socialist, Proudhon, opposed any movements for national independence on the grounds that the concept of the nation was already obsolete.
When Lafargue, a Proudhonist, argued later that nationalities were ‘antiquated superstitions’, Marx teased him gently by replying that ‘by his denial of nationalities, he quite unconsciously understood their absorption in a model French nation’.
Engels elaborated the case:
If members of a conquering nation called upon the nation they had conquered and continued to hold down to forget their specific nationality and position, to ‘sink national differences’ and so forth, that was not internationalism, it was nothing else but preaching to them submission to the yoke, and attempting to justify and perpetuate the domination of the conqueror under the cloak of internationalism.
On the other hand, the internationalism of the patriot, Lassalle's approach, Marx denounced as the ‘international brotherhood of peoples’(that is, nations were primary), not class solidarity across borders.
In their long lives, Marx and Engels faced many different contexts and drew necessarily different tactical conclusions.
The danger in quoting fragments of their writings out of context is that this may distort their intention and produce a static picture.
But change they did, and quite radically.
In 1848, Engels was completely insensitive to the complicated class issues of the Austro-Hungarian empire, subordinating all to the fate of Magyars, Poles and Italians and the need to stop Russia.
All others were reduced to the ‘non-historical’, the rubbish of ages bound to be swept into one or other Great Power but, in the short term, dangerous instruments of the Tsar or the Habsburgs.
All Slavs except the Poles became ‘Panslavists’.
Perversely, it was Marx's anarchist adversary, Michael Bakunin, who displayed greater sensitivity not only to the position of the Slavs in 1848, but also to the close relationship of nationalism and peasant radicalism at that time —‘I demand only one thing: that every people, that every tribe, great and small, be given the full opportunity and right to act according to its will’.
And to Engels' accusation of Panslavism, he replied:
Panslavs are, in the eyes of Germans, all Slavs who, with anger and contrariness refuse the culture which they (the Germans) wish to force upon them.
If that is the sense they give to the word ‘Panslavism’, oh! then I am a Panslav.
However, by about 1870, the differences had grown very much less.
In 1848, Engels had viewed Europe as a general, deploying as his armies subject peoples to lock up the gendarme of Europe, Tsarist Russia.
After 1848, the Tsar's forces were, relative to his rivals, increasingly technically backward; he was less and less able to intervene as gendarme.
But for Marx and Engels the discovery of Ireland changed the motivation, not simply the strategic balance.
The principle of the right of national self-determination was then extended  much more widely.
For now Great Nations must free themselves by releasing peoples they oppressed, not simply assimilate them, and that would have to include Engels’ non-historic peoples.
At the age of 70 (in 1890), Engels reflected on the coming break-up of the European empires and the liberation of many of those for whom, in 1848, he had seen only assimilation:
Magyars, Roumanians, Serbs, Bulgars, Arnauts (Albanians), Greeks and Turks will then finally be in a position to settle their own mutual disputes without the intervention of foreign powers, to settle among themselves the bounds of their individual national territories, to manage their internal affairs according to their own judgement.
The issues at stake — the strategic balance of forces in Europe, both States and classes — were complex; so also were Marx's purposes.
In his lifetime, nationalism was appropriated by the ruling orders as imperialism, a denial of democracy.
The national independence of both Germany and Italy came not through agrarian revolution, but through the force of arms of established powers.
Nationalism did not now overthrow orders, it seemed to make them stronger.
Thus, the political approach had to be changed.
Even so, it was never again to be so easy.
For later generations, the nationalism of the established powers contended with a host of rebellions of the ‘non-historic peoples’ in an extraordinarily complicated national mixture, the surface of even more complex and divergent class and other interests.
The closer the revolutionaries came to immediate issues and tactics in such a context, the greater the strain in reconciling internationalism and nationalism.
THE HEYDAY OF THEORY
THE world of the second half of the nineteenth century was very different from that which had existed before 1848.
Then it might have seemed that, despite the setbacks of that year, popular national liberation would ultimately lead to a Europe modelled on the most advanced powers, Britain, France, Holland and the rest: nation States, administered by popularly elected governments and founded in free-trade capitalism.
The reality was the creation of competitive world empires, the essence of which was a denial of the right of the majority of the peoples of the world to national self-determination, let alone to popularly elected governments.
Perversely progress had brought the leading powers back to the position of the backward, the empires of the Romanovs and Habsburgs: ‘prisons of peoples’.
If Marx were right — that colonialism enslaved the colonizing power — then the slaves had come to be loaded with even heavier chains.
There was a further result of much greater importance for the future.
The Great Powers had been continually driven by the competition among themselves, but in the last decades of the nineteenth century their intensified rivalries included a host of newcomers — Germany and Italy, the two newest Great Powers in Europe, and, close behind, the United States and, in the Far East, Japan.
This led to an extension of Great Power domination to much of the rest of the world.
Furthermore, even the archaic powers that had not started from the position of being nation-states were forced to compete; the Tsars thrust their reach eastwards to block the British advance in Asia, to stop the other Europeans in China, and finally to try to halt the westward movement of Japan.
The Great Powers thus pressed their territorial control outwards to encompass for the first time virtually the whole surface of the globe, to centralize the world on a few centres of power.
Not all were convinced that empire was the right policy.
Leading politicians in Britain, particularly in the mid-nineteenth century Liberal Party, scorned the imperial enterprise as no more than a way of offering the unemployable aristocracy a means to enrich itself at heavy cost to the innocent.
The young Disraeli, later to be the chief manager of the Victorian imperial pageant, deplored the colonies as ‘millstones round our neck’.
But by 1890 the competition imposed on the world by Britain and its nearest rivals in north-western Europe had returned a hundredfold, and there no longer seemed a possibility of escape: if the British did not colonize, others would, and at British expense.
Like the theory of the market in which firms have no choice but to compete if they are to survive, now States were similarly obliged to emulate each other.
Furthermore, empire now had a domestic political function.
The incorporation of the mass of the population in the nation supplied an appreciative audience and, in certain circumstances, enthusiastic recruits for imperial adventures, provided they could be presented as noble rather than money-making enterprises.
If every inhabitant was now to become a citizen and without the former property qualification, empire provided a vicarious property qualification for the Master Race.
In addition, the social imperialists held that empire was the means to secure and enhance working-class living standards and employment in the metropolitan country, and so deflect revolution.
It was not merely a Bolshevik view that empire was the source of a quiescent working class.
There was yet another result, of even greater importance for the future.
The Great Powers imposed upon countless peoples demarcated territories with separate administrations, authorities which ultimately created quite new identities.
Furthermore, with the conquerors came an aggressive nationalism (and racialism) to justify their right to rule.
This in turn invoked a defensive nationalism in the subordinate peoples.
It was the same in the old empires.
The Tsars, the Habsburgs and the Ottomans sought to rationalize and industrialize their ramshackle empires in order to protect themselves against the expansionism of the modern West European State.
They thus invoked a host of resistances, the nucleus for new nationalisms.
There seemed no end to the knock-on effects — the Magyar attempt to resist Vienna provoked the development of nationalism among Croats, Serbs, Roumanians and more.
In Russia, the 1905 revolution served notice of many more newcomers, restless beneath the yoke of the Tsars — Finns, Poles, Ukrainians, Byelorussians, Georgians, Armenians.
There were also the first beginnings of an Islamic nationalism in the Russian Middle East.
This last force emerged parallel to the revolt of the Young Turks in the heart of the Ottoman domains, the Persian Constitutional  revolution of 1906 and the beginnings of national feeling among some of the Arabs.
Further afield, the Indian National Congress was already beginning to grope towards a national identity, as was the Sarekat Islam in the great Dutch empire of the East Indies.
The fall of the Manchus in China hinted at the far wider rebellion that would mark the first half of the twentieth century, transforming world political geography from a handful of empires, maps on which only the primary colours were needed to show each domain, to a mass of independent States, more numerous than the ingenuity of any distinguishable colour range.
All that was for the future.
Few envisaged what was to come, for there were more pressing problems.
As the socialists ceased to be politically irrelevant sects and emerged as worker armies, the violence in the air reflected the contest both of the classes and of the Great Powers, set, it seemed, inexorably on the lunatic road to 1914.
The system seemed doomed.
For the Left, imperialism was the decomposing form of a capitalism no longer capable of its historic role of forcing progress on humanity.
The socialists of the Great Powers dominated the second International.
Internationalist rhetoric prevailed, providing a cover for an increasingly nationalist reality.
After the establishment of an independent Germany and Italy, it was assumed that the national question, as a progressive issue, was now past in Europe; only reactionaries would continue to try to resurrect it.
For the colonies of the European empires it was not over, but independence there would come after the victory of the working classes in Europe.
Some even promoted the idea of an enlightened socialist administration of the colonies —‘until the Federation of the world becomes an accomplished fact, we must accept the most responsible imperial federations available as a substitute for it' (George Bernard Shaw).
It was in Poland, part of the uncompleted business of the old empires, that this complacency was challenged.
By the 1870s, the aristocratic leadership of Polish nationalism had been finally defeated.
Poland was becoming the most industrialized part of the Tsar's empire, and the business classes, as represented in the National Democrats, were strongly committed to remaining part of this imperial market.
Only the intelligentsia remained loyal to the idea of an independent Poland.
In 1881 a socialist organization was formed with a mainly intellectual leadership, and it was obliged to confront the possibility of the recreation of Poland out of the territories held by the Tsar (the part known as the Kingdom of Poland), the Habsburgs and the Hohenzollerns of Prussia.
There were plenty of supporting arguments in the works of Marx and Engels for such an endeavour.
In 1892, the party majority led by Pilsudski opted for opposition to capitalism and support for an independent Poland.
A small minority, led by  Rosa Luxemburg, Radek and Leo Jogiches, opposed the second demand.
The two groups undertook preliminary skirmishes at the Zurich Congress of the International in 1893.
The Luxemburg group was defeated and its claim to the official affiliation to the International rejected; it became the Social Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland, as opposed to the majority, the Polish Socialist Party, PSP.
To clinch its victory, the PSP tabled a resolution for the London Congress of the International in 1896, affirming the right of Poland to national self-determination.
The British chairman, George Lansbury, closed the issue for the moment with a compromise resolution which settled nothing; it affirmed ‘the full right of all nations to self-determination’ and urged workers of all countries to ‘join together to defeat international capitalism and achieve social democracy’.
Social democracy and colonialism
The Polish quarrel served notice that the national question in Europe was by no means over.
However, even where it was acknowledged to be still relevant — in the colonies of the European empires — the Congress of the International was no more clear.
The traditional position was a straight condemnation of colonialism as robbery (as in resolutions to be passed at Mainz in 1900 and Paris in 1901).
But the growing tempo of competition between the Great Powers, particularly for imperial possessions, changed the atmosphere.
When the British were attacked for their role in the Boer War, Hyndman and Quelch for the British Social Democratic Federation prepared a dossier on the crimes of other imperial powers as the basis for condemning all — and so exonerating the British as no worse than the rest.
Others began to develop a countercase.
At Amsterdam in 1904, a Dutch delegate, Van Kol, threw down the gauntlet —‘The new needs which will make themselves felt after the victory of the working class and its economic emancipation will make the possession of colonies necessary, even under the future socialist system of government., The need for tropical products, for outlets for exports and surplus population and to offset ‘the deadly competition of colonial labour’, all entailed rethinking the old position.
‘Can we abandon half the globe to the caprice of peoples still in their infancy…?
Must we not understand by socialization of the means of production that the means of living and working belong to everyone?’
His report was not accepted.
Within the German Social Democratic Party the issue had been in dispute for some time.
In 1887, Kautsky, who was to become the most authoritative exponent of Marxism, gave what became the official  account of the economic basis for modern nationalism — the drive to create a unified market for capitalist development.
He also reaffirmed the continuing need to oppose German expansionism.
Another famous Marxist, Edouard Bernstein — who was to lead the right wing of Social Democracy — began to challenge this position in 1890.
It was at this stage that he sought to qualify the right of national self-determination even in the colonies —‘to support savages and barbarians’, he wrote in Neue Zeit , ‘who resist the penetration of capitalist civilization would be romantic’.
Later he praised the role of the British in India as a civilizing force; Indian poverty was the result of excessive breeding.
A subsequent collection of writings affirmed the right of the more civilized to appropriate the lands of the less:
It is neither necessary that the occupation of tropical lands by Europeans should injure the natives in their enjoyment of life nor has it hitherto usually been the case.
Moreover, only a conditional right of savages to the land occupied by them could be recognized.
The higher civilization ultimately can claim a higher right.
Not the conquest but the cultivation of the land gives the historical legal title to its use.
Later on, for example at the Party Congress of 1907, the right-wing faction, of which Bernstein was one of the leading members, proposed to approve German colonial expansion on the grounds that this promoted a progressive capitalism and harmonized relationships between classes in Germany.
The faction never won a majority, but the party was increasingly circumspect in appearing unpatriotic.
In substance, if not in theory, the German Social Democrats had by 1912 become a patriotic party, with only moderate criticisms of German expansionism.
Efforts were made to nudge the International in the same direction.
A special committee was created for the 1907 Congress, and the irrepressible Van Kol again proposed a ‘positive colonial policy’, affirming that ‘under a socialist regime, colonization can be a work of civilization’.
A German delegate, Edouard David, accepted the principle of colonization on the apparently sound internationalist basis that ‘the occupation and exploitation of the entire world are indispensable for the well-being of humanity…
Europe needs colonies.
It does not have enough of them.’
Another delegate objected that all colonization was ‘necessarily capitalistic and thus exploitative’, but a French delegate, Rouanet, reproached him: ‘it is all too easy to blame everything on capitalism and to saddle it with all the crimes of colonization.
This is not a capitalistic but an historical phenomenon.’
Van Kol's resolution won  a majority of the committee, but not of the Congress.
There it was defeated by 127 to 108 votes (with ten abstentions), but with the benefit of hindsight the size of the opposition showed the way opinion was moving.
The Austro-Marxists 
A different approach to the reconciliation of socialism and empire occurred in the Austrian Social Democratic Party.
As we have seen, the internal nationalist tensions of the Austro-Hungarian empire became severe in the second half of the nineteenth century.
To this were added the effects of the transformation of the social structure by industrialization and urbanization in the more advanced areas (Austria, the Czech lands, etc.).
Vienna's population of half a million in 1864 had become 2 million by 1914.
Industrialization created for the first time a new political force in the mass of factory workers.
Fierce repression failed to eliminate the growing strength of the Social Democrats, and in 1887, after decades of faction fighting, the groups came together at the Hainfeld Congress to form a single multinational party under the foremost Social Democrat, Victor Adler.
With unity and growing legal tolerance, the party, like its fraternal party in Germany, grew swiftly.
At the first May Day demonstration in Vienna in 1890, 200,000 marchers emerged into the public arena.
Furthermore, in the great flowering of Viennese intellectual life which occurred in the last decade of the nineteenth century, the party contributed a galaxy of famous intellectuals — Karl Kautsky (who, through his journal,Neue Zeit , and his role in the German party, became the most influential Marxist of his time), Victor Adler himself and his mentor, Carl Gruneberg, Max Adler, Otto Bauer, Rudolf Hilferding, Karl Renner etc.
However, the national issue was a continuing line of sharp rocks for the frail craft of Social Democracy.
Separate national autonomies had appeal for those with some stake in society, the lower-middle classes, craft and some skilled workers; the right wing gravitated towards peaceful reform and nationalism, while the left endeavoured to hold hard to revolution and a working-class unity that would cut horizontally across the empire.
However, what the emperor could not achieve in neutralizing the working-class challenge, the right-wing Social Democrats did for him.
Nor, as theory suggested, was it the industrially more backward parts that resisted a Viennese leadership.
From the beginning, many of the Czechs, with strong links to the trade unions of skilled and craft workers, resented both the German domination of the heart of the empire and the close links of the Czech bourgeoisie to Vienna  (just as the Polish Socialists attacked the links of Polish employers to St Petersburg).
A majority of the Czech party called for autonomy, and when Adler resisted this, split away.
(Kautsky warned them that capitalism now required large international markets with a single language which, in the Habsburg domains, would best be German; retaining Czech would lead to the economic decline of the Czech people.)
The break was a signal to the rest, the Poles, Ukrainians, Italians, Slovenes and others.
Only the Germans remained ‘internationalist’.
The frictions grew steadily worse, and in an attempt to accommodate them the 1897 Vienna Congress resolved that the party become a federation of six national parties.
A joint central committee and joint congresses endeavoured to secure some co-ordination.
Whatever the pleasure at ‘new experiments’, the party in effect gave in to nationalism and the social forces it represented.
However, the remedy did not settle the issue, and at the 1899 Brno Congress it was again in hot dispute.
By now few proposals could be judged on their merits, only according to which national group put them forward (or rather, each proposal was identified as if it were no more than the product of a national group).
The Germans argued for increased centralization in order to fight the empire.
The Southern Slavs argued for ‘personal cultural autonomy’— that is, the inhabitants of the empire would be grouped according to culture (regardless of where they lived), and their cultural-educational affairs directed by an elected national council.
The final compromise proposed a federation of self-governing territories, defined by nationality, the scattered territories of each nationality to be united in a national council with complete authority in the affairs of that nationality (which were defined as cultural and linguistic).
Economic and political matters remained at the level of the imperial government.
The compromise only fuelled national frictions.
After the 1907 elections, the national components of the party operated increasingly independently.
Thus, the workers’ movement was already showing the disintegration which was fully accomplished in the destruction of the empire in the First World War.
There were two leading theoreticians of nationalism in the German section of the party (although both published their main works well after the Brno Congress).
Karl Renner (1870–1950) was on the right of the party.
For him, nations were the fundamental building blocks of society, ‘both indestructible and undeserving of destruction…
Far from being unnational or anti-national,(Social Democracy) places nations at the foundation of its world structure.’
Nations would not dissolve with the coming of socialism and the abolition of the bourgeoisie.
However, in the short term there was a problem because  economic development led necessarily to the integration of territories, and this threatened the much smaller areas which coincided with nationalities.
The economy demanded multinational States, so that nationality could no longer be a ‘State-forming’ principle.
Nonetheless, nationalism continued and incited collisions between nations instead of‘the orderly procedure of court and parliamentary transactions’.
This blocked the advance to socialism —‘the awakening proletariat is seized by a naive nationalism, fortified by class hatred, and this obstructs, for a long time, the penetration of socialist ideas’.
It also fortified imperialist competition: each Great Power rival was now backed by popular support.
The remedy was to separate the essence of national life (a language and a culture) from the organization of economic activity, and embody it in a separate institution.
For Austria, Renner proposed eight national governments in Vienna to administer the cultural affairs of each nationality, eight socio-economic bodies administering economic regions (covering several nationalities), four agricultural administrations and a supreme federal power under the Crown (responsible for foreign and military affairs, joint finance, economic and social welfare and justice).
Implicitly, the programme was one for the reform of the existing empire rather than its overthrow.
Otto Bauer (1881–1938) was much the most important thinker on the national question among the Austro-Marxists.
Bauer was on the Left, so, unlike Renner, his central preoccupation was with the creation of a united working-class movement for the achievement of a socialist State, but undertaken in conditions where nationalism continually divided the workers.
Like Renner, he saw the system as driving towards increased international economic integration which ought to create an internationally united working class, yet seemed only to strengthen national separatism.
What accounted for this stubborn resistance of nationalities to the predicted assimilation?
Bauer argued that nations were not, as Marx argued, temporary historical formations produced by the rise and rule of the bourgeoisie, but of great antiquity, capable of outlasting all economic change, the residue of the history of a people, ‘the totality of men bound, together through a common destiny in a community of character’.
The cultural community of the feudal nobility created a national culture; the peasants did not participate because their membership of this community was concealed by a mass of local particularisms.
However, ‘Capitalism and its attendant, the modern State, effected everywhere a widening of the cultural community in that it freed the masses from the fetters of an all-powerful tradition and called them to participate in the regeneration of a national culture’.
But the lower classes of different nations were separated from each other, ‘for they, too, gain a share in national education, national  cultural life, and the national standard language’.
Engels, ‘non-historical peoples’ now emerged also with a legitimate claim to a national existence.
However, capitalism forced upon people the collision of classes and this prevented the full development of national culture; socialism would allow the full development of a ‘community of education, work and culture’, rising above narrow local loyalties.
Alongside this flourishing of national cultures, for the first time a real international economic division of labour would emerge, covering multinational economic regions in which each nation would play a specialized role for all other:
Through the international division of labour, the whole of civilized humanity becomes a great organism; and precisely by this means, the political freedom and unity of all nations becomes possible.
In a society in which each community is supposed to be autarchic and to supply its own needs, the full implementation of the nationality principle is impossible; national freedom is necessarily denied to small nations, the nations whose territory provides less favourable conditions for production.
Thus, Bauer's analysis led to a sharp possible separation of the economic and the cultural, each supposedly expressing the international and the national.
In the event, the schemes of Renner for a ‘great central European Catholic peace community’ and of Bauer for a model socialist State with a cultural federation could not save the empire.
And, with its disintegration, both were driven to an increasing identification with German nationalism and the proposal for a merger of Austria and Germany.
Culture now coincided with a large economic region.
The Versailles Treaty forbade the unification of the two countries, so they were obliged, with great misgivings, to settle for a little Austria (until the Third Reich simultaneously achieved the forbidden merger and the destruction of the Social Democrats).
The Austro-Marxists seemed to carry the argument so far into the nationalist camp that only the distinction between the cultural and the economic preserved internationalism.
Yet they attached the greatest importance to the economic (and its organization, the State), so that ultimately they denied the right of national self-determination (that is, the right to an independent State).
The argument was in any case flawed.
For in practice there was little validity in the distinction: the nationalist pursued not culture but power, and above all the power of the State, which, once won, it was thought, would then protect a national culture.
Furthermore, the idea that nations were indestructible components of social life was an historical fantasy.
More peoples, ‘nations’, had disappeared through assimilation than had survived.
Indeed, what had survived were names, not peoples.
The modern inhabitants of Europe had little in common with the ancestors they claimed.
Even for the peoples of the empire, it was not clear how far a majority of them were committed in any serious sense to a separate cultural identity.
To oblige them to belong to a national group was as likely to imprison them in an identity from which they wanted to escape as to liberate them.
It was to block the normal processes of assimilation.
Rosa Luxemburg and the Left
Rosa Luxemburg started from a reconsideration of Marx's argument for Polish independence.
Russia, she argued, was no longer the gendarme of Europe; increasingly ramshackle and transformed by rapid industrialization, it was itself faced with the threat of revolution.
It was no longer necessary to block Russia's advance with an independent Poland and a strong Turkey to control the Dardanelles; nor was it necessary to oppose the national struggles of the Czechs and the Southern Slavs.
Furthermore, the Polish nobility that had led the national movement in Marx's time had yielded power in Poland to a new rising capitalist class and settled for privileges guaranteed by the Tsar.
On the other hand, the Polish bourgeoisie was of mainly foreign origin (it did not therefore identify with the nationalist tradition) and constituted the leading segment of the empire's industry, dependent upon the markets of the whole empire, not a lesser Poland.
Finally, the new working class had no interest in a separate nation; their natural allies were the workers of Petrograd, Moscow and other cities of the empire.
Only the intelligentsia remained loyal, but their social importance was far too slight for the task of achieving an independent Poland.
‘The recognizable direction of social development’, she concluded, ‘has made it clear to me that there is no social class in Poland that has at one and the same time both an interest in, and an ability to achieve, the restoration of Poland’.
However, Luxemburg did not limit her case to Poland.
It became an argument about Europe as a whole.
Vigorous national movements were no longer the instrument of rising capitalist classes, for capital accumulation now required markets far larger than individual countries could provide.
Class, the product of the new economic order of society, now cut across the unity of nations:
In a society based on classes, the nation as a uniform social-political whole does not exist.
Instead, there exist within each nation classes with antagonistic interests and ‘rights’.
There is literally no social arena — from the strongest material relationship to the most subtle moral one — in which the possessing classes and a self-conscious proletariat could take one and the same position and figure as an undifferentiated whole.
If the development of capitalism, for Bauer, allowed nations to escape the internal fragmentation of local loyalties, imperialism for Rosa Luxemburg forced the integration of nations and the emergence of horizontal class loyalties that cut across nationality.
To attempt to resurrect — or, more likely in her view, invent — the old national groups was entirely reactionary, to turn the clock back to a past economic system, and to attempt by this means to frustrate the proletarian revolution.
Marxists were generally agreed on the internationalization of the economic system.
In Rosa Luxemburg's view this forced nations either to be assimilated into an existing empire or to create their own empire.
In an imperialist world, there was no third alternative.
Thus the call for an independent Poland was a demand for a new imperialist power.
There were no longer national interests:
In the era of rampaging imperialism, there can be no more national wars.
(The assertion of) national interests can serve only as a means of deception, of betraying the working masses of the people to their deadly enemy, imperialism.
Nationalism had now become incompatible with socialism, a profound enemy, not an ally.
Existing smaller powers that were supposedly independent had little real power.
World markets dominated their economies, and they lacked the means for independent national economic development.
Aspirations to independence parted from the reality of dependence.
For socialists to champion the aspiration when there was no objective possibility of its being realized was to be both reactionary and utopian.
Only with the end of capitalism, the domination of the world market, would it be possible to attain national independence:
society will win the ability to freely determine its national existence when it has the ability to determine its political being and the conditions of its creation.
‘Nations’ will control their historical existence when human society controls its social process.
But under socialism all oppression would have been ended: there would then be no need for national independence.
This uncompromising case was qualified in two respects.
First, the old programme of the right for national self-determination still applied to the territories of the European overseas empires (because of their backwardness).
‘In India’, Rosa Luxemburg wrote, ‘nationalism is an expression of the rising indigenous bourgeoisie which seeks to exploit the country for its own ends rather than to be drained by English capital’.
Second, Luxemburg accepted, as did the Austro-Marxists, a cultural-linguistic nationality.
For Poles, the programme of her party promised ‘The equality of all national groups that live in Russia; assurance of their cultural development; national schools and freedom in the use of native languages; provincial self-government, that is to say, autonomy’.
It was on this ground, among others, that she opposed the creation of a centralized Social Democratic party for the empire (and so collided with Lenin and the Bolsheviks).
She held out for a federal party in the negotiations with the Russians (1902) to the point where the talks broke down.
The case evolved from polish issues but, at its most general level, it became influential in many other countries, and particularly on the Left of the Russian party.
There, a group of Bolsheviks, including Bukharin, Piatakov and Anovna Bosch, made several attempts to change the traditional position of the party which guaranteed the right of national self-determination to the subordinate peoples of the Russian empire.
They argued that under imperialism there could be no separate ‘national question’.
‘It is impossible’, Bukharin maintained, ‘to struggle against the enslavement of nations otherwise than by struggling against imperialism, ergo…by struggling against finance capitalism, ergo, against capitalism in general’.
If a separate national question were raised, workers would be diverted from the pursuit of their own class interest to that of the petty bourgeoisie, spreading disunity between workers of different national origins.
During the First World War, Radek of the Polish party and the Left abstained on national questions; ‘Social Democracy does not advocate either an erection of new boundary posts in Europe nor the re-erection of those which have been torn down by imperialism’.
National independence could not be achieved under capitalism, and under socialism it would be unnecessary.
What was the reaction of the rest of the Social Democratic movement to this unequivocal internationalism?
The leadership of the International were in general irritated by what seemed to be the sectarian squabbling of the émigré Poles and Russians, while generally defending the traditional interpretation of Marx's opinions.
The famous Russian 
Marxist, Plekhanov, was brought in to defend the traditional position of the Polish Socialist Party against this impertinent young woman, Rosa Luxemburg (in Vorwärts , 23 July 1896).
Kautsky himself defended the orthodox case in Neue Zeit — namely, Polish national liberation, while not as strategically important as before, was still revolutionary and anti-Tsarist; any compromise on the issue would give aid and comfort to the Tsars.
Victor Adler and the Austro-Marxists were hostile, since Luxemburgism, with its unequivocal affirmation of class internationalism, threatened their precarious coalition.
The German Social Democratic leaders, Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel, were also in the first instance critical, since the Polish argument seemed to imply that the territorial expansionism of imperialism in general, and Prussia in particular , did not matter any longer beside the development of supranational class unity.
These purely doctrinal responses were, however, of lesser importance than one practical implication of Luxemburgism.
Rosa Luxemburg spent much of her active political life in exile, working within the powerful German Social Democratic Party.
It was natural that part of this work should be in the Prussian-held Polish territories of the eastern Reich.
Here, the divisions among socialists in Russian-held Poland were reflected.
A Polish Socialist Party of Prussia, formed in 1893, challenged the right of the German Social Democratic Party to represent Poles — even to the point of fielding election candidates against the German party (which then withdrew its fraternal subsidy to the Poles).
It was Rosa Luxemburg, with the strong support of the German leadership, who defended the position of the German Social Democrats in the name of internationalism, urging the Polish worker in Prussia ‘to give up national utopias and to accept that his national interests are best taken care of by Social Democracy, and not by taking up a separate position as a Pole in the wake of nationalist parties’.
‘In practical terms’, Luxemburg's biographer, Peter Nettl, comments, ‘Rosa Luxemburg's opposition to the PPS (Polish Socialist Party), and its policy of self-determination made her the most efficient ally of the SPD's (German Social Democratic Party's) policy of organizational integration for minorities in Germany’.
Luxemburg's internationalism made her insensitive to the possibility of German Social Democratic oppression — or at least, oppression by neglect or indifference — of Prussia's Poles.
It was the blind spot of the internationalist Left.
As we shall see in the Russian case, it was a common phenomenon, echoing Marx's description of Lafargue's internationalism as merely a mechanism for absorbing all in a model French nation.
If Rosa Luxemburg's internationalism might be used as a cover for German chauvinism in Prussia, in Russia it was its potential as  a cover for Russian chauvinism which motivated Lenin.
The Poles, under her leadership, broke off the 1902 unity talks partly because the Russians refused to give up their guarantee of the right of national self-determination for the subordinate peoples of the empire.
Rosa Luxemburg was full of scorn —‘such a formula expresses either absolutely nothing, so that it is an empty non-committal phrase, or else it expresses the unconditional duty of socialists to support all national aspirations, in which case it is simply false’.
Lenin replied:
In her anxiety not to ‘assist’ the nationalistic bourgeoisie of Poland, Rosa Luxemburg, by her denial of the right of secession in the programme of the Russian Marxists is,in fact , assisting the Great Russian Black Hundreds (extreme Right); she is in fact assisting…the nationalism of the Great Russians…the most formidable at the present time: it is precisely the one that is less bourgeois and more feudal, and it is precisely the one that acts as the principal brake on democracy and the proletarian struggle.
Rosa  Luxemberg made no concessions.
When the disputed questions were put to the practical test of revolution in 1917, she saw the ‘doctrinaire obstinacy’ of the Bolsheviks on the national question as one of the key factors in the disintegration of the Tsarist empire in 1918.
The bourgeoisies of the Russian dependencies of Finland, Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania and the other Baltic States were able to exploit the Bolshevik promise of national independence to ally with Germany against Soviet Russia.
‘The Finnish bourgeoisie, like the Ukrainian, were unanimous in preferring the violent rule of Germany to national freedom, if the latter should be bound up with Bolshevism.’
The Bolsheviks destroyed the unity of workers of different nationalities and laid the way open for national leaderships to capture ‘their own’ working class, when they should have defended the integrity of the former Russian empire ‘tooth and nail’.
As it was, quite shallow social forces — like the ‘few university professors and students’ who, she said, constituted Ukrainian nationalism — were allowed to rally counterrevolution and threaten Soviet power.
The damage spread far more widely.
the phrases concerning self-determination and the entire nationalist movement, which at present constitute the greatest danger for international socialism, have experienced an extraordinary strengthening from the Russian revolution.
Rosa Luxemburg was right on the dangers of nationalism.
But, as we shall see, it was not the Bolshevik position on the question which alone  determined what happened in the Russian empire, nor is it clear that, in practice, the Bolsheviks had had any real alternative if the revolution was to be successful.
Lenin and the Bolsheviks
From different motives and perspectives, the political theorists of empire, the socialist defenders of colonialism, the Austro-Marxists and the ‘ultra-Left’ of the Polish and Russian socialist movements explicitly or in effect denied the right of national self-determination in defence of empire, large multinational economies or a world economy.
All agreed that the national State was archaic in Europe.
It was the peculiarity of the Bolsheviks that they unequivocally defended the right of national minorities to secede from the Tsarist empire, to create separate national States.
The position was uniquely associated with the name of Lenin.
For those who regard ethnic origin as an important part of the explanation, this might have seemed odd, for Lenin was, despite recent disputes, solidly Russian, whereas much of the intellectual leadership of the rest of European Social Democracy was drawn from minorities — Rosa Luxemburg was Polish and Jewish, Piatakov was Ukrainian, Bauer and Karl Kautsky were Austrian and Jewish etc.
Yet of all the leaders of European Social Democracy, Lenin came to show the greatest sensitivity to the issues associated with the oppression of national minorities, and to the need for dominant nationalities to demonstrate their rejection of this oppression.
But the issue was still a tactical one, as it had been for Marx; national liberation was a means to support or obstruct the unity of the working class and the achievement of socialist revolution in Russia, not a matter of general principle.
There were several phases in the evolution of Bolshevik thinking.
Up to 1913, the national question did not loom large in the preoccupations of the party.
But from then until 1917 it became an issue of major importance.
From 1917, it was a matter of practical politics, but one which, in the period of civil war, was subordinate to questions of immediate survival.
In the first phase, the question related most importantly to the organization of the party; in the second, to the strategy for overthrowing Tsarism; and in the third, finally, to the overthrow of world capitalism.
In the last two phases, the preoccupation was in creating ‘alliances’— temporary unity in action for immediate purposes by forces which pursued ultimately incompatible aims.
Thus, workers, with an interest in the collective ownership of land, might ally with peasants, dedicated to the break-up of large estates and the establishment of private land holdings, for the common  but short-term purpose of overthrowing aristocratic control of land.
In the same way, workers, committed to the abolition of national States and to internationalism, might ally, to overthrow the Tsar, with national movements dedicated to the creation of new national States.
Let us examine the first two phases.
1897–1913
The right to national self-determination was formally included in the first programme of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP), but was accorded a relatively low priority.
Like most of Europe's Social Democrats at that time, the party saw nationalism as a declining issue, characteristic only of the economically more backward areas.
Lenin did not find it necessary to discuss the issue in his elaboration of the party programme in 1895–6.
Even in 1903, he could still observe that:
Class antagonism has undoubtedly relegated national questions far into the background, but, without the risk of lapsing into doctrinairism, it cannot be categorically asserted that some particular national question cannot temporarily appear in the foreground of the political drama.
However, the 1905 revolution included a number of significant national agitations, small previews of what were to come.
They were important enough to prompt other parties to formulate national demands.
The Kadets, at this time a middle-class reform party, promised cultural self-determination and equality for the peoples of the empire, but in a unitary State.
At their 1905 Congress, the Social Revolutionaries, a peasant party, embraced the principle of national self-determination and a federal State.
On the question of Poland, Lenin accepted much of Rosa Luxemburg's case that circumstances had qualitatively changed since the time of Marx —‘the restoration of Poland, prior to the fall of capitalism, is highly improbable, but it cannot be asserted that it is absolutely impossible’.
However, this was not the key issue for Great Russians, those who historically had participated in the dismemberment of Poland and oppressed its people.
Whatever else was said, it was vital for Russian socialists clearly to dissociate themselves from the Tsarist record:
The accursed history of autocracy has left us a legacy of tremendous estrangement between the working classes of the  various nationalities oppressed by that autocracy.
This estrangement is a very great evil, and a very great obstacle in the struggle against the autocracy, and we must not legitimize this evil or sanctify this outrageous state of affairs by establishing any such ‘principles’ as separate parties or a ‘federation’of parties.
Recognizing the right of Russia's minorities to self-determination was the essence of repudiating the Tsarist inheritance and affirming democracy and the principle that peoples should not be compelled to co-operate by force.
However, acknowledging the right did not mean that the party favoured people using it.
For
The Social Democratic Party considers it to be its positive and principal task to further the self-determination of the proletariat in each nationality rather than that of peoples or nations…it is only in isolated and exceptional cases that we can advance and actively support demands conducive to the establishment of a new class state.
It was on the issue of party organization that the national question assumed most importance at this time.
The Jewish Bund (the general Jewish Labour League of Lithuania, Poland and Russia) was formed in western Russia in 1897, and joined the RSDLP in 1898.
At its fourth congress in 1901, the Bund adopted the position taken by the southern Slavs at the Brno congress of the Austrian Social Democrats (the Bauer position).
The RSDLP should be reorganized as a federal party, with the Bund being recognized as the sole representative of Jewish workers and the party programme promising ‘personal cultural autonomy’(that is, all Jewish workers, regardless of where they lived in the empire, would be members of a national Jewish association, responsible for all Jewish educational and cultural affairs).
At its 1903 congress, the RSDLP rejected these demands in the name of a single centralized party (representing the unity of the working class, regardless of nationality) and the Bund withdrew.
On a compromise proposal, in 1906 at the Stockholm RSDLP Congress, it rejoined the party.
The Bauer/southern Slav position on the national question, however, spread much wider than the Bund.
It was taken up by the Armenian Dashnaktsutiun, the Byelorussian Socialist Hromada, and the Georgian Socialist Federation party (Sakartvelo).
These organizations met in 1907.
The split in the RSDLP (into the Bolshevik majority and Menshevik minority) meant that some of the Mensheviks became influential among these parties (particularly in the Georgian and Jewish parties).
In August 1912, the organizations, along with the Bund, the 
Latvian Social Democrats and the Caucasian Regional League, held a meeting and in attendance were some important non-Bolshevik Marxists (Martov, Aleksandr, Martynov, Trotsky, Akselrod).
There appeared to be growing agreement on the idea of ‘personal cultural autonomy’.
Lenin was willing to make concessions, but not on the centralized unity of the party —‘we must not weaken the force of our offensive by breaking into numerous independent political parties; we must not introduce estrangement and isolation and then have to heal an artificially implanted disease with the aid of these notorious ‘federal’, plasters’.
At this stage, he was firmly opposed to federation; ‘Federation is harmful because it sanctions segregation and alienation, elevates them to a principle, to a law.’
Furthermore, as Martov put it at the 1903 congress, all members of the party should be concerned with the disabilities of minorities, not just the minority itself.
Anti-semitism was not a matter only of concern to Jews; all Social Democrats must campaign against it — or leave the party.
On the Jewish question, Lenin adopted Kautsky's position.
A nationality must have a common language and territory.
The Jews had neither.
The remedy for their disabilities lay therefore in establishing complete equality between Jew and non-Jew, so allowing Jewish assimilation in the majority.
1912–13 — 1917
By 1912, the Bauer case had achieved some prominence among the politically aware socialists of Russia's minorities.
So much so that Lenin commissioned a leading party organizer and Georgian, Josef Stalin, to write a counter-attack (published in 1913).
Meanwhile, events rather than debates intervened.
The Balkans underwent successive crises of competing nationalisms, one of which finally brought down the pre-1914 structure of European power.
In that collapse, the European Social Democratic parties, which had for so long bravely vowed to prevent war between their respective States, lined up with the belligerents; the second International collapsed, another casualty of the trenches of northern France.
The war in turn stimulated an unprecedented number of new nationalisms.
Nor was this simply on the eastern periphery.
Even in the heart of supposedly the most advanced power, Britain, the issue of Irish national liberation re-emerged in the Easter Rising of 1916; for the British, this was as shocking in act of disloyalty in the midst of war as was the Bolshevik revolution for the Russian establishment.
Lenin became more and more preoccupied with the question of national liberation, and in a tireless stream of speeches, letters, articles and pamphlets, sought to clarify the right approach to the nationalism of Russia's minorities.
Nationalism was still bourgeois nationalism (and so irreconcilable with proletarian internationalism), but it needed to be sharply divided between the nationalism of the dominant imperialist powers and of those who were oppressed.
There was at this stage no general right to self-determination.
The war suddenly incited the full force of Russian nationalism, and Lenin's emphasis changed to the struggle against what he called ‘Great Russian Chauvinism’.
The Armenian Bolshevik, Shahumyan, reproached him — as many were to do — with exaggerating the dangers here and was roundly chastised:
I exaggerate the danger of Great Russian chauvinism!!!
Now that's really funny!
Do the 160 million Russians suffer from Armenian or Polish nationalism?
Is it not a shame for a Russian Marxist to adopt the point of view of an Armenian hen coop?
Is it Great Russian nationalism that oppresses, and shapes the policy of Russia's ruling classes, or is it Armenian, Polish?
The public repudiation of Russian chauvinism was to offer the oppressed the right to self-determination, or as he now put it, so that there should be no ambiguity, the right to secede from Russia.
It was this clarification which increased the degree of opposition to Clause 9 of the Party programme.
In November 1915, a Bukharin-Piatakov platform argued that national liberation could not be achieved within capitalism in its current form of imperialism; to demand it was therefore to sow illusions and divert efforts away from the central task of worker revolution.
The same opposition, but enlarged, emerged in April 1917.
Piatakov, a Ukrainian, now argued that, following Lenin's April theses, prepared on his return to Russia, which rejected the existing party policy of supporting the provisional government and set the Party on the road to the seizure of power, socialism was on the immediate agenda, not the establishment of a bourgeois republic.
Therefore, the right of national self-determination could have no place in the party programme.
The programme's drafting commission voted 7 to 2 for the proposition that the national question could be solved only by socialist revolution and that the party slogan should not be new frontiers, but the abolition of all frontiers.
At the Congress itself, there was a strong fight, and Lenin's resolution affirming the traditional position was opposed by 16 (with 18 abstaining) but with 56 in favour.
Piatakov's resolution was defeated by 48 to 11, with 19 abstentions.
The size of the combined opposition and abstentions indicated how far Lenin's arguments had won the day, just before the Bolsheviks were to be put to the test of power.
Over a third of the vote was not convinced  that ‘To deny the right to secede is to help Tsarism and to indulge the Russian muzhik's nationalism.’
There were other grounds on which to support the right of self-determination.
Democracy implied the equality of nations and languages and the prohibition of privileges attached to any one nation.
It was the lack of democracy and equality which impelled the oppressed to fight for secession.
Lenin reproved the luckless Shahumyan,
Why will you not understand the psychology that is so important in the national question and which, if the slightest coercion is applied, besmirches, soils and nullifies the undoubtedly progressive importance of centralized large States and a uniform language?
But the economy is still more important than psychology: in Russia, we already have a capitalist economy, which makes the Russian language essential.
But you have no faith in the power of the economy and want to prop it up with the crutches of the rotten police regime.
However, once peoples had chosen not to exercise their right to secede, they should join a fully centralized State.
For ‘The great centralized State is a tremendous historical step forward from medieval disunity to the future socialist unity of the whole world, and only via such a State (inseparably connected with capitalism) can there be any road to socialism.’
This advantage would constrain the drive for secession:
from their daily experience the masses know perfectly well the value of geographic and economic ties and the advantages of a big market and a big state.
They will resort to secession only when national oppression and national friction make joint life absolutely intolerable.
After the coming of socialism,
a great State will mean so many hours less work a day, and so much more pay a day.
The mass of working people, as they liberate themselves from the bourgeois yoke, will gravitate irresistibly towards us…provided yesterday's oppressions do not infringe the long oppressed nation's highly developed democratic feeling of self-respect and provided they are granted equality in everything.
Divisions must be eliminated for they would institutionalize estrangement.
The most that could be offered would be autonomous areas  within regional self-government ‘towards which members of the respective nationalities, scattered all over the country or even all over the world, would gravitate and with which they could enter into relations and free associations’— some measure of accommodation to Bauerism.
The future lay with full assimilation of all peoples into one and the emergence of an international culture.
This would create ‘a unity that is growing before our eyes with every mile of railway line that is built, with every international trust and every workers’ association that is formed’.
Again, the key to assimilation was complete equality of peoples, and opposition to those who pretended there were separate national cultures operating above the two classes in each culture (as argued by Bauer).
Lenin's division of nationalism into that of the oppressed and that of the oppressor offered a special type of answer to Rosa Luxemburg, a dual policy:
the right to unite implies the right to secede.
We Russians must emphasize the right to secede while the Poles emphasize the right to unite.
The Poles must oppose secession in the name of the unity of the working class of all the Russias, but they should not ask the Russians to compromise with Great Russian chauvinism by refusing the Poles the right to secede.
Rosa Luxemburg, Lenin argued, assumed that economic integration within empires rendered political separatism impossible.
But this confused political and economic independence, as if politics were no more than a reflex of economics.
The mass of politically independent States were economically dependent on the world economy, for parliaments could not tame capital:
The domination of finance capital and of capital in general is not to be abolished by any reforms in the sphere of political democracy; and self-determination belongs wholly to this sphere.
This domination of finance capital, however, does not in the least nullify the significance of political democracy as a freer, wider and clearer form of class oppression and class struggle.
Up to 1917, Lenin's views on national liberation were in the main uniquely related to the situation in Russia and the need to create an alliance for the overthrow of Tsarism.
But as the war progressed he became increasingly preoccupied with understanding the world order.
Once the perspective extended to the world, the significance of national  liberation became much greater and less conditional: for the national liberation of the colonies of the European empires could overthrow the imperialist world order.
However, at this stage, some of the same qualifications occurred:
if we demand freedom of secession for the Mongolians, Persians, Egyptians and all other oppressed and unequal nations without exception, we do so not because we favour secession , but only because we stand for free, voluntary association and merging as distinct from forcible association.
Furthermore, national liberation could only be supported if it took place in a revolutionary way (as Marx had argued on Germany and therefore gone on to oppose Bismarck's route to German unity), not leaving ‘intact the foundations of the power of the ruling class’.
On the eve of the October revolution, Lenin continued in the affirmation of the party's case:
the proletarian party must first of all advocate the proclamation and immediate realization of the complete freedom of secession from Russia of all the nations and peoples who were oppressed by Tsarism, or who were forcibly joined to or forcibly kept within the boundaries of the State.
The new State would seek to draw the minorities back into union with Russia but only as ‘a free and fraternal union of workers and working people’.
To those who expressed alarm at the fact that Finland and Poland were already separating from Russia:
Our attitude to the separatist movement is indifferent, neutral.
If Finland, Poland or the Ukraine secede from Russia, there is nothing bad in that.
What is wrong with it?
Anyone who says that is a chauvinist.
If Finland were free, ‘then there will be greater trust in Russian democracy and the Finns will not separate’.
Lenin used a number of different arguments to justify recognizing the right to secede, and it is worth summarizing them.
First, it was required in order to establish the trust of Russia's oppressed minorities, as the basis for an alliance between workers and minority nationalists to overthrow Tsarist rule.
Second, the affirmation of the right was to ensure that the unification of different peoples was voluntary, part of a well-founded democracy and ensuring the equality of nations  at a particular stage in Russian history, the bourgeois revolution.
Third, the right was needed to make a clear public rejection of the Tsarist record and to combat Great Russian chauvinism.
Recognizing the right to secede was seen as the means of securing the unity of the peoples of the old empire in a new State, not of precipitating disintegration.
The logic of a modern economy would encourage a voluntary assimilation of all, and recognizing the right would in no way impede this forward movement of society to integration.
Finally, as the revolution approached, the issue assumed much wider significance.
It moved from being a component in the domestic strategy for the conquest of power to the key element in the overthrow of world capitalism, founded now upon an alliance of European workers and the nationalist movements of Asia.
Postscript
In 1913, Lenin commissioned Stalin to draft a reply to the Austro-Marxists.
The results were or little significance at the time.
However, with Stalin's ascent to power after the revolution, his pamphlet came to define the orthodoxies of the world Communist movement.
Despite its subsequent reputation, however, Stalin's account is a poor one.
The line remained Lenin's, but the arguments had become something quite different.
Stalin sought to lay down criteria for the identification of a ‘nation’(the entity which possessed the right of national self-determination) as a means, a moral theory, to separate authentic and spurious claims.
However, in doing so, he absorbed much from the Austro-Marxists.
Thus, in his eyes, a nation was a community of people with a common language, territory, economic activity, and a particular psychological make-up as the result of a distinct historical experience, expressed in a common culture.
If a group lacked one of the specified features, it could not be counted as a nation.
Thus, the Jews lacked a common language and territory and so could not be counted as a nation.
Switzerland, on the other hand, consisted of three nations.
Stalin was not to know that his criteria would exclude many nations that were subsequently to emerge (for example, Pakistan, without a common language or territory, but with a common religion), and force some groups into being nations (the most notorious example being the black American population).
Nor was he apparently aware of Lenin's scorn for those who spoke of common culture, let alone psychology and community.
This was pure Bauer.
Stalin's account also misrepresented the Austro-Marxist case, and he made a number of mistakes indicating his unfamiliarity with the subject.
(Thus, he said that the Brno Congress had accepted the  demand for ‘personal cultural autonomy’, when it had not; indeed, Lenin made the point that not even the Austrian party had accepted the southern Slav position.)
It is not surprising that Stalin's document played no role in the party until 1922 and his consolidation of power.
It was a considerable retreat from the sophistication of the case as argued before 1917.
THE RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE
The Tsar's National Minorities
IN the second half of the nineteenth century, the pace of economic growth in the domains of the Tsar quickened, particularly affecting the western borderlands (and some of the more important ethnic minorities).
Poland, the St Petersburg region and Baltic coast, and the eastern Ukraine were industrialized more intensively.
Improvements in agriculture assisted the emergence of a relatively prosperous farmer stratum in the Ukraine; and the commercial unification of the empire created more significant merchant trading classes (for example, among the Tatars, particularly those of the Crimea).
An intelligentsia was one of the byproducts, ranging from priests to teachers, journalists and writers.
It was the heyday of imperialism, and all the Great Powers were under pressure for competitive modernization.
For the archaic empires, this entailed attempts to create modern States in the supposed image of those of Western Europe — a task that was made more difficult by the accelerating technical advance of the West Europeans.
The rising costs of upgrading production and military forces became an increasing burden on the taxable capacity and military services of the sorely tried inhabitants.
Furthermore, war is one of the most radical forces centralizing a country, and the First World War was, for the Russias, a massive influence in this respect.
What was barely tolerable before 1914 became increasingly intolerable to the mass of the population, as the enemy forces pushed the Tsarist regime into more and more desperate expedients to raise the finance and manpower with which to conduct the war.
Part of the process of ‘modernization’ was seeking to achieve  a measure of ‘homogenization’: that is, in the Russian context, Russification of the non-Russians.
But for that to happen a Great Russian culture had to be identified and fostered.
Thus, the government and the intelligentsia of the Great Russians themselves became increasingly nationally conscious, a change felt in the borderlands as outright hostility to the symbols and practices of the local peoples.
In the borderlands themselves, in Poland, for example— as Rosa Luxemburg so cogently argued — the interests of the aristocracy of the minority peoples (where it existed) had become interwoven with the Tsarist order.
Thus, the traditional champions of a separate nation refused to seek to create and lead it.
The new business groups were part of an imperial market and often this was far too important to them to risk the fragmentation of nationalism.
However, cultural Russification directly threatened those who claimed to carry the cultural traditions of the minority peoples, from the priesthood to what there was of a modern intelligentsia.
Their very raison d'être was undermined by the extension of ‘Russianism’.
The intelligentsia were required to fill the role vacated by other classes, but, in the more advanced borderland principalities, their social significance was not large enough to advance national demands in isolation.
They needed a vehicle of much greater weight in the society if national liberation was to be promoted.
In Poland, the new working classes provided just such a vehicle.
The intellectuals often gave their version of national identity a cultural-linguistic stress.
But, even with this emphasis, an emerging nationalism could provide the medium for many class conflicts — for example, between Ukrainian peasants and Russian or Polish landlords and Jewish land agents and tax collectors; between Tatar workers and Russian employers, between Baku Muslim oil workers and Christian oil magnates (Armenian, Russian, Swedish, Georgian).
And far out on the perimeter of empire in the Russian Middle East, where — apart from the mullahs — there was no intelligentsia, Russian colonization of the nomadic grazing lands made class conflicts over land and revolutionary land reform vital national issues.
If they did not instigate it, the Tsars immensely exaggerated the process of ‘nationalization’ of the subordinate peoples of Russia.
The attempts to rationalize the administration, to centralize power, collided directly with local liberties and the particularist and traditional privileges of the old supporters of the regime (for example, the Tatar nobility).
Furthermore, Russification intensified.
Under Alexander III up to the 1905 revolution, particular efforts were made to Russify the European peoples of the empire, to stretch, in Seton-Watson's evocative phrase, ‘the short, tight skin of the nation over the gigantic body of the  empire’.
Finland was more closely incorporated into the central administration, losing the privilege of being a separate Grand Duchy.
Restrictions were imposed on the use of the Polish language in culture and literature.
Publications in Ukrainian were banned (so publishing activities moved over the border, to Austrian Galicia).
Thus, it was the Russian Establishment which made language a key national issue.
Furthermore, the properties of the Armenian Church were confiscated.
Worst of all was the horrifying anti-semitism which was fashioned as a vital support for Great Russian chauvinism; the Jews, long discriminated against — to the tune of 650 legal restrictions on their activities — were used in the great pogroms of the late nineteenth century as the butt of national policy.
Of course, the mass of the Russian people themselves were almost as hideously oppressed within the empire, but without the ‘national’ dimension.
The 1905 revolution brought many of these issues to a head, for it was
as much a revolution of the non-Russian against Russification as it was a revolution of workers, peasants and radical intellectuals against autocracy.
The two revolts were, of course, connected: the social revolution was in fact most bitter in non-Russian regions, with Polish workers, Latvian peasants and Georgian peasants as protagonists.
For a period after 1905, there was a reversal of Russification as part of the programme of reforms.
But it was short-lived and the State soon sought once again to enforce ‘homogeneity’.
To these oppressions, the First World War added unforeseen horrors, particularly where, in the western borderlands, actual fighting took place.
The promise of peace and order which was the supposed vindication of the Tsarist empire was completely betrayed.
As a result of this history, the collapse of the Tsarist regime in the February revolution of 1917 raised great hopes of a new and just order in the borderlands.
The Provisional Government committed itself to recognizing the right of national self-determination and, in place of the old Tsarist governors, installed in the minority areas governing committees of local dignitaries and deputies of the relevant nationality to the national parliament, the Duma.
However, the provisional Government interpreted the right of national self-determination as meaning no more than the abolition of discrimination and the establishment of legal equality’ among the peoples of the former empire.
Even with this limited aim, the strains of war severely inhibited its capacity to pursue any serious reforms.
In any case, the continuation of the war was forcing the revolution  to dig much deeper than the topsoil of reforms.
The representatives of national groups increasingly demanded the right of autonomy, of self-government, if not outright secession.
Furthermore, mutinies and desertions in the forces led to soldiers of the different nationalities returning home to offer their armed support for national administrations.
The army became a forcing house for national liberation.
At each stage the beleaguered national government urged self-restraint, for the continuation of the war necessitated a postponement of all subsidiary issues.
Ultimately, it was said, a Constituent Assembly would have to decide the form of a new State.
Through the summer of 1917, impatience grew at the temporizing of the government.
An Estonian delegate to an August conference summed up the sense of frustration:
We consider it necessary…to proceed to the resolution of the nationality question.
There can be no delays.
No people can live by promises alone…preliminary work must be started for the reorganisation of the State on principles providing the highest guarantee of freedom and national self-determination in a democratic Russian Republic, based on the federal principle of a friendly family of Russian peoples where autonomous regions — Estonia among them — would constitute equal members.
On the other side, the army high command — and the political party, the Kadets — were horrified at the Provisional Government's flirtation with the disintegration of Russia.
As General Kaledin put it:
Russia must be indivisibly whole.
All separatist tendencies must be nipped in the bud.
The Bolsheviks were merciless in their attack on the government for frustrating the movement for self-determination, which they interpreted as the right to secede, to create a new State, and to do it through the direct action of the peoples concerned without awaiting the approval of the central Government.
For Lenin, the growing conflict between Finland and the Provisional Government demonstrated ‘that denial of the right of secession leads to a direct continuation of the policy of Tsarism.’
The nationalities
In 1917,Poland was under German occupation.
The occupying forces set up a puppet government and proclaimed it independent of Russia.
The Russian Provisional Government could hardly do less, a position the Bolsheviks also accepted after the October revolution.
Thus Poland, which had played so important a role in the debates on the national question, slipped into independence by courtesy of German arms without playing any role in a revolution in Germany or in Russia.
Finland was not an obvious candidate for the status of an oppressed nationality.
Under a constitutional monarchy, the Tsar was Grand Duke, with a bicameral legislature.
In 1917, the lower house, the Sejm, had an elected majority of Social Democrats (103 out of 200).
On 5 June, it declared Finland to be self-governing in all matters except defence and foreign policy.
From there the Sejm moved to call for independence, appealing directly to the All-Russian Congress of Soviets.
The Congress, at this time under the control of the Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, rejected the demand, and Kerensky, on behalf of the provisional Government, affirmed the right of the central government to veto any secessionist proposals.
He promised that the government would fight to keep Finland.
He announced the dissolution of the Sejm and sealed off the building.
He began to move troops northwards.
The Social Democrats called a general strike in protest (denounced by the leadership of the Petrograd Soviet as mob rule), which the Russian Governor General banned, promising to put down all disorders by force.
However, despite the bluster, the Provisional Government — in the midst of a World War — was unable to sustain a serious punitive expedition.
The Social Democrats broke into the sealed Sejm building and declared Finland to be self-governing.
On the eve of the October revolution, the Provisional Government accepted this as a temporary expedient.
The Ukraine posed particularly intractable problems for Petrograd.
Advanced in certain respects, it was also divided between an industrialized and Russian-dominated east (with Kharkov as the chief city) and the rural west (with the ancient capital of Kiev), between the cities inhabited by Russians, Poles and Jews (the historic instruments for the Russification of the Ukraine) and the Ukrainian peasants of the countryside (with Polish and Russian landowners).
On the other hand, economic interdependence was great — the Ukraine depended upon the Russian market, and Russia depended upon Ukrainian raw materials (especially grain, but also coal and iron) and manufactured goods.
The hunger of Russia during the civil war added a sharp edge to the demand for Ukrainian independence, the right to dispose of the grain surplus.
The Ukrainian national leadership was fatally weakened by being restricted to the intelligentsia and without the dedication to escape from this.
For the tiny group of declared nationalists, cultural and linguistic  oppression loomed large, far larger than it could for an illiterate peasantry (although the use of the Ukrainian language had considerable popular support).
Insofar as Ukrainian nationalism existed as a popular force, it was hostile to Russian and Polish landlords and anti-semitic.
However, even with this unpromising start, more could possibly have been achieved with a leadership less trapped in its own class origins.
Following the February revolution, a Central Ukrainian Council (the ‘Rada’) was formed in Kiev from the small circle of nationalists.
They formulated a programme of demands, but these fell on deaf ears in Petrograd.
The frustration of mild proposals promoted more radical ones: the right to self-government, backed by Ukrainian military forces.
In the eastern Ukraine, many rejected the pretensions of the Rada to speak for the province and sought to promote a workers’ revolutionary movement as an alternative focus.
Some rejected entirely any talk of self-government or treating the Ukrainians as an oppressed people.
Nonetheless, the Rada persisted, producing a manifesto that proclaimed self-government.
In Petrograd, the Kadets accused the Rada of being agents of the Germans, and the newspaper of the Soviet,Izvestia , proclaimed:
The revolutionary democracy of Russia stands for the indivisibility of the State.
To split up a great State, created by a thousand years of historical development, means taking a big step backwards.
Negotiations between Kerensky and the Rada were fruitless, and the Rada began to speak of the ‘imperialist tendencies of the Russian bourgeoisie towards the Ukraine’.
Meanwhile, the cities experienced growing disorder; in the countryside, a diversity of agitations was beginning.
The Ukrainian Bolsheviks tended to be restricted to the eastern Ukraine; they were therefore limited in their capacity to combat the Rada's position by, for example, raising revolutionary peasant demands.
Opposition to the Rada did not mean opposition to Ukrainian nationalism (although the Rada was happy to make this deduction).
However, the party leader of the southwestern region was Piatakov, the Ukrainian-born collaborator of Bukharin who had consistently opposed the Party position on national self-determination.
He bluntly rejected not only the demands of the Rada but also the claims of Ukrainian nationalism (and so contradicted Party Policy:)
we must not support the Ukrainians, because their movement is not convenient for the proletariat.
Russia cannot exist without  the Ukrainian sugar industry, and the same can be said in regard to coal (the Donbas), cereals (the black earth belt), etc.
Given Piatakov's views and his official position, the Bolsheviks of the Ukraine seemed to the Rada indistinguishable from both the Kadets and the Petrograd Soviet.
There were numerous other stirrings of national opinion, from the Baltic States to the Transcaucasus.
In the latter case, two ancient Christian principalities, Georgia and Armenia, had claims to distinct national identities, along with a Muslim and Shi-ite people in Azerbaijan (which contained the economically vital oil city of Baku).
Georgia had long provided a cadre for the Social Democratic movement, and the Tiflis Soviet was of more substance than many in the region.
Armenia , shattered by the Turkish persecutions, was wholly dependent upon the protection of Russia (whatever its regime), against the Turks.
The people of Azerbaijan sympathized with Turkey, so that domestic collisions were closely related to external threats.
The Azerbaijanis were part of a broader movement of reform among Muslims, led by the more advanced Tatar peoples of the Volga and Crimea.
The spread of secular schools and Turkish-language newspapers (there were 16 by 1913, all except three in the dialect of the Volga Tatars) began to create some sense of identity among the Muslims of the west, or at least among those who were literate.
A key material issue in Central Asia was opposition to the Russian seizure of the historic lands of minority peoples.
Russian colonization, cities and railways cut up the great grazing lands of the nomadic peoples as violently as American settlers had done to the Amerindians in the United States.
There were increasing clashes between the Russians and the minority peoples on the issue in the run-up to the First World War.
By 1916, there were some 144,000 Russian colonists in the Kazakh-Kirghiz steppes.
At that time, the central government, desperate to find new conscripts for the war, for the first time introduced military service for the minority peoples.
This set off a major rebellion in which Russian settlements were sacked with a death toll of over 2,500.
The government reacted with even greater violence, driving out some 300,000 of the indigenous peoples (some fleeing to the mountains and beyond, to Chinese Xinjiang or Eastern Turkestan).
The grateful colonists used the opportunity to expropriate the cattle and other assets of the fugitives.
The February and October revolutions seem to have had the same effect on the Russian colonists as the expulsion of the British had on the American colonists in the eighteenth century — a removal of all restraint on the ambitions to despoil native lands and assets.
In July 
1917, at Semirechensk in Turkestan, Russian peasant representatives met to deliberate the subduing of the natives, and resolved to create vigilante groups to keep at bay those fugitives who were now returning (Muslim sources claim 83,000 were killed).
By 1917, there were three trends among the emerging political leadership of the more significant Muslim peoples — a religious right (with the mullahs and a landowning interest), a liberal centre (westernized, sometimes associated with merchant or business groups, and aligned with the Kadets in Petrograd), and a socialist group (among the Russian-educated young, often aligned with the Social Revolutionaries).
The February revolution gave some of these forces the opportunity to enter the administration, but often only temporarily, until the Russian colonists could re-establish their power.
Thus, the Turkestan Committee (5 Russians and 4 Muslims) that was recognized by the Provisional Government was superseded by the Tashkent Soviet from which Muslims were excluded.
The complexity of social forces — from the quasi-independent states of the western borderlands, to the anti-colonial ferment of Central Asia — belied the simplicity of the slogans.
Abstract internationalism had a strong role to play in rationalizing much more sinister forces than appeared in the rhetoric of Petrograd.
NATIONAL LIBERATION IN PRACTICE: THE FIRST PHASE
HISTORY, as Marx once said, is not made in conditions of our own choosing.
The Bolsheviks came to power not in the relatively peaceful conditions in which policy had been framed, but in conditions of social collapse.
The chaos on the military front, the continued threat of German invasion, the disintegration of the domestic economy with the prospects of both famine and civil anarchy: all these established the first emergencies facing the regime, the imperatives which cried out for response.
Beyond these factors were the numerical weakness and cultural backwardness of the working class, the low average productivity of labour (even if the factories could be put back to work), the vastness of the land area and the isolation of its rural inhabitants, the barbaric inheritance of Tsarism — all in comparison with the exiguous forces of the Bolshevik party.
To come to power in conditions of war was to expose the new regime to the maximum pressures of the world system.
For in war national loyalty is an unequivocal issue, and war and the subsequent Civil War reshaped the Bolsheviks more radically than anything else could.
In selecting only one thread of policy — on the national issue — we are in danger of misconstruing its significance relative to the overall context.
For the Bolsheviks were obliged to be obsessed with one issue and one issue only: the survival of their regime.
All other considerations, to a greater or lesser degree, had to become secondary if that survival was to be ensured.
Once distant from the history, it is difficult to envisage just how powerful that central imperative was and how often the options  available were so narrowly restricted as to exclude most of what the party was supposed to stand for.
After the Civil War, the Bolshevik party had recreated itself in response to events; it was virtually a new organization.
However, despite all the emergencies, in the first instance, the Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia (of 18 November 1917) boldly committed the new Bolshevik Government to support the national self-determination of Russia's peoples ‘even to the point of separation and the formation of an independent State’.
And when the regime finally came to reverse its former position and accept the principle of federation embodied in the new Russian Soviet Federation of Socialist Republics (RSFSR), the same promise was embodied in the new constitution.
Lenin argued tirelessly that, for the majority of the inhabitants, who were not workers, capitalists or landowners, the national question — like the questions of land and peace — was fundamental.
In immediate terms this meant that
we must immediately satisfy the demands of the Ukrainians and the Finns, ensure them, as well as all other non-Russian nationalities in Russia, full freedom, including freedom of secession, applying the same to Armenia, undertaking to evacuate that country as well as the Turkish lands occupied by us.
There was still opposition within the Party, but the immediate confidence of the revolution swept the leadership along on a tide of optimism:
We are told that Russia will disintegrate, or split up into separate republics, but we have no reason to fear this.
We have nothing to fear, whatever the number of independent republics.
The important thing for us is not where the state border runs, but whether or not the working people of all nations remain allied in their struggle against the bourgeoisie…
We are going to tell the Ukrainians that, as Ukrainians, they can go ahead and arrange their life as they see fit.
But we are going to stretch out a fraternal hand to the Ukrainian workers and tell them that, together with them, we are going to fight against our bourgeoisie and theirs.
However, the immediate issues of the war intervened at every stage.
The treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which the military superiority of Germany forced upon the young Soviet State at the end of the year, revealed the limits of its power: ‘The past keeps fast hold of us,’ Lenin observed  gloomily at the 8th Party Congress, ‘grasps us with a thousand tentacles, and does not allow us to take a single forward step, or compels us to take these steps badly.’
By January 1919, qualifications were emerging.
For if the right of self-determination for the Finns, the Ukrainians and the rest could in practice threaten the very existence of the Soviet State, ‘naturally the preservation of the Socialist Republic has a higher claim’.
It was no more than a change of emphasis, but it emboldened the opposition.
This time, a theoretical revision was created by Josef Stalin, the Bolshevik responsible for the execution of policy on the national question: in effect, the right could be reversed.
Only five weeks after the October revolution, he had narrowed the group that could exercise the right to the labouring masses.
Without this restriction, he said, those opposed to the Soviet regime would be able to invoke the principle to subvert the new order.
A month later, he broadened the case: the October revolution had qualitatively changed the context; now the task was not to complete the bourgeois, but to establish the proletarian, revolution.
This rendered the old national movement, led by the bourgeoisie, reactionary.
Now only workers and peasants should enjoy the right to self-determination.
A year later, perhaps to justify his rough treatment in suppressing the national movement among the Tatars and Bashkirs, he affirmed: ‘the slogan ‘all power to the national bourgeoisie’ is being replaced by the slogan of proletarian socialism, ‘all power to the working masses of the oppressed nationalities’.
Bukharin, one of the leaders of the Left opposition to Lenin on the national question, embraced the idea and brought to its exposition his formidable talents.
At this point, as Carr observes, ‘the dividing line between Bukharin's thesis of ‘self-determination for the workers’ and the Polish thesis (of Rosa Luxemburg) of ‘no self-determination for nations’was tenuous and tended to vanish’.
Stalin's argument was part of a broader one that he derived from Lenin: the right of national self-determination was valid only where countries were passing from feudalism to capitalism.
Now, when the transition to socialism was on the agenda, the issues of the national question were no longer relevant.
However, the party did not follow this line; otherwise they would have opposed independence for the more advanced Poland, Finland, the Baltic States and the Ukraine, and supported it only for the more backward minorities.
In any case, the argument was quite remote from Lenin's preoccupation with binding up the wounds of national estrangement.
However, at one stage, different conditions were laid down for different nationalities: a national plebiscite was demanded in order to ratify independence for Poland, Courland and Lithuania, whereas a vote of workers alone was  required for the Ukraine, the Caucasus republics and Latvia.
There was no practical validity in this discrimination, nor was it implemented.
Narkomnats
As earnest of its intentions, the new Soviet government established a People's Commissariat of Nationalities (Narkomnats) under Stalin's direction, and this set up commissions for the main nationalities.
During the Civil War these became important agencies in stimulating and co-ordinating resistance to the German occupation and the activity of the White armies.
By November 1918, there were some 18 commissions or sections.
These were used to draw young nationalists into the work of the Party.
The chiefs of the commissions were often older Bolsheviks of the nationality concerned and often on the Left — that is, opposed to the Party line on the national question.
They criticized the approach of bringing young nationalists with no Bolshevik credentials into the Party as a dilution of Party policy.
Trotsky later noted ‘these russified non-Russians who opposed their abstract internationalism to the real needs of the oppressed nationalities.
Actually, this policy supported the old tradition of russification and was a special danger in the conditions of the civil war.’
Nonetheless, the Narkomnats journal,Zhizn' Natsional' nostei (Life of the Nationalities) demonstrated the relative liberalism of Party control on the issue.
Most striking was the case of the young Tatar Muslim, Mir Sajit Sultan Galiev, who was drawn into the work of the commissions, becoming one of Stalin's assistants.
His contributions to the Narkomnats journal showed how far he was from accepting the Party line on nationalities or even understanding some of the basic Marxist concepts.
The journal also allowed him to display his growing alienation from the Bolsheviks.
In the first instance, he did not accept that there were classes among the Muslims, so there could be no class struggle.
Furthermore:
as almost all classes in Muslim society have been oppressed by the colonialists, all classes have the right to be called ‘proletarians’…
Muslim peoples are proletarian nations.
From an economic standpoint, there is an enormous difference between the English and French proletariat and the proletariat of Morocco and Afghanistan.
It is therefore legitimate to state that the national movement in the Muslim countries has the character of a socialist movement.
He also began to assert that capitalism would be able to survive class struggles in Europe while it retained its powerful economic base in the colonies.
Decolonization was thus the decisive route to proletarian revolution in Europe.
The most important struggle was not in Europe but in the colonized east.
As the ravages of the Civil War continued — and the Red armies, under the fierce exigencies of immediate action, were remote from the scrupulousness Lenin required — the mood changed to gloom.
Once a people had been colonialist, the working class would continue to be colonialist even after they had carried out a revolution.
A Communist International would not help, for it would be dominated by the working classes of the colonial countries, who would continue to be colonialist.
The east could only overthrow colonialism if it formed a separate Colonial International to fight against it (and, by implication, the working-class form of colonialism in the Communist party).
For Sultan Galiev, the picture was dominated by the need of the Islamic peoples of the Russias to secure their own liberation, not by the self-emancipation of the industrial working class of Europe.
Operating within a particular tradition, he endeavoured to draw its language and concepts into the tasks of Muslim anti-colonialism, with an inevitable change of meaning.
What is remarkable is that he was able to do this as a Party member and an official.
As we shall see, the attempt to employ the same concepts to describe quite different tasks was a common phenomenon among young nationalists.
Eighth Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik)
The Left, as we have seen, believed that the October revolution had once and for all buried the national issue.
Proletarian power now superseded the unfinished business of the bourgeois period of history.
The next target was a single unified world, an international workers’ republic, where — in Europe, at least— there would be no room for separate national political entities.
At the 8th Party Congress in March 1919, the Left now made yet another attempt to revise the Party programme on the national question.
Bukharin advanced the case that the right of self-determination be restricted to the ‘toiling masses’, buttressing his argument with quotations from Lenin's writings that affirmed that the Party's task was to secure the ‘self-determination of the working class’ rather than that of peoples.
The issue now facing the Party had become the defeat of global finance capital, and in that struggle the Party could choose to support the rights of national independence or of  world proletarian unity, but not both.
Piatakov also spoke, arguing that national rights were now the weapon of a counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
‘Once we unite the economy and build one apparatus…all this notorious self-determination is not worth one rotten egg.’
Lenin's reply reiterated his argument that world and social development was ‘uneven’, so that, even in the most economically advanced countries, the social differentiation between classes and awareness of this differentiation were not yet sufficient to take for granted the primacy of class, as opposed to national, identity.
Thus, one could not afford to ignore or deny the right of national self-determination.
In Russia, any attempt to refuse this right would immediately aid the bourgeoisie of each nationality and tend to push the local working class into its arms.
‘In my opinion, this kind of Communist (who denies the right to secede)’, he repeated, ‘is a Great Russian chauvinist; he lives inside many of us and must be fought.‘
Then, turning to the Bukharin-Stalin argument, he agreed that recognizing the right to secede would vary according to the social transition involved.
But, even so, it was still true that the bourgeoisie was the rightful champion of nationalism.
The working class must therefore support the bourgeoisie in this respect — A nation means the bourgeoisie together with the proletariat.
There could be no sense in restricting the exercise of the right to the labouring class alone.
In passing, Lenin extended the general argument to a much wider audience, and without the earlier reservations:
All nations have the right to self-determination…
The vast majority, most likely nine-tenths of the population of the earth, perhaps 95 per cent, come under this description…
To reject the self-determination of nations and insert the self-determination of the working people would be absolutely wrong, because this manner of settling the question does not reckon with the difficulties, with the zigzag course taken by differentiation within nations.
For those not already convinced, it is unlikely that Lenin's argument persuaded them.
Particularly since the discipline of administering State power in peculiarly obdurate circumstances inclined all in the reverse direction, and obliged them to limit their preoccupations to ensuring the survival of the State and its domains.
For the old Bolsheviks, imperceptibly, the political terrain was shifting.
The nationalities
The history of the nationalities of the former Russian empire is complex, and here only a few details can be given to illustrate how doctrine was radically reshaped by events until in content, if not in form, it became its opposite.
Poland and Finland established independent regimes most swiftly.
As we have seen, German arms achieved a separate Polish State which remained after the end of the war and the evacuation of the German armies.
The Soviet Republic respected Polish independence until the Poles invaded the Ukraine.
In turning the Polish armies back, the Red Army crossed the border and advanced on Warsaw, vainly expecting a Polish rising to support its advance.
There was none, and the Red Army was defeated at the gates of Warsaw.
It had been a major error of judgement on the part of Lenin and the Bolshevik leadership, disregarding Lenin's earlier warnings that it could not be assumed in any country that class issues would automatically supersede national ones.
In Finland , the Bolsheviks expected a workers’ revolution but in the short term recognized the independent bourgeois republic.
As Stalin scornfully put it, ‘the bourgeoisie of Finland…by a strange confluence of circumstances has received its independence from the hands of a socialist Russia’.
In January 1918, the Finnish Social Democrats, with help from the Russian troops still in the country, attempted to seize power.
In March, the RSFSR recognized the Finnish Socialist Workers’ Republic.
But the move was premature, for a bitter war ensued that was settled only when the Finnish government called in the aid of German troops, supported by Swedish volunteers.
The defeat was severe, for the internationalist Left had been as strong in Finland as in Great Russia.
A not dissimilar sequence of events occurred in the Baltic States.
Latvia alone, without much national tradition before 1917, gave the Bolsheviks an absolute majority of votes in the elections to the Constituent Assembly.
The regimes which emerged in Lithuania and Estonia had considerable popular support (both implemented quite radical land-reform programmes), and might have been able to sustain independent national States without foreign intervention.
However, in the event, Soviet regimes were set up in Estonia and Latvia in October 1917, but were overthrown by German occupation.
Soviet governments returned in late 1918 with the end of the war, but fled early in 1919, when British naval forces in the Baltic landed to establish a base in Estonia, providing the White forces with an opportunity to attack Petrograd.
In 1920, Moscow recognized the independent governments set up after the defeat of the White forces.
In Lithuania, a similar sequence of events occurred, except that it was not the British who eliminated the independent Soviet government but a Polish invasion (in April 1919).
When the Poles finally repulsed the Russian counter-attack, they sponsored an independent bourgeois republic, which in due course was recognized by Moscow.
Thus, again, the simple expression of the principles of national self-determination or workers’ international unity was vastly complicated by the context of competing Great Powers and Russian exhaustion.
In the Ukraine , the already strained relations between the Rada and the Provisional Government could only be exaggerated under the Bolsheviks as the Civil War developed.
One of the main initial bases of the White armies under General Kornilov was on the lower Don river with Kaledin, Ataman of the Don Cossacks.
From the Russian perspective, it seemed that the Rada increasingly favoured the Whites; Cossacks deserting from the Russian armies were allowed to cross the Ukraine to join Kaledin, whereas the Red Army was refused permission to pursue them and confront the Whites.
A new focus of power was also created by the initiation of Ukrainian Soviets, the strongest being in the industrialized east, led by Kharkhov.
In the All-Ukrainian Soviet, the Bolsheviks constituted an important political alternative to the Rada in Kiev.
However, when Moscow threatened war on the Rada if it continued to collaborate with Kaledin and to refuse to allow the Red Army to cross Ukrainian territory to attack the White forces, the anti-Bolsheviks read out the ultimatum to the shocked delegates.
One of their number said, as if consciously echoing Lenin, that the ultimatum ‘destroys the brotherhood of the labouring classes of all nations, awakens manifestations of national animosity and obscures the class consciousness of the masses, in this manner favouring counter-revolution’.
The Bolshevik delegates were obliged to withdraw from the Soviet.
Piatakov and his faction made a virtue of necessity.
It was now no longer necessary to make even token gestures towards Ukrainian opinion.
Piatakov rejected any idea of an independent Ukraine and urged military invasion to re-establish Russian control.
In the interim, the Kharkov Soviet declared a Soviet Republic and the end of the Rada.
In turn, the Rada declared the Ukraine independent.
Simultaneously, Red Army units crossed the border en route for the campaign against Kaledin.
Lenin, watching the military advance closely, was particularly concerned to reassure Ukrainian opinion that this was not the beginning of the end of the right to secede.
His telegrams to the army reiterated the need at all times to respect Ukrainian sovereignty.
The reality, however, was quite different.
Lenin once argued that a political leader is responsible not only for policy but for the action of  those who execute it.
In the Ukraine, it was impossible to adhere to this principle.
The Red Army units had their own dynamic and their own imperative — to reach Kaledin as swiftly as possible, regardless of peasant opinion.
While he was not typical, the notorious sadist, Lieutenant Colonel Muraviev, one of the former Tsarist officers on whom the Red Army was obliged to rely, vowed to hold the Ukraine by fire and the sword.
There were stories of Red Guards who shot those who dared to speak Ukrainian in public or to affirm the rights of Ukrainian nationality.
The military rode roughshod even over the Ukrainian Bolsheviks.
Even if the Russians had wanted to use the pretext to reconquer the Ukraine, however, they could not have done so.
The Kiev Rada, panic-stricken at what they saw as a Russian invasion, summoned the German army to defend their power by taking over the western Ukraine and its grain resources.
The Germans obliged but, once installed as an occupying force, dismissed the Rada and created their own puppet government.
With the end of the First World War, the Germans left, but did not remove their client State.
The Rada now summoned the Red Army to restore its power.
Simultaneously, Piatakov became the head of a new secret Soviet Government of the Ukraine at Kursk.
Lenin was furious when he learned about it.
The Russian Government denied that it was supporting the ‘Kursk clique’ but, for Ukrainian opinion, it must have seemed inconceivable that this were true.
With some armed detachments, Piatakov now seized Kharkov.
Again Moscow denied any involvement.
However, this time the Central Committee intervened to remove Piatakov from his official position.
Party leadership was put in the hands of Rakovskii (a Roumanian), who was instructed to make every effort to win over the support of the Ukrainian Left and make all concessions required to conciliate the Ukrainian peasantry.
At the same time, however, the armed forces advanced on Kiev.
The country was in turmoil.
Bands of predatory freebooters, ex-soldiers turned bandits, preyed on a severely impoverished peasantry which had only the lowly Jewish traders as a target for its hatred.
Warlords operated in the west, and the east was dominated by an independent anarchist force, the green armies of Makhno.
In practice, the Red Army units did nothing to conciliate the Ukrainian Left or the peasants.
Agriculture was brutally collectivized and no concessions were made in the use of the Ukrainian language and culture.
However, Denikin's White armies counter-attacked and after seven months the Red Army was obliged to withdraw.
In Kiev, the military secretary of the Rada, the notorious Petlyura, seized power and instituted a new wave of repression, marked by savage  anti-semitism.
Famine and a typhus epidemic struck in the winter of 1919–20.
In October 1919, at long last the Russian Party recognized the seriousness of the role of the Bolshevik Left in reversing Party policy.
The central committee of the Ukrainian section of the Party and the supposed Ukrainian Soviet Government were dissolved.
Manuilski, on behalf of the Party, indicted the Ukrainian Bolsheviks for excluding Ukrainian participation from the government, for behaving like a typically colonial regime (at the 8th Party Congress Lenin had launched a scathing attack on Great Russian chauvinism in the Ukrainian regional section).
The Party resolved to recognize Ukrainian independence, but to work towards a federal relationship.
It was vital, the Central Committee in Moscow decided, that all Party members support the free development of the Ukrainian language and culture, and defend them against Russification.
All institutions in the Ukraine must move towards the use of the local language.
In order to conciliate the Ukrainian peasants, the agrarian policy of the Party should not be implemented.
The saga of horrors had not yet run its full course.
Petlyura, the military dictator of Kiev and parts of the western Ukraine, had grown desperate at his inability to establish his power.
He now appealed to the ancient enemy of the Ukraine, Poland, to clear the land of all Russian forces — and offered as reward the concession of eastern Galicia to Poland.
In the spring of 1920, Polish armies swept through the western Ukraine to Kiev.
It took a year for the Red Army to prize them loose.
Three years of horrifying anarchy and nine governments destroyed what there had been of Ukrainian nationalism.
In the end, sheer exhaustion and hunger made political questions remote for the majority.
Whatever their errors — and they had been considerable — the Bolsheviks did at last establish some measure of order that allowed some recovery from the attrition of the years.
However, it did not prevent, in the winter of 1921–2, an appalling famine afflicting the southern districts of the Ukraine, ‘the worst’, a League of Nations report declared, ‘both as regards the numbers affected and as regards the mortality from starvation and disease which has occurred in Europe in modern times’.
The price of national freedom might well have seemed impossibly high.
In the Transcaucasus a similar mixture of the threat of external intervention and ‘Great Russian chauvinism’ produced not dissimilar effects.
Following the October revolution, the three countries of the region —Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan (with the vital oil centre of Baku)— established a common assembly which declared the region independent (simultaneously, a Baku Soviet was set up).
However, frictions between the three grew, exacerbated by Georgia's  increasing involvement with Germany and Azerbaijan's relationship with Germany's ally in the World War, Turkey.
Georgia announced its independence and alliance with Germany.
Shortly afterwards, Turkish military forces invaded the other two countries, and finally took Baku — with great slaughter.
The defeat of the Central powers in the autumn of 1918 removed German forces from the scene, and the Turkish military evacuated the region.
However, British forces from Persia temporarily intervened to offer support for Armenia and Azerbaijan against the advance of the Red Army (and to crush the Baku Soviet).
After their withdrawal, the Azerbaijan government was overthrown by a rising in Baku and a Soviet Socialist Republic was established.
Armenia, the scene of fearful destruction with half its population refugees from Turkish persecution, continued to press claims for the return of its homelands in Turkey.
The Turks invaded, but the Red Army was now beginning to re-establish order and a Turkish withdrawal was negotiated.
The Red Army was the sole force available to prevent a complete liquidation of Armenia by Turkey.
The Georgian independent republic was the most solidly based of the three.
It survived for two and a half years under the Georgian Social Democrats (mainly Menshevik), and instituted important reforms.
However, the Georgian Communists, encouraged by the regional Party directorate, were eager to precipitate a military intervention by the Red Army.
Like Piatakov in the Ukraine, the Transcaucasian party chief, a Georgian, Orjonikidze, was impatient to resolve the question, and establish co-ordinated economic communications with Baku through Georgia.
He tried to force the military issue but was checked; a telegram in the names of Lenin and Stalin forbade him ‘to ‘self-determine’ Georgia’.
However, he continued to press the need for military intervention to support, he said, worker risings in the country.
When he finally launched the attack, he did not inform the Central Committee in Moscow.
The Georgian forces manfully defended the capital, Tiflis, but were finally obliged to concede.
Simultaneously, Turkish forces seized the port of Batum, but were subsequently expelled by Red Army detachments.
The Georgian case was as close as could be to straight annexation, without the pretext of disorder (although the Turkish army remained an important threat).
By default, Lenin accepted the fait accompli .
Perhaps a certain sensitivity on this question inspired his particularly detailed instructions to Orjonikidze on how the Georgians were to be treated; the intelligentsia were to be offered particular concessions, and the Mensheviks to be invited to participate —‘avoid any mechanism copying the Russian pattern…bigger concessions to all the petty  bourgeois elements’.
But the instructions were no more effective here than in the Ukraine, and, as we shall see, it was Georgia that came to sum up Lenin's revulsion not only at the implementation of Party policy in the national field, but also at the general evolution of the Party.
For the Muslims of Central Asia the October revolution was in important respects a retreat.
For ‘All Power to the Working Class’ in a colonial context meant all power to Russian colonists, the only workers available.
As one Central Asian observed:
Under Tsarist colonialism, it was the privilege of the Russians to belong to the industrial proletariat.
For this reason, the dictatorship of the proletariat took on a typically colonialist aspect.
To the victims, the abstract Leftism of some of the Bolsheviks seemed in practice much the same as colonial domination.
Particularly since, almost invariably, the colonists used socialist slogans to reject any nationalist demands and justify the elimination of nationalists.
Thus, the early Bashkir Soviet Republic excluded all Bashkir participation.
By means of an appeal to Lenin, Bashkirs were able to secure some positions in the government, only to have their agreement with Moscow cancelled a year later when Bashkiria was forcibly incorporated in the RSFSR.
The Bashkir Revolutionary Commission resigned in protest at this ‘Russian chauvinism’ and the ‘Imperialistic tendencies of the Russians which hinder in every manner the development of national minorities’.
Zeki Validov, one of the most famous Bashkir military leaders, fled to the Urals — to the shock of Moscow — and thence to the armed revolt of the Basmachi in eastern Turkestan.
Behind him, the Russian colonists created vigilante groups to seize Bashkir land.
In Turkestan, the issues were at their most stark, for the province was cut off from Moscow during the Civil War.
The Tashkent Soviet was created from Russian workers.
It excluded Muslims; ‘one cannot permit the admission of Muslims into the higher organs of the regional revolutionary authority’, the Soviet resolved, ‘because the attitude of the local population towards the Soviet of Soldiers, Workers and Peasants is quite uncertain, and because the native population lacks proletarian organizations’.
When a Muslim group in Kokand declared an Autonomous Republic, the Soviet resolved to ‘subordinate entirely the principle of national self-determination to socialism’ and crush it.
The Soviet's military forces instituted a three-day orgy of slaughter and looting in Kokand.
Kokand was by no means an isolated incident, and drove those initially favourable to the Bolsheviks into opposition.
As Ahmed 
Bayturson, commander of the Kirghiz-Kazakh military forces, put it later:.
They (the Kirghiz-Kazakh people) received the first revolution with joy and the second with consternation and terror…
The first revolution had liberated them from the oppression of the Tsarist regime and reinforced their perennial dream of autonomy…
The second revolution was accompanied in the borderlands by violence, plundering, exactions and the establishment of a dictatorial regime…in the past, a small group of Tsarist bureaucrats oppressed them; today, the same group of people or others who cloak themselves in the name of the Bolsheviks perpetuate in the borderlands the same regime.
It was only the proclamation, in the words of the head of the White armies, Denikin, of ‘Great Russia, One and Indivisible’, as well as later Bolshevik efforts to rectify the situation, that persuaded Muslim nationalists to opt for Moscow.
But there were still plenty of forces in the Party that remained ambiguous or hostile.
When the Bashkirs, supported by Lenin and a minority of the leadership, complained at being deprived of the autonomous republic, the secretary of the central executive told them, ‘That whole autonomous republic which you take so seriously is only a game to keep you people busy.’
Successive efforts to force the Tashkent Soviet to open its ranks were unsuccessful.
Moscow's real forces on the ground were too thin and too preoccupied with the Civil War.
Finally, in 1919, a special commission reported that the thin layer of workers had fallen under the influence of ‘colonially nationalistic hangers-on’.
The Politbureau was horrified.
It resolved to equalize landholdings between Russians and non-Russians, and to ‘overcome, oust and subordinate the Russian kulaks in the most energetic manner’.
Errors must be publicly acknowledged, natives recruited at all levels of the administration, and negotiations begun with the Basmachi rebels.
Dismal though it might seem relative to the great hopes earlier, this was perhaps the high point for the accommodation of the nationalists.
Muslim nationalists were encouraged to see themselves as the spearhead of the anti-colonial movement, and Lenin himself addressed their congress (in November 1919).
The end of the Civil War
By 1920, there could be a pause for breath, an attempt to remember what the meaning of the revolution was supposed to be.
The regime  had been entirely obsessed with the immediate issues of survival and had on occasions mistaken the exigencies of the present for long-term principle.
But now the medium-term future of the new federation was becoming more clear, the precedents and balance of powers were clarified.
The more important enemies had, at least for the moment, been defeated.
The Civil War had been fought in the main in the borderlands, precisely where the national question was at its most urgent.
Despite the Party programme and frequent reiteration of the line, the record in practice seemed appalling — ranging from the Russian colonists, operating under the banners of Soviet power and universal freedom; the arbitrary and cruel behaviour of raw troops operating in alien lands and in danger, far from the watching eyes of Moscow; the role of former Tsarist officers whose instincts were for the patriotic defence of all the territories of the former empire, without concession to local nationalism; to the contempt of the Bolshevik ultra-Left for all forms of nationalism.
There hardly seemed room for the Party's official policy.
Yet, despite everything, it did work.
Part of its working was the recognition of sheer necessity; as the old empire disintegrated, the tiny forces of the embattled Soviet republic could not hold it together.
Yet whereas the old political order, including much of the Left, denied the principle of secession, the Bolsheviks were officially proud to embrace it.
The Western peoples — with the exception of the Ukraine — did attain independence.
Elsewhere, the White armies offered the subordinate peoples of the old empire only the same as before, and this made even the Bolsheviks seem acceptable.
While it may not be reasonable to go as far as official opinion, there was some truth in Stalin's retrospective judgement at the 12th Party Congress:
the Party, in its work, never tired of advancing this programme of national emancipation, in opposition to both the frankly coercive policy of Tsarism and the half-hearted semi-imperialist policy of the Menshevik and Social Revolutionaries…
There can be little doubt that this sympathy and support (of masses of nationalities for the Party) was one of the decisive factors that determined the triumph of our party.
Clause 9 of the Party programme could not be blamed, as Rosa Luxemburg argued, for the disintegration of the old Russia; it had been one of the resources for saving what had been saved.
Yet in one respect Rosa Luxemburg, Bukharin and Piatakov were right.
In an imperialist world, the Great Powers, a world system  of States, dominated and shaped all lesser national demands.
The Bolsheviks might wish to prove their democratic credentials to the subject peoples, but the Great Powers would inevitably see this as an opportunity to advance their own interests or eliminate a threat to them.
History was indeed not made in conditions of the Bolsheviks’ choosing.
The native intelligentsia provided the opportunity for outside intervention.
They seized the opportunity for independence or at least a new bargain with Moscow — regardless of whatever views might be held by the silent masses.
But the leaders needed to support their bid with sufficient military backing, and that was usually available only through collaboration with foreign powers.
The Great Powers who wished to intervene were primarily interested in the destruction of Bolshevism rather than in national independence per se .
Thus the immediate issue at stake was not between Moscow and a former Tsarist dependency, but between the Soviet Republic and a hostile Great Power.
As Carr puts it:
What was depicted as a struggle between a national proletariat and peasantry, and a national bourgeoisie, was in fact a struggle between the Russian Bolsheviks on the one hand, and Russian and foreign anti-Bolsheviks on the other hand, for the controlling influence over the territory concerned.
The choice was not between dependence and independence, but between dependence on Moscow or dependence on the bourgeois governments of the capitalist world.
In practice, as the Party learned, so its patience diminished: it shifted to incorporating territories by force, while conceding the forms of federation and a measure of cultural autonomy (those things formerly ruled out as institutionalizing division).
The real Soviet nationalities policy was fashioned in conditions of extreme struggle and desperate material need (for the wheat, coal and iron of the Ukraine, the oil of the Caucasus, the cotton of Turkestan).
The priority was to neutralize the borderlands against the Whites and foreign intervention, to ensure the military security of the Republic.
Furthermore, the cadres believed they were about to ignite the European socialist revolution.
So policy compromises, even reversals, were only temporary.
Provided the Soviet regime could ensure its short-term survival, there would be time for the German revolution to bring political and material relief to the Soviet federation.
Then it would be possible to set matters right and return to the correct position of Clause 9.
However, the legacy was different.
For outside Europe, among that still tiny minority of nationalists in the colonial possessions of the European powers, it was the official position of the Soviet Republic, not the contradictory practice, that was noted.
The Bolshevik reputation stood high, and rightly so, for at least they acknowledged the question and officially embraced national independence.
The European powers flatly — and brutally — rejected the right of national self-determination for their colonies both in the immediate and the long term.
Once peace returned, the government made genuine efforts to be respectful and protective of national cultures, languages and traditions, to be conciliatory towards peasant and middle-class interests, and to create regimes composed of members of the nationality concerned.
This did not, as we shall see, amount to tolerating real nationalists, those who demanded secession.
But, in the policy on nationalities, hypocrisy was no more extreme than in other sectors of policy.
For already domestic class forces were being invented and manipulated at will to validate policy decisions.
Lenin, with his characteristic bluntness, might affirm that
owing to the war and to the desperate poverty and ruin,[the proletariat]has been declassed, i.e. dislodged from its class groove, and has ceased to exist as a proletariat…
Since large-scale capitalist industry has been destroyed, since the factories are at a standstill, the proletariat has disappeared.
It has sometimes figured in the statistics, but it has not held together economically.
The mythology continued: the Party spoke on behalf of a working class.
And the subordinate nationalities freely embraced federation within the RSFSR.
How far were Lenin and those who seriously supported Clause 9 aware of the real logic of events?
The evidence would seem overwhelming that Lenin was not devious in defending Clause 9.
The defence is too frequent, passionate and uncompromising to suggest that it was all a short-term tactic to confuse.
Yet he accepted the military conquest of the Ukraine, the forcible absorption of Bashkiria and the annexation of Georgia.
It would have been impossible to predict the way events developed after October 1917, and the policy of the Party seemed on numerous grounds to be the most sensible, the only one which went some way to reconciling the need for large economic units (which, rightly or wrongly, was assumed to be decisive for material progress) and for democracy, understood as the right of peoples to choose their own State.
Lenin was not a nationalist, and his central political aim was to preserve the Republic as a springboard for world revolution.
All  other questions were secondary, so it is not reasonable to reproach him for not being a nationalist.
His strength was his obsessive single-mindedness, his refusal to be diverted by what at that moment were secondary issues (even though they might be issues of far greater importance in the medium or long term).
Winning the Civil War was just such an overriding priority, and all other issues were in part subsidiary to this.
The troops might be raw, Piatakov might be an ultra-Leftist, but the ship had to be built with the timbers that were available, not some hypothetical timbers that might one day become available.
Of course, he was to some extent screened from the uncomfortable reality.
Friends of Piatakov restrained him from time to time lest Lenin discover the truth.
Stalin kept his friend Orjonikidze warned of the moments when he might or might not move against Georgia.
Even so, it is impossible that he could have evaded knowledge of the reality.
We must presume that, for much of the time, he suspended judgement in order to support the main sweep of the Red Army.
People were changed — as Piatakov was dismissed, or the Ukrainian section purged — or checked, but only in extreme circumstances.
Winning the war took priority over all else.
With victory, other things would become possible, especially if the German revolution took place.
The Civil War and the intervention of the Great Powers were a baptism of fire for the Bolsheviks.
It was so scarring that it dominated perceptions in Moscow for years to come.
For those who survived, the heady talk and dreams, the vision of a global system and of revolutionaries without national allegiances, all that had inspired them before 1917, must have seemed as remote and irrelevant as childhood.
They had been driven by brute necessity to defend one country.
The Bolsheviks had suddenly become exposed to the full blast of inter-state competition.
It was 1914 all over again.
Then the sections of the Second International had divided up between the different belligerent powers.
The rhetoric of internationalism faded like morning mist before the sun of reality.
War allowed no equivocation.
The instrument of war was the national State and it mattered little whether that State was called the beachhead of a world working class or simply an ordinary republic: the disciplines remained the same.
Thus, in the absence of revolutions in other countries bringing a genuine international dimension to the events in Russia, the material basis of the Soviet State, locked in military contest, inevitably generated what Lenin called ‘Great Russian chauvinism’.
It was not a peculiar psychological deviation, nor yet a hangover from the old order (although it might be that as well).
It was precisely the ideological companion of the national struggle for survival of the Soviet State.
Bolshevism, for the more sophisticated Party cadres, was battered by  events into a defensive, half-shamefaced, opaque Russian patriotism.
For the less sophisticated, it was chauvinism.
What is so remarkable is that, given the force of the currents in which the Bolsheviks were swimming, Lenin retained such an obstinate consistency in resisting them.