

The Keys of Palestine
It is a tragedy of both our people.
How can I explain in my poor English?
I think the Arabs have the same rights as the Jews and I think it is a tragedy of history that a people who are refugees make new refugees.
I have nothing against the Arabs…
They are the same as us.
I don't know that we Jews did this tragedy — but it happened.
Shlomo Green, Jewish refugee from the Nazis, on learning that his home in Israel was taken from a Palestinian family in 1948.
When David Roberts toured the Holy Land, he was an explorer as well as an artist, a romantic who filtered the hot and crude realities of the Middle East through a special screen.
As he journeyed on horseback through Palestine and then up the coast of southern Lebanon in the 1830s, he was an adventurer, staying overnight with the governor of Tyre, crossing the snows of the Chouf mountain chain to the gentleness of the Bekaa Valley where he sketched the great temples of the Roman city of Heliopolis.
In the world that he created, there were no wars, no political disputes, no dangers.
His lithographs of Palestinian villages and of Lebanon, of Tyre and the peninsula of Ras Naqourra, of the temples of Baalbek, are bathed only in the peace of antiquity, a nineteenth-century dream machine that would become more seductive as the decades saw the collapse of the Turkish and then of the British Empire.
For today, Roberts' delicate sketches and water-colours of Ottoman Palestine can be found in the hallways, bedrooms and living rooms of tens of thousands of Palestinians in Lebanon.
In the dust of the great Ein Helweh Palestinian camp just east of Sidon, cheap copies of Roberts' prints — of Nablus, of Hebron, of Jericho and Jerusalem — are hung on the cement walls of refugee shacks, behind uncleaned glass, sometimes held in place by Scotch tape and glue.
His pictures of Lebanon's forgotten tranquillity hang in Lebanese homes too.
Volumes of Roberts' prints of Lebanon and Palestine can be bought in stores all over Beirut.
They can be purchased in almost every tourist hotel in Israel.
They are a balm in which anyone can believe.
In Roberts' drawing of Jaffa, the old city seems to bend outwards with domes and minarets and dusty tracks, watched from a distance by a pastoral couple with a donkey.
At Acre, the ramparts of Richard Coeur de Lion's massive fortress stretch down to a tideless Mediterranean while tiny Arab figures promenade in the dusk past the serail .
From time to time, the dun-coloured hills are washed with a light green, faint proof for the Palestinians perhaps that the desert bloomed before the Israelis created their state.
In his epic landscape of Jerusalem executed in April of 1830, Roberts draws the Holy City in silhouette, its church towers and minarets, the Dome of the Rock, mere grey outlines against a soft evening sky.
Six Arabs — their headdress and robes suggest they are Bedouin — rest beside an ancient well of translucent blue water.
A broken Roman column lies beside the pool, its mammoth pedestal a reminder of the immensity of history.
Roberts' prints have become almost a cliché, corrupted by overuse, representative of both a cause and a dream.
If it was like that once, why cannot it be so again, a land of peace and tranquillity?
On the wall of my Beirut home, I have one of Roberts' lithographs of Tyre in southern Lebanon.
There in the distance is the great peninsula upon which Alexander built his city, there are the familiar standing Arab figures, the broken Roman masonry in the foreground.
One afternoon in 1978, I returned from Tyre after spending 12 hours in the city under Israeli shellfire.
The Tyre from which I had travelled was a place of unpaved roads and overflowing sewage, of Palestinian camps and fedayeen guerrillas, of guns and sunken ships and the sharp clap of explosions.
Could I relate this in any way to the picture on my living-room wall?
Was this part of the Lebanon I knew?
Was it a scene which in later years I would look at with nostalgia, even longing?
For the Roman ruins of Tyre, a few of the old Ottoman harbour warehouses, the little Christian streets near the port, are still there.
And the Mediterranean, the great pale green sea that sloshes away at the coastline of Phoenicia, this too still shaped our movements and our lives, provided the essential and unchanging link between that distant, unphotographed world of Roberts and the country in which I now lived.
Reading Roberts' biography, one learns that the world he visited was violent: crossing the snows of the Chouf mountains, he was told that there were gunmen on the road to Baalbek — just as there are today.
But this picture hung there on my wall with the depth and serenity of a new world.
And if I could enjoy the dream, how much easier for those who were born in Israel or Lebanon or Palestine — or for those who wished to live in the land that was Palestine — to believe in it.
Certainly, the Palestinian Arabs can reflect that when Roberts drew Jerusalem, the Jewish population of the land can have numbered scarcely 10 per cent of the total.
There had always been a continued physical Jewish presence there over the centuries; it was for the Jews too an ancient homeland.
But eight years before Roberts sat on that hilltop above the city, there were only 24,000 Jews living in Palestine.
Browse through the second-hand bookshops of Beirut or Jerusalem, however, and the ghosts begin to appear.
In 1835, for example, just five years after Roberts had sketched the recumbent city of Jerusalem, we find the French writer Alphonse de Lamartine returning from a visit there to recommend to his readers in Voyage to the Orient that since Palestine did not really constitute a country, it presented remarkable opportunities for imperial or colonial projects.
Within 60 years, the nineteenth-century fascination with the Middle East begins to lose its romantic edge, even for the most mundane travellers.
In a broken-backed 1892 edition of John Murray's Handbook for Travellers in Syria and Palestine which I bought in an antiquarian bookshop in west Beirut, a volume with a faded title in gold on its pale red cover, I discovered an item entitled ‘Muslim Arabs’.
These people are, we are told, ‘proud, fanatical and illiterate…generally noble in bearing, polite in address, and profuse in hospitality; but they are regardless of truth, dishonest in their dealings and secretly immoral in their conduct.’
The Jews, on the other hand, were in the guidebook's opinion ‘the most interesting people in the land…
The Jews of Palestine are foreigners.
They have come from every country on earth…of late years there has been a remarkable influx of Jews into Palestine, but the Turkish government are striving to hinder their settlement by every means in their power.’
These were the authentic reactions of an imperial Britain to a land which covered its transit routes to the Indian empire.
Britain encouraged the growth of Zionism in Palestine in the early years of the First World War because she wanted American Jews to ally their country in the war against Turkey.
Since the Tsar was already an ally against Germany, it was politically inconvenient to demand an end to anti-semitism in Russia.
The idea of settling Jews in Palestine, the British Foreign Office cabled two of its ambassadors in 1916, ‘might be made far more attractive to the majority of Jews if it held out to them the prospect that when in course of time the Jewish colonists in Palestine grew strong enough to cope with the Arab population they may be allowed to take the management of the internal affairs of Palestine…into their own hands…
Our sole object is to find an arrangement which would be so attractive to the majority of Jews as to enable us to strike a bargain for Jewish support.’
This is cold-blooded business indeed, just as was the Balfour Declaration of 1917 that gave Britain's support to a Jewish homeland providing that‘nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine’.
The equally earnest Anglo-French Declaration of 1918 promising the Arabs of former Ottoman colonies their independence if they supported the Allies against the Turks fell into much the same category, although it was not a promise that was intended to be kept.
As Balfour himself said the following year, ‘in Palestine we do not propose even to go through the form of consulting the wishes of the present inhabitants of the country.’
So far as Balfour was concerned, Zionism was ‘of far profounder import than the desire and prejudices of the 700,000 Arabs who now inhabit that ancient land [of Palestine]’.
The slaughter on the Somme and at Passchendaele had helped to bring about these conflicting pledges, just as a far more terrible massacre would in the second great European war virtually guarantee the creation of the Jewish state in Palestine.
Against these historical profanities, the descendants of those colourfully dressed figures in Roberts' lithographs stood no hope.
The British themselves began their descent of the bloody staircase the moment Balfour blotted his signature in 1917.
As Winston Churchill was to write on a different occasion, ‘at first the steps were wide and shallow, covered with a carpet, but in the end the very stones crumbled under their feet.’
One of the men who had to walk down this precarious companionway was Malcolm MacDonald, the British dominions secretary in 1938, still vainly attempting to reconcile the desperate promises of the First World War before the outbreak of the Second, trying to preserve order in the British mandate of Palestine by restricting Jewish immigration.
Forty years later, I sat in the drawing-room of his home at Sevenoaks in Kent, watching him shake his head vigorously from side to side as he contemplated the ruins of his own efforts to resolve the Palestine problem.
The ghosts were more substantial now.
Churchill, a strong Zionist supporter, had fiercely condemned MacDonald in the Commons in 1938 and continued his verbal assault afterwards in the Division Lobby of the House of Commons.
‘Churchill accused me of being pro-Arab,’ MacDonald said.
‘He said that Arabs were savages and that they ate nothing but camel dung.’
But the British could avoid turning such disputes into personal grievances with a generosity not available to those who would ultimately be their victims.
‘I could see that it was no good trying to persuade him [Churchill]to change his mind,’ MacDonald said.
‘So I suddenly told him that I wished I had a son.
He asked me why and I said I was reading a book called My Early Life by Winston Churchill and that I would want any son of mine to live that life.
At this point, tears appeared in Churchill's eyes and he put his arms around me, saying ‘Malcolm, Malcolm.’’
MacDonald sat there in his deep armchair, savouring this story, an old man contemplating lost opportunities.
He was to die four years later.
He fussed for a while over a large teapot, pouring both of us outsize cups of tea.
He put down the pot, stared at the floor for a few seconds and then looked up glowering, pointed his finger at me in a way that was frightening because it was so sudden.
‘But you are living now in Beirut,’ he said, ‘because I failed.’
How could he have succeeded?
More ghosts, more photographs intervene.
The Yad Vashem memorial on the hills west of Jerusalem is supposed to commemorate the Holocaust.
That word ‘supposed’ may anger Jewish readers, but Yad Vashem is not so much a memorial as a political statement.
Its documents, its photographs, dictate its theme: that the Holocaust produced the state of Israel and that anyone who opposed the creation of that state is on the level of the Nazis.
Thus in the same building as the photographs of SS officers selecting the Jews on the ramps of Birkenau are news pictures of British paratroopers ordering the concentration camp survivors away from postwar Palestine.
The British, it says in effect, were like the Nazis; they too were war criminals.
When I first visited Yad Vashem in 1978, I found it a place of unanswerable accusation.
When I went there in 1987, after my journey to Auschwitz, it seemed somehow facile, an instrument of propaganda that used the horror of what happened in Auschwitz and Treblinka and all the other camps to justify not just the existence of Israel but all that Israel has done since.
It is also a place of accusation against the Arabs of Palestine.
For there are pictures at Yad Vashem of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem being greeted in Nazi Germany by Heinrich Himmler.
The photographs are perfectly clear.
Here we can see Sheikh Haj Amin al-Husseini shaking hands with the leader of the SS, there he proudly inspects a volunteer Muslim contingent of the Wehrmacht .
On the wall are his words — an accurate translation — exhorting the German government to prevent the Jews of Europe going to Palestine.
The inference is clear: the Muslim religious leader of the Palestinian Arabs is also a war criminal.
So why should not his political successors be war criminals?
If the Arab Palestinians who saw in the Nazis some hope of preventing Jewish immigration into Palestine were on the same level as the SS, were not those Palestinians who oppose Israel today equally guilty?
The civil war in Palestine that followed the end of hostilities in Europe inevitably embraced the tired holders of the imperial mandate.
From the desert of political opposition at Westminster, the old Zionist Churchill contemplated the murder of British troops by Jewish gunmen and pronounced Palestine a ‘hell-disaster’.
It was far worse for the Arabs whose homes lay in that part of Palestine in which the United Nations had decided to locate the new state of Israel.
Those whom Balfour had described as ‘the existing non-Jewish communities of Palestine’ were about to undergo their first catastrophe.
The Arab armies that invaded the new Israel were driven out, together with between 500,000 and 700,000 Arab Palestinians whose homes had been in that part of Palestine that was now Israel or in those areas of Arab Palestine that the Israelis captured.
For decades after their War of Independence, the Israelis claimed that most of the Arab Palestinians had left of their own free will after being urged by Arab radio stations to leave their homes and take sanctuary in neighbouring states until the Arab armies had conquered the upstart new Israeli nation.
Israeli scholars now agree that these radio appeals were never broadcast and that the allegations were fraudulent.
The Palestinian Arabs left their homes because they were frightened, often because they had heard stories — accounts which were perfectly true — of the massacre of Arab civilians by Jewish gangs.
The result was inevitable.
While the Jews of Israel exulted in their renaissance, the Arabs of Palestine left in despair.
From the camps of Europe, those who had avoided the execution pits and the gas chambers had at last reached the Promised Land about which their cantors had sung at Auschwitz.
Here, for example, is how the American journalist I. F. Stone describes the last hours of his voyage to Haifa, aboard a Turkish refugee ship called the Akbel , a listing hulk carrying hundreds of concentration camp survivors on their journey to Palestine.
The vessel approached the coastline at dawn, somewhere to the north of Mount Carmel.
Shortly before dawn I slept for a while on top of the wheelhouse.
I woke to see the dim outlines of a mountain towards the southeast.
As the light increased and the sun rose, a cry ran over the ship.
‘It's Eretz Israel.’
We saw Mount Carmel ahead of us and the town of Haifa sleeping in the morning sun below us…
The refugees cheered and began to sing Hatikvah , the Jewish national anthem…
People jumped for joy, kissed and hugged each other on the deck.
And here is the militant Palestinian writer Ghassan Kanafani recalling an Arab family's departure from that same country just a few months later:
At Al-Nakura, our truck parked, along with numerous other ones.
The men began to hand in their weapons to their officers, stationed there for that specific purpose.
When our turn came, I could see the rifles and guns lying on the table and the long queue of lorries, leaving the land of oranges far behind and spreading out over the winding roads of Lebanon.
Then I began to weep, howling with tears.
As for your mother, she eyed the oranges silently…
The feelings of joy and despair in these two passages are almost equally balanced, and the Jewish cry of delight on seeing the shore-line of Palestine in the first and the image of Arab guns and hopelessness on leaving Palestine in the second are even more relevant now than they were then.
The idea that Israel is the final and true refuge of all Jews —‘the first and last line of defence of the Jewish people’, as Szymon Datner called it — is as credible to Israelis today as it was in 1948.
And amid the hovels of Sabra and Chatila in Beirut, in Ein Helweh, in the Nahr el-Bared camp in Tripoli, in Bourj el-Shemali in Tyre or in Rashidiyeh further south, the guns and the bitterness and tears that Kanafani witnessed have congealed into hatred.
Henceforth, the many thousands of Arabs who fled — like the few thousand who stayed and like the inhabitants of Jerusalem and the West Bank that would shortly be annexed by Jordan — would call themselves Palestinians.
The Jews of Palestine were now Israelis.
And from the ‘land of oranges’, the new exiles arrived in the West Bank and in Lebanon and in the Kingdom of Transjordan with an identity — as ‘Palestinians’— that applied to a country that no longer existed, that indeed never did exist as an independent nation.
This irony was only accentuated by the refugees' initial belief that their exile was to be brief, a few days perhaps, at most a month, after which — in the manner of other civilians who had abandoned their homes in the midst of battle — they would return to their houses and fields to resume the life which had been interrupted by war.
It was for this reason that many of them carefully locked their front doors when they left their homes.
Those who had time also diligently collected their most important legal documents — the deeds of ownership to property, the maps of their orange groves and fields, their tax returns and their identity papers going back to Ottoman times — and packed them into bags and tins along with family heirlooms and jewellery and their front door keys.
With luck, their homes would not be burgled and any disputes that might subsequently arise over their property would be swiftly resolved on production of those impressive-looking deeds, some of them so old that they bore the colophon of the Sublime Porte.
By one of the more subtle cruelties of Middle East history, the papers and the keys were to prove the most symbolic and most worthless of possessions to the Palestinians.
They acquired a significance that grew ever more painful as weeks and then months away from home turned into years.
Younger Palestinians — Palestinians who were born in Lebanon, for example— can remember how their parents angrily threw the keys away in the early 1950s, how the documents that were guarded with such care in the initial days of exile were mislaid or destroyed as their true meaning became clear; because they proved ownership of a world that had disappeared.
For the keys — often made of thick grey iron, sometimes with decorated handles — were in a sense a promise of return, a promise that history inevitably broke.
The new owners of those homes forbade any return and then changed the locks.
Yet among the half million Palestinians now living in Lebanon, many stubbornly went on cherishing these keys and their titles of ownership in Palestine.
When a Palestinian political identity began to emerge after the 1967 Arab–Israeli war — when the West Bank and Gaza Strip were occupied by the Israeli army — the promise contained in these mundane implements and pieces of paper was somehow renewed.
Reminders of humiliation once again became priceless possessions, as emotionally valuable as they had once been legally essential.
In Lebanon, where the Palestinian war against Israel was focused once the PLO's guerrilla movement was evicted from Jordan in 1970, they were squirrelled away beneath floors or carpets, sometimes stored in rusting biscuit tins, broken suitcases and ancient trunks, often the very containers in which the refugees carried their most valuable belongings from Palestine in 1948.
Each document is signed by a British mandate official and gives in detail the figures of sale and settlement in the name of the Palestinian who inherited or bought the land.
Some of the papers are now torn and others have been heavily creased because they have been re-read and re-folded so many times over the past 41 years.
But each of them, surmounted by the royal coat of arms and the monogram of King George VI, carries the authority of the British Crown.
Laid across a map of Israel, these documents form a patchwork of disputed ownership, a matrix of lands from northern Galilee to Ashqelon for which there are now in existence two perfectly legal deeds: one, in Jerusalem or Tel Aviv or Beersheba, proving irrefutably that the land is now owned by an Israeli, the other — in Beirut or Amman — showing that the rightful owner is a Palestinian Arab.
Placed next to each other, the documents are both a territorial and a political contradiction; one is proof of the existence of Israel, the other carries with it the dream of Palestine.
The first time I ever saw one of the keys was in the Chatila camp in Beirut in 1977.
I had been interviewing a family — four young brothers, two sisters, their parents, the children's paternal grandmother — about their lives in a city that was now dominated by the Syrian army.
Were they watched by the Syrian intelligence service?
Probably.
Had any of the family been arrested?
Perhaps.
Did Yassir Arafat truly represent them?
Of course.
And then — because the deepest questions curiously acquire the least importance in such interviews — did they ever really think they would return to ‘Palestine’?
At this, the grandmother stood up and shuffled into a little hut-like concrete alcove, her bedroom, and emerged carrying something in a handkerchief.
‘It is from our home in Haifa,’ she said, unwrapping the cloth.
And there was her key, its gun-metal grey shaft rusted brown but the handle still gleaming.
How many families kept these keys?
They did not know.
Only the grandmother was old enough to have lived in Palestine.
Her son and his family regarded the instrument as the key to ‘their’ home, just as they regarded Haifa as ‘their’town although they had never been there.
Over the following three years, I was to see the keys again and, more often, the deeds of ownership to lost land.
In many cases, they were kept in a container with ageing brown British Palestinian passports, the last used page of which registered their owner's final departure into exile.
Before the fighting started in 1948, some Palestinians had even arranged to take a holiday in case of hostilities and had called at the Lebanese consulate in Palestine to pick up a visa for Beirut.
An agreeable sort of departure, a legal exit to which no legal re-entry was ever to be forthcoming.
But if it was so easy for me to see this evidence and to talk to those who had substantial proof of their ownership of homes in mandate Palestine, surely it would be no more difficult to go to Israel, find those same homes and — the idea had a special excitement about it — to knock on those same front doors.
Who would open them?
What I did not realise then — but what I would discover the moment I embarked on my journey to those front doors — was that I had touched upon the essence of the Arab–Israeli war; that while the existence of the Palestinians and their demand for a nation lay at the heart of the Middle East crisis, it was the contradiction inherent in the claims to ownership of the land of Palestine — the ‘homeland’ of the Jews in Balfour's declaration — which generated the anger and fear of both Palestinians and Israelis.
The evidence of history, not to mention the physical evidence of those land deeds, suggested a subject of legitimate journalistic inquiry: who legally as well as morally had the right to ownership of the property?
To the Palestinians, the question appeared naive, almost insulting.
In their eyes, they were not refugees but legal inhabitants of Palestine who were illegally exiled.
Their homes had belonged to them, had been taken away from them and were now in the hands of others.
Merely to ask the question was to imply that the justice of their cause was in doubt.
To the Israelis, however, and to their supporters in the Jewish diaspora, the same question struck at the very morality of Zionism.
To knock on those front doors, it transpired, was to cast doubt upon the very legitimacy of the state of Israel.
It mattered not that after weeks of interviews with 35 Palestinian families in Lebanon, I chose to write about the experiences only of those who had no immediate connection with the Palestinian guerrilla movement.
It proved of no consequence that I then chose only those four families who still possessed their original Palestine passports, complete land deeds and mandate tax returns.
The fact that three of these families had been moderately wealthy in Palestine and had managed to acquire the same social status in their exile — that they behaved and looked like millions of middle-class couples in Europe, or indeed in Israel — only compounded my error.
I set off from Beirut for Jerusalem in the late autumn of 1980; and the moment I entered Rafi Horowitz's office in Jerusalem, I realised that I had set myself no easy assignment.
Horowitz was an Israeli government spokesman, a middle-aged man with an angry, almost bitter way of explaining what happened to the Arabs of the old Palestine mandate.
Every few minutes, he would break off to apologise for his own cynicism.
‘You've got to realise that the state of Palestine never existed,’ he said.
‘The Arabs went to war with us in 1948 to destroy our Jewish state.
Please excuse us for winning.’
Outside, in the rainy winter evening, the rush-hour traffic still clogged Jaffa Road.
It had taken almost half an hour to reach his office along streets jammed with tourist coaches, the Americans inside staring through the windows at the neon Tel Aviv highway sign that glowed through the drizzle.
The advertisement hoardings, the posters on the buses, the names above the shops — all were in Hebrew.
A pretty Israeli girl had been selling magazines in the little paper-shop on the corner.
‘That'll be two dollars,’ she said.
‘Have a nice day.’
She sounded like a clerk at a Manhattan bookstore.
Could this really once have been Palestine?
It is a question that immediately caused irritation in the office of Israel's official spokesman.
Ask just who legally owns the land in Israel — who owns the deeds to the houses and orchards and blocks of property parcelled out under the British mandate — and the irritation turns to open annoyance.
Horowitz left the room for a moment and returned with a slim red volume entitled Land Ownership in Palestine 1880–1948 .
It was written by Moshe Aumann of the Israel Academic Committee on the Middle East and its 24 pages are sprinkled with quotations stretching back a hundred years — from Mark Twain and Lamartine to Lord Milner and the 1937 Palestine Royal Commission — all of which assert that Palestine was a land of brigandage, destitution and desert before the mass immigration of Jews in the late 1930s.
Aumann, for example, quoted Mark Twain's account of his visit to the Holy Land in 1867 in which the American writer spoke of ‘desolate country whose soil is rich enough but is given over wholly to weeds — a silent mournful expanse…
We never saw a human being on the whole route.’
Twain is quoted as recording that ‘one may ride ten miles, hereabouts, and not see ten human beings’ and that ‘the hills are barren…the valleys are unsightly deserts…it is a hopeless, dreary, heartbroken land…
Palestine is desolate and unlovely.’
The quotations were accurate but one sensed within Aumann's text an underlying idea: not just that Palestine was empty of people — which it assuredly was not — but that perhaps those people who did live there somehow did not deserve to do so; that they were too slovenly to use modern irrigation methods or to plant trees or to build brick houses.
That Palestinian Arabs did cultivate the land in the nineteenth century — as a glance at Roberts' lithographs clearly proves — went unnoticed by Aumann, who concluded his thesis by stating that the contention that 95 per cent of the land of the state of Israel had belonged to Arabs ‘has absolutely no foundation in fact.’
To Horowitz, the Palestinians were now refugees, pure and simple.
‘When the entity of the mandate ended,’ he said, ‘two other states — Jewish and Arab — were to have come into existence but the Arab state did not.
It was annexed by Jordan.
Of course, Arabs owned land here legally in what is now Israel.
There are Arabs who owned land and can prove it without any doubt.
But these people are now citizens of Arab states that are at war with Israel and they cannot claim possession of this land.
As a result of losing the war in 1948 — excuse us for winning — the Arabs became partly a community of refugees.
That is part of the Middle East problem.’
There was a pause in Horowitz's peroration.
Then he leant forward across his desk.
‘You know,’ he said, ‘you people have a habit sometimes of coming here to Israel with some specific details and thinking that from them you can deduce some universal truth.
Forgive me for being a little cynical of that.’
There was in reality no need for his self-proclaimed cynicism.
Up in Lebanon, where so many of the 1948 Palestinian refugees are concentrated, there is sometimes precious little detail to be had about the land they once owned.
Even memories have been sealed up.
One elderly Palestinian in Beirut wanted to draw a map of his olive grove for me and spent ten minutes sketching and re-sketching the roads south of Jaffa.
But after a while, the roads on his map began to criss-cross each other in a crazy fashion and it became clear that he had forgotten the geography of his land.
‘I am very sorry,’ he said, ‘but you must understand it has been a very long time…
’ There is indeed an opaque quality to the memories that Palestinians like to tell of Palestine.
Many now recall how happily Jews and Arabs lived together before 1948, although it is a fact that in some parts of Palestine near civil war existed between the two communities long before that date.
Elegiac recollections are buttressed by the Roberts lithographs, pictures which have become part of a deep and dreamlike sleep through which the Palestinians have passed since 1948.
They bear little enough relation to the land that now lies west of Jerusalem.
In many places, the Arab villages have disappeared, their names erased from the map.
Even the township of Deir Yassin — notorious in Palestinian history as the village in which Jewish gangs massacred 250 Arabs, half of them women and children, in April of 1948 — has vanished.
It is now called Givat Shaul and is a mere suburb of Jerusalem, its main street a line of petrol stations, garages and high-rise apartment blocks, more like the Edgware Road or Brooklyn than the scene of a mass murder.
Only occasionally can you glimpse the old Palestine.
Near the Latroun monastery, for example, and along the back road to Ashqelon, you can briefly catch sight of Arab women picking fruit in the dark orchards, their traditional Palestinian dresses of gold and red embroidery glimmering amid the heavy foliage, descendants of the 170,000 Arabs who stayed behind in 1948.
Down in the old Arab quarter of Jaffa, the cosy streets of Roberts' lithographs are all but gone.
The Arab houses are little more than shacks separated by acres of devastation where developers have torn down vacated Palestinian homes.
While I was searching for some Arab property in the area, I had come across three young Palestinians standing beside a shabby food stall on the waterfront.
The three — all were Israeli citizens — were arguing fiercely among themselves about a loan of ten Israeli shekels.
One was talking in Arabic.
But the other two Palestinians were shouting at each other in Hebrew.
After the Palestinian militancy of Lebanon, it was like staring at the wrong side of a mirror: Palestine through the looking glass.
Is this the land to which the Palestinians of the diaspora wish to return?
It was not difficult to find the answer in Lebanon.
For every Palestinian who expressed doubts about the worth of returning, there were hundreds who would go back to what is now Israel if they had the opportunity to do so, people like David Damiani, a Christian whose family had been in Palestine since the time of the Crusades.
Sitting on a thin metal chair above one of west Beirut's noisiest streets, eyes staring intently through heavy framed spectacles, he described his family tree with careful pride.
Boutros Damiani was born in Jerusalem in 1687 and his four sons were consuls there for Britain, France, Holland and Tuscany.
The last consul in the Damiani family was Ferdinand, who represented Mexico in 1932.
David Damiani has an old photograph of him, a slightly pompous-looking man in a top hat surrounded by some Jerusalem worthies and an Englishman or two.
‘When Napoleon besieged Jaffa,’ Damiani said, ‘my ancestor Anton Damiani interceded on behalf of the Muslim population and protected them from French anger — we have an official certificate from the sharia court to this effect.’
In the early nineteenth century, Lamartine stayed with the Damiani family in Jaffa and mentioned them in Voyage to the Orient , the same book in which he advertised the colonial possibilities of Palestine.
David Damiani's father Jean owned olive groves, extensive properties in Jaffa, Tel Aviv and Jerusalem and a soap factory which he operated inside the old Turkish serail on the hill above Jaffa not far from St Peter's church.
The Damianis had bought the decrepit domed buildings from the Jaffa municipality and for several decades after the First World War the name of Damiani was proudly displayed in English and Arabic over the vaulted gateway where Turkish pashas once administered the law.
David Damiani's memories of the time were those of a schoolboy in a safe land.
He lived with his five brothers, sister and parents in an old building near the Cliff Hotel in Jaffa and he still remembered the day in 1935 on which Jean Damiani bought the first family car, a magnificent light green Buick saloon costing 350 Palestinian pounds, equivalent then to the same amount in sterling.
Damiani senior maintained a chauffeur to take him round the family olive groves.
‘Before 1936, the harbour at Jaffa was flourishing,’ Damiani recalled.
‘There were always 25 or 30 ships moored off the port waiting to load.
It was a prosperous place.
Arabs and Jews were happy to live in Palestine.
Everything was in abundance — fruit, vegetables and foodstuffs of all kinds.
People would have lived happily if it wasn't for the troubles instigated by the government and the Jewish Agency.’
It was only when he came to 1936 that Damiani's face grew suddenly cold and his hands, until now resting quietly on his knees, began to move in agitation.
‘I remember the general strike starting in 1936.
It started on April 19th, a Sunday; and the next day I didn't want to go to school.
I was fourteen years old.
A bus used to take us to school in the Ajami area of Jaffa but there was no school that day and I was pleased.
It was an Arab strike but we were in a safe area.
It was middle-class.’
Damiani paused here for several seconds.
‘When the Arab revolt came in 1938, the Arab leaders used to impose taxes on well-off people.
So like many others, my father went to Beirut to get away.
In his absence, the factory was run by honest workers.
I was still at school but at home I used to look after the accounts for the soap factory.
My father did give money to the Arabs to keep his head.’
With the outbreak of the Second World War, life in Palestine returned to normal —‘in a day’, according to Damiani — as old enemies temporarily cooperated.
When the Allies liberated Lebanon in 1941, David Damiani went to the American University in Beirut to study business administration.
It was a gentle enough life and it took only six and a half hours to travel home by taxi from Beirut to Jaffa.
The first hint that things were not really changing for the better came in 1945 when, according to Damiani, two Palestinian Jews paid a visit to his father.
‘They were both prominent Jews in the town.
One was called Jad Machness and the other's name I can only remember as Romano.
They proposed to my father that he make a list of all our properties in Palestine so that they could buy them.
They said he would then have to take his family to Switzerland.
My father would not accept the idea.
He told them that we were a very ancient family in Palestine and were much respected.
He said that our grandfathers fought for the Holy Land and that we must stick to the Holy Land.
Then Romano took me to one side — my father was sitting at his desk — and told me that I had a great future in front of me and that people would be prepared to sell property to the Damianis.
He brought out a list of thirteen Arab properties that he wanted me to buy and then resell to the Jews.
One of the properties comprised five thousand dunums of land owned by the Latin Patriarchate of Jerusalem near Nablus.
He told me that if I bought this land at five pounds a dunum, he and his friend would buy it from me at twenty-five a dunum.
He told me he also wanted me to buy land from an Arab magistrate called Aziz Daoudi who had an orange grove near Tel Aviv.
‘You will make two million pounds,’ he told me.
‘Then you can go and live in Switzerland with your family.’
I told my father and mother about this and my father said: ‘Is there anything that you lack?
Do you lack clothes, food or a home?
Why should we do such a dirty business and stain our name, we who for centuries had an excellent reputation?’
I turned Romano down.’
When the United Nations resolved upon the partition of Palestine in 1947, the Damianis were in Jerusalem, buying property near Talesanta in the Jewish part of the city.
‘We thought that if we didn't like the Arab sector of Jerusalem after partition,’ Damiani said, ‘we would also have property in the Jewish sector.
We thought that Jerusalem sooner or later would be an international city.
We wanted to put our money in various places so that if one was not safe, the other would be.
We did not think of going to live abroad or of buying property outside Palestine.
We did not think things would be as bad.’
A year earlier, David Damiani had married Blanche, an 18-year-old Nazareth girl, and set up a home of his own in the Arektenje district of Jaffa.
He bought a two-storey house at the end of a narrow street just off the Tel Aviv road and furnished it with new tables, chairs and beds.
There was a handsome portico outside and four mock Grecian columns at the back of the front hall that gave the house a museum-like effect.
There was no street number but in Beirut, years later, David Damiani could remember that his postal address had been Post Office Box No. 582.
It was to be the only home he ever owned in Palestine.
‘You have to realise,’ he said, ‘that we didn't think in terms of a Jewish state and an Arab state.
We thought the worst that would happen would be a national partition with Jews and Arabs still living in their own homes.
But from the beginning of December 1947 until April 1948 there was continuous fighting around Jaffa.
In early 1948, people started sending their families outside Jaffa to Nablus, Gaza and Lydda.
Some Arabs went to Amman, Egypt, Lebanon or Syria.
In Jaffa, life was rendered very difficult.
Water pumping by the municipality stopped.
The electric wires were cut.
The British cooperated with the Jews against the Arabs.
Dogs and donkeys were killed and left in the streets to create a health hazard.
The city was in chaos and we were afraid that armed men would attack us.
I once went to the Ajami police station to ask for protection but the British constable wouldn't open the door to me.’
Palestinians find it almost impossible to recall their final departure from Palestine without considerable emotion, for it was not only a tragedy for individual families but has become a critical moment in modern Palestinian history.
The Damiani family made their decision to leave in the third week of April after snipers in Tel Aviv began shooting into the centre of Jaffa, sending at least one bullet into David Damiani's home.
They left for Beirut by sea on 25 April.
‘My father originally refused to leave Jaffa,’ Damiani said.
‘But the rest of our family insisted because we did not want him to be endangered.
We were peaceful people.
We did not care very much for politics.
We are still not interested in politics.
We locked the front door of our home just before lunchtime.
We carried only suitcases and clothes and we had a case with our jewellery and the registry deeds to our lands inside.
We never thought we would not be able to go back.
If we had thought that, we would never have left.
We thought we were going for a month or so, until the fighting died down.
We took our front door keys with us but we threw them away some years ago.
They are worthless now…’
In Jaffa harbour, the Damianis boarded the Italian passenger cruise ship Argentina , a comfortable vessel which would take the family on the 16-hour journey to Beirut port.
Damiani still has the tickets for the journey.
‘When we pulled out of Jaffa, I stood on the stern and looked out over the old city,’ he said.
‘I could see our soap factory in the serail on top of the hill and St Peter's church next to it.
Then I did ask myself if we would see this place again; and when Jaffa started to disappear to our starboard, I remember I said to myself: ‘If this ship could turn round now, I would return to Jaffa.’
We were foolish.
It was too late.’
David Damiani said nothing for several seconds after finishing his narrative but he opened up a battered suitcase and produced from it his old pale brown British Palestine passport and opened the document on page six.
There, in the top left-hand corner, is an exit visa.
‘Jaffa Port,’ it says.
‘25-4-48’.
It still retained the same dark blue colour that it had when it was stamped into the passport by a British policeman 32 years earlier; last exit from Palestine.
David Damiani's life since 1948 was a mixture of family bereavement, hardship and moderate business success.
The family spent the summer of 1948 in the Lebanese hill resort of Aley, living on 7,000 pounds they had taken with them from Palestine.
By the standards of other refugees, they were well off.
‘We heard the radio and saw photographs of the damage in the papers,’ Damiani said.
‘We wondered who would take care of our orange groves.
After about a month, we realised that a catastrophe had taken place.
My father was very sad all the time; he was an old man without home, property or money.
He died in 1952, a broken man.’
Damiani and his wife went to Jordan in 1950 while his brothers looked for work in Beirut.
In Amman, he worked for UNRWA — the newly established United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine refugees — and started a small soap factory, but the project was not successful.
He became a civil servant in Jordan and then part-owner in a Beirut hotel.
In 1949, he had become a Jordanian citizen and in 1954 secured some family money that had been locked in Jaffa bank accounts, making him ‘not a rich man, but living’.
Yet he still kept all the family deeds and files.
On a clean parchment headed by the British crest were the deeds to his home in Jaffa, bought from his father for 3,493 Palestinian pounds and dated 27 October 1947.
He was even able to produce the fragile Turkish deeds to the serail in Jaffa and British documents proving family ownership of orange groves in Yazour on the main Jaffa–Jerusalem road (32 dunums), near Holon (76 dunums) and at Beit Dajan (240 dunums) and to property in Jerusalem, part of which was rented to a British assistant district commissioner.
‘I once had an opportunity to visit Jaffa again,’ Damiani said.
‘My wife went but I refused to go there.
I would see my house occupied by other people.
I am not allowed to dispose of my property or live in it.
If you were not allowed to go back and live in your country, how would you feel?
And if you could go back, would you stay in Beirut just because you had a nice home there?’
There is something insulting about the way in which a stranger can visit a place which is forbidden to people with infinitely more interest in such a journey.
If Damiani could go to Jaffa, most of his fellow exiles are prevented forever from walking in the streets outside their old houses — or knocking on those front doors.
The nearest a Palestinian in Lebanon can go to his former family home in what is now Israel is likely to be the orange orchards south of Tyre or the east bank of the Jordan river.
A key or a lifeless deed or a cheap Roberts reproduction, perhaps a family snapshot or a tourist postcard of the 1930s, is the nearest that many Palestinian exiles can move in spirit towards the place they regard as their homeland.
Blessed be the foreign correspondent who can fly from Beirut to Athens, therefore, and in the same day pick up an El Al flight from Athens to Tel Aviv and land at Ben Gurion airport and travel — faster even than the old direct taxi route from prewar Beirut — to Jerusalem.
Doubly fortunate is the journalist who can within 24 hours leave Beirut and look upon what is left of the world Damiani lost on that April day when the Argentina sailed out of Jaffa harbour for Beirut, carrying his family from Palestine for the last time.
It was not difficult to find the ghosts of that world.
The Israelis had turned the Damiani soap factory into a municipal museum but you could still see the family's name in fading Arabic letters on the archway at one end of the building.
The wind and rain on the little hill above Jaffa had ripped away at the paint but it was just possible to make out the words ‘David Damiani’ to the left of the broken wooden gate.
The rest of the wall was stained with damp and flaking brown paint; the winters had cut deeply into the fabric of the old serail .
The museum had taken over the northern end of the building but the main hall of what had been Damiani's factory, with its vaulted roof and tunnels, was in semi-derelict condition, leased on occasion to a firm of Iranian-born Jews who dealt in Persian art.
The outer windows had been smashed and the cut stone had been severely fissured.
Dust lay thickly over the cracked flagstone floor and only when I ascended a dangerous staircase did I find a solitary reminder of the business that helped to make the Damianis one of the richest Arab families in Jaffa.
Against a wall was a corroded iron trolley that was once used for carrying oil in the factory.
It was perhaps as well that David Damiani had not come back.
The first-floor museum for the Ancient History of Tel Aviv–Jaffa just round the corner was well cared for, although it recorded not the Arab history of Jaffa but the Biblical history of the land; there was an exhibition to illustrate the Israelite Royal Period (930 BC) with references to King David.
A large Biblical map of Solomon's life lay beneath a quotation from the Book of Chronicles chapter 2 verse 16: ‘And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we will bring it to thee in flotes by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.’
The museum staff knew the name of Damiani, although it was not recalled with much enthusiasm.
‘Do I know the history of this building?’ asked the Israeli Jew in the museum curator's office.
He was a cheerful, tubby-faced man, born in Australia and still using the broad, flat accents of the Antipodes.
‘This place used to be the Turkish administrative headquarters in Jaffa.
It was one of the most important places in the city.
Then much later it was bought by a very rich Arab Christian family called Damiani and they turned this building’— the man paused in humorous reflection for a moment —‘into a soap factory.
In 1948, this became a Jewish town and we took over the building.’
The whole structure was now owned by the municipality of Jaffa and the museum hoped to extend its galleries into the rest of the building when money was made available.
When I told the museum official that I had met David Damiani, his eyes opened wider with interest.
‘Does he know this is a museum now?’ he asked, and then walked over to a glass-fronted bookcase.
He withdrew from it a rare bound second volume of Palestine Illustrated by François Schotten, published in Paris in 1929.
The Israeli flicked through the pages of photographs, sepia prints of Arab peasants and donkey-drawn carts clattering through the streets of a forgotten Palestine, until his thumb came to rest on a picture of workers inside a cavernous hall.
And there, sure enough, was the interior of old Jean Damiani's soap factory with a row of moustachioed Palestinians piling up bar after bar of soap around the walls.
Each man in the picture was staring blankly at the photographer, a bar of soap in each hand as if caught in the act of some doubtful ritual.
‘When you get back to Beirut,’ the Israeli said, ‘you must ask Damiani if he's got that picture.’
Beneath the hill on which the serail huddles, the great iron gates of Jaffa port still stand next to a row of small stone shops, their Arab architecture belied by the Hebrew names above the windows.
David Damiani set off from here with his family in April 1948, and it was not difficult to see how clearly the old factory and the church above the city must have stood out on the horizon as the Argentina slipped past the tide bar and steamed for Beirut.
Finding Damiani's old home, however, was not quite so easy.
The Israelis had turned the old Arab buildings south of the serail into a shopping and restaurant precinct, a tastefully laid out tourist attraction in which the best architectural features have been preserved.
But no one there had ever heard of the Arektenje area of Jaffa where the newly married Damiani had bought his home.
Nor did the Israelis in the market by the Jaffa clock-tower have any idea where it was.
It was only when I entered the Arab quarter, a network of dusty roads and wastelands of rubble interspersed with a few small houses just south of the city, that a Palestinian remembered the name.
He directed me to a main road on the edge of Jaffa and to a small lane that ran off it to the north.
I followed his directions and down a narrow street came to a cul-de-sac dominated by a large white house with a portico over the front door.
Jews and Arabs lived together in the street, speaking each other 's language with some fluency, and it was an Israeli Jew who first pointed to the white house.
An Arab woman, a Palestinian, was peering from the upper balcony.
‘Was this Damiani's house?’ he shouted up to her in Arabic and she replied, in Hebrew, that it was.
A small Palestinian boy led me up some steps to the side of the building and the woman ushered me inside.
It was a light, airy room with some small paintings on the wall and two small clean bedrooms leading off on each side.
Very shyly, the woman introduced herself as Georgette Aboud.
She and her husband Louis, a garage owner, had bought the upper floor from a Jewish family and were bringing up their four children there.
The little boy, Zohair, was sent to make coffee.
Mrs Aboud led me to the balcony from where it was evident that many of the surrounding buildings — like those elsewhere in the Arab quarter — had been devastated, their roofs smashed in and their windows punched out of their frames.
‘The landlords do that,’ she said, and pointed to three small cottages that had been vacated and destroyed within the past 24 hours.
‘Two Arab families and a Jewish family lived there and the moment they moved out, the landlords broke the houses.
They want to build on the land.’
Mrs Aboud — she and her husband were both Israeli citizens — seemed resigned to this gradual destruction of the little mixed society around their home.
But her family owned only the upper floor of Damiani's old house.
‘There is an old man living downstairs,’ she said.
‘We do not usually see him but he is a kind man.
He is a Jew.’
It was growing dark and a sharp wind was coming in off the Mediterranean, blowing up the dust around the house.
But downstairs I rang the bell next to the black steel gates and after a while I heard someone coming to the front door.
The gate opened to reveal an old man, slightly stooped and staring quizzically at us.
He had a thin cardigan over his shoulders to protect him from the breeze.
We told him why we had come.
‘If you know the man who owned this house, you had better come inside,’ he said.
And so we followed the old man up the stone steps beneath the portico and into the long hall.
At the far end it was possible to see four mock Grecian columns, painted white and glowing in the light of a single bulb.
‘I live here with my two daughters,’ the man said and sat down carefully in an armchair beside the columns.
There was a little table between us, piled with books upon which lay an old photograph of a man in British army uniform standing next to a beautiful young Jewish girl.
‘That was my wife,’ the old man said.
‘I was in the British army during the war.
I have been here eight and a half years now.
I bought this floor of the house from an Arab family.
I never knew Mr Damiani.’
The man spoke in short sentences, as if trying to strain out of his monologue all but the most essential facts.
There was a long silence and then he said with just a trace of a smile: ‘I am a sculptor, I am an old man and I am a Jew.’
He wanted to talk.
His name, he said, was Shlomo Green and he had been a refugee from Romania.
He had left his village of Clug on the Romanian–Hungarian border in 1939 and boarded a ship for Palestine just before the outbreak of the Second World War.
‘The British navy caught our ship but we were lucky,’ he said.
‘It was the last ship from which the passengers were permitted to stay legally in Palestine.
I spent a year and a half in a kibbutz then joined the English army for five years.
I went from Alamein to Tobruk then to Syria.
All my family were sent to Auschwitz.
Only my mother survived.
They made her a slave labourer.
She told me my father died in the camp in 1944.
I lost about a hundred relatives in Auschwitz.’
Shlomo Green stopped speaking for a moment.
It was a natural coda in his story.
He joined the Israeli army in 1948, fought at Latroun and in Galilee and joined up again in 1956 and 1967.
His wife had died just over a year earlier; one of his daughters was a teacher in Tel Aviv, the other a painter, and Shlomo Green was himself a sculptor of some distinction.
He had had 11 exhibitions in Jerusalem and some of his creations lined the walls of his little home, of David Damiani's home.
Shlomo Green was only 62 but he looked much older.
He walked quickly around the room to show off his sculptures and then said: ‘Tell me about Mr Damiani.
I know nothing about him.’
So he sat down again and listened to the story of the Damianis, of their life in Jaffa and of how they fled in 1948, how David Damiani stood on the stern of the ship off Jaffa port and wished he could have turned round then and gone back to his home.
If human death is a measure of suffering, then David Damiani would surely have agreed that he had suffered less than Shlomo Green.
But the old Jew sat for a long time in silence as the wind and rain in the darkness outside lashed at the windows of Damiani's old home.
Then he looked up quite suddenly with tears in his eyes.
‘I am very moved by what you have told me,’ he said.
‘What can I say?
I would like to meet these people.
If you can say for me…
’ Here he paused, but he wanted to go on.
‘It is a tragedy of both our people.
How can I explain in my poor English?
I think the Arabs have the same rights as the Jews and I think it is a tragedy of history that a people who are refugees make new refugees.
I have nothing against the Arabs.
I am living here with Arab people in peace and I have some friends among them.
They are nice people.
They are the same as us.
I don't know that we Jews did this tragedy — but it happened.
I want only one thing: peace for the new generation and progress.
How can I say more than this?
I feel at home here.’
In Beirut, I told Damiani of what Shlomo Green had said, of the warm old house with the mock Grecian pillars still standing in the front hall.
I repeated the details of how so many of Green's family had been murdered at Auschwitz.
Damiani showed no bitterness.
‘I wish him happiness,’ he said.
‘Can you tell him that?
Can you tell him please that I wish him happiness?’
It would, however, be an historical untruth to suggest that all Palestinians felt as generously as Damiani towards those who now own the lands that belonged to them.
Kanaan Abu Khadra was a case in point, a journalist in mandate Palestine — by all accounts a good one in a crusading and courageous if rather partisan sort of way — who founded and edited a newspaper called Al Shaab .
In 1946, in the top front page article in the very first edition of his newspaper, whose title in Arabic means ‘The people’, he urged Arabs to struggle harder to maintain their land in Arab ownership in Palestine.
The page carried a map covered in dark smudges.
‘These shaded land areas have become the property of the Jews,’ the caption said.
‘This will become the national homeland of the Jews.’
It was a prophetic piece of journalism.
Leafing through bound volumes of those old editions in Beirut, Abu Khadra could still experience the odd moment of journalistic triumph as old newspapermen tend to do, long after their papers have died.
‘We had a great paper,’ he said.
‘By 1948, we had a circulation of 12,000 — the highest in Palestine.
I bought a second-hand English flatbed press and issued shares.
We were less than self-supporting but we were an independent, neutral paper.
We were independent of the Husseinis and the Nashishibis, the big Arab families.
It was a national paper.
The Jews hated it but we were not against the Jews.’
Abu Khadra's heavily boned face and strong rectangular glasses gave him a slightly fearsome appearance.
He was also the kind of editor who would ask you to check the spelling of a place name or the age of a politician (he was born in 1920).
He was as exacting in his own business affairs.
The old blue suitcase which he carried out of Palestine in 1948 was still stuffed with his files and documents, all neatly labelled and dated — land deeds, deeds of sale, taxes, rents and maps of allotments — together with correspondence with the United Nations about the ownership of his family's land.
There was a lot of it.
Indeed, the Abu Khadras were one of the largest families in Palestine, their orchards and property scattered between Jaffa, Jerusalem and Gaza.
There were two Abu Khadra Streets in Jaffa and there still is an Abu Khadra Mosque in Gaza.
The family jointly owned 12,000 dunums of agricultural land and about 20 properties in Jaffa.
One of Abu Khadra's first memories — and one that he went back to again and again — was of walking with his brothers Rabah and Anwar through his father's olive grove in Jaffa to visit the house of his uncles.
The family grew oranges, corn, barley and sugar cane.
‘I used to go there every day when I was a boy.
My uncles Fawzi and Tawfiq lived in two houses joined together, one of which had been built by my grandfather Ismail.
It had three big windows with iron doors and white walls and you used to go into the house up a flight of steps because there were shops underneath.
My cousin Ibrahim lived in a two-storey house a few hundred metres away, just beyond the Tel Aviv–Jaffa port railway line.
He had Jewish tenants in the house.’
In 1937, Abu Khadra went to study science in Beirut and attended the American University — as David Damiani was to do four years later — but he did not like the course and returned to Jaffa, eventually settling for a degree in journalism at the American University in Cairo.
He started Al Shaab in 1946, with four full-time staff in Jaffa.
He was at his desk at the paper when the UN passed its resolution to partition Palestine.
He kept working when the war started between the Arabs and the Jews but his last edition came suddenly on 9 March 1948.
‘We wanted to print a banner headline above the capture of a Jewish settlement by Lebanese soldiers,’ he recalled.
‘The British mandate censor, a Jewish man called Arieh Siev — a nice fellow although we never saw eye-to-eye — refused to let us print.
On the next day, the district commissioner suspended our paper.
My father and mother had died some years before and I lived with my brother Rabah, my sister Rabiha, my wife Sulafa and my baby son.
It was originally my father's home; there was a big hall inside the entrance which was also used as a dining-room.
Most of the house was white.
My father had been a great admirer of Kemal Ataturk — he fought in the Turkish army against the British in Gaza — and Ataturk's picture hung in the living-room.
‘About April 15th, my home was mortared.
It was in the middle of Jaffa.
Two shells hit the roof and one exploded in the corridor during the night.
By five in the morning, it was impossible to stay there.
We had a car, an English Rover, so we drove to the southern part of the city.
We locked the house up but we thought we were going back.
People say that the Arabs were told to leave their homes by Arab countries.
But in Jaffa it was panic.
The city was being destroyed.
Some people left babies behind.
We were being murdered.’
The shelling, according to Abu Khadra, came from Tel Aviv.
The family stayed with relatives for ten days, then drove to Ramleh where Abu Khadra's second brother Anwar lived.
Abu Khadra remembered stopping at a gas station and finding three bullet holes in his car from snipers.
Then he went on to Gaza.
By this time, the Egyptian army had entered southern Palestine but Abu Khadra was to watch them, only a few days later, retreating along the beach towards Sinai.
The family Rover also became bogged down on the beach road and his brother Anwar suffered a heart attack after spending a night on the open beach.
He died of a second attack a few months later.
For days, the Abu Khadras lived in a house in Gaza under nightly air attack.
‘We could not move further,’ he said.
‘We could not move back home and we had reached the end of Palestine.’
Abu Khadra became a refugee camp official for the UN in Gaza, leaving in 1951 to become an UNRWA officer in Lebanon.
He was later to become owner of a Beirut company that dubbed educational films and translated technical books into Arabic.
Yet he took with him to Beirut his old suitcase of deeds and taxes, proof that the Abu Khadras owned their land in Palestine.
The documents amounted to a small archive; they even included his Palestine mandate press cards, entitling him ‘to pass freely anywhere in Palestine, including areas in which a curfew has been imposed’.
There were 1948 tax receipts from the Municipal Corporation of Jaffa and rental agreements for the lease of land to the Royal Air Force.
There were deeds for the family home in Jaffa, in the name of his father and dated 1 August 1930, and a map of the Abu Khadras' mortgaged orange orchards at Barqa around the Wadi al Gharbi on the road from Jaffa to Ashqelon.
‘The groves were just above the sea,’ he said.
‘They were magnificent oranges, the best in Palestine.
These were the original Jaffa oranges; they were grown in Palestine long before the Israelis came.
From my orchard, I could see the steam trains running down the coast to Gaza.
I used to hear the locomotive's whistle.’
Abu Khadra showed little physical emotion when he talked about the past, but his words were carefully chosen and sometimes very angry.
‘It is miserable for us to look back on these things.
The West says the Palestinians are better off now and this could be true in some cases.
But it is not the point.
Palestine is our home.
My sister-in-law was allowed to visit Palestine a few years ago.
She brought me some oranges from my orchard but I couldn't eat them.
I threw them away.
I don't realise even now that we will not go back.
My kids want to go for a visit and my daughter wants a picture of our home…
I was asked if I wanted to go.
But I could not stand the humiliation of crossing the Allenby Bridge — at my age, being stripped and searched by a Zionist, Jew, a Pole, a Russian or a Romanian who is living in my country, in my home, asking me questions and searching me.
And it is my country.
I think about my land every day.
I remember every stone in my house and every tree in my orchards.
I am not willing to sign any paper that would release that land to anybody.’
Abu Khadra's faith in legal niceties was only a gesture.
He knows what has happened to his land.
The trains still run along the coastline south of Jaffa where the family's old orange groves stand.
It is no longer a steam locomotive but a fast diesel pulling a trail of red, white and blue carriages, an express that rumbles down to Ashqelon between the orchards and the sea.
I could see it from where Abu Khadra used to stand at the edge of his fields in Barqa, although few people knew where Barqa was.
‘Was’ is the correct word; for Barqa, like hundreds of Palestinian Arab villages, disappeared after 1948.
The Israeli Jews in the little kibbutz a mile or so away had never heard of it, but an old Arab woman in a long dark dress picking fruit pointed up a hill when she heard the name and shrugged her shoulders.
The orchards, now part of a large farming combine, stretched across a little hill.
The Wadi El Gharbi — mentioned in Abu Khadra's land maps — elicited a faint response in the woman.
It is buried today, like the village beneath the trees, their branches heavy with fruit.
The Abu Khadra inheritance in Jaffa was almost equally hard to find.
The house which Kanaan Abu Khadra fled in April 1948 had lain in semi-derelict condition for years, its windows partly boarded up.
The olive grove through which he used to walk as a boy was submerged beneath a main road and a cluster of lean-to engineering sheds even before 1948.
But I found the home which his cousin Ibrahim owned next to the Tel Aviv — Jaffa port railway line.
The railway track had been torn up years earlier — a cutting fined with ivy-covered telegraph poles marked it now — but the house, in need of a few coats of paint, was just next to the old railway bridge.
One of Ibrahim's former Jewish tenants still lived on the second floor.
David, a small, thin, smiling man with long, sensitive features, welcomed me to his little home.
He and his wife were Turkish-born Jews who came to Palestine before the Second World War.
They had never left their home, even when the Arab–Jewish front line ran behind the house in 1948.
He well remembered Ibrahim Abu Khadra.
‘He was a nice enough man,’ David said.
‘But we saw little of him in 1948.
This house was part of the Jewish front line and although Mr Abu Khadra never knew it, we had guns and ammunition stored downstairs.
Menachem Begin used to come here during the 1948 battles to this house, and he came up to see us three or four times during the fighting to have coffee and biscuits with us.
He was a good man, an agreeable man.’
The war had left its mark, too, on the home of the two uncles whom Abu Khadra so often recalled visiting.
Abu Khadra Street had now become Gerulot Street, but the white-stone house was still there, with its three fine, tall windows of delicate iron tracery.
The embossed iron doors were rusting and one of them had fallen off its hinges.
On the south wall, there were some faint shrapnel marks; several deep bullet holes could be seen beside a window.
The ground floor consisted of a key-cutter's stall and some small shops, just as it did when Abu Khadra knew it.
Up the flight of steps was a very old door, covered in flaking green paint.
I knocked on it but it was so dilapidated that I could see right through the door frame and into a large room where a man was sitting in a kitchen chair, dressed in trousers and vest.
He was suspicious but courteous.
‘Yes, this was Abu Khadra's house,’ he said.
‘It is not his house now.’
He was joined at the door by his wife and daughter.
He wanted no publicity and he did not want to talk about himself.
‘I own this house now,’ he said.
So I left, and as I walked back to my car, the man watched me from the little steel balcony upon which Kanaan Abu Khadra had played as a boy.
His hands were thrust deep in his pockets, his shoulders slightly hunched in the breeze, a man looking after his home.
At least in Jaffa there had been doors to knock upon.
The same cannot be said for many thousands of Palestinian houses in what is now Israel.
Fatima Zamzam, for example, knew just what had happened to her home and lands.
But from her two-room concrete refugee shack, she could now just see Palestine.
She still called it that; and indeed, beyond the line of evergreen trees beside the main road south of the Lebanese city of Tyre, I could see above the coastline a faint, thin grey line of hills inside Galilee on the other side of the Israeli frontier.
Mrs Zamzam had left her home on the other side of those hills more than three decades earlier and she had never been back.
She lived in the Palestinian camp at Rashidiyeh, a wretched four square miles of breeze-block huts and cabins relieved only by the occasional tree, a straggling plant hanging from a poorly made brick wall and an open sewer that snaked uneasily down the centre of the mud roads.
Mrs Zamzam had a tiny garden; a few feet of clay with a stunted flowering cherry tree that shaded the sandbagged air-raid shelter.
For Rashidiyeh was coming under shellfire or Israeli air attack almost every day.
She was at first sight a cheerful figure, a plump woman of 65 who wore a brightly patterned dress and whose curly hair showed around the front of her white scarf.
She had a heavily lined face, a prominent, almost hawk-like nose, but she had kindly eyes and every so often she would display a vein of sharp humour that suggested her family had to keep their shoes clean when they approached her little parlour.
When she told me how she came to be a refugee, she paused reflectively before each statement, conscious that as a foreigner I might not know the history of Palestine before 1948.
‘I come from a village called Um Al-Farajh,’ she said.
‘It was in northern Galilee.
My family had three houses in the village.
We used to make olive oil to sell to the other villages around.
We grew wheat and made flour.
My husband was Mustafa Zamzam and we had three orchards — two with olives and one with citrus.
We even grew grapes on the side of our houses.
We had all kinds of fruit — we had everything.
In 1944, we had a new house built just outside the village for my husband and myself.
Mustafa got Arab engineers up from Tel Aviv to build it and it cost about 700 Palestinian pounds.
Some English tourists even came to take pictures of our home.
It was a stone house — white stone — with four rooms upstairs and four rooms downstairs.
It was built in an orchard opposite a place where we used to have our old house.
It was known in the village as the Island Area.
We had seven children — five boys and two girls.’
Mrs Zamzam spoke slowly, a village woman speaking to a stranger, and without warning she stood up and went to her other room, returning a minute or so later with a rusting tin.
I could still read the name of the English toffee manufacturer on the lid which she prised off with a knife.
From inside, she took a piece of pale mauve, floppy parchment.
It was the 1915 Turkish deed to her family land, heavily stained by damp, the corners torn but the wording and the ornate flowered crest still clearly visible.
A Turkish stamp was still affixed to the bottom left-hand corner.
‘This shows that my family owned the land,’ she said with a simplicity that might have left even a lawyer silent.
Then she took a cleaner but st ill crumpled paper from the tin.
Government of Palestine Certificate of Registration , it said at the top.
‘Land Registry Office of Gelo, Sub-District: Acre.
Village: Um Al-Farajh.
No. of Land 18151.
No. of Doc 52.
Block: Al-Habara Kanel. 19 dunums…
’ The date is 22 October 1947.
The document was in the name of Mustafa Ibn Assaad Shihada Zamzam, Mrs Zamzam's husband, and when she saw that I recognised this type of British mandate deed Mrs Zamzam's face lit up as if a great discovery had been made.
Mr Zamzam was dead but his widow regarded the land — not without reason under Islamic law — as rightfully hers.
She said that it never occurred to her or her husband that her village would be harmed or its people endangered.
‘We used to visit Jewish people,’ she said.
‘There was never any problem.
We took our sick people to a Jewish doctor.
There was a Doctor Kayewe and a Doctor Natani and there was also a lady doctor called Miriam.
They were good to us.
Sometimes we took our goods to sell in Jewish villages.
But one day in 1948, Jewish gangs stopped a truck from our village.
They ambushed the truck and killed the driver.
Jewish women then shot all the men on board the truck.
This happened on the road between Um Al-Farajh and Acre, near the Al-Insherah orchard opposite Nahariya.
So no one went to Acre any more.’
According to Mrs Zamzam, Jews then began to shell her village.
‘We were surrounded.
Other Arabs told us we were surrounded and should move to another village.
We tried to use the date palm trees to close the roads — we had only eight English.303 rifles in Um Al-Farajh.
The Jewish gangs were just outside.
I met a brother-in-law who told me to leave but I stayed another night in our new house just outside the village.
The men stayed behind but we left next day.
I held my son Hassan who was 40 days old and the small children carried the other babies.
We took the keys to the house with us — we lost them here in Rashidiyeh.’
Mrs Zamzam listed the villages through which she travelled — Al Naher, Al Kabil, Al Nahalie, Tashiha and Al Dear — and then she fell into a kind of swoon, wailing as if she was mourning a husband or son and holding her hands to her face.
The young Palestinian men who had gathered in the room to hear her story sat quietly, knowing that she would finish her grief and that this was a ritual even if it was a deeply felt one.
Mrs Zamzam looked up to the wall of the room where there hung a framed portrait of a young man and woman.
The girl was dark- haired with an attractive but serious face; the man was painfully innocent, his handlebar mustache and slicked-down hair with its sharp parting at odds with his handsome features.
It was a photograph of Mrs Zamzam and her husband taken in 1939, six years after their wedding.
Outside Um Al-Farajh as she fled, she had met her brother-in-law Mohamed, who had a car, and he returned briefly to her home to get blankets and clothes for the children.
‘We thought we would only be away from our village for a few days,’ she said.
‘But the Jews entered the village.
My husband was in the fields and he saw them blow up our new house.
They discovered the olive oil we had left behind and they took all our olive oil machines.
The Jews destroyed all the village.
Even the cemetery was destroyed — my father had been buried there.’
In May of 1948, the Zamzams crossed the Palestine border into Lebanon at Naqqoura — where the Palestinian writer Kalafani was to describe the misery of the refugees — and rented a house in Tyre for 12 Palestinian pounds a month.
‘We moved to Baas camp from there,’ she said.
‘We had only tents for shelter and we tried to make concrete blocks.
Then we came to Rashidiyeh.
I thought I would go home when I left but it has been a long time.
I have been twenty-nine years in camps now.’
Just as Mrs Zamzam was finishing, there was a shriek from a home-made air-raid siren in the street and a general movement towards the door of the little hut.
High up in the deep blue midday sky were the contrails of three Israeli jets.
They soared above us up towards Tyre and then turned southwards over the Mediterranean, back towards Galilee.
Mrs Zamzam watched all this with equanimity.
A year and a half earlier, she had lost her previous camp home when a shell fired from the Israeli-armed Lebanese Christian enclave to the south hit the roof.
She had lived almost half her life amid violence.
Throughout our conversation, a loaded Kalashnikov automatic rifle had lain propped against a wall of her living room, left there by a youth who had gone off to drink tea.
When I asked Mrs Zamzam what her sons did for a living, a young man interrupted to say that they all worked ‘for the revolution’.
When I asked Mrs Zamzam whether she would really go back to Palestine if the frontier was opened, she did not hesitate.
‘We are waiting to go back.
I hope I am still alive to go back to Palestine again.
I would like to die there.’
Mrs Zamzam agreed to let me photograph her and she sat a little unsteadily beside the wall of her home just in front of the cherry tree.
She stared into the camera as if she was talking to it.
But when I suggested that she smile, another young man interrupted to answer for her.
‘She cannot smile,’ he said bleakly, ‘because she has lost her land.’
Mrs Zamzam's land should have been only 25 minutes' drive across the international frontier.
It was actually only 15 miles away.
But true to the political contours of Lebanon and what is now Israel, I had to fly to Greece, then to Tel Aviv and then take a four-hour car journey to see it, a round-trip of almost a thousand miles.
On the way to Mrs Zamzam's land, I looked across the same Lebanese border from the Israeli side and could actually make out in the far distance Mrs Zamzam's camp at Rashidiyeh inside Lebanon.
It was a journey that would not have made Mrs Zamzam happy had she been able to make it herself.
For her land now lay underneath a plantation of banana trees a few hundred yards down the road from a bricked-up mosque.
Her two-storey white-stone house long ago disappeared.
It had vanished as surely as the name of her village had been erased from the map of Israel.
The Palestinian Arab hamlet of Um Al-Farajh simply no longer existed.
Just how it came to be extinguished was something of a mystery, and even the Israelis who live in Ben Ami — the farming settlement that has been built on the site — had scarcely heard the name.
A young man wearing a yarmulka skullcap and sitting astride a roaring tractor wiped his brow with his arm when I asked for the location of Um Al-Farajh.
‘I have never heard of this village,’ he said.
‘Why do you want to know?’
The mere question had been enough to provoke suspicion.
Ben Ami lies just five miles south of the Lebanese border, well within range of the Katyusha rockets which were then being fired by Palestinian guerrillas around Tyre and Rashidiyeh; there were concrete air-raid shelters with iron doors between the bungalows.
Barbed wire zigzagged in front of the small houses and large Alsatians snarled at strangers from behind steel fences.
The people of Ben Ami were not frightened but they were prepared for an enemy; and visitors interested in the Arab–Jewish war of 1948 were well advised to present convincing explanations for their questions before they stirred memories too deeply.
‘So you are writing about those things,’ another Israeli said as he stood in a narrow, shaded lane.
‘There was an Arab village here but there is nothing left now, you know.
All that business is over long ago.’
His friend, a tall, bearded man in a black vest with a pair of garden shears in his hand, stared at me without smiling.
‘Whose side are you on?’ he asked.
‘Are you on our side or their side?’
He did not bother to explain what he meant by ‘their’ side.
In the event, it was a local veterinary surgeon, a woman with a brisk, hospitable but no-nonsense attitude towards journalists, who invited me into her home and confined that this had indeed been Um Al-Farajh.
She gave me sandwiches and coffee while I told her of Mrs Zamzam's flight from the village in 1948.
She listened carefully to the details of the Palestinian woman's story, of how Jewish gangs had murdered a truckload of Arab villagers shortly before Um Al-Farajh was surrounded and of how the Jews then destroyed Mrs Zamzam's home, the village and even the little Muslim cemetery beside it.
‘This certainly was an Arab village,’ the Israeli woman said.
She spoke charitably of what happened so long ago but her attitude was to grow colder as the evening wore on.
She suggested that I speak to a man who had lived nearby in 1948, and after some hours he arrived at the house, a middle-aged Israeli with a lined face and very bloodshot eyes.
He spoke only Hebrew and the woman translated for me.
I never knew his name; if I wanted to quote him by name, I would have to get permission.
Neither of them disclosed from whom this permission would have to be obtained.
The newcomer listened in his turn to the description Mrs Zamzam had given me of the events that led her to run away from Um Al-Farajh, occasionally nodding agreement or interrupting to correct her account.
Yes, he said, it was true that the houses had grapes on the outside walls.
He himself had seen them when he used to bring olives to the village so that oil could be made from them.
Yes, Jewish doctors did indeed care for the Arab villagers then, although Mrs Zamzam had mispronounced the names.
It was Dr Kiwi not ‘Dr Kayewe’ as Mrs Zamzam remembered, and Dr Nathan not ‘Dr Natani’, but there was indeed a woman doctor called Miriam just as Mrs Zamzam had said.
Her family name was Beer; all were now dead.
But the man was clearly unhappy about Mrs Zamzam's memory.
Did she really have a two-storey house? he wanted to know.
All the houses in the village had been small single-storey homes, perhaps only four square metres in area.
He was to become even more disenchanted about Mrs Zamzam's record of events.
The first ambush was staged not by Jews but by Arabs, he said.
A bus travelling from Haifa to Nahariya in the early spring of 1948 was stopped by Arabs who took the five Jewish passengers from the vehicle and cut their throats.
Then it was rumoured that Haj Amin al-Husseini, the Grand Mufti, was travelling from his postwar sanctuary in Lebanon to Acre and there was an ambush at Insherah on the bus believed to be carrying him.
When shots were fired at two cars accompanying the bus, one of the vehicles, which had been loaded with ammunition for the Arabs, blew up.
This, the man thought, was the ambush to which Mrs Zamzam had referred.
‘Um Al-Farajh was not shelled,’ the man said, ‘although the Jewish forces threw hand grenades near the village of Kubri some kilometres from here.
Mrs Zamzam has accurately remembered the way she travelled away from Um Al-Farajh but the jews never destroyed her village.
They never blew up the houses.
The mosque is still standing here and one of the stone-built houses of the village is still here.
You can see it.
And the cemetery was not destroyed.
It is still here.
Some houses fell down later.
Mrs Zamzam is correct when she says that the villagers put tree trunks on the road but she seems to have forgotten why this was done.
They were afraid of reprisal because the Arabs had just ambushed a relief convoy at Kubri.
It had been sent to an isolated kibbutz with food but the Arabs stopped it and killed forty-seven Jews.
That is why Mrs Zamzam left Um Al-Farajh.
All she forgot to tell you about was the killing of forty-seven Jews.’
It is quite true that the Jewish armoured convoy was ambushed over at Kubri.
What is more, the old iron trucks with their armour plating are still lying rusting beside the old Kubri road just where they came to a halt in 1948, the wheels stripped of their tyres but their iron bullet shields still intact.
The rifles with which the Jews defended themselves have been welded onto the sides of the vehicles as a memorial.
A plaque erected by the Israeli Ministry of Defence pays tribute to Ben-Ami Pachter, the Israeli commando leader who died in the ambush; which is one reason why the name Um Al-Farajh ceased to exist and the name of Ben Ami took its place.
It was also perfectly true, as the Israeli said, that the village mosque was still standing.
Its windows and doors had been sealed up with breeze-blocks but the Koranic inscription beneath the roof remained and someone had painted it in the past ten years.
The only surviving house of Um Al-Farajh was now used as a storage shed.
It was not so easy to find the cemetery where Mrs Zamzam's father was buried.
The same bearded man whom we had already met said that it lay next to the mosque, behind some barbed wire which had been put there to protect it.
It was impossible to see it now, he said.
But I walked round the barbed wire and crawled inside the little ground that lay beyond.
The Muslim cemetery of Um Al-Farajh was a field of rubble and undergrowth, distinguished over most of its area by nothing more than small mounds of earth and scattered, broken stones.
Two cement graves had been smashed open, apparently several decades earlier.
Just as Mrs Zamzam had said — and contrary to what the Israelis had told me — the cemetery seemed to have been systematically destroyed.
Beside a new gymnasium not far away, an Arab Israeli was sweeping a path.
Where was Um Al-Farajh, I asked him, and he led me to a large square of fir trees and pointed to the earth.
‘There is Um Al-Farajh,’ he said and raised his hands quickly together in the way you might initiate an explosion.
There he left me.
So I walked beneath the trees and found just under my feet pieces of old concrete and what might once have been bits of wall.
There was what looked like a door lintel.
It was cheaply designed, the kind that villagers would have used in their homes.
All this time, I was watched by three Israeli farmers standing next to a tractor.
It seemed as if the circular ironies of history in Ben Ami were too strong.
The dead Jewish convoy commander had given his name to the land where Mrs Zamzam's village once stood, an Israeli hamlet that was now periodically threatened with rocket-fire from Palestinian guerrillas, perhaps the same men who as children walked with Mrs Zamzam from Um Al-Farajh after the ambush on the Jewish convoy.
My visit might have ended there if my car had not run short of petrol on the road south of Nahariya.
The gas station attendant was an Israeli Arab, a young man with light brown hair who assumed I was a tourist and wanted to know what I was doing in the cold far north of Israel in winter.
I mentioned Ben Ami and Um Al-Farajh and referred momentarily to Mrs Zamzam, when suddenly the boy's face lit up.
‘She is my aunt,’ he said.
And so it was that Osman Abdelal took me from the gas station and up to a small Arab village called Mazraa, clustered round the ruins of an old Roman aqueduct.
He lived in a small house there with his brothers and sisters, all Israeli citizens who spoke Hebrew and lived and worked in Israel.
It was Osman's father Mohamed who had returned in his car for the clothes for Mrs Zamzam's children just before Um Al-Farajh was finally abandoned by the Palestinian Arabs in 1948.
The family did not want to talk about politics but they asked about Mrs Zamzam's health.
They never went near Ben Ami, they said, and smiled at me.
What happened to Mrs Zamzam's house?
I asked.
‘It is gone,’ one of Osman's older sisters replied.
‘My mother went to look for it later but it had gone.’
Then what happened to Um Al-Farajh?
Osman looked at his brother and sisters.
‘They blew it up,’ he said.
‘My family did not see it but they heard the noise of the explosions.
They were already coming here to Mazraa.’
And so Mrs Zamzam's family, perhaps irrevocably split by nationalities, was living only 15 miles apart, divided by the Israeli–Lebanese frontier.
If Osman Abdelal and his sisters had climbed the furthest hill to the north, they might have just been able to see Mrs Zamzam's refugee camp at Rashidiyeh.
But they had never climbed the hill.
There are, of course, specific Israeli laws to stop Damiani and Abu Khadra and Mrs Zamzam from crossing back in the other direction.
There is Israeli ‘absentee’ legislation and there are land expropriation laws passed on from the British mandate.
Palestinians with relatives still inside Israel could pay two-week visits — many, like Damiani's wife, have gone wistfully to look from a distance at the homes they once bought and lived in — and the same Israeli spokesman who referred to the Palestinian Arabs as ‘a community of refugees’ said that he had himself assisted 40,000 Palestinians to rejoin their families and become Israeli citizens.
Yet most exiled Palestinians instinctively reject the idea of taking Israeli citizenship in order to return.
The spokesman, Rafi Horowitz, was wrong when he said that Palestinians could not claim their lands because they were citizens of a country at war with Israel.
Whatever his or her status, a Palestinian can claim compensation from the Israeli Special Committee for the Return of Absentee Property.
But only about 170 Arabs had claimed such compensation in five years; making a claim in the Israeli courts means recognising the state of Israel.
It was a point made to me with some vehemence by Mahmoud Labadi, who was then official spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organisation in Lebanon, a bespectacled figure every bit as urbane and cynical as his Israeli counterpart.
‘Do you really wonder,’ he asked me at an embassy function in west Beirut, ‘why we won't claim compensation?
We don't want compensation — we want our land .’
He sipped his champagne (Veuve Clicquot 1976) and raised his finger in the air.
‘It's invidious for any Palestinian to take a cash payment from the Israelis.
It undermines our demand for the return of our homes.’
And he was right, as the Israelis themselves were well aware.
They still hoped in 1980 that the Palestinian issue — the demands of Palestinians who lost their homes in what is now Israel — could be dealt with as part of a general Arab–Israeli peace settlement, that the whole two and a half million Palestinian diaspora could be given a lump-sum, once-and-for-all payment of compensation.
They do not want the Palestinians back and a glance at the statistics quickly shows why.
Well over two million of that diaspora regard themselves as victims of the 1948 war; the half million or so who fled Palestine in 1948 have had children — in many cases grandchildren — who regard themselves as Palestinians.
Many Arabs who lost their homes in what became the state of Israel and settled on the West Bank in 1948 became refugees for a second time during the Six Day War in 1967.
All these people now regard themselves as having a moral claim to land inside Israel — which is one reason, of course, why the PLO was for so long loath to consider a Palestinian nation outside the boundaries of the Jewish state.
Exactly how much land the Arabs owned in the part of Palestine that became Israel is still disputed.
Moshe Aumann concluded from original British figures that in 1948 Jews owned 8.6 per cent of the land and Arabs 20.2 per cent; of which, he claimed, 16.9 per cent was abandoned by Arabs when they thought the neighbouring Arab armies were going to destroy Israel.
But there was one man to talk to in Israel who knew more than anyone else about the land of Palestine.
Jacob Manor proved to be the very opposite of David Damiani or Fatima Zamzam.
He was academically specific and efficient, a thin ascetic man with a degree in jurisprudence from the Hebrew University and offices in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
Manor held the title of Custodian of Absentee Property — the word ‘Absentee’ giving the curious impression that the absent person could not be bothered to return.
He could describe the land registration bureaucracy of the Ottoman Empire, define the intricacies of land expropriation and run off a photocopy of the Israeli Absentee property Law (1950) in the twinkling of an eye.
And everything he did, as he told me several times in his Tel Aviv office, was strictly according to the law.
In his possession were copies of almost every British mandate land registration document, file after file of papers recording in detail the Arab and Jewish owners of property in pre-1948 Palestine.
Ask Jacob Manor about the land that belonged to Mrs Zamzam's husband in the village of Um Al-Farajh and he could immediately explain how it came into the hands of the development authority and was then leased to the village of Ben Ami.
Each transaction — of which the original owners remained in ignorance — had involved the transfer of money from one Israeli government department to another.
If the government expropriates land, then it must pay compensation to the office of the custodian.
The custodian can then in theory pay compensation to the original owner — although the land, of course, has gone.
The law is so rigorous and so thorough that it would be difficult to misunderstand the import of the statutory legislation which governs the property of the Palestinian Arabs who fled their homes in 1948 and who — by the same law — cannot return.
Manor knew much of this legislation by heart.
An absentee, according to the 1950 Israeli law, includes anyone who, between 20 November 1947 and the ending of the State of Emergency, was ‘a legal owner of any property situated in the area of Israel…and who, at any time during the said period, was a national or citizen of the Lebanon, Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Trans-Jordan, Iraq or the Yemen or was in one of these countries or in any part of Palestine outside the area of Israel…
’ An absentee also included anyone who was a Palestinian citizen and left his ordinary place of residence in Palestine for a place outside Palestine before 1 September 1948, or for a place in Palestine held at the time by forces which sought to prevent the establishment of the State of Israel or which fought against it after its establishment.’
The definition is broad.
For the ‘State of Emergency’ has not yet ended.
And if a Palestinian Arab fled his or her home during the 1948 fighting for an area controlled by Arab forces — even though the individual did not in any way participate in the war — Israeli law effectively deprived the owners of their homes and lands.
Jacob Manor made no bones about it.
‘Let us suppose,’ he said, ‘that there is someone called Mohamed and that he was born and lived in Acre.
And let us suppose that in 1948, following the fighting, he left his ordinary place of residence for a place of insurrection, then he is an absentee — even if he did not join the Arab forces that were fighting against Israel.’
There is a further clause in the 1950 law that permitted Manor to confirm that a man or woman was not an absentee if that person left his place of residence ‘for fear that the enemies of Israel might cause him harm or otherwise than by reason or for fear of military operations,.
Manor said he had given this dispensation on 40 occasions.
But the law did not take specific account of Arabs who left their homes for fear that Israeli forces might cause them harm — the reason most Arabs give for their sudden departure.
So much, therefore, for the Damianis, the Abu Khadras and the Zamzams.
Of those who left — well over half a million people — scarcely any had disinherited themselves by claiming compensation under the Israeli Absentees Property Compensation Law of 1973.
Only 170 Arabs had made successful applications in five years.
The Israelis, of course, do not dispute the legality of the old British mandate deeds.
‘There is no dispute about the legality of the mandate papers,’ Jacob Manor said.
‘There is no dispute about the land unless a claim is made…compensation for those who claim it for their land and receive it from the authorities is calculated according to the value of the property in 1973 plus the difference in the index of inflation together with four per cent interest.’
Manor sat back in his office chair as he rolled off these statistics.
‘I am a very liberal man,’ he said.
‘I always take a positive view towards any claim.’
He himself was an Iraqi Jew and estimated that 150,000 Iraqi Jews were expelled from their country.
‘They left all their property.
They came here penniless and made a claim to the Minister of Justice.
We have a list of all the claimants for the future when there is peace with Iraq.’
Manor holds the figures, too, for those Jews who lost all their property in Egypt, Yemen and Morocco after the creation of the state of Israel.
The Israelis have in fact scrupulously recorded every dunum and block of lost Jewish property in the Arab world so that it can be placed on the scales of compensation payments when there is any balancing of refugee debts at that final Middle East peace conference.
The Custodian of Absentee Property did not choose to discuss politics.
But when I asked him how much of the land of the state of Israel might potentially have two claimants — an Arab and a Jew holding respectively a British mandate and an Israeli deed to the same property — he said he figure was accurate — and it should be remembered that over half of Israel in 1948 consisted of the Negev desert — then it suggested that Arabs owned a far greater proportion of that part of Palestine which became Israel than has previously been imagined.
Jacob Manor seemed unaffected by this fact.
‘Do you really believe that the Palestinians want to come back?’ he asked.
‘Most of them have died.
And their children are in good positions now.’
If this extraordinary statement involved a blindness to reality, it provided no warning of the storm of anger and abuse which my series of articles in The Times was to generate among Israelis and their supporters in Britain.
At some length and in careful detail I had told the story of David Damiani, Kanaan Abu Khadra, Fatima Zamzam and of another Palestinian woman, Rifka Boulos, who had lost land in Jerusalem.
To visit their former homes and lands had been like touching history.
For I had also told of the lives of those who now lived on or near those lands.
Save for one mention of a PLO official in Beirut — the spokesman slugging champagne at the diplomatic reception — Yassir Arafat's organisation did not receive a single reference in the thousands of words I wrote.
The Times also carried a long interview with Jacob Manor.
But the reaction to the articles — a series that dealt with Palestinians as individual human beings rather than as some kind of refugee caste manipulated by fanatics and ‘terrorists’— was deeply instructive.
On the day that the last of the articles appeared, the Zionist Federation staged a demonstration outside the London offices of The Times , some of their supporters holding placards which announced that the paper was ‘a new Arab secret weapon’ and that the PLO would be the next owner of The Times .
Shlomo Argov, then Israeli ambassador in London, denounced the series as ‘a bold apologia for what is none other than basic PLO doctrine’.
In the letters columns of The Times , Jewish readers variously suggested that I was ‘making a serious attempt to undermine the legal basis of Israel's existence’ and that the paper had become ‘a platform for the enemies of Israel’.
The general drift of critical correspondence suggested that the mere publishing of the series was anti-semitic.
Argov himself had written an earlier letter of such hostility that it had to be returned by the paper because its contents were regarded by lawyers at The Times as potentially defamatory.
When this was first pointed out to the ambassador, he said that he could not be sued for libel since he possessed diplomatic immunity.
The Zionist Federation condemned Damiani, Abu Khadra, Mrs Zamzam and Mrs Boulos as ‘victims of their own aggression’ who had ‘remained refugees because they are being used as an instrument of the destruction of the State of Israel.’
Just how such lack of pity could be justified was not vouchsafed.
Eric Graus, the Federation's honorary secretary, was involved in a heated argument in the street outside The Times building with Louis Heren, who was deputy editor of the paper and a former Middle East correspondent.
Heren was actually in Palestine in 1948 and was one of the first correspondents to enter Deir Yassin after the massacre of its Arab residents by Menachem Begin's Irgun gunmen.
He found himself bitterly telling Graus of the horrors which he had witnessed during a war in which the Israelis still claim they never committed atrocities.
No comment was made by either demonstrators or critical readers — or by the ambassador — about the kindness of Shlomo Green, the old Israeli who showed such compassion towards the Palestinian in whose former home he was now living.
Generosity, however, was not an emotion that could be found in many Palestinian hearts in Lebanon, and the hatred that burned in 1948 was eagerly taken up by a new generation.
I witnessed this phenomenon in tragically symbolic form several months after The Times had published my series.
In early 1981, the Israelis had staged an air raid against the Rashidiyeh Palestinian camp — where Mrs Zamzam had her home — and I drove down to southern Lebanon from Beirut to report on the attack.
The Palestinians had been firing Katyusha rockets into Galilee, the missiles landing not far from the Israeli village of Ben Ami where Mrs Zamzam's Arab village of Um Al-Farajh had once stood.
There had been little damage to Galilee or Rashidiyeh in the exchange of fire but, not far from the entrance to the Palestinian camp, I was briefly introduced to a man who was described as the ‘leader of joint PLO forces in Rashidiyeh.
Several seconds passed before I recognised the features of the PLO officer who was defending the Palestinian camp and shelling the area around Ben Ami.
It was Hassan Zamzam, Fatima Zamzam's son, the same Hassan who as a 40-day-old baby had been carried by his mother out of Um Al-Farajh in 1948 on the family's road to exile.
So now the children of the dispossessed were attacking the children of those who had brought such misery to their Palestinian parents.
The war had truly gone full circle.
The Pied Piper of Damascus
We went to the Olympic Games of 1936 in Berlin.
And I saw then this discipline and order.
And I said to myself: ‘Why can't we do the same thing in Lebanon?’
Pierre Gemayel July 1982 
The boy amid the ruins could have been no more than 12 years old and he looked at us with genuine disinterest, sitting on a broken office swivel chair in the middle of rue Trablos, scruffy brown hair on top of a tired, old face.
He was wearing khaki dungarees about three sizes too big for him and a boy's shirt with pictures of Mickey Mouse printed across the front.
In his right hand he held the barrel of a Kalashnikov rifle, its wooden butt resting on the roadway.
In his left he balanced a glass of scalding hot tea.
He was a Lebanese Muslim and he had been given the gun by the Palestinians who were sitting on the side of the broken street, sipping their own glasses of tea.
They had made him into a gunman.
No, he was a gunboy, something very special to Lebanon, youth given false maturity.
The buildings around us were scorched by fire, their roofs long fallen in, the façades scored by shoals of bullets, shattered by artillery fire.
It was hot and the cicadas whispered away in the shadows.
Somewhere, perhaps a mile away down the Beirut front line, shells were bursting in a long, low rumble that ever so slightly changed the air pressure in rue Trablos.
The explosions were dull and heavy; the sort of noise that an expensive carpet would make if thrown onto a road from a balcony.
Where had we seen this boy before?
There is a boy of about the same age in Kanal , Andrzej Wajda's epic film of the Warsaw uprising.
He is seen, just briefly, behind a barricade in a burning street, his rifle beside him but intent on removing a stone from his boot while a German Tiger tank moves steadily down the street towards him.
The more menacing the progress of the tank, the more absorbed the boy becomes in his physical discomfort.
The camera eventually tracks away leaving the boy still shaking his boot, part of the furniture of the front line.
As we clambered across the rubble towards him, our 12-year-old boy in 1976 knew that the nearest tank was only 300 yards away.
But he also knew it had been destroyed; like Lebanon and the 40,000 who had died there over the previous 17 months.
The canyons of ruins, the heaps of pancaked houses, formed a front line as static as the valleys and mountains to the east of the city.
The gunmen and the survivors who came here, the photographers and correspondents and film crews simply walked onto the theatrical stage.
The props — ruins, guns, sound effects — were always there.
When we approached the 12 year-old's little aluminium throne with its torn plastic seat and its bent wheels, he looked at us with that special insouciance of the Lebanese militiaman.
The gunmen of Lebanon had grown used to the sahafa , the press.
Sometimes they would take journalists to the front line; sometimes they would risk their lives to help reporters.
Or they would rob them or threaten to execute them.
One day, in years to come, they would kidnap them, too.
Our 12-year-old had plenty of time to make up his mind.
‘If you want to see the war, you should go that way,’ he said, gesturing wearily in the direction of a gutted restaurant.
He put down his glass of tea, lifted the rifle to his shoulder and trudged off into the debris.
We followed him, across the street and into the building.
It was Al Ajami, once one of Beirut's most prestigious restaurants.
We walked into it through the wall, through a shell-hole that had been enlarged by the gunmen for easy access.
In the darkness, we padded across the dank, wet velvet floor and out through the kitchen wall into a street whose hollow buildings leaned outwards.
Four or five storeys high, they tottered against each other, held up only by the shells of neighbouring structures, their innards shrivelled up by fire, a real Dresden of a street.
What did the boy want to do when he grew up?
I asked.
‘I want to be a guerrilla commander,’ he said in French.
An educated gunboy, his intellectual ambitions were limited.
He gave us a grin of yellow teeth.
He was enjoying himself.
And if the war ended?
He shrugged.
We followed him across the street and down crumbling cement stairs into a fetid basement that stank of excrement, a place two feet deep in sodden papers, envelopes, parcels and stained government forms.
Sometime back in 1975 — the date franked on the envelopes — the front line moved across the postal sorting office and the employees must have simply run away during their shift.
From the ceiling on the far wall, a shaft of bright, dusty light focused on a rusting office desk.
We climbed onto it, put our arms into the shaft of sunlight, grasped the upper edges of the hole and, one by one, hauled ourselves up through a manhole into another street.
The war was definitely in this direction.
The air outside snapped with rifle fire.
Here the buildings were disfigured almost beyond recognition; some had fallen into the street while others leaned outwards, a hopeless thoroughfare of broken concrete, stones, weeds and pillaged furniture across which had been built a low barricade made of chairs, doors and broken tables.
The boy ran across it and we followed him, bent double, as bullets hissed around the disembodied doors, the upturned chairs.
On the other side, we jumped over some steps and entered a cavernous, empty doorway, a place of slime and undergrowth.
Months of raw sewage had passed down the scarred pavement outside and a thin layer of grass — a bright, sickly, unreal green — had crept over the doorstep and into the building.
Beside a dangling traffic light outside, an earth revetment was sprouting bushes.
Six years later I would be back in this same street.
Then I would find that the grass had carpeted the rubble and the bushes had begun to climb the torn traffic lights.
In 1987, I would be here in rue Trablos again to find that the grass had formed a miniature jungle, that the bushes had become trees that sometimes grew taller than the ruins, small groves and forests of dark, luxuriant foliage moving gently in the hot breeze.
Their roots lay deep in the shell-holes and in the earthen barricades which had been erected with such sectarian conviction more than a decade before.
It was as if the ecology of the place had chosen to imitate politics.
For the whole of central Beirut was being gradually reclaimed by nature, as overgrown as the political system which had so regularly betrayed Lebanon.
How little we had understood in 1976.
Then it seemed that the Lebanese civil war was one of those historical tragedies in which opposing communities fought themselves to a standstill only to be reconciled by a central government and foreign economic assistance.
The streets would be swept clear, the buildings replaced and rebuilt or repaired.
I still possess a tape-recording of a news report I made for Irish radio in which — to a background of Palestinian rifle fire — I hear my own voice informing listeners in the furthest villages of County Mayo that they are listening to ‘the last shots of the Lebanese civil war’.
Heaps of faded, yellowing newspaper cuttings — their arguments as flawed as the foundations of the front-line ruins — are there to prove our lack of comprehension.
Pious indeed were our predictions of recovery.
There is The Times front page of 16 November 1976, on which I announce that ‘the Lebanese civil war — or at least that stage of the conflict that cost…almost 40,000 lives — came to an end this morning when a Syrian army, 6,000 strong and accompanied by hundreds of tanks and heavy armoured vehicles, occupied the entire city of Beirut.’
Here is a special Times supplement, no less, devoted to the future recovery of Lebanon in which I write of the ships returning to Beirut port, of the re-opening of central banking facilities, the renovations at the temples of Baalbek, the arrival of the first postwar tourists — Swedes, of course— who were bussed off to the ruins of the Palestinian camp of Tel al-Za'atar and then to the Bekaa.
In 1982, when the Israeli army surrounded Beirut and the Palestinian guerrillas agreed to leave, I was down in those same front lines, invited by a Palestinian gunman to push the last sandbags from his position now that the final ceasefire had been called.
The end of the war.
Then the Israelis entered west Beirut, their Lebanese militia colleagues massacred the Palestinians in Sabra and Chatila and European armies established themselves in Beirut.
The end of the war.
The Israelis retreated out of almost all of Lebanon.
The end of the war.
The Syrian army returned in February of 1987 to repress the anarchy of the Lebanese militias.
The end of the war.
Amid the clippings, I find a snapshot of myself sitting on top of a Syrian T-54 battle tank on the Beirut front line at Galerie Semaan; another photograph taken by Zoheir Saade of the Associated Press shows Ed Cody of the AP and myself standing with Syrian troops in the mountains before the 1976 advance on Beirut.
Were there no clues to what was really happening?
Even our 12-year-old boy is there in the clippings in his Mickey Mouse shirt with his cup of tea and his Kalashnikov rifle, scampering across page one on 25 September 1976, behind that barricade of old doors, travelling with us to page four, column three, into that grassy interior.
It had once been the offices of a film company and inside we found a dozen Iraqi soldiers in battledress, claiming to be Palestinians, members of the Arab Liberation Front.
They had been defending the building for 31 days and there was blood on the floor.
It trailed across the dust, occasionally halting in dark brown cakes, from room to room, not through the doors sealed up with breeze-blocks but through holes in the walls, holes through which we crawled, troglodytes all.
We climbed a narrow and broken staircase towards the top of this building, the boy now at the rear, an Iraqi army captain leading the way.
Each landing was almost an inch deep in cartridge cases across which the thin track of dried blood still passed.
It led to the highest floor where we found an Iraqi soldier firing an automatic rifle through a narrow aperture in a pile of sandbags, reloading and firing his weapon until he became exhausted.
The sound moved through us as the gunman's shoulder and body jerked with the recoil of the rifle, the small boy's face alert, fixated.
The Iraqi leaned to the left and I peered through the crack in the sandbags at the Fattal building, a yellow-painted office block whose window frames had been chewed down to an inch or two by thousands of bullets; the Christian Phalangist front line.
It was no different to the building in which we were hiding.
Those inside it behaved in precisely the same way.
They fired back — so many bullets that they cracked against the outside walls of the film company office in a sheet of sound lasting several seconds.
They fired mortars from the roof, the ping-pong noise of the projectile followed by a distant rumble.
‘It was bad last night,’ the officer said.
‘The Phalangists tried to attack us but we beat them back.
We had no casualties.’
It was, of course, a lie.
Was this all it meant then, the Beirut front line, a mile-wide avenue of sepulchral ruins that stretched from the port all the way out to Galerie Semaan, even to the foothills of the Chouf mountains?
How easily we were misled.
How simply we believed that this wasteland was the immediate effect of social antagonism, community tension, civil war.
How little we realised that the front line was a focus, that it was important to the Lebanese, the only way to define the undefinable, the only method by which those who had suffered — which meant every Lebanese — could uniquely understand the nature of the calamity that had come upon them.
In 1976, their government had sent trucks to clear the streets, and the airlines and banks had started to reconstruct their offices.
Then the war destroyed it all again.
In 1982, the French army had collected the unspent ammunition lying in the rubble and defused unexploded shells.
In 1983, the Lebanese– Saudi entrepreneur Rafiq Hariri had paid millions of dollars for the restoration of the city centre.
Then the fighting had resumed and the streets were re-seeded with mines.
In truth, the Beirut front line could not be repaired, restructured, rebuilt or re-roofed because it had become necessary to the Lebanese.
It was a reference point without which the tragedy could not be expressed.
It represented the cruellest of all front lines, one that lay deep within the minds of all who lived in Lebanon and all who came there.
For we had all been fooled, even the Lebanese themselves.
We believed in the idea of national catastrophe, of national renewal, of political renaissance.
We thought that an identity existed beyond the civil conflict.
We were taken in by the lies which the Lebanese told about themselves; we had to believe we had not seen the blood on the stairs.
Just as we were supposed to accept their stories about how this was the only country in which you could ski in the mountains in the morning and swim in the Mediterranean in the afternoon.
Like so much else in Lebanon, it was physically possible but we never met anyone who had actually achieved this.
In reality, the story of Lebanon was one of both implosion and explosion, of internal conflict and external pressure, but its tragedy — its history — was one of constantly invading armies, negotiating, cajoling, intimidating, storming their way into Beirut.
Lebanon was easy to invade.
The country was smaller than Wales, only one fortieth the size of California; the ridge-line of mountain peaks provided Lebanon's epic dimensions, plateaus of snow that seemed to reach up to the moon on winter nights.
Just north of Beirut, at the Nahr al-Kelb, the Dog River, where a doubtful trickle of brown water creeps through a narrow ravine next to a disused railway bridge, inscriptions, steles, cuneiform reliefs and plaques commemorating 25 centuries of armies are carved onto the walls of the gorge.
Nebuchadnezzar the Second, Marcus Caracalla's Third Gallic Legion, Greeks, Assyrians, Egyptians and Arabs, the French expeditionary force of 1860, the French mandate troops of General Gouraud, the British army of 1941; all were somehow drawn to mark their passing above the bed of this little stream.
The very last inscription is that of President Beshara al-Khoury of Lebanon, who in 1946 recorded the evacuation from Lebanon of what he supposed to be the last foreign troops.
Every militiaman in Lebanon should perhaps be taken up to the Dog River to see these memorials to pride and power.
The greatest Pharaonic inscription was defaced in antiquity; the disgraced Roman Third Legion had its name hacked away.
The remaining monuments have been cracked open by undergrowth or assaulted by time and neglect.
The more recent armies to arrive in Lebanon all suffered similar indignity.
The Palestine Liberation Organisation, the Syrians, the Saudis, the North Yemenis, the Sudanese, the Israelis, the Americans, the French, the Italians, even the tiny British contingent, all left Beirut hopeless, humiliated or ashamed.
They were welcomed, always welcomed by the happy, friendly, shrewd, suspicious Lebanese.
In November 1976, I watched Syrian tanks drive through the suburb of Hazmiyeh, a crewman on the first tank playing a flute.
From their balconies, the Christian Lebanese threw rose water and rice at the Syrians, a phenomenon which we journalists archly described as ‘a traditional Arab greeting’.
Just over five and a half years later, I stood on the same spot and watched the Israelis drive down the same road to be greeted in precisely the same way by the same Christians on the same balconies.
‘See how they welcome us,’ a cheerful Israeli colonel proclaimed to me then.
‘We have come to liberate their country; they have been waiting for us.’
The Israelis came like the Syrians, with expressions of innocence and with promises that they had arrived only to restore the sovereignty of Lebanon.
Like all the other armies, they promised to stay not one hour — not one minute — longer than necessary.
And than they stayed for months, indeed years, until driven out in pain and indignity.
One thing all the armies had in common was a careful explanation of their presence, a specific mandate set out in such complex detail that officials of the Lebanese Foreign Ministry were sometimes still trying to decipher its true meaning when the army in question was retreating out of Lebanon.
It was as if in some government department in Washington, Damascus, Paris, Jerusalem, Rome or London, there were people who understood the true meaning of this military involvement and were trying to square the adventure with history.
The armies that came to Lebanon marched down a long, dull tunnel that inevitably ended in brown smoke and pieces of flesh.
It has been the fate of the Lebanese militias to inhabit the very ramparts of their own history.
Israel's proxy ‘South Lebanon Army’ militia invested the magnificent crusader Castle of the Sea at Sidon in 1982.
The Lebanese national army moved into the Castle of St Louis in Sidon in 1985.
For most of the 1975–76 civil war, the massive stone keep of the twelfth-century Castle of St Gilles that still towers over Tripoli was occupied by a Sunni Muslim militia that made its head-quarters in the crusader banqueting hall.
Along the great escarpments that form the spine of modern-day Lebanon, above the rivers that vein their way across the country, the crusader castles that once formed the outposts of Christendom are still part of a front line, albeit with the roles of their defenders historically reversed.
At Tibnin, the ruins are the highest point in the last village in southern Lebanon still held by a Muslim militia.
From the old tower, you can today look across at the concrete and mud emplacements of the occupying Israeli army two miles to the south.
During the civil war, Palestinian guerrillas moved into the far more impressive fortress of Beaufort on the heights above the Litani River, from where they could gaze deep into Israel — or into Palestine as they would insist — and shell the Lebanese Christian villages in between.
In 1977, I had crouched in the corridors of Beaufort as Christian militia shells crashed around the castle walls.
In the gloom and dust inside, there were fluted columns and small, implacable stone faces with crowns that glared down from the upper walls.
Armoured men with swords had clanked down the stairwells here; now the steps were used by gunmen in grubby camouflage fatigues whose rifles lay propped against the walls of the round towers.
After the military disasters of 1192, the Christian soldiers and crusader knights had taken refuge at Beaufort under Renaud, Prince of Sayette, and shut themselves up inside the fortress as the armies of Saladin arrived to lay siege to them.
Renaud was eventually tricked into leaving the castle for negotiations with his enemy; Saladin's ring was sent as a token of good faith.
But the moment Renaud reached the Saracen lines, he was put into irons; the Christian defenders then watched in horror as he was dragged before the castle and tortured in front of them.
The Muslim Palestinian defenders of Beaufort were ignorant of all this, sitting around the walls in silence when I told them of this historical the old tale of fear, treachery and pain.
But when I mentioned that there was a legendary tunnel that ran from the battlements of Beaufort down through the sheer rock to the bottom of the Litani gorge, they leapt to their feet and bounded up one of the staircases.
I followed them onto a narrow, crumbling ledge above the ravine where the wind hurled us against the wall.
The snows of Mount Hermon streaming northwards, the blue vales of Galilee, the brown waters of the Litani encircled us in that little cyclone, We could be seen, for above the sound of the gale we heard the clatter of bullets tossed by the wind against the ramparts.
To the east of the wall, we reached a kind of well, an ancient cistern partly constructed from masonry but also cut into the rock.
Here the Palestinians clustered excitedly around the mouth with their backs to the snows of Hermon.
From the darkness of the interior of this well came the smell of burned refuse and decaying meat and the stench of urine.
Could this be the secret passageway to the Litani, groined by the forces of Christendom to escape from their ancient predicament?
Five years later, the Israelis levelled much of Beaufort with F-16 fighter-bombers and then sent their own troops and Christian militiamen into the rubble.
From the castle, armed Jews and Christians now faced Muslim militias to the west where before Muslim gunmen in the keep had faced Christians and Jews to the east and south.
In the twelfth century, the Christians in Beaufort had confronted Muslims in both directions.
Somehow what is left of Beaufort conspires to embody these political and religious transitions; when the mists lie in the valleys of southern Lebanon, the remaining walls can be glimpsed above the clouds, but because of the peculiar geography of the place — because the ravines and wadis fold in uneven formation and in odd directions — Beaufort always appears to be in a different location, its broken ramparts a nightmare denture which eludes every contour and coordinate.
In winter, when the storms bluster in from the Mediterranean and the valleys glow green, the cloud comes down and Beaufort simply disappears.
The Christian Maronites of Lebanon had unwisely associated them selves with the crusaders — this tragic addiction for unhappy alliances was to be developed in later centuries — and the results are still visible in Lebanon today.
For with the defeat of European Christendom, the Maronites too retreated, up into the mountains of northern Lebanon where their towns and villages still stand, wedged between great ravines, clinging to the icy plateaus of the Mount Lebanon range.
Under assault by Muslim Arabs, they found that these pinnacles provided their only protection and they clung on there, up amid the remains of the ancient cedar forests.
They were a pragmatic, brave, distrustful people who learned that responsibility for their continued existence lay exclusively in their own hands, that their ultimate fate depended solely upon their own determination and resources.
It was a characteristic that they were to share with all the minorities of Lebanon; and later with the Israelis.
Yet through the centuries the Maronites were able to spread south in Lebanon, through Beirut, into the lands of the Druze and Shia Muslims, the Chouf and the lower Bekaa, settling on the low stony ridge-lines south-east of Tyre.
These villages today form the Christian frontier strip st ill occupied by the Israeli army.
Maronite power was consolidated in the aftermath of the civil war against the Druze in 1860, a conflict whose massacres — in which 12,000 Christians died — prompted the French army to intervene in Lebanon on behalf of the Maronites.
French warships anchored in Beirut bay and French troops set up their first encampment at Khalde, where Beirut international airport now stands — and where the US Marines were to establish their own doomed military headquarters 122 years later.
This European — or, to be more exact, Euro-Christian — involvement in Lebanon was to be a recurring theme, facilitated by the fact that every community in the land that was to become Lebanon was a minority.
In Syria, which then included present-day Lebanon, the people were tribes without a country, in many cases the inheritors of great religious schisms, often dissidents who had themselves been drawn to the mountains of Lebanon by the physical protection which the terrain afforded them.
The Maronites, who took their name from a fifth-century Syrian hermit, had emerged from the great division in the Byzantine Church over the single divine will of Christ.
So had the Melchites, whose two communities — Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholics — form a small but economically powerful minority in modern Lebanon.
The Druze had originally come from Egypt.
Regarded as heretics by orthodox Muslims, they believed in reincarnation and the transmigration of the soul.
Yet their real faith — like that of the Christians — was towards their own clan, their villages, their leaders.
In the Chouf now, the Druze holy colours hang over the militia checkpoints.
Small stone oratories — the Druze have no mosques — stand amid the fields.
But it is the Jumblatt family which is the focus of Druze loyalty.
Walid Jumblatt represents their political demands and their claim to a seat in the national government.
Similarly, the Shias have disputed the leadership of Islam with the Sunnis since the eighth-century murder of Ali, the son-in-law of the Prophet.
The Shias believe that Ali's descendants — the Imams — are the lawful successors of Mohamed.
Yet again, the present-day philosophy of the Shias in Lebanon is based as much upon their own political history as it is directed by their religious belief.
Under the Sunni Muslim Ottoman Empire in Syria, they were treated with contempt, abandoned to the poverty of the hill villages in southern Lebanon where they had originally come from Mount Lebanon.
They were neglected and turned into outcasts with much the same arrogance as that shown by the English Protestants towards the Irish Catholics during the same period.
The Sunnis, adherents of the sunnah (practice) of Mohamed — the sayings (hadith ) ascribed to the Prophet and other Islamic traditions — garnered their commercial power from their close association with the Mamelukes and then with the Ottoman Turks, an alliance based on their shared Sunni faith.
They were the merchants, traders and businessmen of the north-east Mediterranean coast who had most to lose if the Shias could establish themselves in the economic life of the Levant.
Thus Sunni power came to be founded upon Shia poverty, the first more or less conditional upon the second.
European interference in the Levant had been evident since the 1840s when representatives of the European powers proposed to the Turks that Lebanon should be partitioned between Christians and Druze.
The Emir Bashir the Third, who ruled Mount Lebanon for the Sublime Porte in Istanbul, had been unable to contain the bitter disputes which had broken out between the two communities.
In 1842, the European proposal — which was to contain the seeds of so much grief in the next century — was accepted by the Turks; Mount Lebanon was divided into two sectors, a Christian canton in the north and a Druze canton in the south, with the main Beirut– Damascus highway marking the boundary between them.
Today on Mount Lebanon, just east of a little Christian village called Kahhale, the same highway marks the front line between Christian Phalangist militiamen and gunmen of the Druze Progressive Socialist Party.
The nineteenth-century European powers only exacerbated the differences between the communities.
The French and the Austrians favoured the Christian Maronites while the British supported the Druze.
The Russians offered protection to the Greek Orthodox.
Only after the civil war broke out between Christians and Druze did the French put troops ashore, but European ‘interest’ in Lebanon had already been clearly established.
Thus by 1892, Murray's guidebook to Syria and Palestine was able to record that ‘the Lebanon district is ruled by a Christian governor, appointed by the Porte, and his authority is guaranteed by the Christian powers of Europe.’
In what the book called ‘the Lebanon district’— for Lebanon would not be a separate independent state for another half century — the writer identified the various religious communities which inhabited the land: Sunni and Shia Muslims, the Druze, the Maronite Christians, Greek Catholic and Greek Orthodox Christians.
The book did not mention the small but thriving Jewish community in Beirut.
In many ways, the Lebanon of 1892 is still identifiable to us, for the various religious communities — the minority tribes — still live in the same villages and cities as they did then.
The Chouf is the preserve of the Druze; Sidon and Tripoli of the Sunnis; the south of the Shias; the mountain chain north of Beirut is the heartland of the Christians.
By 1983, with French, Italian and British troops patrolling the streets of west Beirut, American Marines protecting the city's southern perimeter, the European community supporting the sovereignty of Lebanon, the country st ill seemed to be — as Murray's guide pointed out in 1892 — guaranteed by the Christian powers.
The history of the last century in Lebanon thus provided dynamite for the detonation of the past 15 years.
It is surprising that the explosion did not occur earlier, for the sense of betrayal and hatred towards the foreigner was manifest in Lebanon long before.
During the First World War, Turkish bureaucracy and a locust plague produced a famine in Lebanon of such proportions that an American woman resident in Beirut was moved to describe for readers of The Times how she:
passed women and children lying by the roadside with closed eyes and ghastly, pale faces.
It was a common thing to find people searching the garbage heaps for orange peel, old bones or other refuse, and eating them greedily when found.
Everywhere women could be seen seeking eatable weeds among the grass along the roads…
The Allies then blockaded the Levant in order to starve the Turkish troops in Palestine and Syria of supplies.
Instead, the Turks commandeered the food they needed and the civilian population starved to death.
At least 300,000 people died in Syria and Mount Lebanon in this man-made famine brought about by a war of outside powers.
Another American resident in Lebanon was to describe in 1917 how:
during a two-day journey through the Lebanon with the chairman of the American Red Cross in Beirut (sic )…the scenes were indescribable, whole families writing in agony on the bare floor of their miserable huts…
Every piece of their household effects had been sold to buy bread, and in many cases the tiles of the roofs had shared the same fate…
It is conservatively estimated that not less than 120,000 persons have died of actual starvation during the last two years in the Lebanon alone.
Among the earliest souvenirs to be hawked to the victorious Allied troops who marched into Beirut on 8 October 1917 was a horrific picture postcard, old copies of which can still be found in the antiquarian bookshop that sells the David Roberts lithographs on Makhoul Street.
It depicts the children of a Beirut orphanage in 1915, their matchstick limbs and skull-like faces appended to huge, distended bellies.
The figure of 120,000 Lebanese dead is at least 20,000 higher than the estimated total of fatalities for all the Lebanese wars between 1975 and 1989, including the 1982 Israeli invasion.
George Antonius suggested that the true statistic of starvation deaths in all Syria — including present-day Lebanon — may have been as high as 350,000.
Taking into account Syria's losses in military service and imprisonment under ill-treatment, the country may have lost half a million of its people during the First World War out of a population of well under four million.
From his self-imposed exile in America, the Lebanese Maronite poet Khalil Gibran — whose verse and drawings have an uncanny similarity to the work of William Blake — was moved to write an angry, ferocious poem quite out of keeping with the gentle, philosophical message for which he is generally remembered:
My people died of hunger, and he who
Did not perish from starvation was
Butchered with the sword;
…
They perished from hunger
In a land rich with milk and honey.
They died because the monsters of
Hell arose and destroyed all that
Their fields grew…
They died because the vipers and
Sons of vipers spat out poison into
The space where the Holy Cedars and
The roses and the jasmine breathe
Their fragrance.
It was a time of great migration.
Many thousands of Lebanese had, like Gibran, travelled to America to escape hardship in the years immediately preceding the First World War.
Many of the non-European names among the third class passengers who drowned aboard the Titanic were Lebanese.
But the most tragic movement of population was one of emigration into Lebanon by the victims of the first European Holocaust, the Armenians.
The Turks had used none of the sophisticated machinery that the Nazis were to employ against another minority community less than 30 years later.
The one million Armenians slaughtered by the Turks in 1915 were shot or knifed to death, the women often raped before being murdered.
There are no ash pits, no identified mass graves.
Tens of thousands of Armenians died of thirst and starvation after being forced into the north Syrian desert on the long march south.
True, the Armenians of Beirut have collected some macabre, terrible old photographs that might — had they been studied with more care by the shell-shocked peoples who had just emerged from the First World War — have served as a warning, the shape of things to come.
One brown, scratched negative reproduced by the Armenian Tashnag militia in Beirut shows a long column of men being led out of an Armenian village by Turkish troops.
Each carries a suitcase.
Double-take.
Is this Lake Van or Lvov, western Armenia or eastern Poland?
Are the soldiers Ottoman or Wehrmacht ?
Another old print shows a litter of bodies, young men in white shirts, their stomachs already swelling in the heat, lying spread-eagled beside an orchard.
In some of the photographs, the Turks who had helped to carry out their government's orders to liquidate the Armenians are standing beside the corpses, grinning into the camera.
The only Armenian remains to be saved were found in the desert around Deir Ez-Zohr.
A photograph survives of some Armenian priests kneeling in the sand beside a pile of bones.
Today, there is a small octagonal chapel in the Beirut coastal suburb of Antelyas dedicated to the 1915 massacres.
The visitor enters the gateway of the Armenian patriarchate and first sees the chapel to the left of the cathedral, a small building of yellow stone which appears to contain some religious relics behind sheets of unwashed glass.
Only when you walk out of the sunshine into the shaded interior can you see what lies behind the glass.
Neatly arranged in patterns, fixed to the wall with pins, are human skulls, femurs, sockets and pieces of bone from feet and arms.
Some of the skulls have been smashed, all are brown with age.
These are the human remains that appear in the picture of the priests, from bodies that had already been torn apart by dogs before they were found in the sand.
There are perhaps 36 skulls in all and there were at least a million Armenian dead.
So each skull represents about 27,777 corpses.
To this day, the Turkish government refuses to acknowledge the slaughter, even though the killings continued after 1915.
Perhaps 75,000 more Armenians were butchered during Turkey's 1918 invasion of the Caucasus.
As many as a quarter of a million more may have died between 1919 and 1922.
There are few survivors of the first Holocaust because the Turks tried to kill them all and because age has now claimed most of the rest.
When the sick and exhausted Armenians reached Beirut after the Ottoman collapse, they were allowed to build shacks on the swamps of Bourj Hammoud in the east of the city and then to erect houses which look to this day curiously Balkan, their wooden balconies hanging over the narrow streets of Camp Marash.
A few of the Holocaust Armenians are in Beirut old people's homes, too senile to record what happened 74 years ago.
But old Khoren Pilibossian still lives just off Municipality Square in Bourj Hammoud, up a narrow concrete staircase and through an unpainted wooden door.
He is 90 now, so deaf that we had to shout at him to be heard, so old that he speaks only Turkish, the language of his oppressors.
Many Armenians who lived in Turkish Armenia never spoke their own language.
Pilibossian stares at visitors through powerful round spectacles and walks with the help of a cane as he tells his story.
‘The Turks took my aunt and uncle from our house in the village of Gessaria,’ he said.
‘We found their bodies on the street corner.
They had been bayoneted.’
Here he raised his cane and made a sharp, stabbing motion.
In the corner of his cluttered bedroom was a photograph of a woman dressed in black, her sad, unsmiling face staring miserably from the picture.
‘It is my sister Florence.
The Kurds who worked for the Turks killed her husband and children.
They raped her and took her away and forced her to marry one of them.
When he died ten years later, she came to Beirut and found us.’
Salvation in Beirut.
The Armenians were lucky, for they were the only people this century to flee to rather than from Lebanon for comfort and protection.
Yet their fate is a lesson for others, none more so than for the Palestinians.
Like them, Armenian families in Lebanon remain grouped by their original cities and villages.
An Armenian whose family came from Erzerum or Kars is neighbour to other Armenians whose parents or grandparents came from the same towns, just as Palestinians from Haifa — or from Mrs Zamzam's village of Um Al-Farajh — now live in refugee camps next to those whose homes were in the same places, sometimes in the very same streets, in what was Palestine.
The Armenians — as the Palestinians have often told them — waited too long to fight for their nation.
Camp Marash, where perhaps 150,000 Armenians now live, spawned its own gunmen in the 1980s, the ‘Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia’, whose assassination campaign against Turkish diplomats has provided a violent epitaph for the calcified remains in the Antelyas ossuary.
It is the Armenians who live in what is left of the Armenian Republic — in the Soviet Republic of the same name — who perhaps have the only fragile opportunity of one day restoring their nation; just as the Arab inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza Strip are now the only Palestinians to be able to fight with any effect for their statehood.
Political and military impotence is one of the prices that Lebanon exacts of all who enter her frontiers.
This, of course, was not how it seemed to the European powers which held authority over the Middle East after the 1914–18 war.
European culture, European political and military power — and specifically French cultural and political influence — began to dominate Lebanon.
France's League of Nations mandate extended across Syria and Lebanon, just as the British mandate encompassed Palestine, Transjordan and Iraq — with all the consequences this held for the future.
The French now shamefully manipulated the religious minorities within their area to increase their control.
They used Druze fighters as a colonial militia just as they used members of the minority Muslim Alawite community in Syria to put down Sunni Muslim nationalist revolt.
The irony behind this — that President Assad is himself an Alawite — has not, of course, been lost on the majority Sunni population who live in Syria today.
Until February of 1982, the Beit Azem museum in the Syrian city of Hama contained dozens of torn and faded grey photographs of young Sunni militiamen who had fought the French, who had in some cases been hanged for their acts of defiance.
The Azems were the Rockefellers of Hama, a wealthy family of Maecenas-like aristocrats who governed and influenced the city for well over two centuries.
Assad Pasha al-Azem was governor of Hama in 1700 and a descendant became prime minister of Syria.
Many of the young men in those faded grey pictures were Azems.
The photographs were arranged behind glass in a small anteroom above the door of which was printed the legend: ‘The Martyrs of Hama’.
There were snapshots of youths with big moustaches and huge muskets over their shoulders, country boys sensing that nationalism rather than colonialism was a path of honour.
Some of them were dressed in Ottoman regalia or Arab dress or even French cavalry uniform, serious-looking young men who — in the later pictures — were carrying Lee-Enfield service rifles.
These were the Azems who had once served in the French army or even the French air force but who later turned against their French masters — and their minority supporters in Syria — and died fighting them.
Some were sacrificed in later wars.
On one wall was a portrait of a man who looked like a young Gary Cooper, hair waved and slicked back, jaw jutting in heroic pose.
He was Farid Adib Azem who was shot fighting the Israelis in 1948.
In February of 1982, the Sunni fundamentalists of Hama rose up against the Alawite regime.
They were cut down and much of the ancient city was destroyed.
Perhaps 10,000 — even 20,000 — people died.
The photographs of the ‘martyrs of Hama’ were, of course, burned with them.
The French fully understood that Syrian nationalist sentiment would be opposed to their rule.
This, in effect, meant that the Sunnis were their principal antagonists and they thus proceeded to capitalise on the good will of the Christians, their oldest friends, by creating a new state which stripped Tyre, Sidon, Tripoli, the Bekaa Valley and Beirut itself district) of Mount Lebanon, the very backbone of Maronite Christianity.
Syria was cut off from its finest port and Damascus — the centre of the Muslim Arab nationalist movement opposed to French rule — was weakened at the expense of Beirut and the new Christian-dominated regime.
The ‘State of the Greater Lebanon’ proclaimed by the French General Gouraud on 31 August 1920 was thus a totally artificial, French-created entity.
Its frontiers, over 20 years later, would become the borders of the independent Lebanese state.
It was in defence of the presumed ‘sovereignty’ of this peculiar nation — a product of the Quai d'Orsay rather than the creation of any Arab national aspiration — that countless thousands were to die more than half a century later.
Not surprisingly, the Sunnis led the opposition to this strange, inter-tribal state.
The Druze of Lebanon were to join forces with their fellow Druze in Syria in the rebellion against the French in 1925.
The Greek Orthodox wanted to be re-united with Syria.
So did most of the Sunni inhabitants of Sidon, Tripoli and Beirut.
Only the Maronites felt able to drink from the cup of French tutelage and even they quickly found that the chalice contained a special, colonial poison, the effects of which would be passed on to future generations; for by adding such large areas of Muslim Syria to the new ‘Lebanon’, the French ensured that the Christians' precarious status as the largest religious community would — once the Muslim birthrate increased — be lost.
All the more, therefore, would the Christian Maronites need French protection.
Much has been made of the beneficence of French rule in Lebanon; the economy was revitalised, Beirut harbour enlarged, and a network of major roads built to link the country's principal cities.
A new judicial system was introduced.
The educational system, public health and living standards were improved.
But the inhabitants of Lebanon saw these changes in a somewhat different light.
When the French introduced a new ‘Syro-Lebanese’ currency, for example, they pegged the new currency to the collapsing French franc, thus inflicting the weakness of their own monetary system on the Lebanese.
The currency management was entrusted to a French bank whose shareholders were said to have prospered at the expense of Arab fiscal autonomy.
In the schools, French became a compulsory language at the very moment when Arab nationalists were enjoying the linguistic triumph of Arabic over the Turkish of the now broken Ottoman Empire, a victory which had important political implications for the concept of Arab unity.
The teaching of French was seen as a deliberate slight by the Lebanese.
The new Lebanese flag was a French-style tricolour.
In the law courts, the French language was given equal precedence with Arabic.
Many government documents, passports, residence cards, even the road-signs, appeared in both French and Arabic — as they still do in General Gouraud's strangely conceived republic to this day.
The French were well aware of the enmities which they had aroused.
The 1925 Druze rebellion in Lebanon and Syria was put down with great brutality and with the help of gangs of Armenian gunmen who had been armed by the French in order to attack the rebels.
And there were other precedents for the future.
In the Syrian town of Suwaida, a French force of 3,000 troops was routed by Druze militiamen who then advanced on Damascus.
At one point, the insurgents even approached the new Francophile capital of Beirut.
The French air force was used to bomb rebel-held areas of Damascus and Druze villages, a bombardment that fell indiscriminately upon the civilians of Syria and Lebanon.
Thus developed in Lebanon a pattern of events which was to recreate itself in increasingly savage form over the coming years.
The Maronites were prepared to cooperate with the outside power because they correctly believed that the French wanted a future independent Lebanon which would look to France for protection.
The Muslim nationalist parties continued to demand the abolition of the 1920 frontiers, to agitate against French rule and against the pre-independence governments, while the Maronites looked to French civilisation for their inspiration.
They adopted French Christian names, often spoke French as a first language, were educated at French schools and frequently sent their children to French universities.
In November of 1936, a Franco-Lebanese treaty theoretically recognised the ‘independence’ of Lebanon but France was permitted to keep an army in the country and thus maintained considerable political control.
There were serious disturbances in Beirut and Tripoli which were put down by the new Lebanese administration with the help of French troops.
The Christians not unnaturally responded to Muslim protests with alarm.
That it represented a threat was clear enough.
But how to deal with it and encourage loyalty, impose discipline upon the people of the future notional Christian state?
On 16 December 1936, the French-language Lebanese newspaper L'Orient did a most unusual thing; it abandoned its normal, sober typographical layout and printed instead across the top of its front page a seven-column photograph of hundreds of young men in well-creased shirts and trousers standing in lines across a field in the rural Beirut suburb of Ein al-Rumaneh.
The men in the picture were staring straight in front of them, dedicated to a new cause, the very first escadrille , as the caption informed readers, of Lebanon's new blue-shirted Phalange party.
Visitors to the present-day west Beirut offices of L'Orient-Le Jour , as the paper is now called, will not find this front page among the back issues.
In July of 1982, during the Israeli siege of west Beirut, I had myself prowled through the archives to try and discover the political roots of the Lebanese Phalange, Israel's latest ally in its war against the Palestinians.
From outside the newspaper's offices could be heard the murmur of distant artillery as the Israelis and Phalangists fired into the city.
From time to time, a shell-burst would shake the windows of the stuffy, hot little room where the paper's forgotten editorial history lay between great covers of bound leather.
The entire issue of 16 December 1936 had simply been removed from the file.
So had several issues from the previous August when Lebanon's football team under the captaincy of Pierre Gemayel, a Maronite Christian, had travelled to National Socialist Germany to attend the Olympic Games in Berlin.
Several of L'Orient's editions of that autumn had also disappeared and in later issues, articles about the new Phalange party — the headlines still intact but the accompanying text missing — had been crudely cut from the pages.
I only came across the 1936 front page because it was hanging framed on the right-hand wall of old Pierre Gemayel's office when I went to talk to him in the summer of 1982 in east Beirut.
Here, in a high-ceilinged room only 400 yards from the front line — on the Israeli side of the fine — the grand old man of the Maronite cause, now aged 77, still held court.
He was dressed in the manner of the Thirties with a broad-lapelled jacket, wide cuffs and dark tie firmly attached with a gold clip to a gleaming white shirt.
His face was thin and emaciated, drawn together as if it spent each night in some kind of linen press.
His hair was combed straight back like a French politician of the Third Republic.
He preferred French to Arabic, a language he had anyway never fully mastered.
He had not expected me to ask about his 1936 visit to Nazi Germany.
His Phalange was now, after all, a bosom ally of Israel.
So he waited for perhaps eight seconds before replying.
‘I was the captain of the Lebanese football team and the president of the Lebanese Football Federation,’ he said.
‘We went to the Olympic Games of 1936 in Berlin.
And I saw then this discipline and order.
And I said to myself: ‘Why can't we do the same thing in Lebanon?’
So when we came back to Lebanon, we created this youth movement.’
Gemayel did not mention Adolf Hitler.
Nor did he suggest that the government of the Third Reich used the 1936 Olympiad as a propaganda vehicle for the German Nazi Party.
German Jews were forbidden from participating and when Jesse Owens — a black American — won the 100 metres, Hitler walked out of the stadium.
Gemayel saw it all rather differently.
‘When I was in Berlin then, Nazism did not have the reputation which it has now,’ he said.
‘Nazism?
In every system in the world, you can find something good.
But Nazism was not Nazism at all.
The word came afterwards.
In their system, I saw discipline.
And we in the Middle East, we needed discipline more than anything else.’
Gemayel's youth movement blossomed; indeed, its military descendants were standing guard outside Gemayel's office as we spoke, pistols at their hips, a triangular-shaped cedar tree insignia stitched to their olive-green battledress.
After Hitler's demise, the Phalangist movement died out across Europe.
Only in Lebanon did it survive, outliving even Franco's political offspring.
And in 1982 Gemayel still saw it as he had in the late 1930s, as a movement of renewal that prepared Lebanon's young Christians for independence and civic responsibility.
‘We had four hundred years of Ottoman rule in Lebanon,’ he said.
‘And we asked for our independence.
But we had to be mature enough to undertake this independence.
And I think we succeeded in our Phalangist youth movement because we created young men who were prepared for politics.’
Gemayel's foot tapped up and down as he warmed to his subject, his large oak desk shaking slightly with the vibration.
‘We succeeded because we were elected to the Lebanese parliament and we were able to take over from the Turks and French in their ministries.’
But the transition from French rule to Lebanese self-determination had not been an easy one.
The French several times reneged on their pledges of future autonomy for the Lebanese.
In 1941, after a brief and inauspicious period of Vichy French rule, Lebanon was again occupied by Allied armies; it was the second time in 24 years that British troops had crossed the southern frontier from Palestine.
The Australian army won their first Victoria Cross of the Second World War in a tank battle against Vichy forces near the south Lebanese town of Marjayoun — which would in 1978 become the headquarters of Israel's local Christian militia — while in the coastal village of Damour, the future Israeli minister of defence, Moshe Dayan, lost his eye to a Vichy French sniper while fighting as a British soldier.
A Free French administration was installed in Beirut and General de Gaulle quickly made it clear that he intended to keep his forces in Lebanon however much independence the country thought it had been given.
Churchill was bitterly opposed to the continuation of the French mandate, but when the Maronite President Beshara al-Khoury and the Sunni Prime Minister Riad Solh also insisted that the French must leave, they were summarily arrested by the French and imprisoned in a castle in the village of Rashaya in the Arkoub region of south-eastern Lebanon.
The French wanted to stay.
Even the Maronites — including Pierre Gemayel and his Phalange — now demanded their withdrawal.
It was not until 1946 that the French departed from Lebanon and Syria, spitefully shelling Damascus and killing 500 Syrians as they did so.
Armies would leave Lebanon this way in the future, firing into its hinterland to persuade themselves that they could abuse their tormentors to the end.
But the French also left behind them a nation which was still dominated, both constitutionally and fatally, by the Christian Maronites.
In 1943, the Maronites had agreed to an unwritten National Covenant which awarded them the presidency of Lebanon, command of the Lebanese army and other assets in return for their abandonment of French protection.
The Maronites now had to acknowledge that Lebanon possessed what would be described, exactly 40 years later, as an ‘Arab identity’.
For another generation, this Covenant was to be held up as a model of political excellence within the Middle East, especially by the Western powers which gave it such approval but which did not have to suffer its consequences.
It was supposed to be a paragon of democracy in an Arab world more familiar with dictatorship than freedom.
But there were two fundamental flaws in the Covenant.
The first was that the Maronite community — which at best constituted only 30 per cent of the Lebanese — was almost certainly outnumbered by the Sunnis or the Shias.
There had been no census since 1932 — nor was there ever to be a census again.
The myth of a Maronite majority thus had to be accepted by the Muslims for Lebanon's ‘democracy’ to work.
For their part, the Muslims had already given up their claim to reunion with Syria as their price for participation in government under the Covenant.
But whenever the behaviour of either Christians or Muslims was to be challenged in the future, the Covenant itself would inevitably be called into question.
And this would reveal that the Covenant's structure was by nature essentially Western, a product of European parliamentary equality grafted on to a newly independent nation whose very existence had been contested by more than half its population for more than two decades.
It was, as the Lebanese Maronite publisher George Naccache was to say, compromise elevated to the level of state doctrine; the folly was to have ‘treated an historical accident as an element of stability’.
It was, in essence, a system of power-sharing in which offices were distributed according to the notional strength of the communities.
Thus the president was a Maronite, the prime minister a Sunni, the speaker of parliament a Shia; even in parliament, there had to be six Christians for every five Muslims.
Power-sharing had a good name in the West.
The British instituted a remarkably similar system in post-colonial Cyprus, where a Greek Christian president was appointed alongside a Turkish Muslim vice-president.
In the early 1970s, Northern Ireland's politicians were urged to study Lebanon's Covenant by the British government which, in 1974, actually created another power-sharing administration in Belfast.
There, the chief executive was to be a Protestant and the deputy chief executive a Catholic with ‘Cabinet’ seats apportioned according to the two-to-one Protestant majority in the province.
The Cyprus model failed when an attempted coup by Greek Cypriots provoked a Turkish invasion.
In the same year, the Belfast model collapsed under the strain of working-class Protestant opposition.
Lebanon's own power-sharing institutions lasted longest and only finally fragmented when Muslim–Maronite friction — and foreign interference — became so intense that parliament could no longer elect a president.
It was in any case something of a miracle — and a tribute to the tenacity of the Lebanese — that their Covenant worked for as long as it did.
This was partly because of the fantasies in which most of the parties in Lebanon found it convenient to indulge.
In 1975, for instance, journalists arriving in Beirut would invariably be told by the Lebanese of the halcyon days which had just ended, of the peaceful Phoenician land in which Christians and Muslims had shown the world that historically religious antagonists could live in peace.
Or, more to the point, how they could live in peace and make money.
For as long as Lebanon's economy grew, the dream years were credible even to the Lebanese themselves.
The Sunnis and the Maronites were both beneficiaries of the extraordinary wealth that flowed into Beirut.
As a financial centre with an open economy, as a trade intersection between Europe and the Middle East with a lucrative port in its capital, as a comparatively ‘free’ nation amid the dictatorships of the Arab world, Lebanon was to be blessed with the indulgence of both East and West, its modern-day caravanserais arriving hourly at the new international airport at Khalde.
The first visions to distort this mirage had appeared on the southern border of Lebanon or from the sea off Beirut in 1946 when the Covenant was barely three years old.
But when David Damiani, Fatima Zamzam and her children, Ghassan Kanafani and his family and around 140,000 other Palestinian refugees fled into Lebanon, the Beirut government took comfort — as did the Palestinians themselves — from the hope that they might soon return to their homes.
These disturbing images — convoys of refugees, unsanitary tent encampments — were initially refracted because Lebanon had itself vainly assisted the ridiculous ‘Arab Liberation Army’ in its war against the new Israeli state; for the Lebanese, their own military failure was of greater moment than the fate of those whom they were supposed to be saving.
Most of the Palestinians were distributed around Lebanon to settle in UN camps on the fringes of Tyre, Beirut and Tripoli or the old Wavell barracks outside Baalbek.
The filthy colonial military compounds so recently evacuated by the British and French provided convenient quarters for those who were now destined to spend most of their lives in exile, even though neither they nor their unwilling Lebanese hosts yet knew that they would have to do so.
From the start, the Palestinians were treated with little love by the Lebanese.
Since most of the refugees were Sunnis, the Maronites correctly divined that they were potential allies of Lebanon's Muslims.
Some Palestinians with relatives in Lebanon were later to change their nationality and become Lebanese, but most of the refugees were classed as non-citizens and given a pale brown passport — the same colour as the old British Palestine passport — with a cedar tree printed on the front.
They could not enter the civil service or acquire the privileges of Lebanese citizenship.
It was almost impossible to obtain work permits.
Poorly paid employment on Lebanese construction sites—as David Gilmour points out in his Dispossessed — was the fate of many of the farmers and labourers of Palestine.
But if this large population of unwilling immigrants did not immediately worry the Lebanese, the emergence of Gamal Abdul Nasser's Arab nationalism could not be ignored.
Much later, in 1975, the Lebanese chose not to refer to this period.
It occurred during Lebanon's glorious recent history and so only in old magazines or in scratched newsreel films can one sense the phantoms that were even then being made manifest in the streets of Beirut.
On leave in Ireland during a ceasefire in the 1976 fighting, I came across a pile of back issues of the National Geographic Magazine in a Dublin bookshop.
In the April 1958 edition, I found an article entitled ‘Young–Old Lebanon Lives by Trade’, by Thomas J. Abercrombie.
The sub-head said it all: ‘The Land of Cedars, Phoenician Sea Cities, and Crusader Castles Thrives Again as Middleman (sic ) of the Middle East.’
Here was the old dream.
Coloured photographs in the magazine show yachts and surfers in the pale blue waters beside the exclusive Saint-Georges Hotel in Beirut, a folk dance festival on the playing fields of the American University (founded by American Protestant missionaries, 1866), the ancient cedars at Bsharre (‘the glory of Lebanon’, Isaiah 35:2), the Phoenician port of Byblos (‘root of our word ‘Bible’) and an aerial view of the Bekaa Valley (‘an enormous oriental rug unrolled beneath the Anti-Lebanon Range’).
There is even a coloured snapshot of President Camille Chamoun in huntsman's dress taking a picnic lunch in the Bekaa with his wife.
(‘Fluent in English, French, Turkish and Arabic, the President has represented his country in the United Nations.
He is an ardent huntsman.’)
In his travels around Lebanon, Abercrombie visits Beirut, Jounieh, Byblos, the Cedars and Baalbek and even Beaufort Castle.
Mrs Chamoun guides him around the Emir Bashir's palace at Beit Eddine; he is clearly taken in by the mythical Lebanon of happy agrarian masses toiling away under the guidance of a benevolent leader.
In the Bekaa, he records, ‘birds sang among the reeds and were echoed by a distant chorus from farm workers marching out to potato fields with long hoes over their shoulders.
Then coming towards us appeared His Excellency, President Camille Chamoun…
His graying hair and tanned complexion accentuated the distinguished bearing of his tall, erect frame.
A single game bird hung from his belt.’
But then, suddenly, at the very end of his report, Abercrombie writes something quite extraordinary, as if a bright and penetrating light has suddenly fallen upon the land of dreams.
He hears that an anti-government demonstration is to take place in the Beirut suburb of Basta — a Shia district which 30 years later will be controlled by pro-Iranian militiamen — and he takes a taxi to investigate:
‘You must not go there; you will be killed!’ warned my cab driver…
‘No photographs!’ shouted one gendarme…around the corner rushed an angry mob of demonstrators pursued by a squad of gendarmes…
Suddenly the mob turned and began throwing rocks…
Spectators standing on the balconies joined in, filling the air with stones.
One of the gendarmes stumbled dizzily and dropped his rifle.
The rest of the squad fell to one knee, and I heard the smart click of rifle bolts…
I flattened to the street just as the first shots were fired…
I saw one demonstrator crumple as the rest fled…
Ambulances were screaming back and forth, and then in the distance I could hear the rumble of tanks…
Shortly afterwards, Abercrombie's journalistic inquisitiveness deserts him.
He concludes that the event demonstrates only the ‘growing pains of a young republic’ which ‘after 5000 years of conquerors…looks forward to a prosperous and peaceful future.’
In fact, Abercrombie was watching the start of the first Lebanese civil war, itself the preliminary act in the catastrophe that would tear Lebanon to pieces.
The 1958 war is remembered now not so much for the vicious sectarian battles that occurred in Beirut but for the arrival of the US Marines, who stormed ashore only to find the beaches occupied not by militiamen but by bikini-clad ladies and street urchins who were merely waiting to sell Coca-Cola to the country's latest rescuers.
The story is true but it has also become part of the myth.
For the reality behind the 1958 conflict was the reawakening of the old dispute between pro-Arab nationalism and pro-Western Maronitisme , the same antagonism which had emerged in 1920 when the French created Lebanon.
Now, however, it was Nasser's United Arab Republic — the union of Egypt and Syria into one nation — and the nationalist opposition to the Hashemite regimes in Jordan and Iraq that excited the Muslims of Lebanon, especially the Sunnis.
Their interest in Nasser's message of Arab unity was natural, although to President Chamoun it appeared to be a dangerous obsession.
Chamoun himself was less of a Francophile than an Anglophile and his contempt for Nasser bore a strange similarity to the equally irrational hatred expressed for the Egyptian leader by Eden's Suez adventure would be successful in deposing Nasser.
Eden had regarded Nasser as a fascist in the Mussolini mould.
Chamoun saw him — or claimed to see him — as a communist.
Chamoun was leader of his own National Liberal Party, which at that time included a number of conservative Shia and Sunni political leaders.
But he treated the democracy about which he boasted to foreign journalists with near contempt when it stood in the way of his domestic ambitions.
In the 1957 parliamentary elections, Chamoun's supporters claimed that the opposition were in reality Nasser's candidates; political constituencies were gerrymandered to ensure that Saeb Salam, the most prominent Sunni leader in Beirut, and Kamal Jumblatt, the Druze leader in the Chouf, were defeated.
The violent street demonstration witnessed by Abercrombie in Beirut had been in protest at these electoral violations.
Chamoun then attempted to capitalise upon his victory by contemplating a change in the constitution that would allow him a second term as president.
The National Covenant had already been weakened by Chamoun's decision to accept the Eisenhower Doctrine, under which the United States promised to use its forces to help any nation which requested assistance against aggressors controlled by ‘international communism’.
When the Muslim– Druze revolt against Chamoun began with fierce street fighting in Beirut, the Christians noted that the Muslims were using the same pan-Arab rhetoric as Nasser.
The rebels were supposedly in league with Egypt; and since Nasser was — in Chamoun's eyes — a communist, then the Eisenhower Doctrine could be invoked.
Chamoun called in the US Marines to preserve the sovereignty of Lebanon.
The whole structure of the Covenant creaked under the strain as Salam in Beirut and Rashid Karami, the Sunni leader in Tripoli, accused the Chamounists of allying Lebanon with the West.
Only the succession to the presidency of the Lebanese army commander Fouad Chehab, and his refusal to commit the army to the struggle, preserved the balance of power in Lebanon.
During the fighting in Beirut large numbers of armed militiamen had appeared on the streets.
Christians and Muslims had been the victims of sectarian assassinations.
The Lebanese air force had used its Hawker Hunters to attack Muslim positions in the sector of the capital around Fakhani.
In Tripoli, Karami's insurgents kept government forces out of the city for several weeks.
Yet outside Lebanon, it was as if the battles had never occurred.
The economy continued to grow, the banking services increased; by 1962, 38 airlines were flying into Beirut at the rate of 99 flights a day.
It was calculated that 65,000 of the country's registered 76,000 road vehicles were used by or for tourists.
‘Beirut…is acquitting herself brilliantly in her new role of tourist ‘Gateway to the East’,’ Hachette's Guide to Lebanon boldly announced in 1965.
How did the world remain so blind for so long?
In late 1976, Radio Telefis Eireann, the Irish state television service, decided to produce a documentary on Lebanon and asked me if I could locate any films that depicted the country in the days of peace.
The nearest him archive was at the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation's studios, outside Nicosia.
The projectionist there dutifully pulled out can after can of old stock, sometimes so poorly preserved that the nitrate was destroying the footage.
The longest documentary, a British film, had been made in 1969.
And up on the screen came the familiar images: young women water-skiing past the Saint-Georges, farmers in the Bekaa, the great cedar trees of Bsharre.
But then again, a penetrating light: a group of young men with carbines over their shoulders marching through the foothills of Mount Lebanon.
The Phalangists look innocent enough with their little moustaches and their campfires amid the fir trees, the stuff of youth movements.
Another sequence of frames, this time in the lower, warmer hills of southern Lebanon, where a uniformed officer is teaching some young Muslim men how to load and fire rifles.
The voice-over says that the officer is from the Egyptian army.
There is a quick flash of ‘unhappier times’, of a Hawker Hunter attacking a Beirut apartment block in 1958.
The plane jerks across the screen in its bombing run, the camera panning wildly to the building as a cloud of grey and white smoke blossoms from its interior.
In 1982, I would stand just where that cameraman stood in 1958 and watch an Israeli jet on the same bombing run, attacking the same block of buildings in west Beirut.
The film closed gently, at night, the lights winking along the Beirut skyline.
Footage of a different kind.
It is 1972 and I am travelling in a minibus through the Bekaa Valley,The Times correspondent in Ireland on holiday in Lebanon, unwittingly choosing to spend my vacation in the country in which I shall much later spend more than 13 years of my life.
It is hot and the windows of the bus are open, the smell of orange trees moving through the vehicle, flashes of purple and crimson bougainvillaea brushing against the windows as we approach Baalbek.
The Lebanese tourist guide, a small man with a thin moustache, is a Christian.
His commentary is all about the past, the very distant past, of Phoenicians and Romans, Assyrians and crusaders — as if the modern history of Lebanon were the story of tourism.
The columns of the Temple of Jupiter bake in the sun, white at midday, rose-red in the evening.
Beside the Temple of Bacchus, its great stone doorway familiar from the David Roberts lithographs, the floodlighting is being prepared for the Baalbek festival.
The Comédie Française is to perform this year.
On the way back to Beirut, we stop in Chtaura for tea and our little Christian guide flourishes a tourist map on the back of which is a photograph of a silver-haired, bespectacled man in a dinner jacket and white bow-tie.
He has a sash across his shirt as if he is an ambassador at a diplomatic function.
‘An appeal from His Excellency Monsieur Suleiman Franjieh,’ says the caption.
‘We hope that our meeting with tourists and holidaymakers in our country may be an opportunity to demonstrate the honesty of the Lebanese people, their hospitality, freedom, security and stability which have become an example to others.’
But on the highway into Beirut we pass a shanty town on the left-hand side of the road, a place of destitution, of tiny concrete huts, their corrugated iron roofs held down by stones.
When I ask our guide who lives there, he glances disapprovingly at the slums.
‘Palestinians,’ he says.
‘They are not part of our people.’
It was the Chatila camp.
At Raouche, we watch the water-skiers sliding beneath the tunnel formed by the Pigeon Rocks.
The fish restaurants are full.
The papers say there has been shooting in the centre of Tripoli far to the north.
‘Bandits’, the paper reports, have ‘taken over’ the souk.
A jeep passes with members of the Squad 16 paramilitary gendarmerie on board.
They are holding automatic rifles and wearing steel helmets.
No one— not even the hotel receptionist — can explain why they are there.
On the way back from the classical ruins of Byblos in an old red and green school bus, co-opted by the bus company for the tourist trade, we drive down the coastal highway into Beirut from the north, towards Martyrs' Square, so soon to become the front line.
On the road, the Christian driver has pointed out those inscriptions on the walls of the Dog River.
There are Muslims and Christians on the bus.
Then as we pass the slaughterhouse at Karantina, I ask the Christian driver the reason for the appalling smell.
He does not refer to the factory or the tannery beside it but points cruelly instead towards some squalid huts behind a tin wall.
‘It's probably the Palestinians,’ he says.
The war is only three years away.
To 1982 again, to the high-ceilinged room in east Beirut where Pierre Gemayel sits behind his large oak desk.
He does not wish to talk further about his visit to Berlin in 1936.
But he does not wait to be asked about the Palestinians.
He calls them a ‘fifth column’ and he means it.
‘They were a subversive presence here,’ he says.
‘There was a war, not between us and the Lebanese, but between us and the Palestinians, who tried to conquer Lebanon and take Lebanon and occupy it.
They wanted to dissolve Lebanon in the Arab world.’
And one is conscious as Pierre Gemayel speaks — unfairly perhaps but the parallel is there — of another, infinitely more vulnerable minority which another government blamed, back in the 1930s, for its own social ills.
There can be no denying the effect of the Palestinian presence upon Lebanon.
By 1975, the Palestinian population — swollen by refugees from Israel's conquest of the West Bank in 1967 and from the Jordanian civil war — was around 350,000.
But now it was also an armed presence, established by the PLO guerrillas and their leaders who had been forced out of Amman by King Husain.
Beirut had become not just the cultural capital of the Palestinian movement but the headquarters for Yassir Arafat's Palestine Liberation Organisation.
It was therefore also an ‘enemy’ capital for the Israelis.
Lebanon had already suffered for the Palestinians' presence.
From 1968, the PLO sent raiding parties into Israel from southern Lebanon and the Israelis responded by launching their own revenge raids, often against Lebanese villages.
The motive was simple and comparatively cost-free: if the Lebanese villagers allowed armed Palestinians to take shelter among their homes, then they would be made to pay for it in blood.
The only way to avoid Israeli attack was to eject the Palestinians from their villages.
This, of course, the Lebanese could not do.
The Palestinians were armed and the Lebanese were not; and the Lebanese national army was too weak — both militarily and politically — to remove the Palestinians.
The PLO, of course, saw its often murderous operations as a sacred duty; they were fighting the occupying power that had taken away the land of the Palestinians.
To legitimise their activities in Lebanon, the PLO could point to the 1969 Cairo agreement, a dubious document drawn up in Egypt between Arafat and the Lebanese army commander which permitted any Palestinian in Lebanon ‘to participate in the Palestinian revolution’ and to assist in guerrilla operations by safeguarding ‘the road to the Arkoub region’, the great volcanic escarpment in south-east Lebanon that was now largely controlled by Arafat's Fatah gunmen.
The Lebanese, meanwhile, would ‘continue to exercise all their prerogatives and responsibilities in all areas of Lebanon…
’ This assurance was, of course, meaningless.
The PLO struck at Israeli soldiers and civilians alike, and by 1970 the Israelis were retaliating deep into Lebanon, usually against civilian targets and always with results quite out of proportion to the original Palestinian attack.
Thus, for example, when Palestinian rocket fire and a mine explosion had killed two civilians and two soldiers, the Israelis shelled the town of Hasbaya, killing 45 people and wounding another 45.
It was another pattern that would be expanded, developed and perfected with ferocity over the coming 15 years.
The Lebanese were powerless to control this conflict between Israel — a foreign nation with which Lebanon was still technically at war — and their own camps in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon.
Palestinian gunmen stood guard at the entrances of the camps of Sabra, Chatila, Karantina, Tel al-Za'atar and Bourj al-Barajneh in the capital.
The Israelis alleged that the Palestinians had created a state within a state, a claim with which few Lebanese would have disagreed.
Whenever the Palestinians attacked Israeli targets abroad, the Israelis invariably assaulted Lebanon.
After guerrillas attacked an El Al jet at Athens airport, Israeli troops landed beside Beirut airport and destroyed 13 aircraft belonging to Middle East Airlines (MEA), the country's national carrier, and other Lebanese companies.
There were Israeli attacks inside Beirut itself.
Three leading PLO figures and the wife of one of them were murdered in their homes in rue Verdun by an Israeli assassination squad on 10 April 1973.
In 1974, the Israelis began staging what they called ‘preemptive’ raids, attacks made against Palestinian targets without provocation.
All this had its inevitable effect on relations between Muslims and Christians in Lebanon.
The Maronites complained that areas of the country had fallen under Palestinian control, especially the Arkoub, which was now known as Fatahland.
The Muslims, however, felt an instinctive sympathy for the Palestinians.
Was their cause not also a pan-Arab cause, one for which all Arabs should be fighting?
The structure of the Lebanese National Covenant groaned again under the weight of these new pressures.
Damascus urged the Lebanese to allow the PLO to continue operations from southern Lebanon while ordering the Syrian security services to ensure that no such activity could be undertaken by Palestinians from Syrian territory.
The best-armed — and most opportunistic — of the Palestinian guerrilla movements in Syria was Saiqa (‘the lightning bolt’), whose officers were themselves Syrian and whose energies were to be employed almost exclusively against their brother Palestinians.
The Palestinians were thus caught in a moral circle, although they rarely cared to debate the morality of what they were doing to the Lebanese: if they failed to fight the Israelis, then they sacrificed their right of return to Palestine; yet if they did attack the Israelis, they created a new class of refugees among the Lebanese, mostly from the poor Shia community in southern Lebanon.
The Maronites would later insist that the Palestinians had helped to destroy Lebanon's democratic freedom.
But as Arafat and his colleagues knew full well, the Lebanese state was not beholden to anything so exotic as parliamentary democracy.
For Lebanon was run by the zaim (or, more accurately,zuama ), the ‘leaders’, the powerful feudal chieftains whom the Lebanese would describe as ‘honoured families’ but whom the average Westerner would quickly identify as mafiosi.
Every community, every tribe, had produced its leaders whose pronouncements, conspicuous wealth, bodyguards, cruelty, education and private armies proved more efficacious than any electoral appeal.
Their principal characteristics were a declared love of Lebanon, a publicly expressed desire to respect the National Covenant and a ruthless determination to ensure that their power was passed on to their sons.
The gentle old men who took up the presidency of Lebanon had about them a streak of cold savagery that stunned even the Palestinians.
Suleiman Franjieh, the elegantly dressed ‘excellency’ who expatiated so eloquently on the back of the tourist map about Lebanon's hospitality, security and stability, is widely believed to have participated in the machine-gun massacre of members of the rival Douaihy family near the town of Zghorta in 1957.
Although he denied it, at the time he fled to Damascus where the Syrians — never slow to take advantage of those in need — offered him protection and later supported him in his successful candidacy for the presidency of Lebanon in 1970.
When his election was disputed by the speaker of the parliament, Franjieh's gunmen brought their firearms into the chamber.
Franjieh's rule had been particularly corrupt; his son Tony was exalted to the Cabinet through a process of nepotism scarcely rivalled elsewhere in the Middle East.
But Tony Franjieh's rise was to be short-lived.
When Suleiman Franjieh refused to accept the growing Phalangist relationship with Israel in 1977, Pierre Gemayel's son Bashir — destined himself to be elected president of Lebanon — sent his gunmen to the north Lebanese town of Ehden to cut down the young man in whom Franjieh had vested all his hopes.
The Phalangists stormed into Tony Franjieh's home, murdered 32 of his supporters and bodyguards and then set about the ritual execution of Suleiman Franjieh's beloved son.
According to the old man, the Phalangists first forced Tony and his young wife to watch the shooting of their baby.
Then the gunmen made Tony Franjieh witness the murder of his wife.
And then the Phalange killed him too.
When Bashir Gemayel's own baby daughter was killed in a car bomb attempt on his life in east Beirut, Suleiman Franjieh, who was now secluded in his home town of Zghorta under the protection of his Marada (Giants) militia, could scarcely suppress his satisfaction.
When I asked him for his reaction, he sat hunched behind a table in his little palace, his head hanging down, his half-moon spectacles on the end of his nose.
‘I hope,’ he said to me, ‘that Bashir Gemayel now feels what I felt.’
Camille Chamoun's power was ultimately founded upon his Nimr (Tigers) militia, commanded by his son Dany, who was himself to be a declared candidate for the presidency of Lebanon in the aborted 1988 elections.
If the Muslim zaim were less cruel, they were no less devoted to the system of patronage and family loyalty.
Rashid Karami in Tripoli had inherited his father's political power.
Kamal Jumblatt's assassination in 1977 led directly to the succession of his son Walid as leader of the Druze and as commander of the ‘Leftist Alliance’, the agglomeration of Lebanese Muslim and Palestinian guerrillas which generally represented the nationalists.
Kamal Jumblatt lived — and Walid still lives — in a magnificent palace of dressed stone at Mukhtara, its courtyards alive with fountains and artificial waterfalls and green-uniformed gunmen.
When his militiamen had stormed onto the Jiyeh coast road and killed the remaining Phalangist defenders there in 1985, I found Walid leaning back in an old wooden chair in one of his palace reception rooms, swigging from a bottle of frozen Czech lager and lamenting the moral improprieties of war.
‘There have been people killed, yes,’ he said.
‘And there has been looting — ah, this damned war!’
Walid promised that all displaced Christian civilians would be allowed to return to their homes with appropriate compensation.
There was, of course, no such recompense, and I later watched those Christian homes — hundreds of them, even the local Maronite church at Jiyeh — being dynamited to the ground and bulldozed into the earth.
As usual with the Druze, there were no prisoners.
women, of course— who amassed personal power as assiduously as they propagated the myth of a stable, pluralistic Lebanon.
Walid Jumblatt at least made no secret of his own disillusion, but the dream had to be maintained.
Pierre Gemayel in his high-ceilinged office personified this fantasy, lecturing visitors on the achievements of an ordered world which really existed only inside his own office with its Phalangist and Lebanese flags and its old newspaper photograph on the wall.
Outside in the street, there were ruins and shell-holes and warnings to drive fast round the port because the snipers were busy again.
‘Between 1943 and 1970, Lebanon had its happiest period,’ he said.
‘We were free and independent.
Some countries are rich because they have oil or copper or iron.
But the wealth of Lebanon is in private initiative, a wealth that needs social and civic security.
The free economic system cannot work with communism or socialism.
We had a very special system in Lebanon, a parliamentary democratic system.’
Yes, he said, there were equal rights for Lebanon's 17 religious communities, freedom of expression for every man and woman be they Muslim or Christian; it was a land where every man was a friend to the other without distinction.
For Pierre Gemayel, myth had become religion.
Only the Palestinians were to blame for its destruction.
The Shias, the growing community of poor who had suffered more than any other Lebanese, were curiously never mentioned.
The events of the 1975–6 civil war have become a fixation for the Lebanese.
Even today, the bookshops of Hamra Street and Sassine Square contain shelves of expensive photographic records of the fighting, coffee table books with colour plates in which readers can study at their leisure and in detail the last moments of a young Muslim militiaman before the firing squad, the anguished eyes of a Palestinian mother pleading for her family before a hooded gunman, a Christian family lying massacred inside their home.
It is a kind of catharsis for both the Lebanese and the Palestinians who have long understood the way in which these dreadful events should be interpreted.
Victories were the result of courage, of patriotism or revolutionary conviction.
Defeats were always caused by the plot: The Plot, the mo'amera , the complot , undefinable and ubiquitous, a conspiracy of treachery in which a foreign hand — Syrian, Palestinian, Israeli, American, French, Libyan, Iranian — was always involved.
Edward Cody of the AP and I once came to the conclusion that in every interview we conducted in Lebanon, a special chair should be set aside for The Plot — since The Plot invariably played a leading role in all discussions we ever had with politicians, diplomats or gunmen.
The 1975–6 fighting may have been the beginning of the final struggle over the Covenant between Arabism and the West, although in physical terms, it involved a series of horrors rather than battles; Black Saturday on the Ring motorway, the Palestinian massacre of Christians in Damour, the Christian massacres of Palestinians at Karantina and Tel al-Za'atar.
Typically, it was an economic dispute between Muslims and Christians in Sidon — involving Muslim fishermen who feared that a new fishing consortium run by Chamoun and other Maronites would destroy their livelihood — that ignited the fire.
Maarouf Saad, the leftist mayor of Sidon, was fatally wounded in a fishermen's demonstration and in further fighting the Lebanese national army — largely commanded, of course, by Christians — came into conflict with Muslim gunmen and the more radical of the PLO's Palestinian guerrilla groups.
Those who have always believed that the war was between Maronites and the rest — the forces of the Gemayels and the Chamouns against Lebanese Muslims and Palestinians — can point to the Phalangist massacre, on 13 April 1975, of 27 Palestinians who were travelling by bus through the Beirut suburb of Ein al-Rumaneh.
The Maronites were later to claim that there had been provocation for the killings but the attack appeared to have been carefully planned.
If it was intended to provoke the Palestinians and the Muslims into armed conflict, it certainly succeeded.
Kamal Jumblatt and other nationalist leaders said that they would no longer support a Cabinet that included Phalangists — just as Chamoun, back in 1957, had refused to countenance nationalists in the administration.
The more extreme Palestinian groups and, more discreetly, Arafat's Fatah guerrillas and subsequently the Muslim militias — were drawn into battle with the Phalange.
There were moments of truce — the first of hundreds of Lebanese ceasefires — during which the Lebanese persuaded themselves that the war was over.
But it was the entente that was at an end.
Rashid Solh, the prime minister, spoke darkly of the arrival in Lebanon of several hundred Israeli agents provocateurs whose mission was to destroy the republic.
The plot had arrived at Beirut.
The Sunni Mourabitoun (‘Ambushers’) militia, which was Nasserist by persuasion and venal by instinct, allied itself with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General command (PFLP—GC).
Like George Habash's PFLP, from which it had broken away in a brutal revolutionary schism, it was opposed to Arafat's gun-and-olive-branch approach towards Israel and therefore outside Arafat's control.
The two groups drove the Phalangists out of the Kantari district of central Beirut and evicted the Maronite militias from their bunkers in the luxury hotels near the port.
In December 1975, on what was ever afterwards to be known as Black Saturday, four Christians were found shot dead in a car outside the electricity company headquarters in east Beirut.
Bashir Gemayel was in Damascus when the news was reported to him.
Phalangist officers of the time insist that he told them to kill 40 Muslims in reprisal.
Christian roadblocks were therefore set up at the eastern end of the Ring motorway and the first 40 Muslim men to arrive at the Christian checkpoint, some of them travelling with their wives and children in their family cars to homes in east Beirut, were taken beneath the overpass and had their throats cut.
When this news became known in west Beirut, Muslim militias followed the Christian example.
For hours, civilians of both faiths dutifully queued at these terrible checkpoints at each end of the Ring on the innocent assumption that the gunmen there merely wished to look at their identity papers.
Only when they saw the hooded men with blood-covered knives approaching their cars did they realise what lay in store for them.
At least 300 Muslims were butchered in this way; an equal number of Christians probably met the same fate.
In January 1976, the Phalange overran Karantina and killed or deported the inhabitants.
Arafat had tried to keep his Fatah guerrillas out of the fighting, but when the Phalange and Chamounists laid siege to the Palestinian camps of Karantina and Tel al-Za'atar, the PLO had committed itself to the war on the side of the Muslims and leftists.
The PLO could no longer remain out of the war.
Arafat allowed his men to join a leftist Lebanese assault on Damour, a pretty Christian coastal village of silk factories and olive groves that lay across the Sidon–Beirut highway.
Chamoun's own home was here, a graceful, red-roofed villa whose tennis courts and lawns ran down to the Mediterranean.
Chamoun directed the defence of the village before being evacuated by helicopter.
The remainder of the Christian population were either evacuated by sea or murdered by the advancing Palestinians.
For the Palestinians, the Lebanon conflict was now a ‘war of liberation’ in its own right, intimately bound up with the aspiration for a return to Palestine, a conflict in which the Maronite militias became a proxy enemy.
‘The road to Palestine’, we in Beirut were told by the PLO, lay through Jounieh, that pleasant Maronite port halfway between Beirut and Byblos.
It was Salah Khalaf no less, one of the PLO's leading strategists, who announced in May 1976 — when the Palestinians were climbing the eastern flanks of Sannine to attack the Christians in their historic mountain defences — that the road to Palestine should pass through ‘Uyun Al-Siman, Aintura and even Jounieh itself to prevent any further threat to the Palestinian presence in Lebanon’.
This sort of statement required a special kind of arrogance.
It showed what many journalists in Beirut had long realised: that the Palestinians regarded their cause,their country — Palestine — as infinitely more holy, more sacred than the nation in which they had been given refuge.
Jounieh, after all, lay to the north of Beirut, not towards Israel in the south.
The Palestinians were fighting their way forward — as they were to do many times in the future — in the wrong direction .
One hot morning in west Beirut, the Palestinians' Mourabitoun allies even invited journalists down to the American University campus to witness the launching of a newly acquired ground-to-ground missile towards Jounieh.
What was this new rocket? the press wanted to know.
Would it be used against Israel?
The guerrillas duly launched the missile north across the bay of Beirut at Jounieh, the first stage of the projectile falling into the Mediterranean as the warhead sped off towards the sleepy Christian harbour and its unsuspecting inhabitants.
The Mourabitoun then held a press conference to explain the significance of this new weapon while the correspondents — few of whom could speak Arabic — waited in patience to know the weight of the warhead, its height and range.
A militia spokesman rambled on in Arabic about the need for resistance, the nobility of the struggle against isolationism and the potentialities of the revolution.
Unaware that they were being treated to a rhetoric bath, foreign reporters demanded a translation, whereupon Mohamed Salam, a Lebanese AP staffer, turned to them with grim cynicism.
‘The man,’ he explained to his press colleagues, ‘is saying ‘no comment’.’
With good reason, the memory of the 1975–6 war became painful for many Palestinians.
West Beirut, which the PLO controlled, was a lawless, anarchic city in which corruption and protection rackets thrived amid gangland feuding and murder.
There were genuine attempts to curb these activities but the PLO could do no more than send its security units into the streets to prevent looting.
One hot afternoon in June of 1976, I flew into Beirut to find the PLO in open combat within west Beirut against Saiqa, who had attacked Arafat's forces on orders from Damascus.
The first body I saw was that of a man lying in a gutter in Raouche, his arms wrapped around his face, one leg hooked above the pavement.
He was a Fatah gunman.
The Lebanese — Muslim Lebanese — remained locked in their homes while their streets became a battleground for foreigners.
This disgraceful phenomenon — of Palestinian fighting Palestinian — was to be repeated with ever greater savagery in the years to come.
The Lebanese, it seemed, were brother Arabs when they were allies but foreigners themselves, ignored and disregarded, when internecine feuds had to be resolved within the Palestinian resistance movement.
All but the Palestinians appeared to realise that Syrian military involvement was now inevitable.
Yassir Arafat and Kemal Jumblatt had been summoned the previous winter to Damascus, where they told Assad that they were winning the war and wished to move all the way into the Christian heartland.
Assad told them he would prevent this at all costs.
And when Jumblatt insisted that he would order his men to advance into east Beirut, Assad had angrily walked out of the meeting.
The Syrian foreign minister, Abdul Halim Khaddam, visited Lebanon on three occasions to call for ceasefires or appeal for political reforms that might re-establish trust between the two sides.
But when in the early summer the Palestinians appeared on the slopes of Mount Sannine and the Christians found themselves in danger of total defeat, a Syrian military intervention in Lebanon became certain.
Sure enough, after persuading President Suleiman Franjieh to request their help — a formal prerequisite which the Syrians characteristically demanded for their army's advance — armoured units of President Assad's forces moved into the Bekaa Valley.
They were joined, like most of the other foreign armies that came to Lebanon, by a retinue of Lebanese acolytes, of leftist militiamen and Lebanese Baath party functionaries, all of them desperate to explain how delighted they were that the peace-loving Syrians had arrived to save their country.
Armies are much alike.
Their soldiers are bored, the tedium relieved only by seconds of frantic danger and usually futile endeavour.
In films, they advance in droves of armour across open fields, their soldiers running behind their tanks for cover.
Sometimes it is like this in Lebanon.
More often, we would come across them when we least expected it; which is how we found the Syrians one hot June morning in 1976.
We simply drove over Mount Lebanon on the Damascus highway, turned a corner west of Chtaura where silver birches ran beside the road and there, quite casually, stood a Syrian soldier in combat fatigues, rifle over his shoulder, cigarette in his mouth, a swaggerstick covered in snakeskin in his right hand.
He was leaning against a tree.
In the centre of the road was a six-foot colour portrait of President Assad, an artist's impression of the Syrian leader in air force uniform that made him look like an elderly Battle of Britain pilot, eyes narrowed against the sun, gaze fixed on the heavens.
The poster had been pinned onto a large wooden board to the top of which had been affixed a very small Lebanese flag.
Only when we looked very carefully did we see, behind the poster and almost obscured by the wall of an old quarry, the barrel of a tank.
The soldier idly flapped his hand towards our car.
‘Hello to you gentlemen,’ he said, surveying the cameras on the back seat with faint disapproval.
‘No pictures.’
No indeed.
‘It is forbidden.’
Of course.
Behind the gun barrel, we could now see the tank crew sitting on the turret of the T-62, one of them with a cloth tied round his forehead.
‘If you take any photographs, we will riddle your car with bullets.’
Perhaps this soldier had heard this in the films.
In Arabic, the word for bullets —rassass — is almost onomatopoeic, and the soldier hissed the word at us.
No, we absolutely would not take pictures.
The idle flap of the hand again, and round the next corner was another tank, then a third, hull down in the long grass like old dogs sunning themselves on a lazy day.
A second checkpoint where another soldier pushed a handful of printed sheets through the driver's window.
Syria had been invited to come to help Sister Lebanon, they announced, and President Franjieh himself had asked them to come.
We were next to that restaurant in Chtaura, where the little Christian tourist guide had four years earlier produced the tourist map with President Franjieh's photograph on the back.
So this was what Franjieh meant by hospitality.
The Syrians were everywhere, marching beside the highway where it stretched across the Bekaa towards Masnaa, buying sandwiches and wine in the village shops.
‘It is always good to have visitors,’ one storekeeper told us.
‘And it is always nice when they go home again.’
But the Syrians were not going home.
We found the local Syrian commander basking on the geranium-smothered patio of the Park Hotel, in happier times the retreat of honeymooners.
His soldiers, he said, would prolong by an extra day their ultimatum to the Palestinians to leave the mountain ridges between here and Beirut.
He too was happy for us to continue our journey — no photographs, of course— and there was every reason why he should have been.
For there was not one gunman to be seen in the Bekaa.
A few hours earlier, Ismail Fahmi, the Egyptian foreign minister, had emphasised his country's deteriorating relations with Damascus by claiming that Syria's invasion might produce ‘massacre and genocide’ in Lebanon.
Yet in the Bekaa, this was not true.
The Christian town of Zahle, which had been under siege by leftist militias, was now open to visitors and traffic, the Syrians cooperating openly with the local Phalangist defenders.
With Syrian approval, the captain of the town's ‘defence committee’ had set up office in the telephone exchange.
For the Syrians had come to protect the Christians.
Just like the French 116 years earlier, the Syrians had entered Lebanon to save the Maronites from defeat.
The Maronites needed saving; they were a minority and President Assad understood minorities.
The Christians were beholden to the Syrians for this service — for the moment at least— and thus the Syrians could expect compliance from them.
So was it any surprise that the Syrians we met that hot day in the Bekaa wanted only to maintain Lebanon's Maronite-dominated institutions, to restore the sovereignty of the Lebanese government, to stay not one hour,not one minute longer than necessary?
They also wanted the Palestinians crushed.
Assad did not want the civil war to continue, for if Lebanon suffered any more wounds some of its blood might seep into Syria, through those narrow grey wadis in the anti-Lebanon mountain range and down into the plateau beyond, perhaps even infecting Damascus, whose carefully balanced but Alawite-controlled metabolism had so far remained untouched by the epidemic on the other side of the border.
Nor did Assad want a new Palestinian state in Lebanon.
That was not where Palestine was supposed to be.
Palestine was meant to be to the south, beyond Golan, on the West Bank, in Gaza, in Israel itself.
The Syrians had no desire to have a revolutionary Palestinian state along their western frontier.
Indeed, the Palestinians were soon to wonder whether the Syrians wanted a Palestinian state at all.
Certainly, there was little to recommend Palestinian rule to the inhabitants of Lebanon.
By midsummer of 1976, robbery and kidnapping in west Beirut had become an inseparable part of the war.
‘Savage wolves’ was how Franjieh would describe the Palestinians a few weeks later.
On 16 June, the American ambassador to Lebanon, Francis Melloy, was abducted near the Museum crossing on the front line together with Robert Waring, his economic counsellor, and their Lebanese driver.
That same evening, their corpses — minus their shoes and socks — were found lying on the beach at Ramlet al-Baida by the Beirut station manager of British Airways.
President Ford demanded that the assassins be ‘brought to justice’, a curious concept in Lebanon just then and one that was predictably ignored.
When Arafat satisfied himself of the identity of the three Palestinians responsible, they were sent down to Tyre ‘in disgrace’.
At least one of them surfaced, rifle in hand, as an officer in the Palestinian forces to fight against the first Israeli invasion a year later.
Ford demanded an evacuation of American citizens.
There were to be a lot of evacuations in the coming years, by land, sea and air, each accompanied by promises from departing residents that their absence would only be temporary.
In some cases, they meant what they said; by 1986, some foreigners had been evacuated from Lebanon four times in 12 years.
The British left first in a convoy of 20 cars fluttering with Union flags, led by the absent ambassador's Austin Princess and a station wagon containing the bodies of Melloy and Waring.
The Americans had dignified their departure with a ceremony of shallow and macabre sentiment.
Television crews were invited to stand in front of the US Embassy and film a senior member of the staff, in black tie and dark suit, as he slowly wound up the folding door of an inconspicuous, metal-framed garage.
Inside were two young men in the full dress uniform of the United States Marines, standing like figures in a wax museum under the television lamps with two flag-draped coffins between them.
‘On my left, ladies and gentlemen, is the casket containing the body of Ambassador Melloy…
’ It was the soft-shoe théâtre noir for prime time television, broken only by the agitated voice of an American security guard wearing a blue T-shirt yelling: ‘Come on.
Let's not waste time.
Let's go.’
The PLO escorted the British through west Beirut and they were replaced at Khalde by Major Hassan Kassar of the Libyan army, a reconnaissance officer for a Libyan-sponsored Arab League peace force that disintegrated some days later.
Major Kassar carried a silver cane made from a golf club and dutifully escorted his charges through every militia checkpoint between Beirut and the Syrian front line.
When he handed them over to the Syrians, the major received a special word of thanks from representatives of the country which would, ten years later, help the Americans to bomb Libya.
The American operation on the following day was in a class all its own.
US Marines sailed a 115-foot landing craft into a converted bathing club on the west Beirut Corniche guarded by armed PLO guerrillas.
The vessel was decorated with the American bicentennial logo and American diplomats publicly thanked Palestinian officers who — a few years later — would be vilified by the same nation as ‘international terrorists’.
Avoiding the stigma of using the word ‘Palestinians’, Ford would later express his thanks to what he called ‘Arab soldiers’ who had ‘helped’with the evacuation.
But Lebanon's foreign community did not view the operation with the same enthusiasm or sense of drama as Ford, who ostentatiously spent the night in the Oval Office in Washington waiting for news of the evacuation.
When the landing craft pulled away it was only just over half full, because scarcely a tenth of the American and British citizens in the country wanted to take advantage of the offer.
Some of the Americans who stayed behind questioned the motive behind the whole affair; having publicly urged their own citizens to leave, the British Embassy then let it be known that ii privately viewed the evacuation as part of Ford's election campaign.
The Palestinians ordered a general strike in protest at Syria's involvement in Lebanon.
In Sidon, a sudden Syrian armoured thrust into the city had ended in disaster when Palestinians and Muslim members of the fragmented Lebanese national army — glorying in the name of the ‘Lebanese Arab Army’— trapped the Syrian tanks in Riad Solh Street and destroyed every one, burning their crews alive inside.
But in the mountains above Beirut, the Syrians advanced.
Every day, we would drive up to the mountains and each day the Syrian tanks would be a little closer.
The Palestinian guerrillas would squat behind their outposts of earth and rocks up in the cold air among the fir trees, cradling their rocket-propelled grenades and announcing to us that the Syrians would not be permitted to move one more metre —not one more inch — along the highway to Beirut.
And each time we visited the mountains, we would find the Syrians not an inch nor even a metre but at least a mile nearer to Beirut.
At Bhamdoun, a hill resort with a little railway station, an ornate French signal box and a clutch of mosques and apartment blocks built by the Saudis who had once gone there for their summer holidays, Syrian shellfire had smashed into the shops and flats, punching a hole into the wall of the Carlton Hotel.
The Palestinians claimed to be mining the road when we arrived; Palestinian military preparedness was as thorough as usual.
Several guerrillas, wreathed in cartridge bandoliers, were reading comics near an empty café where an old man was picking crumbs of bread off a table.
There were some Mourabitoun warriors down the road, asleep beside their mine explosives.
A Fatah officer with long, dirty hair led us down a slit trench cut into the soft, red earth.
And there, across a field filled with long grass and butterflies, were the Syrian tanks.
‘We do not want to fight the Syrians any more,’ he said.
‘The Syrians and ourselves should be fighting the Zionists together.
Assad was fooled by secret promises from America.’
It was our old friend, The Plot.
Yet the Palestinians could not see the illusory quality of such conspiracies.
How else were they to account for the martyrdom of Tel al-Za'atar, the huge Palestinian camp under siege in east Beirut?
Its Maronite attackers were able to concentrate all their energies upon their last assault against the Palestinians now that the Syrians had arrived to save Christian Lebanon.
Etienne Saqr, who used the name Abu Arz, the Father of the Cedars’— one of the more psychopathic of the minor Christian militia leaders — commanded a group which specialised in cruelty, whose men tied Palestinian prisoners to the backs of taxis and then dragged them 12 miles up the motorway to Jounieh.
Their carcasses would then be flung into a dried-up riverbed.
‘If you feel compassion for the Palestinian women and children,’ Abu Arz proclaimed, ‘remember they are communists and will bear new communists.’
Arafat had ordered the inhabitants of Tel al-Za'atar not to surrender, knowing full well that they would be defeated.
The survivors themselves later said that Arafat only wanted more martyrs to capture the attention of the world.
Bashir Gemayel's Phalange and Dany Chamoun's Tigers provided thousands of them, mostly civilians, when they eventually broke into the camp in August.
The Syrians ensured the continuation of Maronite rule by arranging for the installation of Elias Sarkis, a banker of political probity whose rule was to be marked by the further collapse of the country he promised to save.
The Syrians produced 2,000 soldiers and 40 T-62 tanks to guard his installation ceremony in the Park Hotel in Chtaura.
No stranger honeymooners could have gathered there than the gangs of parliament members — 67 of them — who were ferried down to the Bekaa in Syrian helicopters and armoured limousines, guarded by squads of bodyguards armed with anti-tank rockets.
A flight of Lebanese Hawker Hunters from the Rayak air base, now in Syrian hands, flew over the hotel as Sarkis expressed his ‘unshakeable faith in the ability of our people to rebuild a new Lebanon based on fraternity, unity and hatred of any form of partition.’
The Syrians drove effortlessly through the Palestinian positions on Bhamdoun while the Phalangists attacked the Palestinians further down the mountains.
The Syrians used their tanks against the leftists without compunction, but by October they were armed with a weapon far more powerful than their armour: a mandate from the Arab League to enter Beirut as an ‘Arab Deterrent Force’.
The Syrians could now move into the city.
Contingents of Saudi, North Yemeni, Sudanese and Emirates soldiers were to operate with the Syrian army to provide a semblance of pan-Arab unity, but it was Syrian armour and Syrian troops who would occupy the Lebanese capital.
There was to be no opposition, the Syrians said.
Once in Beirut, all heavy weapons would be collected from the militias.
This was another of the instructions that would be repeatedly announced, ignored and forgotten over the next decade.
Emboldened by their own good fortune, the Maronites even argued that they did not need their Syrian saviours in the streets of Christian east Beirut.
It was a premature demand.
Down the mountainside above the city at dawn on 10 November — almost 17 months to the day since the civil war had begun — there filed column after column of Syrian tanks, artillery and troop transporters at least 20 miles of them, clogging the valleys with clouds of blue exhaust fumes.
More than half the 30,000 Syrians to have entered Lebanon were now approaching the city that lay below them in the early morning heat, its dim perspective merging into the Mediterranean.
Never had a postwar Arab army occupied the capital of a brother — or sister — nation, let alone done so with such formal constitutional approval.
And they were led — incredulity forced us to ask each other later if we had seen it — these legions of men in full battledress were led by a lone soldier in a forage cap sitting atop a T-62 tank, playing a flute.
At 35 mph, he travelled down the highway, all the while swaying from side to side on the iron turret, cheeks puffed out, face frozen with concentration as he played his unheard tune, his notes smothered by the thrashing of the tank tracks.
The Pied Piper of Damascus led the way into Beirut.
In the Christian village of Kahhale, white flags were hanging from the windows.
The local Phalangist headquarters were deserted but a Syrian officer, who had earlier been distributing leaflets describing the Syrian army as ‘an envoy of brotherly love and peace’, brusquely jumped down from his tank and uprooted a Phalangist sign designating Kahhale a military zone.
He contemptuously hurled the notice-board into a ravine.
At Hazmiyeh, the Christians threw rose water and rice at the tank crews.
Only when the soldiers moved opposite the Palestinian front line at Galerie Semaan — and the familiar crackle of Beirut rifle fire began to make the troops nervous — did the Syrian column come to a halt as if scarcely able to take in its objectives.
A disciplined, regular army was about to drive the gunmen from streets which had for so long been ruled by rival guerrillas exacting their own terrible day-to-day justice.
And it was a genuinely historic moment when the first tanks moved past the blocks of apartments in the Beirut suburbs, many of the buildings scorched and smashed by months of fighting.
Just half a mile away, we could see the rampart of sand, 20 feet high, behind which the Palestinians lay waiting, unwilling participants in a ceasefire which Arafat himself had already declared sacrosanct.
Only a few of the Christian residents appeared to notice that the Syrians had come prepared for more than just a few days' stay.
Many of the soldiers had brought their own suitcases and there were truckloads of supplies: not just food and bedding but barrack equipment, construction materials, even parts of prefabricated buildings.
A more transient atmosphere existed on the other side of the front line, just beyond the heaps of dark earth at Galerie Semaan.
If the Syrians moved to a coordinated plan, their potential Palestinian opponents still lived on their emotions.
On their side of the line, singing was coming from inside the shell-smashed, desecrated church of Saint Michel.
The Palestinian gunmen crouching behind the sand embankment across Boulevard Ariss went on watching the Syrian tanks, ignoring the sound.
But when we walked inside the church, we found five small Palestinian boys standing in a line just where the altar would have been.
Each was dressed in a miniature guerrilla uniform and each carried a gun.
The eldest, who had unwashed brown hair and could have been no more than ten or eleven years old, was holding an automatic rifle in his arms.
The boy on his right was grasping a rocket-launcher.
The youngest, perhaps only eight, was bowed down under the weight of an M-16 rifle.
He had grenades strapped to his chest with military webbing.
Under the eyes of a serious, tall Palestinian with a pistol in his holster, they were singing, over and over again: ‘Fatah, we are your children and, when we are older, we will be your soldiers.’
Stamping their hopelessly outsize boots, they trudged in single file out of the gutted, white-stone church and slogged off over a ditch away from the barricade.
The guerrillas there still ignored them.
Instead, they went on watching the Syrian tanks manoeuvring down the road half a mile away, in what had the previous day been the Christian front line.
Shells exploded a long way away across Beirut, down by the port.
The thump of each explosion sounded like a door being slammed far beneath our feet.
One of the Palestinian guerrillas turned irritably to a companion and asked: ‘Why don't we shoot at them?’
Had he not heard the Arab League spokesman that morning, promising that the Syrian ‘peace-keepers’ would ‘strike with an iron fist’at any resistance?
But then a remarkable event occurred.
From behind us, from the Muslim district of Shiyah, came about 20 people, husbands and wives and a few girls in summer dresses and a man with two little boys walking beside him.
They were the nearest residents to the front line and most of them had not dared to walk down the boulevard for more than a year.
Cars began to draw up amid the rubble and whole families, 60 or 70 people in all, climbed out of them to view the silent barricade.
Businessmen and elderly women picked their way over the broken concrete and steel to stare in disbelief at the crippled buildings with their bulging walls and blackened balconies.
The final great act — for everyone thought it was the final act — took place on 16 November.
It fell to a platoon of 14 Syrian infantrymen to end the war because, down by the harbour, the 19 months of street fighting were, almost inconceivably, still going on.
For to the very last absurd minute, the combatants went on shooting at each other, as if they could not resist one last battle, as if the front line and the war had become inseparable from their own lives.
We discovered the Syrians sheltering under the walls of Avenue Charles Helou as they came under intermittent shellfire, apparently from Palestinian positions a mile away.
Their path of advance — from Christian to Muslim sectors — seemed to have been ordained by history.
The Syrians had after all come to save the Christians.
The soldiers carried rocket-launchers as well as rifles or machine-guns and behind them, spaced along the dual carriageway high above the port, were lines of tanks.
The platoon commander, a short man with a moustache, a cane and a two-way radio, was arguing with a gang of Christian Phalangist gunmen who had not yet vacated their barricades and who were still guarding the streets, wearing revolvers and carrying carbines with telescopic sights.
The officer, obviously unnerved by the continued shooting, was trying to persuade the Phalangists to leave the area while at the same time asking them for directions.
Every few minutes a shell would swish over the rooftops to explode with a roar in the docks; and more Syrian troops — nearer to the explosions and silhouetted against the sea — could be seen running beside the harbour wall.
The Syrian intention was to move right across the front line and, with tins in mind, the officer with the radio began to lead the way up the avenue towards Martyrs' Square.
We could see the entrance to the great square at the end of the street.
Before the war, it had been a fruit market and bus station; one side of its nineteenth-century Levantine façade had served as the entrance to the souk.
Its centre was once lined with palm trees and its perimeter with cafés.
It took us 20 minutes of scrambling through squalid, ruined alleyways before we reached the place, clambering over burnt-out buses and cars to find some Christian gunmen sitting on a pile of earth, smoking cigarettes.
But the square was now unrecognisable, every building had been tom down or pummelled by hundreds of shells and rockets.
Buses — some of them upside-down and turned into barricades — were strewn across the square while a mountain of upended transport containers formed the last Christian front line.
‘Please,’ the Syrian officer kept saying to the Phalangists.
‘Please leave us now.
You can go now.’
The Syrians watched impassively as one of the Christian gunmen produced a camera, the kind of small pocket camera that might be given to a child as a Christmas present.
Then the Christians stood up in front of their barricade and put their arms round each other 's shoulders.
They faced the camera in their dungarees and jeans and cowboy-style holsters and knee-high boots.
Two of them put on paper hats which bore the sign of the swastika.
A third held out a crucifix.
And there, in front of their destroyed city, they had their photograph taken, like a picture for a school magazine.
The front line was thus immortalised, firmly affixed to their own existence, a part of them, something to be recalled with nostalgia, something to be understood and wondered at.
Then they walked solemnly away.
We waited another half hour behind a pile of sand for the shooting to die down.
Round the corner to our right was what we journalists liked to refer to as ‘No-Man's-Land’, into which no man had ventured for more than a year.
At 10.30 precisely, the Syrian officer stood up, studied a large map of Beirut and walked into an open street to the right.
The soldiers followed him and so did we.
But what we saw was not a street in any real sense of the term.
It was an avenue of crumbling, collapsed masonry in which eight- and nine-storey buildings had slid into the spaces between ruins.
Ceilings and floors dangled from what had once been a department store.
We walked through this rubble, the Syrian patrol around us, picking our way over concrete and broken typewriters and tailors' dummies and, occasionally, small, grey, live grenades.
There was complete silence as we padded through two more streets with walls so bitten away that they looked like lace.
Then we came to a smashed yellow stone façade and a doorway that led down into a cellar.
Sounds came from inside and from the darkness appeared a man holding a Kalashnikov rifle and wearing a Palestinian scarf.
His face was covered in dirt and he grinned at us in a rather frightened way.
We had reached the Palestinian front line.
The Syrian soldier nearest to the door held out his arms in friendship.
The man embraced the Syrian, starting at the same time to cry.
He sobbed on the soldier's shoulder.
More Palestinian guerrillas emerged from the darkness — two Palestinian girls with rocket-launchers were among them — and the soldiers began to shout greetings.
We walked up a narrow street from their dugout past a doorway whose lintel was matted with grass, the entrance to the old film company offices to which the 12-year-old gunboy had taken us less than two months before.
There on the other side stood the small square where the Lebanese parliament had once met.
The parliament building had burned, its roof had collapsed and a large heap of concrete lay around its doors.
Just in front of it lay what remained of the ancient forum of Roman Beyrutus , three bullet-slashed columns in the middle of the road.
The Mourabitoun gunmen and Palestinians fired their machine-guns in the air to welcome the Syrians, the thousands of bullets ricocheting off the ruins.
Had the Lebanese gunmen not been so enthusiastic in their celebrations, they might have noticed a small but symbolic incident which cast a shadow over the Syrians' arrival.
As the guns were still being fired, a Syrian tank came lunging up the shattered street where we had just been walking and entered the tiny square.
It drove to one side, then turned 90 degrees, its tracks skidding on the rubble.
And as the last shots were being fired, the Syrian tank came to rest outside the very door of the building which housed Lebanon's ‘democratic’ parliament.
It was too soon for anyone to understand the true meaning of what had happened.
That afternoon, Ed Cody and I drove up to Galerie Semaan.
The Syrians had already broken through the rampart of sand but as we approached, a Palestinian holding a rifle walked up to our car.
He was tired, unsmiling, puzzled in an irritated way.
‘Where are you going?’
Sahafeen , we said.
‘Where are your papers?’
Cody looked at the gunman with a cold, unhappy expression.
‘We don't need papers any more,’ he replied, rewarding the Palestinian with his familiar, mirthless smile.
‘The revolution's over.’