

Introduction
THIS book is about later life from the inside.
The heart of it is about later life today, as told to us by 55 older men and women who are all grandparents.
We have reached out in two directions.
For each of them we aimed to speak to one of their children and if possible one of their grandchildren too, in order to have more than one perspective from inside each family.
We have also reached back in time, using memories of grandparents from more than 600 interviews and autobiographies, to try to sense how later life may have changed over two or more centuries.
Listening to all these personal accounts has had a profound effect on us.
The fundamental message is in our title.
In terms of chronological years, our 55 grandparents are aged from around sixty to over eighty.
But unless they are ill, or miserable, they do not feel, in their real selves, that they are old.
And considering how most of us think about old age, they are absolutely right.
Contrary to the all too common belief that ageing is essentially an unavoidable process of retreat, of withdrawal into passivity and dependence, the truth is that for most men and women later life is a time of active challenge: a time when perhaps more than ever they need to be able to respond imaginatively to change.
To succeed, they have to be able to draw on their full resources, built up over a lifetime.
They need not to feel old, but to feel themselves.
We have been able to explore, through what they told us, the many different ways in which they respond to this challenge.
Revealing the roots of their resilience through their own accounts is the essential purpose of this book.
A century ago, later life was a privilege reached only by a fortunate minority: average life expectancy was under fifty years.
Today it has risen by more than twenty years, to 72 for men and 77 for women, and it is still rising.
The proportion of our population aged over 65 has swollen from one in twenty to one in five.
The once tiny fringe of retired men and women has broadened to a band of ten million.
This dramatic alteration in the pattern of human life is part of a still-continuing worldwide change.
More men and women are not only living healthily into their seventies, but into their eighties and nineties.
By the early twenty-first century there will be two million eighty-year-olds in Britain; seven million in the United States; 25 million in China.
For the first time in history, later life has become a normal human expectation.
Yet for all that, it remains a strangely secret and much misunderstood world.
In writing this book we have had a double objective.
The first is to convey a picture of ordinary later life and its diverse patterns and meanings as older men and women have expressed it to us.
The second is to place that direct experience of a particular generation against the longer perspective of time.
We shall turn to the dimensions of historical change in our next chapter.
Let us begin here with a few facts — and also some fallacies — about the present.
They bring us immediately up against the complex and fundamental issue of how the images we hold of later life and ageing are put together.
Why do we take some things as natural, unavoidable, and others as socially shaped and changeable?
Take health.
The image of natural decay is very deep-seated.
Nor should we underestimate the health problems of later life.
In middle age a quarter of the population report some kind of ill-health or disability; at seventy, two-fifths; beyond 75, half.
Of those over 65, 15 per cent are seriously incapacitated or housebound; 5 per cent are psychiatrically ill, and depression is much more widespread.
Nevertheless, looked at the other way round these figures show that most older men and women enjoy reasonable if not perfect health.
Only one in twenty of them is reduced to a dependent life in a hospital or home: considerably more, in fact, are carers for others.
The transformation in earlier health patterns brought about by social and medical change is obvious, and can be expected to continue.
The most recent Scandinavian and American research suggests that however long you live, serious ill-health is most likely to lie compressed into the last three or four years before death.
Contrary to common belief, in short, ‘longer life means longer healthier life.’
What of the association of old age with poverty?
Some older men and women have very comfortable incomes, and the recent spread of advertised facilities for them such as sheltered home developments suggests their numbers are far from insignificant.
On the other hand, a third of the retired today live at or below the poverty line.
Such sharp contrasts are partly the consequence of inequalities of income earlier in life.
But poverty is also the direct result of a new historical disadvantage: the exclusion of older men and women from work.
In the past they worked as long as they were able: it was illness rather than age as such which placed them in need.
This may be one reason for the relative generosity of earlier community help.
We falsely congratulate ourselves on the progressiveness of contemporary welfare provision, ignoring not only its insufficiency but also the fact that much of the need itself is an artificial creation of contemporary social prejudices against people continuing at work.
How about the differences between older men and older women?
Beyond 75, women outnumber men by almost two to one.
Not surprisingly, the contemporary image of an old person is typically of an old woman, and of the loneliness of widowhood.
But again, this imbalance is a new historical phenomenon, brought about by the uneven advances in medicine and the lesser exposure of this particular generation of women to health hazards such as smoking or industrial injury.
We need to remember that it is no more natural for women to live longer than men than it is for them to have lower incomes, to expect to give up work if their men wish it at marriage or in later life, to be the keepers of family memory, the main carers of those in need, the main sufferers from the empty nest as children leave home.
This may have been their experience in a particular historical era.
But even within it, we can see plenty of seeds of possible change: older women intensely committed to a work calling, older men who become housekeepers or carers.
The danger, however, lies not only in swallowing false generalizations, or in forgetting how far the realities of later life are shaped by social pressures which may be quite new or open to future change.
We should be equally sensitive to the pervasive and often demeaning influences of some of the common images of old age on older men and women themselves.
These images build up into stereotypes; generalizations about what is to be expected of older people, which are based at best on partial information rather than the full diversity of their real lives.
The process of stereotyping is complex and only partly conscious.
Behind it seems to lie a powerful public need to provide a justification for social inequality by blaming those who have the rawest deal for their own fate: hence the stereotyping of immigrants, and of women, as well as of older people.
Stereotyping takes place partly through splitting, and partly through discarding.
Splitting creates idealized images as well as vilification: the quiet, kindly grandmother, the benevolent granddad, the wise elder, set against the dried-up spinster, the interfering granny, the miser, the dirty old man, the bedsoiler.
But it is the derogatory, spoilt image which sticks as the group image.
The typical old person is transformed into a patronized welfare recipient, only one step removed from the ‘poor dears’ in nursing homes: not to be listened to very seriously, if at all, ‘not quite whole people, not people like us’.
But everyone knows real old people who do not fit the stereotypes: so discarding follows.
The active next-door neighbour, the national political leader, artist, or intellectual, the well-to-do couple on their constant travels, are defined out of the frame.
‘They are not a problem, they have no obvious needs, hence they cannot really be elderly.’
The real lives of ordinary men and women described here give the lie to such false images of later life.
But we must not forget the shadow which they cast, particularly on older women, who bear the double burden of sex as well as age prejudice.
Some of the attitudes and strategies which we shall find — defining only others as old, for example— are ways chosen, sometimes consciously, sometimes not, to avoid the humiliations of a spoilt identity.
Later life, in short, demands courage; and as we shall see, imagination too.
But both prove abundant.
It may seem odd that what we heard was such a revelation.
After all, interviewing old people is no new idea.
How is it that the sociologists and oral historians who interview and record the elderly have not already countered the derogatory myth of old age as helpless degeneration?
In part it is because they too have unknowingly taken in the prevailing stereotypes.
But it is also because their own specialist interests have led them in other directions.
Thus the most influential sociologists researching on later life in the last thirty years have been first and foremost concerned with documenting poverty and need among the old, rather than looking at their present lives as a whole, or how they reached where they are now.
For the same reason they have focused on the groups who seemed most likely to be needy: the working class in the inner city, the isolated and the institutionalized.
Peter Townsend's classic The Family Life of Old People (1957) still remains in many ways the most sympathetic and sensitive portrait of ordinary old people's lives published in Britain.
It takes us into their homes, gives space for their voices; and Townsend powerfully attacked the widespread myth that the family was no longer providing most of them with social support or practical help.
But even then the East End of London could not have represented the rest of the country; and even he plays for our pity, opening with a classic portrait of poverty and deprivation.
The emphasis in his own later work, and of others who have followed him, has been increasingly on the most vulnerable.
For the study of social need and welfare policy this is clearly right; yet it unwittingly helps to reinforce the stereotypes.
Oral historians had meanwhile begun to record the earlier memories of ordinary old people, working right across the country.
But as historians they were more concerned with the past than the present, so they only gradually came to realize that the two were in many ways inseparable: both that remembering itself could be a help to the present lives of those telling their story, and also that the memory could be profoundly shaped by subsequent experience and this needed to be known to interpret it more effectively.
Hence oral history interviews were typically truncated.
Sociologists chopped off childhood and most of adulthood from their interviews, and oral historians neatly matched this by chopping off the whole later life.
More than this, even with earlier memories they rarely made any systematic attempt to gather evidence of later life from childhood memories about grandparents or old people in the neighbourhood.
In this they were simply reflecting the typical disinterest of historians.
Indeed, even today, the social history of ordinary ageing in this country has barely started.
We have tried to sum up the fragments of information which we have for the last three centuries in our second chapter, ‘Glimpses of a Lost History’.
There has been no British work to match the attempts of pioneering European and American historians to provide an overview.
Although we have a clearer picture than we did of long-term changes in demography and household structure, little has been done to fill out the picture in terms of living experience.
More than ten years ago Peter Laslett complained that ‘we can say little yet about the everyday relationship between old people and their grown-up, independent children for any period earlier than recent times.’
That remains true: and the recent past, which is the one period open to direct study through life story testimony, is the least subject to research by either historians or sociologists because it falls uneasily between their concerns.
For these various reasons our own use of full life stories for understanding later life both in the past and today remains exceptional.
But its context has been a general quickening of interest in research on ageing not only among sociologists and historians, but also from other disciplines such as psychiatry and anthropology.
Our research itself gained from its context as part of the recent Economic and Social Research Council ‘Ageing Initiative’.
The work of other researchers has in many different ways helped to shape our work, to influence what we have asked and to make us more sensitive to what we have heard.
There are four ways in particular which we wish to mention here.
The first is the ‘life course’ approach which was first developed by sociologists, but has recently been taken up by some historians.
Ageing has to be recognized as a process , a gradual transition, rather than a once-for-all event.
In the crudest sense, there are indeed ‘young old’ and ‘old old’; and although you can be either younger or older at any age, physical and mental disabilities do slowly cumulate on average with increasing years.
Some of the first life course sociologists assumed that this gradual ageing process was also socially unidirectional, towards ‘disengagement’, as if in acceptance that life itself was ebbing away.
This was the approach of M. E. Cumming and W. H. Henry's influential book,Growing Old (1961).
But it was soon followed by another American study of the elderly, Margaret Clark and Barbara Anderson's Culture and Ageing (1967), attacking the idea that disengagement was typical or commendable.
On the contrary, they saw their San Francisco elderly as fighting for survival and self-esteem through a remarkable variety of strategies.
What was most striking was ‘the rich and wide variety of adaptations to ageing’ which they had encountered.
‘The clearest, most unequivocal finding to come out of our social analysis is the singularity of the subjects in it.’
And their telling portraits of their subjects vividly brought this home.
Although earlier crude categories survive in some influential textbooks on ageing, a subtler stance has gradually emerged from this controversy.
It is recognized that there are many valid ways of growing older.
Social workers in training are now encouraged to accept that ‘older people are entitled to select their own destiny, within given limits.’
This in itself means that it has become more important to understand what their lives mean to them.
Even at the most practical, simple level, those concerns and aspects of their lives ‘which are not highly valued by external observers may well be amongst the most significant.’
Equally important, the interest and wishes of the old are not created spontaneously in the present.
They are the culminations of a whole life which, as Malcolm Johnson puts it, ‘sculpted their present problems and concerns’; a life itself built around many different ‘life-threads’— education, work, marriage, children, hobbies, and so on— so that it is best understood, both in psychological and social terms, ‘as a complex of strands running for different lengths of time throughout a life biography and moulding its individuality’.
Only a life history approach can allow us to follow these threads to a fuller understanding of each person's singular present.
It has been fundamental to our own work here.
A second influence has been the developing interest in the differences in later life experience between men and women.
The fact that men are likely to die earlier, and far more women experience many years of widowed life, is well known.
Sociologists have also frequently documented the peculiar strength of the tie between married daughters and their mothers in many communities, and how women are more likely both to be cared for by their families in old age, and to be the carers.
Relatively recently, feminist scholars, now drawn closer through common experience to an older generation many of whose values they had challenged, have extended their concerns and pushed forward a more subtle questioning of women's experience of ageing and how it might differ from men's as a result of inequalities right through the life cycle.
In what special ways, Sarah Matthews asks, could a group of American widows maintain their sense of self-identity?
Or following closely from this, what do physical changes in their bodies imply for men and for women?
Is there a ‘double standard of ageing’, Susan Sontag asks?
Getting older may be ‘less profoundly wounding for a man’, because throughout life being physically attractive counts more in a woman's life than in a man's, and for women especially beauty is identified with youthfulness.
Or perhaps, on the contrary, it is a release for older women no longer to have to be so concerned with sexual appearances.
It can give them a chance — certainly often seized by widows in the past — to assert themselves with genuine dignity and authority in the public world.
What of the implications of the traditional division of roles in the home and at paid work?
The unthinking equation of widowhood for women with retirement for men has been challenged.
So has the common assumption that retirement from paid employment is ‘far less drastic’ for women than for men.
The majority of women do undertake paid work in their later middle life, and it can be just as wrenching for them to leave it as for men.
Hence the social acceptability of earlier retirement by women can prove a mixed blessing: it gives them more chance to leave paid work at a time of their own choosing, but also leaves them more open to pressure from others to retire.
Similarly, the changing of domestic roles proves complex: while some wives may welcome more domestic help from their retired husbands, others will resent it as an intrusion into their sphere of control in daily life.
Françoise Cribier finds one reason for the remarkable exodus of retired couples from Paris is that both man and wife need the husband to get out of the house.
In the city they are cooped up together all day in an apartment.
In the country or on the coast they can re-create their routine of earlier days.
They rise early by the alarm clock, so the husband can go out to work — cultivating vegetables, rearing rabbits and poultry in the garden, and mending things in his shed.
British couples have less need to leave the city to find a garden.
But perhaps more generally women find their own retirement easier because they have had to organize their own time for most of their lives and have relied more on the small pleasures of domestic life.
And what were the implications of these traditional roles for grandparenthood?
Sarah Cunningham-Burley finds Aberdeen grandfathers much more uncertain than grandmothers of what their role should be.
But could that not be a new chance for a man to find in later life ‘an emotional experience that he missed when his children were young’?
Beyond that, how are the implications of widowhood different for women and men?
Sheer numbers mean that widows are much less likely to remarry than widowers: there simply aren't enough men of their age around.
It has been suggested that the shock of widowhood for a woman is like compulsory redundancy for a man; and for a woman whose career has been as a housewife this might certainly be the case, even though for others it could prove a relief from the narrow constraints of their domestic role.
But if widowhood is such a double shock for many women, why do widows survive much longer than widowers?
Is it that men are simply less used to looking after themselves, less adept at creating the new social relationships they need?
But if older women do have special survival skills, evaluating them is not a simple matter.
Throughout their lives most women play less prestigious social roles than men, and their paid work is generally worse paid, less secure, and of lower status.
They also take the primary responsibility for the care of children.
The unbalanced responsibilities which they bear as carers continue in middle and later life.
In Britain, three times as many women as men care for elderly or handicapped relatives: most typically women in middle age, but many themselves older.
They look after parents most often, but also neighbours, friends, and other relatives.
Men in middle age do this much less often, although surprisingly, in later life those who survive are as likely to be carers as women.
A notable group of recent feminist studies has focused on these women carers, bringing home in no uncertain measure the cost they pay, financially, in time, and emotionally: ‘the claustrophobia, to the point of being suffocated, of living with the situation and, of course, the exhausting conflict of mixed emotions…the love, anger, frustration and guilt’.
At the same time there is a real personal value and satisfaction to be gained from the caring and nurturing work of women in the family.
Barbara Myerhoff's notably thoughtful study of a seafront Jewish old people's centre in Venice, Los Angeles, conveys this well.
Observing the men and women here, she came to suspect that appearances were deceptive.
The men had won their prestige from work, from scholarship, in the public arena; and they sat outside on the pavement benches, publicly debating politics, theology, and history.
But did the women really feel that their own work had been less important?
She had her doubts:
Perhaps it is true that women are kept humble by the nature of their everyday activities.
They spend so much time immersed in unglamorous stuff — transient and trivial details that vanish and reappear to be done again the next moment.
But does this necessarily mean that a woman is not fully aware of the enormous importance of offering food, producing and raising children, shaping the atmosphere of the home?
Considering again my grandmother and the Center women, I suggest there is a set of understandings shared among women, concerning the meaning and value of the conventional functions…
In caring for others, in serious, dedicated friendships, in constructing individual careers made of personally discovered projects, in arranging lives of self-care and attentiveness to others who are needy…
These understandings are a kind of underground culture, quietly transmitted…
Real but rather easy to overlook, they continue through the life cycle, and may reemerge as essential aids in later life.
Certainly the importance of such roles, and the strengths won from them, need to be taken seriously; but not at the price of romanticization.
A third way of distinguishing experiences in later life is in terms of community, class, and conflict.
This has been a traditional starting-point for both historians and sociologists.
The Americans have again gone ahead, with books on retirement communities like Idle Haven and Fun City, documenting their way of life and internal struggles for leadership.
The same can be done in miniature by looking at a sheltered housing group or an institutional home.
Chris Phillipson has contrasted retired men from different work backgrounds in different British communities.
He found that both class and community mattered.
Birmingham architects had the continuing energy, self-confidence, and material means to create a comfortable and interesting retirement for themselves.
Former Midland carworkers and Tyneside shipbuilders seemed by contrast worn out, despairingly lost, cut off from former workmates in their conurbations.
They wept on their last day of work: ‘I felt terrible’; ‘it seemed as though you were suddenly cut off from life.’
They lay in bed in the morning, ‘puzzled about how to fill me time in.’
Yet in a former Durham pit village, although all had either been made redundant or been forced out of work by ill-health, a group of miners were so sustained by the community network of neighbours and relatives that giving up work seemed a positive blessing.
‘When a person has been underground for so many years it's a new lease of life’; ‘it's just a grand feeling.’
In practice, although this way of thinking was one perspective from which we looked at our material, it proved much less useful than we expected.
This was partly because our people were all scattered, rather than concentrated in particular communities.
The material therefore only hinted at differences in social life between them.
But it was a good deal more surprising to find that class patterns were not more obvious.
Judged in terms of former occupations, there seemed to be much more variety within than between classes.
There are in fact good reasons for this.
Occupation is never more than a shorthand for allocating social class, which leaves out other key dimensions: your education, or the house you live in, for instance.
It works particularly awkwardly for married women at any age, since they may be employed at quite a different level from their husbands, or not at all.
But in later life these difficulties apply equally strongly to both men and women.
If they carry on working, it may be in a lower status occupation: should they be classified by this, or by their earlier main job?
And as the years from retirement lengthen, it seems more and more tenuous to group men in terms of long-past work, let alone women who since marriage may never have been in paid work at all.
What must count is their present resources: their home, their pension, their health, their family, their friends, their psychic energy.
In terms of class background, some of these factors are more sharply tilted than others — and not all the same way.
Thus those who were in middle-class occupations will almost certainly enjoy larger pensions and more comfortable houses, and they can expect to suffer fewer disabilities, and live longer too.
But they are less likely to benefit from family living close by to support them.
On the other hand, what older people have in common is in some ways more striking than the class differences between them.
Except for a very few rich people, they are all financially much less well off than they were.
As a whole group they are in relative or absolute poverty, in contrast to the general adult population of working age.
Nor can they hope to earn more in the future.
Systematically pushed to the margins in the labour market, past the household power of active parenthood, soon deprived of all but the trimmings of public influence, are they not all victims in the age-bound society of the contemporary West?
Anthropologists, like Nancy Foner in Ages in Conflict , have shown how in non-Western societies this struggle for rewards and power may be openly organized through recognized age-sets.
It is this perspective, drawn from both anthropology and history, rather than class conflict, which provides the deeply pessimistic theme of Simone de Beauvoir's Old Age .
We reject her pessimism.
But the discrimination is undeniable.
More positively, older people share a degree of freedom.
Just because their lives are no longer structured by employment or education, there is more space for a variety of life patterns among the elderly of any class background.
They are distinctive, ‘because they must choose; responsibility for structuring their lives is uniquely their own’.
Rex Taylor and Graeme Ford found a ‘seemingly endless’ diversity of life patterns through interviewing old people in Aberdeen.
They could focus on their wider family, or their spouse, or a continuing job, or a social cause or hobby, or their own physical health.
‘Some lead such active lives that we found it difficult to arrange a time for interview, while others are so isolated and lonely that our interviewers felt guilty about terminating the interview and leaving them to themselves.’
This certainly fits with our experience.
And the overall groupings which we finally evolved for this book in terms of life focus also turn out to be remarkably close to the clusters of life styles picked out in an earlier American study taking just this perspective, Robert Williams and Claudine Wirths's Lives through the Years .
This brings us to the last perspective which has influenced us: the study, in the broadest sense, of personality.
Older people may have the scope for choice, but how they use it depends on the resources which they have built up over their lives.
Partly this is a question of class.
We have also been impressed by the independent influence of family relationships over the generations, an approach which has been brought home to us through discussion with family therapists.
But the individual variety in resilience, energy, and adaptability remains remarkable.
Sometimes it is clearly the outcome of a lifetime.
There are also others whose unrealized creativity only flowers in later life.
These personal responses and strategies build the sense of individual meaning and self-identity essential for survival.
They will remain fundamental to our concern, and a basic issue to which we shall return at the end.
How typical of the ordinary experience of later life are the accounts which we present here?
Two kinds of caution are needed about the nature of the evidence, and about the people who gave it.
One chapter of this book is based on written autobiographies, and almost the whole of the rest on tape-recorded life story interviews.
Typically these interviews lasted three or more hours and were recorded over two or three visits.
They were all transcribed, to produce 50 to 150 pages of transcript each.
This gives our evidence great strength.
Telling their own story from childhood to an interviewer is for most people an intimate experience which encourages them to be remarkably open about themselves.
Not uncommonly, indeed, they will speak of things which they have never before told anyone.
They have the time and space to explain themselves.
We have the exact record of their words, rather than an interviewer's summary interpretation.
And we can look at the interview as a whole to understand what particular comments mean.
These are all significant advantages when compared with the evidence of most social surveys.
We use this evidence in two different ways.
The first is retrospective.
It is therefore subject to the omissions and confusions of long-term memory, which have been discussed in considerable detail by both social scientists and oral historians.
It will suffice to say here that while most people retain quite substantial and reliable memories of their own everyday lives in childhood and young adulthood, and also of the key turning-points in middle and later life, both fleeting and peripheral experience is much more rarely remembered.
Memory of life in middle age tends to be sketchier.
Dates are never reliable, and similar events can easily be confused or telescoped into one.
And most important of all, although past feelings — often encapsulated in vivid stories — can certainly be remembered, we all go on reinterpreting our lives in emotional terms at every stage.
We feel differently about our parents when we are children than we do as adults, and while this may not alter our recollections of everyday family life, it will affect what we choose to highlight, and how we sum up our relationship with them.
In a similar way, as we shall find later, although the widowed and still married give similar pictures of the practical division of roles in their married lives, the widowed tend to interpret these apparently similar marriages differently, remembering themselves as having been closer couples than do those who are still married.
In Part One the life stories are used only retrospectively, drawing on childhood memories of grandparents.
A child's view of the older generation is clearly very partial.
It is most intrinsically valuable as an indication of the quality of relationships between the generations, and we have primarily interpreted it in that way.
We also believe that these intimate, naive glimpses of a lost past have a wider interest just because what we know of the history of later life from inside is so meagre.
The impressions conveyed, however, need to be taken within the frame which historians have put together from other sources, with which we therefore begin.
In the remainder of the book the focus is on activities, feelings, and relationships in the present.
For this purpose the type of interview was particularly suitable, with accounts of present-day life coming towards the end of a now intimate interview.
We wanted both detailed accounts and subjective interpretations, and we were given both.
It is important to re-emphasize, however, that just because we are presenting an account of later life from the inside, rather than as judged by outsiders, this book does not attempt to present an objective measure of disadvantage.
If we had wanted that we would have used medical questionnaires to evaluate physical and mental health, listed the facilities and defects in each house, and asked for income and expenditure budgets.
Many very thorough and valid surveys of this type have been carried out.
Our objective was different: not so much to plot the difficulties of later life, as to discover how people find a path through them.
What about the people who wrote or told us life stories: how far can they be taken as typical?
For Part One we used two separate samples, which we explain in detail.
The 142 written autobiographies from the nineteenth century are a cross-section of the social classes, but in no sense representative.
Autobiographers are clearly special people — even though many may come from quite typical families.
But once we try to reach beyond living memory this constraint is inevitable.
Our other main sample, however, the 444 life stories recorded for an earlier project, had been deliberately chosen on the basis of a quota sample to be representative of the British population as a whole in the early twentieth century.
We are confident that these are a broadly reliable cross-section.
The remainder of the book is based on the 55 interviews with contemporary older men and women.
This is too small a number to make any claims to statistical representativeness.
We nevertheless ensured that as individuals they were selected in a random way, by using an earlier sample survey as our starting list.
Through that we obtained a middle generation, who then passed us on to the older generation of the family.
As a result there was a double filter, in terms of willingness to be recorded.
Since we wanted to record long, in-depth interviews, this was inevitable, but it is a difficulty which must bring caution.
For example, we know that some people eventually decided not to be recorded because of painful secrets in their lives, while there were others who for just this reason found it helpful to talk: but how far these two groups balance out can only be guessed.
Fortunately it is possible to check how far — in terms of occupational background, type of housing and main income, and general health — these grandparents match the general population of their age.
One qualification must be that because the sample is small, there is only one immigrant family among them, which excludes any consideration of the special features of later life in ethnic minorities.
Another crucial difference is a direct result of our research design: among the population as a whole, only two-thirds of those over 65 have children and grandchildren.
We have therefore missed two important minorities: those who never married, and those couples who had no children.
In terms of needing help, these are precisely the most vulnerable groups, and for good reasons they have therefore received more attention in earlier work on the elderly.
We have to remember this in considering how far the experience presented in this book is typical.
On the other hand, the elderly with descendants are the majority.
It is worth noting too, that with higher marriage rates and less involuntary childlessness, they will constitute a rising proportion of those entering later life.
In all other respects, however, our group seem to present a typical spread, excluding only the very small minority too seriously ill to be interviewed.
We cannot claim these life stories to be ‘representative’ in the strict social scientific sense, but we do believe them to be ‘valid’.
What they have to tell us fully demands our respect.
We must add one final personal note.
It did not feel right, in a project on latter life from the inside, to stay on the outside ourselves.
So early on we recorded our own life stories and our own reflections on the personal experience of getting older: at around thirty, around forty, and around fifty.
We have also recorded the older generation in our own families — noticing how some things we knew went unmentioned, but also making some surprising new discoveries of our own family secrets.
And as family members we have seen and felt at close hand some of the most intense pains and also pleasures of later life: on the one hand, bereavement and loss, but on the other, the continued mastery of old skills, the creation of new pursuits and interests, the discovery of new friends and of new ways of contributing to the wider community.
In dedicating our book to six grandmothers in our own families, we mark the special inspiration which each in different ways has given us.
PART ONE: THEN
Glimpses of a Lost History
WHAT was it like to grow old in the past in Britain?
For the moment we can only piece together fragments of evidence.
The history of ageing in this country has still to be written.
Much of it is now irrecoverably lost; for the lack of interest in the experience of ordinary old people shown by historians is mirrored in the scanty documentation which survives from the past.
Like ordinary people in general, old people usually show up vividly in the record only when they become a problem.
At death, in the moment of passing, all secure an entry, and some a lasting monument; but of most people's later life little is ever known, or now knowable.
Such a silence is itself significant.
It reflects powerlessness.
It also reflects ambivalence.
A rounded picture of later life over the past two or three centuries is thus impossible.
But we do know enough to be able to pick out some clear changes, and continuities too, by tracing particular themes.
Let us begin with social attitudes to ageing.
How different were they in the seventeenth century from today?
‘In early modern England’, Keith Thomas has written, ‘the prevailing deal was gerontocratic: the young were to serve and the old were to rule.’
It was assumed that wisdom, as the sum of experience and self-control, grew with age.
The image of God as an old man was echoed throughout society.
The church itself was headed by elderly archbishops and the law by aged judges.
In the printer's workshop the oldest workman would be ‘father’ of the chapel.
Children were taught to show their parents obedience, duty, and respect, taking their hat off to their father as a matter of manners, and at solemn moments kneeling to receive his formal blessing.
Communities were typically run by the ‘ancientry of the parish.’
Often this was reflected in the village church, where the old sat in the best seats and the young at the back.
Yet alongside this ideal — perhaps in part provoked by it — ran strong counter-currents.
In reality the key positions of power in both politics and the law were normally held by men in their forties and fifties.
The elderly could not sustain the more strenuous manual work in agriculture or the crafts.
Respect did not prevent children from rebelling against their parents.
And the grave, sober image of old age was a constraint on social behaviour.
The elderly who expressed continuing sexual interests would be mercilessly ridiculed by the youth groups of their village.
There was a wide-spread mocking of ‘old fools.’
‘Old people commonly are despised,’ observed Richard Steele, ‘especially when they are not supported with good estates;’while another commented in 1621 how, in contrast to the common ‘pleasure in infants’shown by women, ‘old people are burdensome to all; neither their talk nor their company is acceptable.’
This ambivalence towards the old is clearly shown in the traditional seven stages of life.
These stages, linked to the known planets, can be traced back through medieval literature to the ancients.
From the middle years onwards the phases were Manhood, under the control of Mars, Old Age under Jupiter, and finally Senility under Saturn.
The idea of an important division between the ‘young old’ and the ‘old old’in today's terms was thus already accepted.
One respected writer, Dr John Smith, went further in his Portrait of Old Age (1666) in suggesting a triple division between ‘green’ old age when men could still work well, the ‘full, mature’or ‘good old age’of the retirement years, and a last stage of extreme, ‘sickly, decrepit, ever growing old age.’
But most of his contemporaries did not share his hopeful vision of ‘good old age.’
They preferred to contrast the typically active and widely powerful young old with the pathetic senility of old old age, the ‘Crooked Age’, summed up by Shakespeare as ‘second childish= sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
There were thus two concurrent stereotypes of the old.
One was as strikingly negative as the other was positive.
Either could be drawn on, to support respect or scorn.
And the balance of early modern attitudes to the old looks a good deal less favourable when we realize that the terms of chronological age used then were quite different from those in use today.
Their Old Age, from fifty to 62, we now see as part of Middle Age.
Our Young Old Age they saw as Senility; our Old Old Age was beyond the focus of their conventional wisdom.
This pushing onwards of the chronological stages over the centuries partly reflects a second, more fundamental transformation: the cumulative impact of changes in health and demography.
The direct impact of improving health in later life has been relatively recent.
But the position of older people is also shaped by general birth and death rates.
Thus in a rapidly growing population there will be relatively few older people, as in many contemporary Third World countries; while in a stagnant population they will be relatively more numerous, and more of them will lack the support of children.
Hence in late nineteenth-century France the aged were already a more prominent group, almost twice the proportion in England at the same time: indeed, there were proportionally somewhat fewer old in booming Victorian England than in 1700.
But these changes through the birth rate remained relatively modest in this country until the present century.
Right through from the seventeenth until the early twentieth century those who reached the age of sixty years remained a small but quite steady 5–7 per cent of the English population.
By 1900 however, the birth rate was plunging as couples chose to have fewer children, just as improved health had also begun to have a marked impact; and it is the combination in the twentieth century of a now almost stagnant population of small families with a new fall in death rates which explains the striking rise of over-sixty-year-olds to form over 20 per cent of our population today and why, more than in any previous generation, such a high proportion of them are without children.
It is partly that old people themselves are living longer.
A late Victorian at sixty could look forward to scarcely a dozen more years of life; a contemporary sixty-year-old man can expect almost twenty more years and a woman even more.
But the impact of the fall in death rates among younger age groups (which began earlier, in the mid-nineteenth century) has been still more dramatic.
In the past, death struck right through the life cycle.
Children were especially vulnerable, but many also died in young or middle adulthood.
By fifty a married man or woman was as likely as not to have suffered widowhood, and would have already lost half his or her contemporaries: in contrast to a mere twentieth today.
Hence far more people enter old age.
But they pay an unexpected price, which is itself one of the underlying differences between old age in the past and in the present.
The withdrawal of earlier death has been so marked that today most English people will have no direct experience of the grief of bereavement until they lose their own parents, when they are themselves well into middle age.
For the young, death is so unreal that it has become a pleasure to play with, part of the fantasy of violence.
Then suddenly, unprepared by experience, as they become old they are struck by the unfamiliar, relentless impact of death combing out their social world, remorselessly striking down their family and friends.
Today it is only the old who regularly die, so only the old who have to deal with the universality of death.
Funerals were within living memory ceremonial rites engaging whole communities — blinds drawn down across the street, the pomp of plumed horses and the procession of followers, traffic momentarily halted, the bereaved publicly showing their sorrow for months in the long wearing of black afterwards; monuments and cemeteries were focuses of family and civic pride; fear of a pauper grave was so powerful that death insurance was by far the most widespread Victorian insurance policy.
Ironically, just because death was such a central concern in the past, the history of death is much more fully studied than the history of living old people.
Today, by contrast, funerals are diminished, cemeteries deserted, even sold off.
Once loudly and publicly proclaimed, death has become private, secret, almost shameful: so much so that nobody of any age wants to talk about it.
That makes facing one's own death, and the crushing pain of bereavement through the death of others, even more bewildering.
The very changes which have lengthened life have made the coming of death feel stranger and harsher from its new unfamiliarity.
It is above all women who are living longer.
In 1800 there were roughly equal numbers of older men and older women, but today there are three women to every two men.
Since women in general have less social prestige than men, this in itself tends to reinforce negative attitudes to the elderly.
But the imbalance affects women more directly.
The majority of men who survive can expect to have the support of a wife up to the age of 85, but any woman over 72 is more likely to be a widow left on her own.
While men today enjoy later life as one of a couple, for women the experience is most often solitary.
There was no such sharp contrast in the earlier past.
Less dramatically, the health of the surviving has improved.
Doctors in early modern England had developed no special skills for dealing with the health of older people.
Probably most of those surviving were reasonably active, as they would die rather quickly when they succumbed to their first serious illness at this stage of life.
However they would have been commonly toothless, since false teeth were a luxury until the nineteenth-century.
And enough elderly people did survive as chronically sick, physically maimed, or mentally impaired, to sustain the most negative seventeenth-century images of old age as ‘a perpetual sickness’, ‘a disease’, a time of impotence in the widest sense, ‘the dregs…of a man's life’.
One very early sign of a more positive attitude, arguing that physical ageing could be delayed through a plentiful diet, regular sleep and short naps, and moderate exercise including riding and dancing, is Francis Bacon's History of Life and Death (1623).
Possibly the earliest attempt at a scientific study of ageing, he wrote it when he was himself 62.
Bacon's fundamental concept was of ‘age as a great but slow drier.’
By comparing different plants, animals, and human physical types and ways of life, he suggested defences against this drying-out.
These were mainly from changing daily habits, but included some medicines.
He claimed that there were places in the past where ‘men's lives were longer, when plain homely diet and bodily labour were much used, and shorter when more civiliz'd times delighted in idleness, and wanton luxury’.
In the countryside you could still find ‘in every populous village a man or woman of three-score years of age.
And at a wake in Herefordshire, a Dance was performed by eight men, whose age added together, amounted to eight hundred yeeres’.
A shift to simple wholesome living could bring long life to many more.
The sustained development of the study of the diseases of later life had to wait until the nineteenth-century.
It was led by French physicians and at first it simply confirmed the most pessimistic of common views.
Old age was a phase of irrevocable and inevitable decline.
The external signs of ageing, as at different points eyesight blurred, menstruation ceased, hair and teeth fell out, were seen as linked to signs of internal degeneration such as sclerosis which were being discovered through post-mortems.
Decay was seen as mental as well as physical: ‘the faculties of intelligence share equally in this universal deterioration.’
Loss of memory and progressive senile dementia were all part of ‘normal mental deterioration.’
Even genius disappeared in old age.
Texts in English such as George Day's Practical Treatise on the Domestic Management and Most Important Diseases of Advanced Life (1549) soon took up this thinking.
Old age was a disability in itself.
The elderly were advised to put themselves ‘under the immediate and constant care of the physician.’
Physical exertion was dangerous, sexuality inappropriate and obscene, and even overworking the mind ‘might bring on mental exhaustion.’
In France itself this stifling view was still being propagated up until the 1950s.
It was only with the American-led development from the 1900s of geriatric medicine as a new specialty, followed in the interwar years by self-help books and clubs encouraging older people to keep fit, travel, keep working, and — at least from the 1950s — stay sexually active, that informed European opinion began once more to swing towards a positive view of ageing.
Changed attitudes, rising living standards, and more effective health care have together resulted in not only a longer, but a fuller life expectancy.
The new conventional wisdom which divides the young old from the old old at 75 marks a boundary for entry into the last stage of life which has now been pushed back by a dozen years.
While the ancient ambivalence in attitudes to ageing, symbolized in this division, undoubtedly survives, the targets have shifted.
The young old now keep one foot in the full humanity of middle age.
Our understand of the quality of later life before this revolution in attitudes is severely constrained by the kinds of information which have survived.
Most of this information is disconcertingly dry: we have to squeeze it hard to make anything of it at all.
But let us look more closely at what the archives can yield.
There is only one type of personal family document which survives right through the last three centuries in really significant numbers.
This is the last testament, will, or contract through which the elderly transmitted their material possessions and land to their heirs.
In fact, because most older people had nothing significant to leave, only a minority wrote wills.
But they were a substantial minority, and those historians who have recently been studying inheritance have reached some interesting conclusions.
It was a general principle of English and also Scandinavian medieval law that relatives who inherited land were responsible for supporting its former owners, including widows.
But this operated in very different forms between countries and regions, and even at the level of a single English county.
Nor is it really clear what the documents tell us.
Thus before the 1833 Dower Act, the principle under English common law was that a widow had a life entitlement to one-third of the income from her husband's former property.
Some wills assumed this as an inexcludable entitlement and did not even mention it.
Others attempted to alter it, or to enforce it when land was left by the will to the children alone, rather than as more usually to the widow or the widow and children jointly.
Historians have found some manors where the local custom was for the widow to receive a half proportion, or even the whole, and yet in others apparently none — although in these cases it is more likely that the documentation is being misconstrued.
But normally either the land was eventually to be divided equally between the children or, more typically where land was scarcer, the land itself would go to a single son and provision be made for the other children in cash — very often advanced earlier in life, on marriage or to set up in a trade.
In some parts of Scandinavia where the land was divided equally, the old person would move between the heirs, receiving food and lodging from each in turn.
More usually, as for instance in Scotland, one heir took on the duty.
In England, by contrast, although there were some villages where having a widowed parent in the house ‘was very much the ordinary, expected thing’ at a certain stage in life, already by the late middle ages it was not the normal pattern.
It was a part of folk wisdom that providing houseroom for a widowed parent could lead to intense family friction.
The Bethnal Greeners of the 1950s who believed that to live together was an invitation to ‘open conflict’ belonged to a long tradition.
One Scots proverb ran:
Here is the fair mall (mallet) To give a knock on the skull To the man who keeps no gear for himself But gives all to his bairns.
There are English law cases of the late fifteenth-century for not providing meat, drink, and lodging to a retired father-in-law, while Swedish High Court disputes of two centuries later show grievances ranging from poor food to cursing and physical violence.
The Swedish priest who advised, ‘He wrongs himself who turns over his farm to his children, if they are badly brought up’, was echoing the ancient Biblical warning in Ecclesiasticus:‘As long as thou livest and hast breath in thee, give not thyself over to any.
For it is better that thy children should seek to thee, than that thou shouldest stand to their courtesy.’
One Jacobean preacher vividly elaborated on just this text.
Hath any man ever seen a poor aged man live in courtesy in the house of his son with his daughter-in-law?…
Doth not the good father in short time, either by his coughing or spitting or testiness…become troublesome either to his own son or to his nice daughter-in-law, with continuing so long chargeable and so much waited-on, or to the children, with taking up their room at the fire or at the table, or to the servants, while his slow eating doth scant their reversions?
And the grumbling was unlikely to be one-sided.
One retired Somerset man told a visiting kinsman, ‘You are likely to have but a short feast here, but I pray you if you have not good cheer blame my sonne John Webb and not me, for of my troth I have made him master of all.’
As Daniel Rogers warned in 1642, ‘No prison can be more irksome than a son or daughter's house’.
In Scandinavia living space was cramped.
Whole farm families normally shared a common bedroom well into the nineteenth-century.
By the mid-seventeenth century it had become normal for the wealth of the old people to be transferred to the next generation when they retired, perhaps in their sixties, but for the retired couple to retain houseroom in the family home; and in order to make disputes less likely, these retirement arrangements were increasingly recorded in deeds.
Only in the late nineteenth century did these contracts generally disappear and instead the land was sold or let and the old people lived off the cash proceeds.
In the far west of Ireland retirement contracts were still quite common in the 1930s.
Both the practice and the tensions associated with it were meticulously described by the American anthropologists Arensberg and Kimball.
Families in this still Gaelic-speaking region were classically patriarchal.
Even when the sons were carrying out all the farm labour, the father would continue to control all their tasks and all money matters, to the extent of walking to collect a son's wages for work off the farm.
So long as the old couple had not made over the farm, their middle-aged son remained a ‘boy’: ‘You can be a boy here forever as long as the old fellow is still alive’.
Inside the farmhouse the warmest seats by the fire belonged to the old couple ‘by right’.
Significantly, the form of written agreement by which the father handed over the farm would make explicit not only his right to a room in the house, a place at the hearth, food, and the yield of a potato-patch and ‘grass of a cow’, but also clear financial compensation if the arrangement broke down.
Inharmonious transitions were evidently far from rare, with not only violent arguments, but ‘the young woman and the old woman slashing each other with tongs, the doors broke, and it would be two dwellings in one house’.
Custom, in short, was no guarantee of harmonious relationships in three-generation households.
On the contrary, one sees how greater physical distance could well help to bring emotional relationships closer.
In England, however, written retirement contracts are historically ‘very rare indeed’.
But this is probably because such retirement arrangements died out before formalizing them became the normal custom, rather than because they were never common.
Certainly, already by the thirteenth century the building of a separate cottage for a widow was as often stipulated in wills as the provision of houseroom.
Nor was this simply because the land market was developed earlier.
Already by the late middle ages the English were beginning to expect more space and more privacy in their houses than was to be normal in Scandinavia for another three centuries.
England's very unusual system of inheritance is of particular interest because of its continuing influence in later centuries, both on the fate of older people and also more generally on the English class system.
The English aristocracy pursued the principle of independent homes for the older generation to its ultimate conclusion.
Despite the vast size of their houses and the numerous servants surrounding each aristocratic family, on the death of a Victorian head of household ‘his or her resident family was expected to leave to make way for the incoming heir and his or her family.
The widowed mother and any unmarried siblings living at home usually had to move out.’
As an American commentator put it, ‘a duchess abdicates when her son comes to his title; she is turned out of the mansion where she once presided…’ especially through this single-minded concentration of resources through inheritance on a principal heir that the English aristocracy were able to tighten their grip on the land.
Farm families by contrast increasingly sold off their holdings, in order to secure their own last years and at the same time allow equal treatment of their children.
The farmers'  descendants , moving over the generations into commerce and trade, stuck to the old peasant form of succession, if the picture given by Leonore Davidoff and Catherine Hall of Family Fortunes in early nineteenth-century Birmingham and East Anglia is representative.
The system was still one of equal division between the children.
As with the land, if division was difficult the business or the family home would be sold to allow it.
Lifetime gifts such as apprentice premiums or partnership capital or lump sums on marriage were treated as advances on inheritance portions.
There were also some devices which counterbalanced this continual splitting of family resources, such as the partnership system of the family firm, marriage between cousins, and setting up trusts to provide income for daughters and wives which at the same time allowed the trustees, who were always men, to use the trust capital for the business.
A widow without sufficient means was still expected to work.
Some carried on the family business, as had been typical in the past.
But the development of trusts and the final disappearance of common law dower rights in 1833 meant that until the late nineteenth-century reassertion of women's independent property rights, a wealthy widow was much more dependent on her male kin than either in the past or today.
Her fortunes were in the control of men who could candidly say, like one Essex trustee, that her ‘present views are of entire indifference to me’.
Those with significant property to leave were of course a minority.
But it seems to have been equally rare for young couples in the poorer classes to help their ageing parents by providing them with houseroom.
Thanks to the recent statistical work of demographic historians we now have quite detailed information on with whom the old lived in England from early modern times onwards.
These statistics can easily seem impenetrable and tedious, but they have important light to throw if we can tease out their implications.
Studies of household listings reveal comparatively few three-generational homes in England from the sixteenth century onwards: a mere 5 per cent on average.
This is half the typical findings for France, and far less than the third or more often reported from eastern Europe or from Japan in the same centuries.
The English figure climbed briefly to 9 per cent in the mid-nineteenth century and then fell back to a mere 1 per cent today.
But although these figures do tell us how few families had a grandparent in their own home, they can be misleading.
The grandparent could have been living a few houses away.
Indeed, an international survey of old people in Britain, Denmark, and the United States in the 1960s found over 40 per cent of them living within ten minutes' journey of their children in all three countries.
This could well have been true in the past too: we do not know.
Also, the figures depend on how many grandparents were alive in the population.
Typically, because people elsewhere married much younger than in north-west Europe, they became grandparents younger — so there were simply more grandparents around.
A large part of the contrast results from this.
All the same, if we turn the figures about and look at them from the point of view of the older generation themselves, we still find that in early modern England only 10 per cent of sixty-year-olds were living with their married children or grandchildren.
This is startlingly lower than the figures of over half reported from eastern Europe and the Far East; and it also looks as if co-residence was much more common in southern France, and also in post-colonial America.
This contrast has continued.
In Britain today only 9 per cent of those over sixty live with another relative apart from their own spouse, in contrast to 12 per cent in the United States, 14 per cent in France, and 29 per cent in Japan and China.
The consequence of these household arrangements today are that a very high proportion of older people live alone.
The longer they live, the higher the figure climbs.
In early modern England the proportion of solitary 65-year-olds was only 10 per cent, while in the mid-nineteenth century it came as low as 7.5.
In the East there were almost none.
Today it has risen to over 40 per cent in Britain, Scandinavia, and North America, and 30 per cent in France, in contrast to less than 7 per cent in China and Japan.
To put it another way, the English have always been prepared to let some of their old live alone.
But one of the great changes from the past is that this possibility of living alone is swiftly becoming a probability.
Yet a closer look behind these stark figures suggests that the English have not been so peculiarly heartless.
Their housing was very early on more ample.
They were also early in being especially mobile, no longer tied to land which could easily be sold.
So with each generation there was a ‘scattering of children at marriage’, which left scarcely one couple in ten with married children in the same parish.
On the other hand, there were much more likely to be single children still living at home.
Women bore children late; widowed men commonly remarried quickly to a younger woman so that there was another batch of younger children in the family; and most children married late.
There must have been many daughters like Margaret White, who described in the 1590s how she stayed on living with her widowed father, ‘guided him and his household, and was continually with him in his sickness until his death’.
In practice the widowed of any age were much more likely to stay in their own homes than to move to find support.
The early modern English household listings show that over half (55 per cent) of all over-sixty-year-olds lived with relatives apart from their spouse, and by far the most common of these were unmarried children still living in the parental home.
But the pattern varied distinctly between the married and widowed.
Nearly all the married couples kept their own homes, half still with children, a quarter with other kin or lodgers, and a quarter on their own.
Of the widowed and single, by contrast, only two-thirds now lived on in their own homes, usually with their children or lodgers, or very rarely grandchildren, but 12 per cent on their own.
Over a third had moved, roughly half into their children's or grandchildren's homes, and half to live as ‘lodgers’— sometimes with other kin — or go into institutions.
Thus overall only one in eight sixty-year-olds were solitaries or institutionalized.
In England, as elsewhere, ‘even though their help could not be counted upon’, children and kin were providing the greatest share of support for the older generation of their families.
Nevertheless, what remains especially striking and distinctive is the English reluctance to take back the elderly within the home as dependents .
When, during the nineteenth century, there was briefly a sharply rising proportion of widowed older people living With relatives, this was above all in the cotton and pottery towns, where married women factory workers were exceptionally common.
Grandmothers could therefore join their children's households to fulfil a direct need as child-minders.
Elsewhere the great majority of the older generation continued to run their own homes.
And when they could no longer do so, they were more likely to become independent lodgers than to move in under their own children's roof.
The other side to English hesitation in offering houseroom was a belief in the independence of the old.
Independence of course demands economic means: and this brings us to a last and equally basic issue.
What resources were open to older men and women in the past?
There were a small minority of property-holders who could retire on their revenues, at a time of their choosing.
Although at first mainly farmers, by the nineteenth century many more were substantial tradesmen, manufacturers, or professional men, suffering, like the Birmingham banker Samuel Tertius Galton, from ‘commercial weariness’.
It had become quite acceptable for such a man, in his early sixties, to shift his money to safer investments, hand over the family home next to the workplace to his son, and move into a house in the suburbs from which he could maintain a benevolent but less taxing interest in family concerns.
As the Birmingham hardware manufacturer John Kenrick put it:
The prospect of such a season of leisure towards the decline of life, is one of the strongest motives to a man to go steadily on year after year with the drudgery of business; indeed without it, the complete absorption of many men's minds in the affairs of the world in the early and middle part of life would be hardly justifiable.
The great majority, however, carried on working as long as they possibly could.
At any age, most men were still at work.
There are instances of ninety-year-olds still at work in seventeenth-century England.
Even in the 1900s the national census returns show over 60 per cent of men over 65 employed, in England, the United States, and France.
Of American men in their late sixties and early seventies, 85 per cent and 70 per cent respectively were still recorded as employed, together with half of eighty-year-olds.
The proportion in work had begun to fall, however, and from the 1930s dropped rapidly: according to official figures, today in England a mere 7 per cent of men over 65 remain employed.
The earlier situation lingered longest in the countryside.
In England older men could get contract work for hedging and ditching, maintaining public spaces, or minor building repairs, which allowed them to work at their own pace.
Among the French peasants of Village in the Vaucluse, Laurence Wylie still found in the 1950s that nearly all the older people were still at work.
Many had shifted to lighter tasks, such as delivery rounds, mending bikes, minding children or animals, keeping chickens, gathering firewood, or growing vegetables for sale.
But the working old men also included a miner, two blacksmiths, and the three hardest-working farmers in the village.
The lighter work to which men tended to shift as they got older was generally worse paid.
Work for older women was as badly paid, but for many it was more of a gain because they had not earned at all while their children were young.
For them new chances opened up in late middle age as their children left home.
In York in the 1930s, Seebohm Rowntree found many older women would be earning a few pence, or gifts in kind ‘for rendering small services.
To ‘mind the baby’ for a neighbour when the mother is out, or to wheel one in a pram on washing-day and do any necessary errand, will probably mean a square meal or ‘a mash of tea’and some coppers, as well as discarded garments, if the neighbour's husband is in good work.’
More significantly, if they had a reasonable house they could take paid lodgers in their children's former rooms.
These lodgers were quite often from among their own more distant relatives.
The listings from early modern England show that up to 8 per cent of households of over-sixty-year-olds might have been receiving some economic support through lodgers.
During the nineteenth century, as more people survived their last child leaving home, it became a particularly important form of support, with perhaps a quarter of working-class older people in some towns taking in boarders: a pattern which persisted until young people began to marry much earlier in the 1950s, setting up on their own instead — and leaving more of the old on their own.
A third possibility, at first unusual but slowly growing with time, was retirement in the modern sense, on a pension.
Retirement for men of property was, as we have seen, an accepted practice in early modern England.
The merits of pensions, extending this practice to those on salaries, were debated from the late seventeenth century onwards, with leading advocates including Daniel Defoe, and later the radical Thomas Paine of the French Revolution years.
The first small groups to be provided with pensions were the lower-paid naval warrant officers in 1672, and soon afterwards customs officers; while an Act of 1749 set up a scheme for master merchant mariners.
The pioneering general pension scheme was, however, for the Civil Service: first established in 1810, by, 1859 a full pension scheme allowed retirement at sixty.
The first commercial companies to follow suit were public utilities such as some railway and gas companies, which started pension schemes for their clerical staff from the 1840s onwards.
These early pension schemes were all rewards for loyalty to a narrow group of white collar staff, whose salaries were insufficient to allow them to retire like more prosperous middle-class professionals.
It was only in the late nineteenth century that a sustained campaign for pensions for manual workers began.
Among the pioneers, the Great Western Railway scheme of 1865 was notably early.
It was followed by some other railway and gas companies, and from the 1900s a range of well-known paternalistic companies: Cadbury, Colmans, Coats, Cunard, Wills, Marconi, and many others.
Their paternalism was sometimes explicitly mixed with the desire ‘to take the fire out of the socialist cause.’
Strikers could find their pension rights withdrawn.
In this period, however, by far the largest occupational scheme was the independently organized Durham Miners Permanent Relief Society, originating in the 1860s, which by the 1890s had 140,000 contributing members and 4,000 pensions being paid out.
All these advances were dwarfed by the step forward made with the introduction of a national state Old Age Pensions scheme in 1909 for all those over seventy on incomes of less than ten shillings weekly — roughly a charwoman's wage.
It could not be taken along with poor relief, and those with criminal records were excluded; it was only available at seventy, not sixty; and it was set at a very mean level, a mere five shillings, below the bare minimum which Seebohm Rowntree calculated was then needed for subsistence.
It was a supplement for the ‘deserving poor’, rather than a true pension.
Yet its impact in allowing ordinary retired workers some self-respect was enormous.
Paradoxically the introduction of the state pension seems to have ended independent activity by workers' organizations, with even the Durham miners' scheme fading out between the wars.
From the 1930s, on the other hand, the big insurance companies moved in strongly to fill the gap between the state pension and the standard of living for which most workers hoped, setting up occupational pension schemes for firms on a contract basis.
The 1930s also saw a vigorous campaign for better pensions for women, which led to the introduction of a state pension for women at the age of sixty in 1940.
Men remained eligible only at 65.
Public and private sector schemes together covered one in eight workers in 1936, and one in three by 1956.
By this time retirement schemes were not merely rewards for work and service.
They also reflected a growing belief that it was in the general interest for the old to stop working: a fundamental change in attitude.
This in part reflected the conviction of nineteenth-century experts that the later years of life were a stage of general physical and mental deterioration.
Was it not uneconomic to employ older workers whose apparent competence simply masked inevitably growing incapacity?
By the 1890s civil servants had become obliged to retire on reaching pensionable age.
And the message was soon to be taken up by American-influenced scientific management in industry.
The first major American pension scheme, by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in 1884, was comparatively late; yet by 1926 three-quarters of American companies with over 1,000 workers had them.
Pensions were now ‘wise business practice’, ridding firms of ‘dead weight.’
Similar efficiency programmes were soon seeking to remove ‘dead wood’ from the public services; and by 1935 an American national pension scheme had been enacted by Congress.
Already in 1913, as the Independent observed, ‘gray hair has come to be recognized as the unforgivable witness of industrial imbecility.’
In England too, grey-haired workers were fearfully staining their hair with soot to try to protect their jobs.
What of those who could not work, and were ineligible for pensions; or, as more often recently, whose pensions were insufficient?
We have already seen through looking at where the widowed lived that in England, as throughout the world, the family was the biggest single resource for older people in trouble.
Through the centuries moralists, like Sir William Blackstone in the 1760s, urged that ‘they who protected the weakness of our infancy are entitled to our protection in the infirmity of their age.’
As Thomas Becon put it in the sixteenth century, it was a ‘duty of children’ whose parents were ‘aged and fallen into poverty, so that they are not able to live of themselves, or to get their living by their own industry and labour’, to work and care for them and ‘provide necessaries for them, ‘just as in their own childhoods ‘their parents cared and provided for them.’
In early modern England, however, families were expected to provide care and company, but not cash: for the poor had scarcely any.
Support was given in kind, mutually.
One Edwardian farm labourer's family from Oxfordshire, described by Rowntree, may typify the best-spirited mutual help in earlier times too:
The Allens are a cheery, plucky family…
Her father, a hale old man over seventy, with a fresh colour and benignant expression, was sitting at the table finishing his meal.
Her husband had taken lunch with him, and would not be back till teatime.
The old man generally comes to dinner two or three times a week, as he has no one at home to look after him, and on these occasions he generally brings a ‘bit of bacon’ with him to replenish the Allen larder.
Inevitably there were always ways in which these ‘family obligations’ could be evaded.
Alan Macfarlane has recently argued that the social pressure to enforce them was less strong in England than elsewhere.
Certainly the fear of abandonment in old age has never been more powerfully put than in King Lear .
On the other hand — and the two aspects of English attitudes could indeed be different sides of the same coin — there was an especially clear and early assumption of community obligation to support the aged poor.
In the middle ages the lord of the manor was regarded as legally responsible for the relief of the poor and one-quarter of the church tithes were also customarily set aside for this purpose.
After the Reformation these traditions were regularized in a unique Poor Law which made each parish responsible for its own poor, and obliged it to finance its aid by levying a poor rate on its inhabitants.
This communal support for older people in early modern England could be on a remarkably generous scale.
For the elderly, the history of welfare provision seems to have been less a story of steady progress over the centuries than an oscillation between phases of relative generosity and meanness.
From the seventeenth until the early nineteenth century, parish records suggest that over one-half of widows would normally have been provided with regular pensions on the rates; and still more remarkable, when compared with working-class incomes, these pensions were twice as good as those offered by state pensions today (see Fig. 1).
The mid- and late nineteenth century saw a savage counter-attack on this system, with a reduction of pensions to a mere third of the value of the average working man's wage, and a concerted attempt to shift more of the burden back onto the family.
Some Poor Law Guardians made attempts to enforce the new legal obligations which the 1834 Poor Law imposed on children to support their parents with money.
In one case, for example, Reepham magistrates in Norfolk sent two brothers to prison for two months as a penalty for not supporting their mother, although both men were close on sixty and had wives and children themselves.
But the new law failed to change normal practice, and such cases remained rare.
It seems that these obligations were found more likely to stir up serious friction within families than to rally family help.
Charles Booth.
noted in the 1890s that many sons would prefer to move rather than accept legal compulsion, and that their own old parents would often see relief as a right: ‘the aged prefer a pittance from the parish (regarded as their due) to compulsory maintenance by children; compulsion makes such aid very bitter.’
The simple truth was that in any case, few such poor families would have had cash that they could have regularly given away.
On the other hand, among more prosperous working-class families customs were changing as real wages continued to rise.
One Suffolk farm servant paid five shillings every week in the 1900s to help a sister keep their eighty-year-old mother.
A skilled Nottingham engineer's daughter of the 1920s remembers her father ‘would never go to see his parents unless he could take them some money…
Three pound notes were usually left discreetly on the table after tea.
It was never mentioned.’
And a study in the 1940s reported that one person in every five over sixty was receiving some form of financial support from a son or a daughter.
More immediately, however, the new policy was imposed through suspending pensions to the elderly themselves, and insisting that those on relief should move into the prison-like work-houses built in each Poor Law district after 1834.
As a result, in the sixty years from 1851 the proportion of old people living in institutions almost doubled, rising to over 7 per cent of men over 65 and nearly 10 per cent of those over 75, and slightly over half this figure for women.
Since the 1900s, despite the increasing numbers of the elderly, the proportion has again fallen back by more than a third.
The regime of the workhouse was deliberately deterrent, and at least up to the 1890s married couples would be forced to live apart within it.
Little beyond food was provided: not even false teeth to eat with.
Middle-class visitors entering a work-house for the first time could be deeply shaken by the harsh indignity of the prison-like routine, the grotesque, despairing toothless faces, ‘the forlorn, half-dazed aspect of these battered human hulks who once were young.’
There was no need ‘to write up the words ‘Abandon hope all ye who enter here’, George Lansbury wrote of the Poplar workhouse.
‘The place was clean: brass knobs and floors were polished, but of goodwill, kindliness there was none.’
Not surprisingly, only families in real difficulty were prepared to see their own older generation end their lives in such a place.
One survey of aged inmates of the Newington workhouse in south London showed that a mere sixteen out of 725 had any relatives with even the space to take them in.
Even in 1930, when the most draconian workhouse rules had been eased, another London survey of aged applicants for relief found that half had no family at all.
Albert Funnel, a child in Brighton in the 1900s, evokes the long shadow of the workhouse over the lives of the elderly in the decades before Old Age Pensions:
The people I knew had a terrific dread of it, and they very rightly dreaded it.
Because it was diabolical, the workhouse.
It was ‘the spike’, we used to call it.
And in those days if you were old and if you were poor,…that was the end of the road.
Because in the poorer streets, if you saw — the neighbours in the street knew an old couple, they were too old to work…and if you saw an old blue van with a coat of arms on it with an old horse, old grey horse driven by an old grey man, drive up the street, stop outside the door, you knew that the old couple were on the way to the workhouse.
The old man's come out — probably the old lady first with a bundle, and the old man'd come out with his few possessions in a red handkerchief tied up.
They were gone.
Never come out any more.
The old man went into one wing of the workhouse and the old girl went to the other.
I can't say whether this is true or not but I have been told, it was spoke about when I was a kid, that they never saw each other except if they were both of the same religion.
On a Sunday, they could go down to chapel, the old girls'd to go down one side of the aisle, they'd go down the other, the old men, tried to put his hand out, touch the old lady…
If the old man was dying they'd maybe let the old lady come and see him or vice versa.
And at the end they used to have a jingle:
Rattle his bones over the stones:
He's only a pauper that nobody owns.
And that's what it was.
That's why they built the cemetery up close to the workhouse, so they could take them over on a barrow.
It took the rise of the socialist movement to turn the tide.
George Lansbury himself became one of the first reforming Poor Law Guardians in East London in the 1890s, and the social legislation of the Liberals, including the state Old Age Pension introduced in 1908, was a direct response to the rising political influence of the labour movement.
Nevertheless, the move back towards a more generous welfare policy for older people was hesitatingly slow.
The pension was fixed well below subsistence level.
Walter Greenwood portrayed an old age pensioner in the 1930s who had to live on sixpence a day after he had paid his rent.
He could afford nothing for tobacco:
I don't eat breakfast, just a cup of tea and a bit of toast if I can spare it.
The butcher lets me have a pound of dripping now and then and I can make it last.
Dinner I boil myself just a few potatoes, and I eat them with a piece of bread…
There's a pal of mine who works at the wood yard and he brings me a bag of bits of wood that's been left over.
He comes once a week with it and I've got to be careful to make them last.
That's my biggest worry, keeping warm.
Sometimes I can't sleep I get that cold.
They give me the newspaper from next door when they've finished with it.
And I go to bed as soon as it gets dark.
It saves burning light and fire, and I can listen to next door's wireless if they've got it turned on loud.
You can hear it plain through the wall.
Poverty surveys support Greenwood's account.
In London, for example, Llewellyn Smith reported in 1932 that ‘lack of warmth seems to be a greater hardship than lack of food.’
Rowntree's three surveys of York show that as working-class living standards gradually rose because of wage gains, smaller families, and from the 1940s full employment, poverty became increasingly concentrated among older people.
In 1900 they were no more often in poverty than the working class of any age, but by 1935 they had become significantly more vulnerable, and in 1950 the elderly comprised over two-thirds of all the poor.
The surveys also show that older people continued to be found in some of the very worst housing.
In Rowntree's examples of typical streets in 1900, in the poorest streets up to a third of the householders were widows, in contrast to less than 5 per cent in the best working-class districts.
Roberts has recalled the houses in his own slum district of Salford where two or more ‘old maids’, or ‘old faggots’ as the teenagers mockingly called them, lived together.
Just the same refuges of the elderly also appear in the Social Survey of Merseyside of 1934, where they made up a third of the tenants of the largest multiple households.
In one, for example, a casual labourer and his wife in their sixties lived with a woman of 79, her son of 57 who was a street matchseller, and six younger tenants; in another a woman of 68 was subletting to another woman of 65, a crippled woman of sixty, and two others; while in a third household a 71-year-old sandwich-man lived with an unrelated widow and widower of the same age and two younger tenants.
Deprived, and often also dirty, these ageing social outcasts, rather than ask help of the community, chose to huddle together.
The poverty surveys are also remarkable in another way.
They are the first published documents from which we can glean personal details about ordinary older people in significant numbers.
Rowntree's investigators sketched in details of each household.
These show that half the older men were still at work.
Still more of the widows went out as chars or washerwomen, and a few minded children.
The atmosphere of the homes varied.
At one extreme, an invalid widow was described as a ‘disreputable’ hawker who ‘ought to be in workhouse.
Hawks when able…
House very dirty, probably used as a house of ill-fame.’
At the other, in a respectable working-class street, were the old couple living ‘on his means…
Resting after a life's hard work.’
Llewellyn Smith's London survey of the 1930s similarly provided nutshell portraits of many old people, combining what the interviewers noticed with comments from the older people themselves.
Again, the contrasts are striking.
Thus one couple living in a basement were ‘respectable’, ‘very superior and very particular about cleanliness’; the wife spent most of her day on housework and mending clothes, while the husband ‘does such things as chopping the wood and mends anything that is broken.
In the evening they both listen-in [to the radio]and enjoy it very much, especially the Sunday evening sermons.’
By contrast, a single old woman who lived in ‘some very nasty flats in a very poor street’ seemed to be ‘rather a grubby woman.
Her clothes were very, very untidy, not very clean and not too well cared for…
I rather wondered whether she drinks, as when I went in in the morning there was a large bottle of beer on the table.
She seemed to be quite a cheerful old woman.’
However, ‘she said that she now has really no friends or relations in the world and there are times when she feels very lonely.
She is very frightened of falling ill in that flat as she has no one to look after her’.
Another widow of 84 ‘had outlived all her old friends’ and did not get much support from her children.
She seemed ‘rather frightened of her daughters and they seem to treat her very badly…
One cuts her dead in the street if she ever sees her.’
Several others, on the other hand, were ‘on the best of terms’ with their children, including two in shared households and another couple who said ‘their children are very good to them; one daughter does their washing for them and their daughter-in-law goes up nearly every day to do their shopping for them’.
Of particular interest here are the minority of notably active older people, like the man whose ‘great hobby is making toys for his grandchildren and great-grandchildren;’ or the amateur painter always at his easel ‘if the light is good enough;’or the old sailor, disabled for fifty years, yet ‘a very contented old man’, who spent his time cooking, cleaning, and reading ‘either novels or the newspaper.’
He had sublet part of his house to a married daughter, and would also play with his grandchildren, ‘amusing them when they come back from school’.
He was also clearly fond of his daughter and ‘likes her company’.
Significantly, he said he was ‘on the best of terms with her as they are quite independent of each other.
He says that he would not get on so well with her if he had his meals with her, but as he lives quite separately they are very friendly and he likes to know that they are near if he wants company.’
Perhaps the fullest set of early portraits of ordinary older people as individuals is provided by a Sheffield survey of 1919.
This was concerned not only with poverty but with working-class culture more generally.
Four women suggest something of the variety revealed by the ‘intensive studies’ which were included here.
Mrs Lowrieson was a widow of 69, an active Baptist, becoming infirm, but still keeping her shop going, mainly through the help of two ‘devoted’ grown-up daughters.
‘One could scarcely find a more motherly kindly woman…good natured and the opposite of worrying…
She is absolutely wrapped up in her children; she is a good and devoted mother; and others besides her children call her ‘mother’ because of her kind care for them.’
Mrs Stappell, a widow of 72, was another ‘exemplary’ mother, but more striking in other ways.
Sheffield-born and daughter of a cutlery master, she was herself notably active, running an allotment and still a working cutler: a woman with ‘plenty of initiative and business capacity.
She likes a glass of beer, but can control all her appetites.’
She was particularly unlucky to be alone, for she had first married at 18, but after losing a child had been left a childless widow at 25.
She remarried to a railway worker three years later and had ‘several children’ by him before becoming widowed again.
Her third marriage at the age of 47, to a widower with a grown-up family, had again ended, after five years, with her husband's death.
This last marriage, although he had been a ‘good man’, was uneasy, and she now had ‘no connection with the stepsons and daughter.’
Mrs Roggson, by contrast, although a widow of only sixty, seemed to have lost her energy for life.
She had been a widow for 25 years and now lived in one room, earning a living as a charwoman.
‘She says she is willing to work all her days just to keep a little home of her own’, yet she also felt ‘too old for the work.’
‘She is so tired when her work is finished that she just sits still and rests.
But the most pathetic of all was the fourth widow, Mrs Shepman, aged eighty and in poor health, who lived as a lodger.
She was a high-class cook who had worked in many parts of the country including London.
But after losing her only child, ‘both she and her husband took to drink and dishonest dealing, and finally went back to South Africa under a cloud.’
She had returned since his death and was now drifting, ‘sinking lower, cadging, getting drink where possible — a pitiable object.
Absolutely refuses to go into workhouse.’
These rare but vivid glimpses of the extraordinary variety of life experience among the older generation in the early twentieth century are not only precious in themselves, but suggest the dangers of generalizing about the earlier past to make up for the lost history of ageing.
Certainly the historical evidence as a whole gives little support for the quite widespread belief that older people in the past enjoyed a much more secure and respected position than they do in the present.
The one undoubted gain has been improved health, and with it longer life itself.
But the continuities are equally striking.
There have always been a minority of wealthy older people and a majority struggling to survive in poverty.
The rise of the welfare state has brought much earlier retirement from work, but has had little impact on the low incomes typical of later life both past and present.
Nor has there been much change in the pattern of support from the family.
Throughout this period older men and women in this country have preferred to live in their own homes and have maintained a strong belief in independence.
Within these continuities, the individual variety is also significant.
There have always been some old people who were influential and highly regarded, in contrast to the many others who were treated with ridicule, antagonism, or at best patronized as dependents.
And as we have seen, the life-styles of older men and women have been equally varied.
So far, however, we have been constructing a picture only indirectly.
Most of even the best material is second-hand, typically refracted through the rewording and prejudice of interviewers with strong points of view of their own.
Although occasional direct personal documentation does exist for earlier periods, and more could no doubt be found, for the moment we have no choice but to sketch the history of later life in the past without the intimate testimony of older people and their families.
It is only for the last century and a half that a direct picture becomes a convincing possibility.
The Autobiographer's Eye
IF we want to understand how later life was in the past through direct experience, we have three possible sources.
Firstly there are contemporary diaries and correspondence.
Diaries have proved by far the most vivid source for intimate family life in early modern England.
When Thomas Turner, Sussex village shopkeeper turned thirty, confides his deep hurt at ‘the seeming distant behaviour with which my mother treated me today, seeming so mistrustful that I should cheat her’, he takes us right to the heart of the complex mixture of love and pain which then as now underlies the relationship between adult children and the older generation:
Oh, what pleasure would it be to me were there a good understanding between my mother and myself, when I am assured if I know my own heart, that I am so far from having any ill against her that I have almost undone myself to serve her…
[But I will]only conclude with saying and thinking — she is my mother.
How familiar does that cry sound?
But unfortunately references to later life in diaries are infrequent.
Our own search of 26 mid-nineteenth-century diaries for this book produced little worth noting.
Elderly diarists were rare, and younger diarists not much concerned with observing the old.
Both tended to step back and reflect on ageing only after a death.
It was only then, for example, that John Bright, busy Member of Parliament, revealed that his stepmother, who had lived alone as a widow for nearly thirty years to the age of 95, the last ten years blind, was visited daily by his own wife ‘to chat with her and to cheer with her in her solitude and blindness, or to render her any help in her power.’
our purposes frustrating, that older people seem to feature so little in the consciousness of these diarists, preoccupied with the meaning and the daily bustle of their own lives.
Our other two forms of personal document are both retrospective: the written autobiography, which we consider here, and the recorded oral interview, which is the subject of our next chapter.
British historians are especially fortunate in being able to draw on the oldest tradition of popular autobiography in the world.
By the mid-nineteenth century it had already extended across the whole social spectrum.
For our present purpose we have examined 145 autobiographies written by men and women born from the 1830s to the 1870s.
A third of the authors were women, while in terms of their childhood backgrounds, 25 of them were upper class, 21 upper-middle class, 15 lower-middle class, and 84 working class.
What do they have to tell us?
Because we cannot question their authors, autobiographies can be tantalizingly elusive: but in compensation, what they omit or include is in itself evidence of the attitudes of the writers and of the readers they had in mind.
In principle, autobiographies can refer to the experience of later life at three main points: through distant childhood memories of grandparents, through accounts of a parent s last years, or most directly, through reflections on the writer's own ageing.
It is immediately noticeable that the great majority of comments come from the childhood memories.
Old age rarely seems to be regarded by a writer as interesting in itself: it is relevant above all as an influence on a young, new life, and never as the culmination of a lifetime.
Ninety autobiographies refer to grandparents, sometimes at considerable length.
Only ten refer — usually more briefly — to their elderly parents, and only eight to their own ageing.
We shall come back to two of these references inspired by dreams of his mother and the hope that if reprieved he could ‘comfort the autumn of her life’— and the remainder are mere passing notes.
They tell us that a stonemason's third marriage at 57 was his happiest; or that a retired doctor found ‘life was for a time difficult’ for lack of ‘any special hobbies.’
A Yorkshire mill-owner's seventieth birthday is recorded as bringing ‘callers all day, bringing little remembrances of flowers, fruit, etc;’ while a Kent farm labourer, on reaching the same age after 51 years on the same farm, was given a pension from a local charity and gave up work.
He had been moved to lighter work three years earlier: ‘my Master took me from the farm work to do the House Boys work — cleaning the Boots seeing to the wood and coals and sweeping up the back yard and the paths and looking after the poultry.’
A much more consistent theme, highly significant for this generation which bore the brunt of the late nineteenth-century attack on community provision for older people, emerges when a parent's later years are mentioned: how their need for support was met.
Most often it is described as care returned more or less explicitly in gratitude for what the author had been given in childhood.
Thus a migrant son from a Scottish island croft answers his parents' call: ‘when I grew old, I had to come home to be with them.’
A Norfolk farmworker turned trade unionist writes proudly of how he took in his own mother and his mother-in-law in turn ‘without receiving a penny from anyone…
For 22 years of my married life I maintained these two old people.’
Two men from poor northern city backgrounds, who later became very wealthy, tried to set up their elderly parents in comfort: Andrew Carnegie, American millionaire bachelor, gave his Scots mother, ‘my best friend and trustiest counsellor’, a house and a carriage and pair as he had promised her when young, while a Manchester mill-owner failed to persuade his old mother to spend more than £1 a week, but ‘would pet her like the sweetheart she was.’
Not all were so positive, however.
The harshest comment comes from an illiterate Yorkshire collier who had suffered a bitter, loveless childhood, tormented by a cruel brother.
At 78 he still refused to stop work: ‘My advice to parents is not to give up to the rising generation the place you have occupied in the world so long, because there are some who are very near to you who would turn round and put you out homeless and penniless.’
Lack of trust or love framed his view of the world to the end.
Equally revealing is a rare autobiography by an impoverished Norfolk farm labourer's son, who had turned professional poacher and been disowned by his harsh father.
When the father turned 65 he gave up work, and ‘at last he found he had a son, as later on in his old age I helped him and Mother all I could.
But he never seemed to appreciate my help like poor old Mother did.’
He felt more duty to his mother too, because she had brought up his own first son after his wife's death in childbirth.
Symbolically, he allowed his father to have a pauper burial, but when his mother finally died at 97, ‘I buried her.’
The ambiguities of the parent — child relationship in these last years are also evident from two Lancashire accounts, both by writers who had become trade unionists.
One says simply that her parents kept their ‘strong, independent spirit; they would be no burden on their children.’
James Sexton explains more fully.
For twenty years his widowed mother had kept a small shop in a St Helens slum, only accepting an occasional small amount of money and putting off other help with ‘the same naive reply: ‘It's very good of you, dear lad, and I appreciate it, but as long as I can manage it, I shall prefer to have my feet under my own fender.’
In the end Sexton took her literally.
As her health began to fail, he and his wife invited her
to come to my home for a holiday and a rest…
After she had been with us a fortnight we told her, as gently as we could, that she was never going back…
She could not go back, because we had disposed of the business, along with her tools and much of her furniture, but not her fender, which would arrive at Hale-wood in due course.
No English autobiography of this period tells of that experience of powerlessness from the other side.
The American Mary Vorse published her remarkable Autobiography of an Elderly Woman in 1911, which reflects at length on the reversal of roles that left her ‘contriving to get my own way, for all the world like a naughty, elderly child, while my daughter was worrying about my headstrong ways as if she was my mother instead of my being hers.’
She complained of being prevented from helping in the house —‘You'll tire yourself out’— or from going out in cold weather, and above all, of not being taken seriously.
She could not offer advice as a grandmother, despite her long experience of children; and now her own children had ceased to confide in her ‘because they felt that the time had come when I ought to be ‘spared’ every possible worry.
So there is a conspiracy of silence against me in my household.
‘We mustn't worry mother’ is the watchword…
I move in a little artificial, smiling world away from all the big interests of life.’
Mary Vorse pinpointed ‘the time when old age finally claimed me’ as the ‘moment when my two boys were more thoughtful of me, when they didn't come to me any more with their perplexities.’
That was the psychological moment: but she also remembered another, a turning-point in physical ageing, ‘when I began to hate to look at myself in the glass.’
And she could balance both the gains and the losses of becoming an elderly woman.
There were some new freedoms: good reasons for escaping boring social duties, such as calls, or church sermons, or committee meetings.
But on the other hand increasing age brought new social restrictions.
It was thought improper for elderly women to wear bright clothes.
And gradually, lack of energy cut into the hopes of fulfilling the dreams of special pleasures such as travel in these last years.
It seemed for her that space itself was now slowly constricting.
‘The size of the earth over which one may roam shrinks day by day, until it decreases to the house,— to one's room,— to one's bed; and finally to the narrowest space of all.’
We can set that unique inside view of later life in America against only two comparable glimpses — brief but direct — from our own set of British autobiographers.
An eighty-year-old aristocrat recorded his devastation when, on his wife's death, his town house was sold and his Norfolk home passed on to his son.
‘I felt a homeless wanderer on the earth…
. My daughters, as well as many of my friends, wished me to visit them, but I had no heart for any society…
. I was ill as well as desolate, and all I wanted was to hide my wretchedness from everyone.’
Before long he ‘could not stand the horrid hotels all by myself…
The loneliness of life had become unbearable.’
So within six months the wealthy widower plunged into remarriage.
‘Of course the world was affronted’, but, now again surrounded by ‘devoted thought and care’, he could afford to ignore it.
‘As to the outside world, I now take just sufficient interest in what goes on to be thankful that, though I am deaf, I can vote.’
A working-class London woman, by contrast, though far less well-off, conveys a more positive experience of later life.
Now she had become a pensioner she had been able to give up work as a midwife, and she spent much of her time on her allotment:
I have a very nice little hut and can rest and read and do a bit of sewing between planting, hoeing, weeding, etc.
I lined the hut with paper and put up pictures.
I have a stove on which I can cook a dinner, and a paraffin stove for heating.
Very often I spend long days on my allotment, and cook quite nice dinners of, say, breast of mutton and peas and fruit off the allotment for myself and a [woman]friend who has been ill for a long time….
I love to watch the things grow.
Just at the present time everything looks so fresh.
The seeds I put in are just beginning to peep through.
There is a railway bank covered with grass and beautiful dandelions.
I can sit outside the little shed and see the church tower of old Hampstead Church.
It is a nice change from my one little room where I live by myself, and do all there is to do, washing included.
Sustained by her own independent sense of purpose, she still felt growth and life within herself.
Autobiographical recollections of grandparents, although indirect, allow us to push back considerably further in time than through direct memories: from the early twentieth back to the mid-nineteenth century.
This in itself alters the picture.
Over half the British population was then still living in the countryside, and among the older generation even more — fully twice the proportion today.
And as we have seen, retirement was then much less common, and confined to a restricted social minority.
Through the autobiographies we can identify the economic position of 72 grand-parents.
Today we could expect to find perhaps a dozen employed; but then, only 14 were retired in the broadest sense.
The other 44 — over 95 per cent in the working-class families — were still at work.
The ‘retired’ include nine middle-class and two working-class widows.
Eight of them lived their last years in their children's homes.
One grandmother, remembered as ‘dressed all day in black silk’, had an annual income of £700 from the New River Company, which she ‘spent in bringing us up’ to make up for the incompetence of her solicitor son: she would sit all day ‘upright in an armchair at the side of the fire’, opposite to her son's.
Two North Welsh grandfathers also lived with their children, one above his son's butcher's shop and the other on the family farm which he had handed on to his son.
In Robert Roberts's farming family this seems to have been the accepted practice on both sides: later on, as a young farm servant, he went to work for an uncle where his mother's parents still lived in the farmhouse.
And as a child his own household included not only his father's father but his mother's grandmother, who spent most of her days hidden away ‘in her own cabin’, but who would emerge on Sundays, always knitting a long stocking.
Roberts's grandfather had made over the farm when his father married, yet remained the respected patriarch of the household:
He was now but a guest in his son's house, but I think my father lost none of his deference to him when he resigned the farm.
The greatest respect was paid by all the family to his opinions on all subjects from farming to knotty points of theology.
His large oak chair in the corner was sacred, and the words that he uttered from that privileged seat were truly spoken ex cathedra .
For a man like this, still living in the midst of the work which had been his life, retirement had none of its typical contemporary implications: he retained his technical authority along with his social networks and his familiar surroundings.
The same applied equally to elderly landowners.
We come closer to contemporary retirement with the second Roberts grandfather, a man who had been much less successful at work, and after failing as a shopkeeper had nearly failed as a farmer until his son took over.
He was ‘a man of powerful intellect, though a little eccentric’ to the point of sometimes appearing ‘simple-minded.’
After giving up the farm he ‘amused himself with carpentering and the making of various fanciful machines.
Among others he had a plan for discovering the perpetual motion.’
Except for these older men who owned or tenanted land, however, only two were recalled as independently retired, and both were middle-class businessmen.
In the Potteries a prosperous general dealer in china and earthenware had handed over his business to his sons, who subsequently let the business collapse: his grandson remembered him ‘sitting in the sunshine…just below the house which was once his own., More successful in his retirement was a London coal merchant who provides the single instance of the complete change of life and place which today is a widespread ideal for retirement.
A keen rider of ‘simple habits’, he was able to withdraw to an idyll of country life on the thousand-acre estate he had bought in Sussex.
The other grandparents were still at work.
They included three vicars, of whom one doubled up as an architect; a doctor who was also a horse-breeder; a barrister; a master builder; five shopkeepers; a smallholder and packman; and — by far the largest group — ten farmers.
Among the manual workers there were two weavers, a mines steward, and a papermaker; a railway porter, a canal boatman, and a Thames waterman; a joiner and two brickmakers; a hawking couple; two midwives and three domestic servants; a gamekeeper and a shepherd, and seven farmworkers.
It is a strongly rural range of occupations, and it is especially striking how few were regular manual employees.
Most were casual or self-employed workers who could not be made to retire, and many were also small property-holders — an important factor which also made their position stronger for continuing at work.
One old couple who were village publicans used their house as a shelter for ‘a very composite family’ which included a daughter who did the pub cooking, a brother, and a son who used two rooms as his tailor's shop.
Even two of the farmhands rented a smallholding where they could grow vegetables and keep cows, pigs, and poultry; while another was also a carter.
Because they continued to be economically independent, these working older people, both men and women, were often remembered as strong characters, like the Lancashire shopkeeping grandmother, a ‘powerful personality’ who was without any doubt ‘boss of the concern’, or the old North Welsh woman who ‘was doing all the cobbling for the neighbours in Berthengam, and…they were done by her well.’
But there is a harsh side to this independence.
Those unfit to work were rarely remembered, principally because few survived for long.
And there was pain as well as pride in working right to the end, as did the 99-year-old Suffolk widow who ‘worked on the land all her life’ or the Derbyshire midwife in her eighties who still ‘would get up in the night and walk miles to attend a confinement.’
Others were clearly no longer up to their profession.
A Dorset village boy was sent ‘to a very old man’ to be taught to read, but learnt little: the old man stood ‘facing the window, puffing away at his pipe, and when we would ask him to explain anything that we did not understand, he would tell us that he watched the chimneys to see when other people lit their fires….’
A sadder figure still was a once well-to-do, highly educated London grandfather who had quarrelled with his wife and retreated to live in a Battersea slum, running his home as a junk shop and seeking consolation in the local pub:
He loved company and could be found at night in a dingy tavern a few alleys away; this was the resting place of riverside workers and shady persons who obtained their living without work.
This tavern was well-known to the police…
. It seemed that he acted as a receiver of stolen goods…
. More than once my grandpa's shop had been visited by the police officers, but, however well founded their suspicions, my relative usually managed to keep well within the law.
He would play crib with zest with the lowest characters and would allow no argument.
He could treat the loser and afterwards pay for drinks all round.
Without doubt he was a peculiar man — a mixture of miser and philanthropist…
During the day he would cross the bridge to Chelsea to buy old clothes and other cast-offs, walking the streets with his cry of ‘Old clothes and old hats I'll buy them’, or begging his keep in more fashionable parts from ‘cooks thinking he was such a nice old man…
He would get good food from the basement kitchens.’
He would tramp back with his findings to his slum home, where the boys would shout ‘Moses’ at him and ‘he would reply by shaking his stick at them.’
His home was equally pathetic:
It was a dirty shop with small windows and cobwebs abounded everywhere…
. Old clothes and china, any old things, an accumulation of valuables and rubbish crowded out…bundles of dried herbs,…sweets and apples…books on shelves, clothes hanging from pegs and armour and swords in the corner, even the table was littered leaving just enough room to eat…
. It was a puzzle to me to think that any customers wanted any of these things in the alley he lived, but he did have a few visitors, because he dealt in antiques, he knew a great deal about them…
He came to a macabre end.
A typical miser, he hid his money in the house in various places.
The largest cache was in his former kitchen basement, behind ‘a carefully concealed trap door at the back of the counter.’
But less discreetly, when haggling over prices in the house he could lose his temper and shout ‘Don't think I am hard up’, as he took from the cupboard a quarter pewter pot full of sovereigns’ to flash at his antagonist.
Rumours spread; and eventually the day came when ‘he was found in his shop dead, sprawled amidst rubbish around him.’
Any autobiographical evidence needs to be taken cautiously and read as an interpretation, a perspective, rather than as literal fact.
It reaches us through not only the filtering processes of memory but also the demands of style: and this is particularly obvious in this instance Although his autobiography was never published, the teller of this tale, James Mackenzie, was a professional showman who ended up on the fairground stage.
The Dickensian flavour in his memoir is strong, and also conscious, for he wrote that his grandfather's shop ‘outvied the Old Curiosity Shop.’
But it is also noticeable that Mackenzie wrote a much less dramatized description of his grandmother, ‘a weird old lady’ with penetrating eyes and a low voice’, who had only fallen a little less severely than her ex-husband, living as landlady in a poor alley with ‘an old servant companion’in a house furnished with antiques.
For it was she who brought up the young James after the perhaps fortunate death of his violent, drunken father in a railway accident.
But his grandfather he only saw in brief glimpses, when James called in the hope of being given a shilling.
The old man would often not recognize him, and at the most answered with a phrase or two or a grunt.
We may indeed take the depth of the autobiographer's image of a grandparent as one measure of the quality of their mutual relationship — and an especially important one, for on such relationships between earlier generations the insights which autobiography offers are unique.
To start with, over a third of the autobiographies have no mention of grandparents at all, or a bare reference.
Occasionally it is explained that they had already died — and given the still short life-expectancy of the period this must have been so in many cases.
But death was not the only reason for lack of memories.
Two were out of contact because of physical distance: the fate of a Berwickshire couple who had emigrated to Australia was ‘a mystery’, while even within the same county a Norfolk farm labourer's parents were too far away to visit on foot, so the family ‘hardly ever saw them.’
Others were psychologically out of touch: one grandmother is described as mad, another as losing her memory.
Or the breach could be social.
After Colonel Charles Maynard died, his widow remarried to the Earl of Rosslyn and found herself ‘not on cordial terms’ with her ex-father-in-law: so much so that he cut her out of his will, leaving all the family property to his granddaughter Frances, and so much embittering the family that Frances's mother ‘feared the abduction of myself and my baby sister.’
A bankrupt London draper's family had no social contact with their landed grandparents: their social fall was too severe.
Of those who are remembered, the more distant or briefly glimpsed a grandparent, the more likely the recollection is to be no more than an external image.
There are thus a considerable number who appear in the autobiographies as simple vignettes.
Among them are a Duchess who inspired ‘awe;’ an engineer's ‘stern looking’mother; and the ‘tall and stately’wife of a farm labourer sitting at the fire ‘enjoying her ‘bit of bacca.’
Most formidable of all is the Scots joiner grandfather, ‘dour, stern, Calvinistic…a man of few words, just and honest in his dealings, but feared by his family.’
Complete silence was expected nightly while he took stock of the world: ‘after supper, the paper was unfolded and the old man began reading the four pages; woe betide if any noise or talking was indulged in by the family until the task was completed.’
There are other less forbidding images: a shipping magnate with ‘a kind face’, or a vicar's wife who ‘used to box dear Grandpapa’ lovingly on the ears because ‘he would sometimes slyly give the servant's elbow a tip when his daily tablespoonful of brandy was being poured out.’
The descriptions of two older people, each in their own setting, bring out especially vividly the inequalities of later life.
One was a rheumatic Black Country labourer who would come threshing with a flail, wearing a smock.
‘A merry old soul’, he ‘loved us kids’, even though the children stole his cocoa and his stick, and he would reply by singing them ‘quaint ditties.’
He lived in evident poverty, lodging with a cobbler called Morgan, and when his grandchildren came on Sundays to visit;
We could hardly get inside for rubbish and couldn't see the floor, it was all dirt, and there used to be two or three benches on which we had to sit down; then old Morgan would read the Bible to us and pray, we had to kneel down — oh what a dry lesson.
A great aunt, who was also pious, but who lived in manorial comfort, provides by contrast the most immaculate portrait of respected ageing:
Miss Froude matched her surroundings.
During her later years she was never visible till mid-day, by which time she would, in an upstairs drawing-room, be found occupying a cushionless chair at a large central table; with a glass of port at her right hand and a volume of sermons at her left.
At either side of her stood a faithful attendant, one being a confidential maid, the other a Miss Drake — an old, mittened companion, hardly younger in appearance than herself — both of whom watched her with eyes of solicitous reverence, and seemed always ready to collapse into quasi-religious curtseys.
Here she would receive such visitors as happened to be staying in the house, and subsequently reverential visitors, who appealed to her for aid or sympathy.
Sometimes little more is said even of grandparents who were visited regularly.
This is especially true of those remembered with ambivalence: grandparents who evoked ‘admiration mixed with awe’ or of whom ‘we were afraid;’the swearing, free-thinking grandfather of a future preacher; or the high-minded but remote Wiltshire rector —‘We were all a little afraid of him: he was so tall, venerable, so full of big words and bigger gestures.
But he represented authority, parentage, religion.’
One farming grandfather is remembered as ‘open hearted, hospitable, a good sport’, in contrast to his ‘stingy and penurious’ second wife.
Two other grandmothers who came on regular visits, one ‘very generous’ and the other an eloquent ‘martinet’, died too soon to leave more than a dim recollection.’
Nevertheless, visiting could undoubtedly be important in enabling closer relationships to develop between grandparents and grandchildren.
This was especially the case among the well-to-do, who had ample space for guests and the means to travel.
From working-class childhoods certainly there are memories of farm holidays, or travelling from Liverpool to Sheffield to see grandparents — but they are unusual.
Such occasional visits could be important.
One granddaughter of a carpenter's widow ‘adored my grandmother, whom I seldom saw: my greatest reward was to be allowed to brush grandmother's long silken white hair.’
A Buckinghamshire village boy ‘liked best to go and stay’ with a farming grandmother, finding a ‘special quiet’and ‘peace’about her; while a Yorkshire weaver's son who went to stay with his grandmother for several weeks ‘during family sickness’always kept the bond they made then —‘religious, yet loving, although seemingly cold, perhaps I had a special bit of her love, for she corrected me with thrashing me.’
But for him too, as for most working-class children; the closest memories were of grandparents who lived nearby and could be seen frequently.
He describes his other grandmother as ‘a wee frail woman’ in a mob cap, smoking a long clay pipe and ‘stroking my hair as I lay down at her feet with my head in her lap’, while her railwayman husband also ‘had a great liking for me, and when he could spring to a halfpenny or an apple or some nuts for ‘whiteheaded Benny’, he did it, Once he gave me a shining white metal watchguard’, a symbol of work efficiency which he wore proudly to school, ‘swanking’with it hung across my chest.’
Similarly, a Norfolk farm boy ‘used to spend a lot of time’ with his labouring grandparents: ‘a dear old cupple, and I was very fond of them and they of me, and would never hear anything wrong of me’, although he was already in trouble with the authorities.
His grandfather, who taught him songs and ballads and regaled him with tales of his own ‘merry’ youth when he fought with gamekeepers, clearly saw the young poacher as a chip off the old block.
Different lessons were passed on by other grandparents.
A stonemason's daughter, later a writer, passed ‘many happy hours’ in her nearby grandfather's cottage ‘reading and dreaming.
‘A future professor of philosophy was taught to read on overnight stays by a keen chapel-going Welsh labouring grandfather.
A Scots farmer shared with his grandchildren a ‘wealth of knowledge’ on nature and agriculture.
A Thames waterman would take his grandson, on his Sunday visits, out on his lighter, handing down his skills to the fifth generation to work on the river: ‘he was one of those methodical old fellows who live quietly, and never get ruffled.’
And when the grandson left school, ‘I worked in my grandfather's boat just as he had worked in his grandfather's…
It was a matter of family routine.’
A Northumberland collieryman ‘of a most tender, humane disposition’ chose his grandson as ‘a frequent companion’on long walks, as well as racing, climbing trees, and teaching him to swim: ‘he had a great liking for children, and was full of little plans and devices to interest and amuse them.’
Above all, he took the future trade union leader seriously, answering his incessant questions, and calling him proudly the ‘queerest bairn he had ever known.
One had need to be well-informed to travel with that child.
He is for ever asking questions.
He won't be put off with a surface answer, but he wants to know the far end of everything’
For the middle and upper classes, visiting often quite distant grandparents was a normal family pattern: so much so, that it is the commonest context of recollection.
Most often these memories are positive.
The ‘charming and delightful’ London lawyer grandfather who told stories, or the once stern parent who could find ‘no limit to his indulgence for his grandchildren;’the weekly visit to a landowning grandfather ‘to whom we were deeply attached;’the ‘lengthened visits’from ‘very kind’grandparents, or a grandson's ‘happiest days’, being ‘thoroughly spoiled’in the countryside, are all typical Especially with upper-class families these visits were often directly linked with the handing down of their own distinctive family traditions.
The family house itself assumes a special prominence which is unique to this class.
Lord Ribblesdale thought of his grandparents' house as ‘my second home.’
For Louisa Coutts Trotter, whose hypochondriacal father was constantly on the move seeking new cures, her grandmother's Edinburgh house was a fixed point in their peregrinations; while Willoughby de Broke eccentrically opens his autobiography with a series of chapters on the family's houses, rather than on its people.
In such families, pride in ancestry was quite consciously imbued.
One grandmother is remembered as taking ‘a deep interest in all her grandchildren’, reading and talking, walking and painting with them; and when her granddaughter became in turn a mother, it was her belief that
parents should always arrange if possible for their children to see old people of marked interest in their lives, so as to carry on the links of tradition…
. When two of my sons were little boys I took them to our old great-uncle Lord Albemarle's yearly reception on Waterloo Day, that they might hereafter be able to say in their old age that they had seen and spoken to someone who had been at the Battle of Waterloo himself.
For the grandchildren of the Cornish Earl of St Germans, house and family memory combined to give an unforgettable magic to their long seaside summer and autumn visits to Port Eliot.
‘We had our own large suite of nurseries in which to play’, wrote one of the earl's granddaughters, from which, when there were big evening dinners, the children would ‘creep down the back staircase’ to be fed with sausages, turkey, ice-cream, and nuts in the ‘comfortable sanctum’of the housekeeper.
The earl himself ‘we children all loved’, remembering that their peculiar delight ‘as a small child was to sit on his knee and inspect his watch, which could open and shut, and chief novelty of all in my eyes, could chime!’
On these visits they would be joined by multiple cousins, and together ‘we used to love to listen to stories about the past of the family:’ stories which frame the opening of this granddaughter's own life.
Their more ample resources also explain why it was least common for such upper-class grandparents to share a house with their grandchildren on a longer basis.
The autobiographies show that homes could be shared for two reasons, with differing implications.
Firstly, a widowed grandmother may be remembered as moving into the family home.
While in such cases quite often the three generations ‘got on together very comfortably’, there were also some significantly discordant memories.
In one home a ‘strong and masterful, buxom and choleric’ grandmother took charge of the household.
Another grandmother, while ‘an unwearying entertainer’ to her grandson, ‘a familiar friend, ever kind — too indulgent’, was a less welcome guest to his parents, for whom her presence was ‘not an altogether blessed arrangement’, and she was expected to retreat from the parlour to her own room upstairs well before the master of the house returned from work.
A ‘rather terrible’ third old lady displayed such a regularly outrageous temper that she was constantly locking herself in her room, expecting her meals to be left outside the door for her.
But even here, the conflict was not with her grandchild, who could benefit even when her parents did not.
Two other living-in grandparents directly encouraged future autobiographers by teaching them to read, one at the age of three.
It was quite different, however, when through parental death or disaster a grandchild went for a time to be brought up by grandparents.
When this happened a much more detailed picture of them and their way of life is usually given; and in all but one case the memory is strikingly positive.
The exception was a former aristocratic beauty who had led a bitter life, losing five children through death and almost leaving her soldier husband on account of his affairs.
‘A frustrated and embittered woman’, ‘melancholy’ and ‘puritanical’, she was an ‘austere and repressing influence:’‘she had no affection for her grandchildren, but she was a conscientious woman.’
But the typical memory is of ‘generous care’, ‘kind’ treatment, a ‘happy home’or ‘happiest days:’‘she nursed me, fed me, rocked me to sleep.’
A great-aunt who performed a similar caring role is remembered in much the same way, as the one who ‘spoilt me…
I loved her.’
One upper-class motherless boy moved to live with a great-uncle who ‘treated me with the same affection which he would have given to a son.
He used to have me romp up in his bedroom.
Grandparents were in a uniquely strong position as substitute parents, for they were both progenitors and chosen friends.
Their influence could therefore be especially powerful.
Many are portrayed as strong personalities: the Swansea shopkeeping grandmother, a ‘wonderful old lady’ who would tell historical stories of the Rebecca Riots; the cultured, much-travelled Scots widow, a ‘remarkable woman’who ran her late husband's estate; the toothless, pipe-smoking, ‘mediumistic’Lancashire granny who believed in ghosts and practised second sight; or the Scot ploughman's wife who taught her grandson the Bible and catechism ‘patiently, affectionately, and prayerfully…and at night she would put me to bed, wrap me snug and warm, and kindly teach me short prayers, psalms, and hymns.’
How deep such bonds could go is suggested by a Sussex carter's grandson who had been ‘very happy’ as a child brought up by his grandparents, ‘much attached’to them, and who writes of how he later found a house for his ageing grandmother close to his own and nursed her through her last illness: ‘no mother could have been more kind.’
Similarly a Yorkshire millworker describes himself as brought up by a grandfather ‘who cared for me as perhaps few grandchildren are cared for;’ when the old man died during his teens, ‘by this death I lost a friend.’
Practical caring undoubtedly made the influence of these grandparents particularly likely to be strong.
But lasting influence depended not only on some form of regular, close contact, but equally crucially on a sense of affinity, of common inheritance and character, which allowed a grandchild to see in a grandparent a model for his or her own development.
This model did not have to be of the same sex.
Willoughby de Broke saw something of himself in his grandmother, ‘a good whip and a good horsewoman’, who taught him to ride and launched him on an obsessively pursued career in hunting.
George Lansbury saw ‘a strain of my blood’ as coming from a ‘favourite’fiery grandmother with a zest for political talk.
Marianne Farningham, religious journalist, learnt her faith from a papermaker Baptist grandfather, ‘a preacher of great force’, who would sit ‘in our kitchen, talking with some friend, each smoking a long clay pipe, and with a glass of home-brewed beer on the table’, debating ‘on high themes, of Calvinistic doctrine and the heresies of Arminianism.’
Andrew Carnegie, millionaire-to-be, believed his ‘optimistic nature’ and wit ‘must have been inherited’from his ‘delightful old masquerading grandfather;’while the future feminist Hannah Mitchell could see her own dogged persistence in the extraordinary working energy of the octogenarian grandmother who was ‘the delight and terror of my young days’
This sense of inherited destiny could be especially powerful for those who were cut off from their real parents.
A disobedient Norfolk farm boy was propelled into a lifetime of professional poaching by the combination of a harsh, flogging father, who for years ‘never spoke to me nor owned me’, and an entertaining, caring grandfather who had poached himself: ‘I'm not shure I did not inherit some of my sporting ways from him.’
And for fatherless Havelock Wilson, sea captain's grandson, it was his storytelling grandmother who set him on his life path, despite a mother who banned him from the harbour at Sunderland.
This grandmother had been herself ‘a very efficient sailor and navigator’ and acted ‘for many years’as chief mate of her husband's ship.
Now blind, she would recount to the boy ‘strange stories’ of her ‘sea experiences.
I used to love to sit and hear her talk.’
He would come back entranced to his own home: ‘from the window, right across the housetops, I could see the masts and sprays of tall stately ships…
The blood of my forefathers, all men of the sea…tingled at the very thought.’
Not all bereaved children could find such a grandparent in their moment of need.
The importance of their support, in an age when poverty and early death threatened family life in childhood still more than divorce and deprivation today, is brought home by the story of a North Welsh orphan, baptised as John Rowlands.
His father had died and his mother had married another man and completely rejected him.
‘I was a disgrace to them in the eyes of their neighbours.’
He did not meet his mother from infancy until the age of twelve, when they found themselves accidentally in the same workhouse: but instead of the ‘gush of tenderness’ between them of which he had dreamt, ‘her expression was so chilling that the valves of my heart closed as with a snap…
She remained a stranger to me.’
Fortunately he had been taken in by his mother's father up to the age of six, living in a cottage by Denbigh castle; but after this grandfather died he spent nine years as a child in St Asaph workhouse.
At 14 he ran away, deciding to seek out help from his father's family.
John Rowlands's search ended with the discovery of his surviving grandfather, a ‘severe and sour old man’ who lived with two of Rowlands's aunts in an old Welsh farmhouse.
He found him, stout and pink, in a brown suit, knee-breeches, and blue-grey stockings, sitting in the farm kitchen on the wooden settle by the fire, smoking a long clay pipe.
The old man asked his story,
who I was, and what I wanted, in a lazy, indifferent way, and…never ceased smoking while he heard me, and…, when I concluded, he took his pipe from his mouth, reversed it, and with the mouth-piece pointing to the door, he said, ‘Very well, you can go back the same way you came.
I can do nothing for you, and have nothing to give you.’
When that grandfather, his last hope of a parent-figure among his own kin, turned his pipe, he pointed John Rowlands on the path which was to give him his place in history.
Hopeless though it seemed, he did not abandon hope of finding a parent.
Within three years he had emigrated to the United States.
There he was to find an adopted father in his American employer, a New Orleans storekeeper.
So it was under his adopted name, as Henry Morton Stanley, that he met Livingstone in Africa.
At the Edge of Living Memory
Autobiographers are unusual just because they are writers.
However diverse their origins, this means that they cannot be presumed typical of their time; certainly many wrote their life stories just because they were exceptional.
Recorded life stories, by contrast, offer a double advantage for those seeking to understand the ordinary experience of ageing in the past.
Firstly, it is possible to choose who to record in order to collect a representative group of lives.
And rather than being at the mercy of the autobiographer's choice of what to mention, we can ask questions and open up areas of significant memory which would otherwise have been lost.
We draw here on two sets of interviews, both based on representative samples.
The first is much larger: 444 interviews carried out in the early 1970s.
In these, however, no special attempt was made by the interviewers to evoke memories of grandparents or other old people.
The second is the smaller group of interviews with 55 grandparents carried out specifically for this book, and intentionally focused on ageing through the generations.
They differ too in time-span, for the first set of informants were mostly born between the 1880s and 1900s, and the second set from the 1900s to the 1920s.
But the overlap in time and content makes it most convenient for the two groups to be discussed together.
There is, however, one noticeable general contrast between the two sets.
Because in the earlier interviews no attempt was made to stimulate recollections of grandparents, we have a clearer indication of how far such memories were important.
In almost half the interviews, no grandparent is mentioned in any way.
In many others there is simply a reference to a grandfather's occupation.
Occasionally there is no more than an indication of the family's ancestry: of migration from Ireland, or of a strain of distinction.
One great-grandfather had been an inventor, ‘socially in a higher class’, while another family claimed ‘a good background somewhere’ through a great-grandmother who as a maid had eloped with a young aristocratic gambler.
Five grandfathers are less favourably remembered as drunkards: at least two passed down their habits to their sons —‘dad had a poor bringing up’— while a third son was provoked into signing the teetotal pledge.
If we exclude these brief references, we can say that 290 of the 444 interviews contain no memories of any grandparent.
It is also noticeable that slightly fewer men than women informants reveal any significant memory.
In the second set of interviews, by contrast, when asked, five out of six informants recall at least one grandparent.
Grandmothers are remembered twice as often as grandfathers — principally because they survived longer; but it would seem that physical survival coincides here with salience in the memory.
Recollection of grandparents thus appears strongest between women: granddaughters remembering grandmothers.
In the later interviews it is only when grandparents were not known directly that there is no significant memory of them, and we can reasonably assume that this was also the commonest reason for lack of memory in the first set.
Usually this was because the grandparents had died too soon, but in a few cases it was because of distance.
Occasionally they were cut off for other reasons.
The father of one family had no contact with their Irish Catholic grandparents because he had married a Protestant — although he did later inherit one of the grandfather's pawnshops.
One grandmother had been the orphan daughter of a silk merchant, ‘taken into care’ and sent as a young woman into service.
When she married a Kent farm labourer her own relatives disowned her: ‘it wasn't a very happy thing, you see, that she married into this family…
I don't think they had anything to do with her after she married him.’
Such rejections could easily harden and become two-sided, obliterating family memory itself.
A Lancashire insurance agent ‘would never talk about his family cos they rejected him.’
Similarly the wife of a Yorkshire brassworker could never forgive her parents for handing her over to be brought up by her retired grandparents, who had come to live nearby after their glassworks business had failed.
‘They took two of the children and my mother was one of them.
Because of this she never had any time for her own parents: my mother couldn't think it was right that they'd parted with two of their children.’
They were considered unmentionable: ‘we never talked about them.’
These family stories of rejection are unusual.
But more surprisingly, there is little sign of the positive family traditions which were so striking in some of the autobiographies of the wealthy.
It does not look as if such story-telling was a typical element in ordinary family culture.
Where grandparents were never directly known their occupations may be remembered, but rarely more than that.
There are only two notable exceptions.
Both come from workers' families with traditions of earlier independence and generosity.
In one the grandmother was a country publican with her own farm, and ‘on a Sunday she used to make broth and put plenty of salt in it, and then the children had to stop outside and we'd say, ‘Are you my granny?’
And she'd say, ‘I'm everybody's granny.’
In the other, the mother, a railwayman's wife, ‘used to talk about when she was a girl’, and of her memories of visiting the great-grandfather, a Lancashire clogger with his own shop:
They used to go down to the clogger's shop, which was at the bottom of the road where they lived, and he used to make toast, make a drink, and they used to sit round by the light of a candle, eating toast and drinking.
And they used to make coltsfoot wine.
It used to be in all the fields then, and he used to take all the kids gathering coltsfoot.
You had to get the head in between young fingers and just pluck the head…
And the lads used to go and pinch out of the girls' bags.
So then he used to segregate them: they go over there, and they go over there .
Make sure they didn't get in touch.
For the most part, however, the interviews simply offer direct memories from childhood.
What can we learn from them?
Let us begin with the economic aspects of later life.
Unlike the autobiographies, the interviews rarely describe older men at work.
In part this may have been because the trend towards larger-scale workplaces meant children were less likely to see them working; but there is also evidence of the now growing pressure to retire.
A Glasgow publican was forced to give up his position and become a lamplighter ‘because they said he was too old.’
An Essex countryman who could no longer find any work ‘drowned himself in a lake…
He'd got just tuppence ha'penny in his pocket for his beer, when they found him.’
By the time we reach the second set of interviews, where the question of retirement was clarified, only a quarter of the grandfathers are remembered as still at work in old age.
One was an Abergavenny horse-cab proprietor who ‘drove a lot of nobility around’ although ‘he was very aged;’he had married his housekeeper after becoming a widower, and lived in a mill where his grandson ‘used to learn all about his horses.’
Another was a Scots upholsterer who kept on his business because ‘that was his life;’ a third, a retired London stevedore who ‘had a pub in Rotherhithe.’
An Aberdeenshire small farmer had retired, but onto a seven-acre croft where ‘they used to always have fences to mend and trees to cut down;’‘he used to take me round on the barrow, when he was cuttin' down trees.’
A more remarkable exception since he was not self-employed, was a Scots miner who worked in the pit until he was 75, ‘six days a week…
He was working on the Saturday and took a stroke on the Sunday.’
For a miner who remained fit no standard age of retirement was enforced before nationalization in 1947.
Another Scots miner, a great-uncle, is also remembered at work until he was 74, ‘lookin' after the ropes and that in the shafts!…
And he kicked up hell when he was told he had t'retire.
It was after the NCB took over and he was told straight that he was t'pack in.
He says, ‘Oh no wait, I'm no packin' in.’
They said, ‘Aye, ye are.’
Nevertheless, most of the grandfathers were retired, and so was one elderly father, a Kilmarnock tinsmith.
He still worked a little for pleasure, mending urns and clocks: ‘he was good with his fingers…
So he did a lot of that, for nothing.
Just bring it and he did it.’
But he had married a greengrocer — a much younger woman — and ‘retired early’ partly to help her: ‘he worked a lot in the house.
You know he used to see to a lot of our meals, and see that we were away to school and such-like.’
Their marriage was certainly not typical, yet it is possible that even in the early twentieth century it was not uncommon for retired men to take on more responsibility at home, as many do today: for lack of other evidence, we can only speculate.
In the first set of interviews there is another interesting aspect of references to work.
In more than half the cases where the occupations of grandparents are mentioned, this is partly because the father followed a grandfather in his own work.
A small number were textile millworkers, others were miners, fishermen, or seamen, skilled craftsmen, or farmworkers.
An even smaller group were professionals, most commonly clergymen.
The greatest number, however, were self-employed men who often had some small property to hand down along with the know-how of their trade.
The variety of their occupations gives a sense of the remarkably diverse bases for economic independence still open at the beginning of this century.
They range from a cotton mill-owner to outwork stockingers and frameknitters, through cornfactors and wholesalers, master builders, shopkeepers and market stallholders, hatmakers, shoemakers, and wheelwrights.
There was often a special pride that the family were ‘all in the trade;’‘all my people have been in the dealing world;’‘we've been blacksmiths for generations;’ or they had been self-employed Portland quarrymen ‘right back a hundred year back.’
It is this same group who most often remember grandparents as providing significant direct financial aid either in their lifetimes or in their wills.
Out of sixteen instances, four were shopkeepers, one a hotel proprietor, one in insurance, and four were farmers; and nearly all provided either houses — in one case paying for the maids, coal, and gas as well— or land.
‘My father passed the farm on to me and I shall do the same for the two boys.’
Inheritance within working-class families was rarely significant, their struggles against the poverty of old age itself exhausting their scant savings.
By the time a Scots undertaker's horseman and his widow were dead, ‘the little they had was all gone;’ and this would have been typical enough.
Even the goods manager at King's Cross station, a salaried employee, left his children no more than some bedroom furniture.
‘With rare exceptions, in working-class families aid from grandparents to their adult children was at best symbolic: a parcel of rabbits from the country, or a turkey sent for Christmas.
Even small gifts could strain resources.
A London postman's daughter whose grandmother lived next door remembers how the old lady ‘used to pass one or two little bits and pieces over to us, but she used to say to mother, ‘I can't do much for the grandchildren because we have no pension at the end.’
Family help could not be relied on, even in a crisis.
Some grandparents are remembered as explicitly refusing to give any help, as for an illegitimate, fatherless grandchild, or for a parent who drank.
A pottery fireman lived opposite his wife's parents, but because of her drinking ‘they wouldn't have nothing to do with her…
They said it was up to me father to try to alter her.’
Only middle-class grandparents could afford the exceptional indulgence shown to a Yorkshire coalman who regularly gambled away in the pub his weekly takings from customers.
‘They helped him many a time to keep his head above water or else we should have been in a poor way.’
When he was sunk by the 1926 miner's strike and had to ‘sell everything he had’, they came to the rescue again.
‘I don't think he were ever in't position to pay them back.
They never came and bawled him or nattered for it.
It was just off and forgotten.’
The still greater rarity of references to the economic activities of grandmothers than of grandfathers reflects the shrinking participation of married women in paid work at this time.
But a number of older women did find ways of earning, especially after they were widowed: as a midwife, nursing, or doing ‘a little bit of needlework to keep herself going’, or baking cakes for sale.
One ran a cooked-meat shop and dining-room; another specialized in funeral teas.
Others used their empty houses to run a corner shop or to take in lodgers, sometimes both together.
Two old sisters in Portsmouth kept shops side by side: the great-aunt running a coal shop where ‘you had to go in there with your pail, and they weighed the coal’, with vegetables as a sideline, while ‘my gran she had a wee shop and she used to sell toffee apples.’
We have seen earlier how lodgers provided another means of support for older householders: and there were lodgers in some childhood homes too.
They are recalled as somewhat sad, dependent figures: a ‘poor old fellow’ who went out to his sister for his meals; ‘a right cripple’who had been unable to work for over ten years; ‘a very old gentleman’who scraped together a living by selling vegetables and tomatoes which he grew in his greenhouse, but was ‘very unhappy’because he had quarrelled with his drunken son.
He lived for twenty years with the family as a lodger with meals included: ‘he had a home with us, all those years.’
Another working-class London mother took pity on an old couple who could not work and had no pension, and lodged them rent-free.
The old man had been a seaman, and they had come from Chatham seeking a relative who had once lived next door, but who they found had moved.
‘They said they had nowhere to go, so mum took them in.’
Auntie Kate, as they called the old wife, proved ‘a dear old soul, and of course the old boy, he used to tell us all stories about over the sea.’
But such charity was rare, for it meant real sacrifice.
‘I know my mum was very very worried.
Because things were very hard for us.’
One has a brief glimpse here of the fate of the elderly who were childless or out of touch with their children.
Their poverty and loneliness were part of an isolation from ordinary family life which left them at the margins even of childhood memory.
Very occasionally there are recollections of helping other older people in the neighbourhood.
In a Welsh mining village the boys were told to go and carry water for the old people…and see about firewood for them for the week.
When we'd see these old people, we had to help them in every way, we were taught to do that.’
Similarly a London fireman's widow sent her daughters round to an old lady after school.
‘I'd only be about 6 or 7, and she'd always have the door open, she was always in bed, very old lady…
And no light, only a candle.
And we'd light the fire and go run any errands, and wait till her son used to come home.’
In some cases the benefit was mutual.
In a Devon village the teenage boys used to keep company with a lonely old woman ‘called Granny Vasey.
Her used to be working on the roads, see, quarrying, work on the roads, crack stones.’
Joe Orr, the publican's son, would surreptitiously take a beer bottle, ‘fill it up when his father wasn't about, see, and put it in his pocket, then take it up to granny.
And us used to go up there…
There was five of us, five boys.’
By her fireside there was a settee and a table, ‘and old granny was in the corner.
Well us used to sit around the table, give granny her bottle and a glass, then us'd play a game of cards, see.
That's where us used to go up night times when it was raining and that cold.’
But while some neighbours could be generous, others were callously exploitative.
A Lancashire railwayman's son remembers how in his street the men and women insured older neighbours as a speculation:
Supposing you knew of somebody you thought, ‘So and so'll not be here long’, you'd get a policy on 'em.
They did.
In them days they used to get policies on people as weren't relations.
I know one fellow called Ashworth, he were bit of a coal merchant, I remember him shouting one day across to somebody, ‘I backed a winner.’
He'd backed a winner — he hadn't paid as much in contributions as money they could draw from dying.
They did that, they could insure anybody.
Childhood memory is however typically family-centred, touching only haphazardly on the unattached.
For our purposes the special strength of the evidence from the interviews, as from the autobiographies, is for relationships within the family, and those must be our main concern here.
But it is important to notice how the idea of the family at this time often stretched beyond the normal three generations of direct descent.
There were in fact a variety of entrances to the grandparental role.
by no means all required a blood relationship.
A Shetland crofting family, for instance, had moved in with a childless older woman, who became ‘one of the family…
We used to play and the noise was terrible…climbing on her back and shouting…
We used to call her granny, she was really no relation.
But she owned the croft, you see.’
And in gratitude, ‘the old lady gave it to my father.’
In the cities it might be a neighbour up the street who took the part of grandparent, as for the Stoke pottery fireman's son whose mother was always seeking advice from ‘your Grandma Coates’—‘I could never find out what relative she was to me mother.
But she always used to say, ‘Well I'm a bit doubtful on the question.
Wait until I've been up and seen your Grandma Coates.’
Cos she was the one with the knowledge.’
In families without a surviving grandparent there might be other relatives to take the part.
A Welsh farming family called an aunt by marriage ‘granny;’ a Grantham print manager's family took in a grandfather's cousin ‘too old to live alone’who just ‘spent her time knitting’and ‘seemed something like a granny but she wasn't.’
Great-aunts were sometimes significant: a Scots farmer's old sister, ‘very straightlaced…you sat like a mouse;’ or the great-aunt of a Portsmouth docker's daughter, ‘an old, old lady’, who liked to celebrate receiving her weekly pension —‘Every weekend, pension day, she had a wee brown jug and she used to send me up the beer shop to get half pint o'stout.
And when I come back, she had the poker in the fire: they used to put it into the stout.’
There are also hints of the four-generation families which longer life has now made so much more common, when — though still very rarely indeed — a great-grandparent is recalled.
An Enfield clerical family took in a great-grandmother in her nineties for her last two years: ‘she didn't want to go in a home and she wrote to my mother and asked if she could possibly look after her.
Of course, my mother gave in.
Shouldn't have really, because she hadn't got the room…
She was no bother.
No, she would just sit and look at us.’
A Nottinghamshire miner's daughter remembers being taken to the fair by a ninety-year-old great-grandfather, a very big man, bony man.
Some grandparents were acquired through adoption, or through remarriage following family break-up.
An Essex girl was expected to call her foster-mother's mother ‘granny’, and to shop for her.
‘Poor old lady, she used to say, ‘There'll be a penny change and you'll get home some nice rock.'…
The foster-mother said, ‘you light Granny's fire before you come.’
And I was only a wee mite.’
She was also sent to the old lady's house to sleep, ‘because she was alone.
And it was very dark, but I had to go up every night, and I didn't like going up in the dark.’
Much more common were step-grandparents.
Of these, some left openly hostile memories.
A Moray Firth fisherman grandfather, for example, had remarried, and his new wife ‘was very hard on her family…
I remember the stepmother, yes — didn't like when I saw her comin' t'the door.
But eh oh no, she was a hard woman, very hard woman.’
Some strongly objected to the possibility of taking on a full grandparental role.
An Edinburgh postman's second wife protested when a cousin congratulated her on the birth of her first step-grandchild, ‘You'll be a granny now.’
‘Oh’, she says, ‘I'm not going to be called a granny.’
So they called her ‘Auntie Granny’ instead.
A Potteries child who was brought up by her grandmother and ‘treated her as me mother’ remembers how ‘grandad always used to turn and say, ‘I'm not your daddy you know.’
If you said ‘daddy’ to him, were putting your arms round him —‘Well, no — you know I'm not your daddy.’
He used to drill it in us that he wasn't, he was only my father's stepfather.’
But others, more spontaneously affectionate, are remembered very positively.
A Dumfries horseman step-grandfather used to look after horses at the county balls: ‘look after the horses while they were there.
All the aristocrats.
Well they used to get tips, it'd be sixpences and threepenny pieces.
And when my grandfather came in he always had a pocketful of these tips, and he would give us all some sixpences and some threepennies.’
When the sales were on, ‘he'd put his hand in his pocket and gave my mother sovereigns —‘Go and get them all something.’
And he used always to buy us shoes and boots…
. We always seemed to be lucky in that way.’
Step-grandparents, like step-parents, need to win a child's approval.
But to a lesser extent this is true of natural grandparents, too; they cannot, like parents, assume their significance to a child.
As we look at these memories, it is clear that the relationship depends both on the opportunity to know each other and also on the degree of compatibility between grandparent and child.
Too early death, or severe infirmity, or excessive distance could eliminate any possibility of a significant relationship.
Villages now a mere half-hour apart by car could then be prohibitively far away: the daughter of an Essex farm horseman was taken to see his parents across the county boundary in Suffolk for the first time only at the age of 14.
But with regular visiting, or through living together, grandparents could become important and sometimes crucial figures in childhood.
With grandparents who were visited, quite often the memory is mainly of the occasions when visits took place, or of the setting: of ‘lovely times’ staying with grandparents at Christmas, or of playing games —‘beggar my neighbour’and ‘old maid’with a grandmother, dominoes and stories with a grandfather.
One Lancashire grandfather's warm hospitality was more dubiously remembered:
he was a very jovial man.
And he always had a pot of linseed and black Spanish, and we always had to have a drink of this, cos he thought it was fantastic.
It was horrible.
They had old-fashioned grates and it was always there on the side keeping warm.
So you was always greeted with a drink out of this pint pot.
There are idyllic memories, especially in the more recent interviews, of holidays in the countryside, learning to grow vegetables or brew beer, and bringing home fruit from the farm.
One Midland industrial city child could vividly recall the country cottage of his gardener grandfather:
a lovely cottage, thatched roof cottage they lived in and it had an apple tree in the front, and a pear tree down the back, and all fruit trees.
You had to go right down to the bottom to the lavatory: that was a game, that was.
It was all beams, ever so nice.
And inside the cottage were his grandmother, ‘a very buxom lady’ who was ‘the spittin' image’of his mother, and the grandfather, who ‘looked like a little bird’with his wavy hair and pointed beard and bird-eyes.
Some families congregated weekly at their grandparents' home for music.
One family would gather on Sunday evening round the harmonium; another would go to their grandfather's village shop, boys and uncles each with a fiddle or cello, to sing or dance to their own tunes —‘we really enjoyed that;’ while a Yorkshire millowner's family used to ask all their kin for weekly musical parties, taking turns to host these ‘dreadful performances.’
One Manchester grandmother had seven daughters, of whom two were amateur opera singers,
and they all had their own songs…
Oh yes, it used to be wonderful to go there…
. And she was crippled with rheumatism — she used to go with a stick, and she was the boss.
I remember one time when Auntie Margaret back-answered to me grandma and me grandma couldn't get to her so she tipped the table upon her.
And walloped her with her stick.
But they — oh, they daren't give any cheek.
Other memories are no more than a nutshell description, a fleeting image, perhaps of an eccentricity.
‘Me grandfather, aye, I can remember me grandad’, a Durham railwayman's son recalled, ‘A very old man he looked to be with long white whiskers.
And the last time I saw him, he was in the yard.
He was sitting on a three-legged stool chopping sticks.
Aye, chopping firesticks.
And that's a long long time ago.’
A former Clydeside shipyard worker and a keen Mason had ‘got a bit chesty’.
‘I remember him sitting by the fire all wrapped up an' coughing.’
But the other grandfather in the same family, an old Ulsterman, who lived with an aunt, still spent much of his day with his former workmates.
He ‘used to go round by the harbour.
There was an old deckhouse off a ship and these old chaps used to meet there and I suppose they'd be talking of old times — shipbuilding.
They would go for a drink and then toddle off home.’
With a grandmother, it might be an odd domestic habit that is remembered —‘you know she used to polish her table legs and brass — and she used to cover 'em up after’— or simply her appearance: ‘I can just see her with her white apron on, and cap;’ or ‘she had a beautiful sequin coat, cape and a little sequin bonnet;’or again, of a duchess, ‘I can remember a tall gaunt woman in black — rather frightened of her.’
Occasionally a grandmother and grandfather are remembered as a discordant couple.
One old sailor kept a custom from his nautical days.
‘Last thing at night he always had his tot of rum, and it used to smell the room out.
I can smell that rum now.’
He and his wife were a ‘very, very thrifty’, simple-living couple, and right at the end of their long lives quite close.
But before that, ‘unfortunately, their domestic life wasn't very happy and there was a period in their lives when they both lived in the same house but didn't speak to one another.
And if I visited my grandfather I went upstairs to see him in his rooms and I came downstairs to visit my grandmother.’
Another old London couple were dominated by a ‘matriarch’ of a grandmother.
It was rash to complain of anything there: ‘the slightest — you know, when my throat's dry, you'd get dosed with blackberry syrup, or if you felt a bit hot then you'd get dosed with ground ivy tea.
Some most awful concoctions, the whole cupboard was full of.
She had a remedy for everything.’
And as for her husband, ‘poor old grandad liked his pipe, but he was never allowed to smoke a pipe in the house.
He had to go and sit in the woodshed and smoke it.
And he was never allowed to keep his tobacco in the house.
He always used to tuck it underneath the water butt.
Oh yes, she was a very very strict old dear.’
Sometimes it is all held in a single incident.
A London chemist, a sturdy, blue-eyed man with a long white beard, would take his grandson for walks.
Once, going through a churchyard, ‘he held my hand…
He said, ‘Don't fear’, he said, ‘the dead don't hurt you, it's the living that hurt.’
I've remembered that all my life.’
Part of the fascination of the old for the very young could be the sense of contact with a long-past world, half haunted.
A Durham boy had an old aunt, a frequent visitor, a ‘very fine woman’, still an agricultural worker.
She was grand, she would sit and play concertina…
She used to smoke a clay pipe and shag tobacco.
Me father used to sit at one side of the fireplace and me aunt at the other one, and they would sit and talk about the Bible.
And every night before we went to rest.
Every night…
If there was a moon she used to go out into the yard, and look at the moon, and prophesy what the world was going to be like tomorrow.
And this particular night, it was a full moon.
She used to wear very thick-lensed spectacles, and they were thick, very thick.
And a very broad-knitted hairnet, about half inch square net.
And this particular night she went into the yard, the yard door was shut, she went into the yard and was standing, looking at the moon — when the ticket lad came up with a ticket for me father.
He took one look at her — and he off.
He didn't leave no ticket.
He off.
He went up to the office, he said, ‘I've —’, he said, ‘I've seen the devil in Turnbull's yard.’
Aye.
She frightened him.
Most grandparents known only through visiting did not leave a strong emotional mark.
But almost a quarter of the childhood memories do express distinct feelings.
Some were of definite dislike.
One younger Welsh hill farmer used to go up ‘to help his father in evenings with the few cattle they had’, but afterwards at supper the older man expected the grandchildren to keep silent, and if they spoke ‘he'd look at us fiercely.’
A London postman's daughter whose grandparents lived next door contrasted the couple: ‘oh she was a pet, but not him, he never gave us any love.’
He was ‘a very very severe Edwardian’, looking a bit like the king, with
his beard and everything to a T. He'd sit at the top of the table, have his stiff white serviette tucked into his waistcoat, and he's lifted that carving knife and fork until — you sat there and you never said a word.
And then he'd carve and he'd pass round all the plates.
You dare not lift your knife and fork to start your meal until he started his.
You daren't say a word.
And if the meat was not quite to perfection he used to grumble at my grandmother…
Oh he was severe.
Grandmothers could be equally daunting.
An Oxfordshire carpenter's daughter ‘lived in fear’ of a ‘very puritanical, very strict’grandmother who ‘bossed the village, and kept everybody in order.’
A Liverpool naval engineer's daughter was sent on her own each week to her grandmother to collect her weekly sum for the thrift club run by her mother.
The grandmother was a Manx seaman's widow, always smart’, in long skirts and an apron, ‘always cooking, baking, and sewing: always clean…immaculate;, yet somehow without warmth.
She lived in a top flat ‘up a hell of a lot of stairs, and she used to have a parrot on top of the stairs.’
The girl would ‘just sit and talk to her.
Hating every minute of it.
Cos we had to go you see, and you had to put your Sunday clothes on, your best coat and everything; and then when you came back you had to take them all off again.’
Still worse, however, were visits to a Kilmarnock grandmother, a tough ‘old tartar’ of a truly ‘grim disposition’, who ‘just lived and lived and lived’in her spotless ‘scrubbed white’house.
When her granddaughters came they were expected to scrub too: ‘I've seen my eldest sister, the minute she went in she was made to scrub the table — and it was white — scrub the floorboards — which were white.’
But the younger children, being less useful, ‘weren't even allowed in.
We had to sit outside on the front steps, which were also white.
And you couldn't move…
Couldna look at her.
We had to sit outside, we couldn't speak.
Oh no, we didna like her at all…
We hated her.’
Against these negative memories may be set more frequent instances of closeness and admiration.
One Manchester grandfather, a market fishmonger and former wrestler, died when his granddaughter was only six.
But she did not forget ‘sitting on me grandad's rocking chair combing his hair and I can always remember him sat there and me stood up behind him: I'd comb his hair for hours and he just sat there and let me.’
Another influential grandfather was a Scots miner who had retired from the pit to become the gardener of a big house at Broomie Knowe.
He was ‘a great Labour man’, a non-smoker and non-drinker, an elder of the kirk until the minister mistakenly, suggested he had a hangover —‘and it was the last time my grandfather was ever inside a church.
And he was buried without a minister: he specified it.’
Again on principle, he and his wife ‘refused point blank t'draw their pensions: ‘We're no wantin' charity.’
They were both ‘rant Labour’ and at elections the campaign office was ‘my granny's front room.’
I used to go more or less t'my grandparents, almost every day…
You always went to them.
They had a house in Broomie Knowe at the bottom: it faces onto what is the public park now, the big hill.
And he had a grand garden, he had everything in his garden.
Fruit trees: apples, pears, plums, cherries, rasps, gooseberries and redcurrant and blackcurrants…
He had more or less green fingers, my grandfather.
He could grow anything.
And anything that was eaten in my mother's house was either home grown or home baked.’
He kept hens too, and was also a pigeon enthusiast.
‘My grandfather was…always an active man, right t'more or less about the last year that he died.
He was always active, yes.
Oh aye.’
More often it is a grandmother who is remembered as a ‘guiding influence.’
A Yorkshire pay clerk's widow was able to play a ‘big part’ in her granddaughters' upbringing because she lived next door across a common yard and could be ‘always there’, in and out of the house.
She would watch her granddaughter wash the doorstep and come out to comment:
‘Now Kathleen’, she says, ‘there's a right way and a wrong way to do everything’, and she showed me how to wring out a cloth…
I never saw her with a hair out of place.
She always looked absolutely immaculate.
When she got up in the morning, always had amethyst earrings — and she left to me actually — and she always looked absolutely immaculate.
And whenever she bought it always had to be the best.
This grandmother was a lasting influence, ‘because she always insisted that you had to have the best of everything.
Nothing else was right, you had to go for the best in life, and I suppose we've always felt that.’
There were several families where extra closeness to a grandmother was encouraged by a strained relationship with the mother.
Thus the daughter of one mother who drank asked to go to live with her grandmother, in her well-ordered ‘nice’ home: ‘but they wouldn't let me go.
I was the eldest daughter and they really wanted to keep me.’
In another instance, a Portsmouth docker's daughter had grown close to her grandmother through helping her go out to shop or visit, or just sitting with her —‘her and I were never separated.’
The old lady ‘was in our house more often than she was in her own.’
As the granddaughter grew into a young woman, they still ‘always got on, and she always stuck by me;’ When she was told off by her parents for coming home late at night, the old lady would ask them, ‘Were you never young once?’
In a London wheelwright's family the grandmother had a crucial influence, in particular because the mother was ‘very prudish’ on sexual matters.
‘One day I asked her a question as I was getting on, and she just smacked my face…
. You had to learn all about anything from other girls.’
But unusually the daughter was able to confide in her grandmother:
Thank God I had a very wonderful grandma.
Perhaps it's not right to say it, but I loved my grandma much more than I loved my mother…
. She was sweet, she was really lovely.
Not only her own people but other people used to come to her for advice…
. And when I was beginning to grow up and I used to visit her.
She'd say to me, ‘Come and sit down, ducky.’
Used to go and sit down.
‘Getting a big girl now’, she'd say.
‘Well, you know what you've got to do, you've got to be careful.’
And I used to look at her.
‘You've been talking to the girls?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well’, she said, ‘listen.
If there's anything you don't understand, I know your mother won't tell you, you come and tell gran.’
And I used to.
Later, as a 16-year-old, she went into a wartime gas mask factory working beside ‘real cockney women’: ‘I was shocked…
I couldn't believe what they said.’
So she went back to her grandmother.
She says, ‘Come here, sit down’, put her arm round me.
‘Now’, she said, ‘they've told you in a very bald way.
That's wicked.
Yes, the baby is born like that.’
So I said, ‘Well how does it get there?’
You see?
So there's my grandma telling me the difference between a girl and a boy.
And the way she put it, she ought to have been alive today, she could have taught them how to tell people about sex.
You know I thought when she explained it to me, not like some people think it's dirty, I thought it was wonderful.
I did really…
I think that's why I got through life as well as I did.
Because I'd had the grand advice from my grandma.
Another basis on which close relationships commonly developed was a pattern of visiting which included the exchange of help and caring between the generations.
But again, this did not necessarily follow: the spirit of the exchange mattered too.
While grandmothers who brought cakes or made clothes for their grandchildren did so from their own choice, childcare stemmed principally from the request of mothers.
These were mostly working wives: mill or munition factory workers, cleaners or outworkers.
Grandmothers would help them by minding the children after school, cooking their dinners, and sometimes having them overnight.
Typically they lived very close by.
A Durham miner's daughter ‘could shout down the passage and me grandma would soon know if there was anything the matter with us.’
The grandchildren always bathed in her kitchen rather than at home, and she ‘looked after our heads’ for lice, while after the bath the blind grandfather ‘used to tickle our backs with stick in front of fire.’
Some grandmothers were not enthusiastic for this role.
A Lancashire mill child assumed that although her grandmother fed her, ‘mother must have paid her of course’, a quite regular practice in the region.
A Tyneside girl disliked going for dinners to her grandmother because ‘she used to threaten us with this monkey stick, hung behind the door.’
Some grandmothers took children only at times of crisis: when the mother was ill, or when parents were locked in dispute.
Thus one mother was an East London waitress, first married to a shrimp-seller and later living with a docker.
Her daughter was ‘pushed around’ between various homes, never secure: ‘it wasn't a home life really.’
She found consolation in her grandmother, ‘a mother or an angel…
I loved her.
Anything that went wrong I always went there.’
But her grandfather was ‘a very strict man’, and although she went to live with them ‘just now and again when things went wrong at home’, this never lasted: a respectable mechanic and chapel man, the grandfather could never forgive his daughter's errant ways.
‘I was being punished for what my mother did…
. He seemed to have spite on me…
So I got turned out of there.’
Against these, we may set happier examples.
A London girl whose father had died lived at times in the next street with her grandmother, moving between the two homes.
She remembers how ‘in the evenings we used to sit by the fire and grandma'd let me comb her hair.
She had lovely long hair and I'd roll it up all in little merry widow curls.
If you got tired and worried, she'd say, ‘Come on, comb my hair for me.’
A Plymouth dockyard labourer's daughter lived across the road ‘as much with grandma as I did with mother.
Well I'd rather go with grandma, rather than my mother.’
She ate there often; and since her grandmother had been a gentleman's cook, she ate well.
The grandmother of a Cornish smallholder's family would stay the first three days of each week ‘to help my mother to do the washing and buttermaking…and to help to do the mending;’ and when the children were not at school they would walk the mile and a half back to granny's own ‘little thatched cottage.’
She kept a cow, and although there was only water from a well ‘up top of the garden’, this was another spotless house: ‘she always kept a nice white cloth down over her stair matting, washed and ironed each week.
And her brasses shining, slab scrubbed.
The back kitchen had an earth floor, and that was sanded.’
A Dumfries house factor's daughter would visit her grandmother each morning on her way to school,
to see if she wanted any messages, corn or meal for the hens, she kept hens.
There was a wee window you could look into before you came to the back door and she was always sitting reading the paper.
She was very religious…had texts hanging on the wall, framed text.
I can remember grandma's text: ‘Cast all your care upon Him, for He cared for you.’
And she was a good living woman.
If her parents needed her to be looked after, she would be off there again later; or she would go there in the evenings to read a book to her grandfather, or play games with him, or listen to one of the old pair storytelling.
The grandfather was a favourite with the neighbouring children too, ‘a great one for stories’, and in the summer would sit them on a seat outside his door, ‘not only his own grandchildren but other children about, listening to the tales he used to tell, about old Dumfries’: of the murderess Mary Timmony, for example, the last woman publicly hanged in Dumfries.
Here again, it was easy for the grandchildren to call in frequently: the two houses were both in the same ‘raw — this ‘raw’ was a row of houses.
As a child I remember I used to call my mother at home, ‘mammy up the raw’, and grandma was ‘mammy down the raw'…
So that I had two homes really, because as often as not I was down at her house, as in my own home.’
There were some families in which domestic help from a widowed grandmother was really a disguised form of assistance in the other direction.
An Oxford painter's wife paid her mother a half crown a week for coming to help on washday: ‘a little bit of pin money…
This was my mother's way of helping out a little tiny bit.’
And although the flow of mutual aid was markedly more often from the grandparent so long as the two generations were living separately, there were several cases in which visiting was explicitly intended to enable the grandchild to convey help.
A Bolton engineer sent his daughter each week ‘up to me grandmother's, take her a shilling.’
A London grandmother was particularly troublesome because of her drinking sprees, but her granddaughter was expected to clean her front doorsteps every Saturday: ‘the old bugger used to sit at the window and watch me clean 'em.
Hearthstone all the lot you know, from outside the door right the way down to the steps.’
Some children were sent to widowed grandmothers to live with them for company, or just sleep a few nights, like the seaman's daughter on the Western Isles who, when all the men were away at the fishing, ‘used to sleep with granny…bringing the water from the well and bringing in the peat, tidying up the floor and singing songs, for granny she was a very musical lady, yes she was.’
Another widowed grandmother chose her grown-up granddaughter, who had had dinner with her every day as a schoolchild, to be her companion on seaside holidays.
‘We used to go and sit in the park, on the river bank, and she'd have a book and I'd have a book…
Yes, we got on exceptionally well…
I suppose it was a gentle hand really.
She seemed just happy to see us.’
Less often, a widowed grandfather was helped.
A Stepney dairyman's daughter had to call every Sunday morning on the way to church, to read her grandfather a verse from the Bible.
After listening, he would say, ‘Well now, you've got a good home.
Go to church.’
I said, ‘Yes grandad.’
And he always left a little bag of sweets and a threepenny bit.’
A Luton shoemaker's grandfather would come every Friday night for a bath and a meal of pease pudding and chitterlings in front of the fire.
And in a four-generation family of Dumfries master slaters, the 13-year-old granddaughter was daily housekeeper to the eighty-year-old grandfather, cooking and cleaning for him: ‘you just did what you were told.
I was sent —‘Go up…
.’ In return, she was given a half-crown a week.
Although visiting grandparents was the basis of many significant memories and relationships, it is surprising that in the first set of interviews there are even more significant mentions of grandparents who at some point lived in the same house as their children.
Even in the second set, where memories were specifically pressed, one third of the grandparents who were remembered had at some time lived in the same household.
But we know that three-generational households were in fact as rare in the past as they are today.
What lies behind this apparent conflict between memory and historical reality?
Statistical averages are often deceptive of social practices.
There can be no doubt that the normal British ideal was for adults of different generations to live in separate houses.
‘No, I never lived with any of my parents.
No damned fear.
I got out of the way, on my own.
Nevertheless, there were four situations in which an ‘extended’ multi-generational family was, at least transitionally, a regular practice.
The first was early in a young couple's marriage.
It is a remarkable finding from these interviews that of those informants who married before 1918 almost half — and over half if we include those with soldier husbands — lived for an initial period, sometimes brief but often two or more years, with one of their parents before moving into a house of their own.
These were years of housing shortage and this was frequently the reason.
Much less commonly, in a small number of families these mutual arrangements continued for many years.
This happened typically where both generations participated in the same family business: most often, but not always, a small farm or croft.
Here housing and common work meant co-residence was to their mutual advantage.
A second, but also rare, situation in which an extended household could arise was when an elderly person was able to obtain the support of either an adult child or grandchild to continue living in his or her own home.
Grandchildren could be used to help when small, and there were also a few instances of a grandchild moving in during adulthood.
In a similar kind of way, one  Essex farm labourer's daughter was called back from service to live with her ageing parents again, the household supported partly from the wages of younger brothers, and partly from pigs and hens which the old couple kept themselves.
Interestingly, it was not only daughters who could feel such a binding duty.
A Devon labourer who promised his mother not to marry in her lifetime, finally married only at the age of 51: ‘bugger, we was courting for seventeen year.
Yes, her and I went together for seventeen year, before us got married.’
The third situation, much more common, was when a grandparent abandoned living independently, either following widowhood, or through infirmity.
This does not show up in the household statistics because many of these stays were for a brief few months right at the end of life.
It was above all grandmothers who came to live with their children in this way: five times as many as grandfathers.
This was partly because grandmothers lived longer and were more often widowed, but also because they were more helpful.
As children sometimes realized, a wholly dependent old relative was a serious burden —‘It half killed my mum looking after her’, Some families managed to postpone sharing house by well-organized support for a grandmother in her own home.
A Lancashire miner's daughter, whose grandmother ‘was very sprightly, very clean…very like prigmeat, you know, everything in its place’, remembers how one of her brothers moved into the next-door house when he married, and ‘they helped with them when they were older.’
When the grandmother was in her eighties and widowed, ‘we went religiously one of us each day, one sister and another, each day.
And then this brother lived next-door and his wife popped in and out.
And they'd good neighbours as well.
We kept it up.
Cos she used to say, ‘I never had daughters but I've ended up with three.’
Cos we went religiously.’
They also all helped with the cleaning in turn, ‘like do the curtains and windows and give it a general do over.’
Although in the event the old lady died first, towards the end it looked as if she would need to be taken in by one of her descendants and this caused distinct tension: ‘we had least room and everything — and least money’, but ‘there was a bit of squabbling in family.
And we decided we'd have her.’
Other families showed astonishing generosity, even for grandparents for whom they felt much less sympathy.
One grandfather had earlier abandoned his own responsibilities: ‘when his wife died he went off and left his family’, with his eldest daughter shouldering the task of an unsupported mother of the younger children.
Nothing was heard of him.
And then me grandfather suddenly appeared, many years later, when they'd got children that were grown up then, all of them, he appeared to these girls, would you believe it?
His two daughters who he'd never really done anything for — expecting them to look after him.
Which they did.
Much to their credit.
And they had him there until he died.
It was not uncommon, when it was unclear who should be responsible for an elderly relative, to take turns.
A Lewis grandmother was moved between her daughters ‘as the family arrive’— she had to move on to make room for infant children.
A Stoke pottery manager's parents retired to the south-west, but returned when they could no longer live independently, moving ‘to each of our houses in turn.
Fortnight at each house, with each — all seven of us…with each of us a fortnight, each time, each of us in turn.’
Similarly a Bolton great-aunt ‘spent her time with various relatives.’
Bachelor uncles were the worst difficulty.
One Keighley mill warper's wife found herself with four to care for; and even one could stir up great resentment.
A young Scots miner's wife found herself saddled with a great-uncle:
he had six sisters an' a brither an' he wouldna stay wi' any o'them, cause he wanted to stay wi'me, so I took him in.
Cause he had been used to me lookin' after him doon at my mother's hoose…
. We didna have any option, we never got any option.
They jist had a meetin' an' telt me, ‘Bruce's stayin' wi' you.’
He was with them 13 years: ‘We were never on oor own, we were never — didna seem t'have the hoose t'oorselves.’
Grandparents who moved in only at the very end of their lives, just for a few last months, rarely left much of a mark unless earlier contact had been important.
‘I don't remember her really, only as a figure sitting in a chair…
She wasn't able to walk.
She had two enormous lumps on her head…
Lace caps with black velvet bows: she always wore those.’
One country child born in the 1870s was an exception to this, for she had to share her grandmother's bed — until her parents removed her, having been superstitiously warned that ‘she took my young breath.’
Closeness to a grandmother's death seems never to have invoked the intense emotional experiences which those who nursed a parent or spouse sometimes recall with such striking physical intimacy.
No grandparent is remembered in such a way.
It was their activity over longer periods which mattered to their grandchildren, not their passing.
Many grandmothers who lived with their grandchildren helped look after them, made their clothes, got them up for school, minded them while their mothers went out to work: ‘I thought of my grandmother even more so than my mother cos she was always there, you see.
We were never left alone.
And very good she was too.’
And whatever may have been socially expected of them, some grandfathers evidently helped in a similar way.
In a Welsh farm family the grandmother was bedridden, and child-care fell to the grandfather: ‘cause he was in the house, he was the one that looked after me and kept me in order.’
In a Nottingham mining family the grandfather was named as a second father: ‘I used to call him ‘father’ and me dad, ‘dad’.’
Another grandfather, a retired Manchester newsagent, would light the fires, mend shoes, and peel the potatoes, while in a south London stableman's home the grandfather would clean the shoes and cook too —‘We always said we had two mothers and two fathers, always.’
Some inevitably left a much less favourable impression.
One grandfather ‘was a very wicked man…whom we disliked.’
A Jekyll and Hyde journalist, who ‘never drank tea or coffee — he believed in water, ‘God's ale’ as he called it, he was a natural vegetarian, he didn't believe in killing anything.’
Despite these high principles he had driven his wife to drink by abandoning her, and a crippled daughter into prostitution by making her pregnant: ‘You see, our history's really rather dreadful.
And all that we daren't say anything about; I didn't even know until long afterwards.’
Whether explained or not, the family's disapproval of this incestuous old man was clear enough.
Nor was it easy to be thrust together with some grandmothers.
Some were difficult because they seemed too controlled, or controlling.
One grandmother was ‘like a queen, unapproachable.
I don't remember her kissing anybody…
She sat upright, always, she knitted all our socks…on four needles.
She was always occupied, but you never went near her.’
Another was ‘a bit of a boss, and she moved about from one daughter to another…
When she found out that she couldn't boss the children, she moved on.
Well, when Gran came to us, ooh — she was a tyrant.
Others are recalled as causing unease because of ways thought unsuitable for women of their age.
One grandmother, who had been out tot he Australian Gold Rush and back, was inseparable from her pet chaffinch and her nightly glass of porter.
‘She used to take it in bed and that was her night cap…
She was a lad, she was.’
Another, born in Ireland, whose son was a Yorkshire steelworks labourer, also liked a daily drink, but went out each night to the pub and was back regularly as it was ‘just turned seven’.
One night, when she was in her nineties, she failed to reappear and the labourer's wife went out to look for her:
So I look in this public, I can see it now, stood back at top of Hope Street, and there were two steps and a little snicket — and there were about four in there.
Four old women.
See I just went like that, looking up: ‘Come on, its bed time.
I've been worried to death over you’, I says, ‘wondering where you was’.
They were all having a packet of chips and fish — whoever fetched them I don't know, cos they were all up for a good age: tell you, she were a hundred just in St Patrick's Day.
I said ‘Come on’.
She'd got her glass of beer.
She come out.
I gets hold of her arm…
I said, ‘Do you know, you frightened me to death?’
But the old lady's humiliation was not over.
She got in trouble when I got home.
He says, ‘Where the hell have — he were right snotty — have you been?’
She says, ‘What do you want to know for?’
She was right haughty with him.
‘You frightened Alice to death’, he says; ‘you never stop out like this.’
So she said, ‘If tha wants to know, I've had a gill of beer and me chips and fish.’
No wonder, with such threats to independence a possible outcome, sharing house with the younger generation remained usually a last resort.
Yet if living together could create problems, it also resulted in some notably strong relationships between grandparents and grandchildren.
‘I liked him’, one daughter summed up a grandfather who had been orphaned in the Irish potato famine: ‘he was an old man, and I was only nine when he died, but as our father was at the [First World]War, I suppose he was the only man in the house.
And he was very nice to us…
He was a great one for singing because he'd sing sea shanties and Irish songs.’
And a Kent farm labourer's daughter recalled with special intimacy her grandmother who lived into her nineties, only moving from her own cottage in her last five years.
‘We went to her house a lot.
We'd pop in any time, and I have been to stay with her…
She used to have me in a big feather bed with her…
She cooked all outside — the fire was outside the house…
She had every tooth in her head…
We didn't discriminate so about age.
My grandmother was just one of the family.’
Most remarkably, she used to talk to the girl about her grandfather's dying:
You see, we'd got such confidence that she told me that when he died, she said, ‘He died in his bed here’, that we were in, you see; and she said, ‘I then closed his eyes and I laid down with him till the morning so that nobody should be disturbed.’
So I said, ‘Ooh gran, did you?…
Were you frightened gran?’
She said, ‘No.
Love casts out fear.’
She was very, very fond of him.
‘Love casts out fear’, she said: ‘you'd better learn that as soon as possible.’
I did.
And it does…
Wonderful old lady.
One last form of co-residence brought some of the closest relationships between grandparents and grandchildren, as well as some of the most sustained instances of tension.
This was when the need to live together came not from the older generation, but from the child's own family.
There are altogether thirty instances of this in the two sets of interviews, resulting from three different situations which occurred almost equally commonly: need for housing space, death, or desertion.
Sharing house space has the fewest implications.
In typical instances, in the cities a widowed and formerly more prosperous grandmother might still be living in a larger, now empty house: thus a Liverpool labourer and saltpacker's family moved in the with grandmother, who kept a secondhand clothes shop.
Or in poor farming areas, the farmhouse might be divided with the grandparents ‘living in the old room.
A Barra fisherman's son, one of eight born to a couple who lived as squatters in a foreshore hut, ‘was brought up in my grandfather's across the road: ‘I had everything in their house.
I had nothing to do with meals or anything at home.’
Not all such arrangements were easy.
A Welsh smallholder quarryman moved into the family farm so that his wife could go out to earn as a washerwoman, but the children did not get on well with their step-grandmother: ‘There was a very hard side to her, she was a very stern woman, and we didn't like her.’
It was quite a different situation when a grandchild came into the grandparent's home through the death or desertion of one or both parents.
Sometimes an older child made a deliberate choice to do so, having already got to know them well, but others could find themselves suddenly in a new home with no say at all.
Thus when a Lancashire miner died, his widowed wife went into service as a living-in maid with a doctor and ‘put us in with me grandma’.
Another girl was ‘sent away’ for two years because her mother was severely ill after childbirth.
Brothers and sisters were quite often split from each other, as well as losing parents, in these moments of crisis.
Thus a London ship's carpenter's daughters were sent to one grandfather, and the boys to their other grandmother.
Old people who took in their grandchildren at such moments might have few resources and little space themselves.
The son of a drunken soldier lived for six years with his grandmother in one room.
A girl from another broken family ‘used to sleep in the same bed as grandma — I was sleeping with her the night she was found dead the following morning.’
The grandparent could feel resentful at such unexpected burdens, and sometimes grandchildren were aware of this: ‘course there was — bits of squabbles at times with me father and me grandfather.'
The typical tone of memory, however, is very different from this: a special sense of love, even devotion, in the grandchild for a wonderful old lady: ‘I treated her as me mother’, as an abandoned farm-child sent over from Ireland put it; or a motherless Bolton spinner's son —‘she were a love…
We've grown up as if she was me mother.’
The sense of rescue undoubtedly gives a special strain of idealization to these comments, but this seems to go back to the childhood experience rather than to be a retrospective gloss.
A Wiltshire cowman's son, for example, had lost his mother.
They were going to put us in the workhouse.
Only there was a lady lived at the manor, and she said — come up and see my grandmother and if she'd look after us, she'd keep us in clothes and food.
So she did.
So my grandmother brought us up…took care of us…
Always sewing, making things.
Yes, she was very good at looking after us.
We were never untidy, always clean and always well fed…
Oh wonderful, wonderful grandmother!
But he felt strikingly differently, about his grandfather.
‘He was always grumbling at me’, and threatening him with a stick.
‘Grandmother used to say, ‘Now grandfather, you begrudge the food that boy eats'…
I didn't like my grandfather.
He didn't like me.
He liked my brother and sister.’
The relationships described here are much more complex than a simple retrospective stereotype.
It is equally notable that in four other instances, children who later had a choice stayed on with grandparents, rather than returning to their parental home.
One grandmother, a London insurance broker's wife, had originally taken her grandson because he was seriously ill and the mother — who suffered from depression — had another infant only a little younger.
‘Granny came up one day and saw her, and she said, ‘You can't go on like this: I'm taking the boy back with me.’
And she grew so fond of him…
And every year it was put off.
So he finally stayed with her altogether.
So he was brought up with her.’
And a Liverpool painter's son, who after his father died ‘was brought up with me grandmother’, calling her ‘mother’, chose not to return to his real mother when she remarried and could offer him a home again: ‘They'd brought me up, and it wouldn't be fair for them to take me after from rearing me.’
Similarly, a motherless Glasgow soldier's daughter was taken in by her grandparents and brought up with the help of an aunt, who married soon after but stayed in the same home.
The grandmother had ‘a wee shop’ and the aunt was ‘a dressmaker, she made dresses and sold them cheap, round about the doors.’
The grandfather, a former soldier in India and retired horseman, had had a leg amputated: ‘he ended up wi' a stump, so he used to sit in this…old chair in the corner…and nurse Aunt Lillie's children.’
The girl does seem to have been closer to her aunt than to her grandmother who died relatively soon, in her sixties.
Nevertheless the grandmother was a strong influence.
She had been a teacher, and made sure the girl went to a good school: ‘my granny had more influence on me education-wise.
I mean she was the one that would push ye.
She sent me to that convent, thinkin' she would make something o' me.'
She also gave her a sense of family background.
They would visit the cemetery together: ‘she would take a tram car, see she'd one or two buried there, it was her own family, and we'd go to the cemetery nearly every Sunday if the weather was good.
And she would take ye a wee walk round the cemetery, and I can remember pinchin' rhododendrons comin' out the gate.’
Being mothered by a grandparent was certainly not always a happily remembered experience, and for one illegitimate Scots girl it generated a lifetime of mutual bitterness.
The grandmother was always frightened that she would follow her mother's mistake: ‘she always said I'd turn oot t'be like my mother…
Cos my mother worked through in Glasgow as a maid, and — eh — she had me t'a dentist — well he was a university dentist — fae doon the myre.
His father said if he married her he would be cut oot, cut off withoot a penny.’
Her grandmother made the illegitimate girl into a Cinderella: ‘I was made to work in the house…a house slave.’
Every week she was expected to clean the house right through and make the dinners, while the grandmother had her outing to Edinburgh: ‘she had jist t'come in and sit doon like a lady.’
Then as soon as her grandfather had died, she was sent out to earn as a butcher's shop girl.
Yet when the girl grew into a young woman, she seemed unable to break free of her grandmother.
She moved out for a while, but carried on cleaning for her; and then when she married, she moved back in again, and had her first child there.
The old lady had scarcely mellowed.
When her granddaughter quickly became pregnant, ‘she thought it was disgustin'…pure disgusted shameless young woman…
I said, ‘Of course you had grandfather and you only kissed an' they were there.’
That shut her up.’
The grandmother was also ‘involved in interfering’ with the upbringing of her great-grandson: ‘I darn't speak t'Gordon rough.
I remember one day she slapped me across the jaw.
For hittin' him.
Said I was cruel.’
After six years she moved out again into her own house, but continued to visit daily.
And when the old lady finally died suddenly in her eighties, she felt utterly bereft.
‘I wis lost for a while, because I had went there every day.
When she died, I just felt I had naewhere t'go.
Cause I hadna made any friends.
I just kept the bairns t'myself an' went doon an' did her work…
I suffered maist fae her dying, than her ain family did.’
It is above all those children who were cared for actively by their grandparents who recall them in depth and with strong feeling.
But the acute tension in this account is exceptional.
It was in fact rare for a grandchild to be so entirely dependant on grandparents, even after death or desertion.
Normally at least one parent remained in the home, or if not, close by; and in many cases aunts of the parents' generation were involved in caring.
Larger family size alone usually made for a very different situation from that of a grandchild brought up alone by a grandparent today.
We may conclude with a less unusual example, from a South London family.
Here the father was an Irishman, a stableman, drunken and violent, who eventually deserted, leaving the mother with her own parents.
They were originally Wiltshire country people, the grandmother and mother being both illiterate, and the grandfather a blacksmith.
The grandparents took on responsibility for the house and the children together: ‘my mother went to work all the week, she never done no cooking.’
It is the grandfather, however, who emerges most clearly in his granddaughter's recollection.
He was evidently an ingenious man, and after retiring from the smithy would earn from carpentry:
Man next door, he used to say he wanted — some chest of drawers.
He went and got the wood, he done it all…
Christmastime, he used to go and get some wood, and he'd make engines, great big engines and…tip-up cart with two wheels.
He used to ask us for the pearl off our coats, collars, put on the horses, make 'em all.
And I used to take 'em round the pubs and put 'em up for raffles for Christmas.
And got him his beer money for Christmas.
He also made a creeper-covered trellis in front of the house door and did all the garden, ‘do all the flowers.’
Inside, he ‘used to make all the mince pies for Christmas’, peel the potatoes for Sunday lunch, and every morning make breakfast: ‘you never had to get up and make a cup of tea of a morning, he'd get up.
He'd fetch us all up a cup of tea in bed with a bit of toast.’
He also lit the fires; and ‘we never knew what it was to clean boots or shoes.
He used to clean all our shoes and put them along the floor.
Then as we got older, about 16 or 17, we used to give a couple of bob at the end of the week to keep all our shoes.
That was his beer money, his bacca money.’
He was fun with the children when they were younger, too, telling them stories about life in the countryside, taking them out —‘go all over the place with him, yes’— and seeing them to bed: ‘he always give us a piggyback up the stairs to bed.’
And when they married, he gave each grandchild a wedding present from his own handiwork.
‘He used to make us a rolling pin, a dough board and a rubbing board…
They lasted donkey's years.
Donkey's years.
Yes, he was a wonderful carpenter…
Good old man our grandfather was.
You know, really good old boy.
It would be unwise to suggest that any of these remembered families can stand as typical.
On the contrary, the most telling message which these interviews have to convey is the great variety not only in circumstance, but also in responses to later life of the older generation in the earlier part of this century.
Autobiographies and interviews, each constrained both by what children could see and also by what they would remember as significant, offer inevitably partial glimpses of the experience of ageing.
They can only hint, for example, at the group activities of older people which excluded a child, or the pain of bereavement, or the loneliness of those without family, which then as now, must have been widespread.
But put together, they certainly can help us to fill out the picture of the earlier experience of ageing.
They bring home the inequality of material conditions: at the one extreme old men in filthy lodgings chopping a few sticks to keep warm, and at the other the lady of the manor supported by servants and a companion in her immaculate drawing-room.
They emphasize the importance, both for keeping independence and for helping their descendants, of owning even a small amount of property and passing down specialized occupational skills.
They show how retirement, earlier a privilege of the middle classes, becomes a general and sometimes threatening expectation.
Working grandfathers, originally the rule, become the exception, and working grandmothers rarer still.
They suggest some of the typically simple pleasures of later life in the past, such as keeping parrots or pigeons, gardening or baking, playing dominoes, drinking a nightly glass of porter at home, or going out to gossip with old workmates.
Most of all, they give us a unique insight into the quality of family relationships in later life, and the variety of ways in which they could be constructed.
We encounter the contrasts between at one extreme domesticated grandfathers, and at the other, elderly couples at war.
We can see how family memory is socially shaped, and also the willingness to incorporate substitutes, not always related in any way, for absent grandparents.
We are able to trace the patterns of practical aid and its mutuality between the generations, and in an especially full way, of house-sharing.
Above all we can observe how closeness between grandparents and grandchildren can develop: the significance of visiting, and of practical caring, but equally of personality.
It becomes abundantly clear from these accounts that then as now, family support was a two-way process, and that responding to a crisis could result in intense friction as well as in deep affection.
Grandparents could not count on natural loyalty: rather; they had to positively create their roles by winning a child's affection.
So some were hated as insensitive and disciplinarian, while others were remembered as models or guiding influences through relationships of striking tenderness and intimacy.
In short, in the past as in the present, both through fortune and also through choice, the experience of old age could differ sharply.
At one extreme were those so inert, so withdrawn into themselves, that they gave out nothing to the young.
At the other were old women and old men up and about, actively using old skills, adapting and developing new ones, able to play and to care and confide; still open to new love from the young.