

To Clare, Anne, Jennifer, Philippa and Sonia, My Granddaughters and Greatniece, All of whom spin.
‘Keep the Wheels Turning’
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank the Curwen Archives Trust whose generous grant has made this publication possible.
My thanks also are due to Miss Mary Burkett and her staff at Abbot Hall, from whom I have had help and co-operation since the start of the survey in 1975; to Mr B. C. Jones and Miss S. J. MacPherson, County Archivists, of the County Records Office, who have given generous help and advice;; to Marie Hartley and Joan Ingilby, whose book first aroused my interest in the stocking trade; to my fellow members of the Lancashire and Lakes Guild of Spinners, Weavers and Dyers for encouragement and support; to my granddaughter, Anne Allen, who took the photographs,(except where otherwise stated); to my daughter, Jan Hare, who typed the manuscript; to my friends, Penelope Porter, Kathryn Allen and Mary Sutherland, who gave technical advice, reviewed text and read proofs; Elizabeth Edwards and Kathleen Drummond for advice and information, and above all my thanks to the many kind people who live where there are galleries, and who have put up with my enquiries with such patience and kindness.
ILLUSTRATIONS
Black and white photographs were contributed by Anne Allen.
References to The Allen Collection refer to data and photographs in the Author's possession.
INTRODUCTION
During European Architectural Heritage Year 1975, the Women's Institutes of Westmorland organised a survey of dated buildings and furniture in the villages.
Brathay Women's Institute decided to work on Spinning Galleries, and as I am a spinner and weaver and at that time was a member of the Institute, I became involved in the search for galleries.
This survey, as so often happens, led from one thing to another, and I became interested in vernacular architecture and the people of the area, particularly in their work and homes over the changing years.
Although this book is in no way offered as a study of history or architecture, I hope that some of the information gathered may be of interest to those who love Cumbria and cherish the old buildings and traditions.
 PHOEBE ALLEN 
EARLY WOOL TRADE
The early wool trade is so closely associated with the spinning galleries and those who lived in the farmhouses and cottages that a short explanation of the methods of production may be helpful in understanding the way of life of the producers.
This information, spanning several centuries as it does, must necessarily be brief and incomplete.
In the Middle Ages the Church was the largest land owner, and the abbeys were particularly important.
Furness Abbey was the largest land owner in the Lake District.
It was the fourth largest abbey in the country and one of the richest.
Its lands reached from abbeys in Yorkshire as far as Borrowdale and Eskdale, where its sheep runs extended over the fells.
The Cistercian monks with their lay brothers administered the abbey wool trade.
Furness wool was of good repute.
Although wool was not usually graded, Furness wool was listed as ‘worst, medium, best,’ and it went far afield by pack horses to London and Southampton, where it was exported to France and the Low Countries.
The Furness monks conducted the local wool trade, administering the Grange at Hawkshead.
The lay brothers brought the fleeces to hamlet and village and collected the spun yarn and woven cloth from the workers.
The shepherds, who were serfs, cared for large abbey flocks and two or three sheep of their own on common land.
The women were the spinsters, completing the ‘Dual Economy’ so neatly expressed by Herrick, who understood the women's importance in the cottage economy:
‘Set to your wheel, and wax rich by ductile wool and flax
Yarne is an income, and the housewives' thread
The larder fills with meat and bins with bread.’
(Hesperides )
Wordsworth refers to ‘women and children as manufacturers.’
All women of high and low estate were spinsters.
The children were at work at an early age teasing and cleaning the fleece with carders, wooden bats with sharp teeth, to remove tangles and impurities.
Before the spinning wheel came into use, much later in the North than in the South of England, all spinning was done on a spindle.
A wooden rod was placed through the centre hole of a whorl or disc made of wood or stone.
Then the rod was twisted by the spinner, who pulled strands out from the fleece, allowing them to twist into thread by the action of the revolving spindle.
When a long length had been spun, it was wound onto the rod of the spindle, and the process was repeated.
The first wheel in use was the Great or Walking Wheel, which required space for the spinner to walk to and fro.
The more familiar wheels at which the spinner sat soon followed.
In fine weather spinning was done out of doors.
‘Spinsters and knitters in the sun’, as Shakespeare wrote.
Wordsworth also gives a description of a family spinning in the sunshine in The Brothers , but the Lake District has a higher than average rainfall and in wet and windy weather spinners no doubt sought shelter where it was available.
There is considerable confusion about the use of the distaff, sometimes referred to as a Rock, probably because of the old terms ‘Distaff and Spear’ sides of the family.
Writers often mistakenly use such terms as ‘women spinning with their distaff.’
Actually, a distaff takes no part in the twisting of fleece or flax to produce thread.
It is the holder of prepared fleece or flax from which the spinner draws out strands.
It is usually a three foot rod, often beautifully carved as a love token, onto which the prepared material is bound by a ribbon, traditionally red for a girl, blue for a married woman.
The spindle spinner tucked it into her belt or under her arm leaving both hands free to spin.
Distaffs may also be attached to a spinning wheel or be floor standing.
When sufficient yarn has been spun on spindle or wheel, it is removed onto a niddy noddy, or skein winder.
The spinners had to work hard to keep the weaver, a man, at work.
He required seven or eight  spinners to keep him busy as he threw his shuttle to and fro on his heavy wooden loom.
With the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1537, the wool trade underwent a notable change, passing from the abbeys to the towns and village markets.
Kendal was known for ermines, coatings, duffel, blankets and much more, including a prosperous stocking trade.
Hawkshead, already a well known wool town, became second only to Kendal.
Gradually, wool clothiers, merchants and hosiers took over the work formerly done by the monks.
Their servants, the broggers, took raw materials to the peasant workers and collected the finished yarn and cloth.
Broggers were sometimes middle men and worked for themselves.
Meanwhile, the making of cloth went on as before.
When the cloth was taken from the loom, it was loose and open in texture and needed to be fulled, or shrunk, to make it warmer and more durable.
In the early days this was done by peasants ‘waulking’ the cloth, treading on it in shallow water:
‘Where tumbling waters turn enormous wheels
Whose hammers rising and descending learn
To imitate the industry of men.’
(Anon.)
By the 14th Century the great revolution of the fulling mill had caused this to be forbidden.
The Lake District was fortunate in having plenty of fast-running water, not always available in the towns, and cloth to be fulled came to the area from many places.
Soap was locally made from animal fat and lime mixed with potash derived from the burning of green bracken.
The fulling mill had a large wheel, turned by the water power, which activated wooden hammers, rising and falling on the cloth in soapy water.
After fulling, the cloth was well rinsed and, now reduced from 35″ to 27″ in width, was taken to the tenter ground to be stretched to shape by fastening hooks in the selvedge and attaching them to the tenter frames.
It was a capital offence to steal a ‘web’ from the frames.
There are many local place names which still include the word ‘tenter’.
The fulling and corn mills were owned by the Lord of the Manor, to whom payment was made.
Later the cloth was brushed with teasels to raise the nap and sheared and dyed by the shearmen dyers.
The Kendal Green was famous in Tudor times.
Genista tinctoria (yellow) overdyed with woad (blue) produced the colour to which Shakespeare's Falstaff referred in Henry IV : ‘Three misbegotten knaves in Kendal Green’, Falstaff being one.
Not all wool was dyed.
The fleeces from the fell sheep in their natural state produced the hodden cloth, which later became familiar to all in the song about John Peel: ‘D'ye ken John Peel with his cote swae grey’(Woodcock Graves).
There were still many changes to come, both in the country and in the towns.
The manorial laws had been very strict, and villagers had stayed close to home, but now the villeins were becoming tenure farmers, and the yeoman or dalesman farmer, sometimes known as the ‘statesman’ in the Lake District, was emerging.
There was much more movement amongst the people.
In Kendal prosperous merchants and clothiers had established a middle class, and the Kendal yards, with the merchant's house, the workers' cottages, and the spinning and weaving lofts all packed together under close supervision opened  up new conditions.
The country worker who came to town lost much of his independence, in spite of the long-established guilds, which had existed from the past to watch over the workers' interests.
There was no such protection for the spinners, who were often exploited.
(See quotes below).
The Industrial Revolution followed, and all too soon the peasant economy came to an end as the rural handworkers discarded their wheels and looms, and cloth was made in the mills.
From ‘The  Clothiers Delight’ Broadsheet:
‘Combers, weavers, spinners for little gains
Doth earn their money by taking of hard pains.’
‘When next for the spinners shall ensue
We'll make them spin three pounds instead of two
When they bring home their work unto us, they complain
And say that their wages will not them maintain.’
 (Anon.)
The history of the wool trade would be incomplete without a reference to the animals.
The hardy fell sheep, the dogs who have worked with the shepherds, and the pack horses and ponies have made an indispensable contribution to the trade, and all deserve recognition.
The Herdwick sheep, who withstand wind and weather on the fells with their ‘heafing’ property of returning to base, were not so named until the 18th Century, the name ‘Herdwyke’previously referring to the abbey sheep farms.
From early days every shepherd had a ‘serviceable barking dog’, whose herding skill has become legendary.
The nimble pack horses, with a capacity to carry twenty stone, moved on the narrow trails in a train of twenty horses, connected one to another by plaited tail to following halter.
A bell was worn by the leader to encourage those behind and to give warning to others approaching.
THE OLD GALLERIES OF CUMBRIA
The galleries of Cumbria, so frequently referred to as ‘Spinning Galleries’, could better be called ‘Wool Galleries’, for they were mainly used for fleece, wool, yarn and cloth in many stages of storing, preparation and drying.
Certainly women sat spinning upon them as we know from the description by Adam Sedgwick, a reliable witness.
Sedgwick, born in Dent in 1785 and for many years Professor of Geology at Trinity College, Cambridge, and a friend of Wordsworth and Darwin, describes the galleries of Dent vividly and delightfully in his book,A Memorial To Cowgill Chapel 1868 : ‘The galleries were places of mirth and glee and active happy industry for there might be heard the buzz of the spinning wheel and the hum and the songs of those who were carrying out the labours of the day.’
H. S. Cowper, writing on Hawkshead in 1897, refers to pentices and galleries and their uses for spinners and weavers, and The Royal Commission on Historic Monuments, Westmorland , 1936, and Walton's Survey , 1956, mention a few galleries.
However, there is little else authentically recorded, a strange omission inasmuch as these galleries and a few over the West Yorkshire border are indigenous to this area.
This survey has covered an area twenty miles around Kendal, a well-established wool town since Medieval times with the appropriate motto, WOOL IS MY BREAD.
Kendal had many galleries in the past, and some are recorded here, but the search has been concentrated on the country areas.
The dates of the galleries are on record from the 14th Century in more pastoral areas to much later in the Lake District.
It was within the period 1650–1710 that the building of many stone houses took place and the galleries with them.
There are references to galleries in the deeds of houses in some cases, and date stones and the carved fitted cupboards in the houses provide date references for this period.
There are different types of galleries.
In many cases the buildings show the Nordic influence of the long house with farm buildings attached, sheltering man and his animals under the same roof, and the gallery may be on the house or barn.
It is believed that the galleries themselves are strongly influenced by the Nordic tradition.
Some galleries project from the first floor of the house; others are on barn buildings above the yard.
One has an outside stair, the only way to the first floor before an inside stair was built.
Some galleries are long, like those at Yew Tree and Monk Coniston, where a great (or walking) spinning wheel could be used, the spinner requiring space to draw her thread away from the great wheel and, turning, to reverse the wheel and walk back to wind the spun yarn on the bobbin.
The first of the great wheels were tall, and consideration has to be made for the height of the canopy, but there were many adaptations of the walking wheel and the more familiar smaller wheel, at which the spinner sat, soon followed, and on a small gallery like the one at Hodge Hill, the mistress of the house could sit with her tiny flax wheel.
The usual plan includes a wool room or barn behind the gallery, with shippens and stables below.
Where the gallery projects from the first floor of the house, the wool room was in the house on the first floor.
Hawkshead, Ulverston, Ambleside, Kirkby Stephen, Dent and Sedbergh all had galleries where prospective purchasers could walk around to view the goods on sale on market days.
In the hamlets and villages the galleries were used for many purposes.
It is on record that within living memory swill basket makers and tanners used them, and that peat, fodder and farm implements have been stored there.
In some cases fleece could be stored on a gallery for a group of spinners, for it is preferable to keep fleeces in a cool atmosphere as they deteriorate in hot and dry conditions.
The main room or ‘house’, where the family gathered and worked and where the fire never went out, would not have been a suitable place for storage.
Galleries were used for display purposes also.
Finished cloth and yarn were hung out for the approval of the merchants and their servants, the broggers, as they rode round the countryside in search of spun yarn and woven cloth.
Village inns such as the Black Swan at Ravenstonedale were used as depots where raw material was left and finished work collected.
It is recorded that galleries were used at election times by prospective M.P.s stating their case at Ambleside and Ravenstonedale and, no doubt, at other places as well .
How the name ‘Spinning Gallery’, so often used, came into use is a mystery.
It is often attributed to Ruskin, but no definite proof has emerged.
De Quincey, writing in his Recollections of The Lakes, 1840 , did not refer to them thus.
He wrote: ‘A very interesting feature of the elder architecture annually becoming more rare, viz. the outside gallery.’
There have been many theories accounting for the prevalence of North, North East and East facing galleries, including a favourite one that they were built so that thrifty spinners might sit out and catch the last of the waning daylight.
This is a doubtful speculation as spinning, unlike sewing or embroidery does not require a strong light, and it is much more likely that the spinners would be found in comfort spinning by the light of their peat fires as dusk approached.
There was, however, a very practical reason for the facing of the galleries in these directions.
In the case of many of the galleries, the wool room or barn for the storage of the fleeces lay behind the gallery; below there were facilities for penning the sheep.
At clipping time the sheep were driven in and penned, and as they were clipped, the fleeces were thrown up to a helper standing on the gallery and put at once into the wool store.
It is a well-known fact that clipping is done in the shade as it is a long and sweaty business for man and sheep, and was especially so before the days of electric clipping.
This practice has been followed for over 300 years at High Bridge End, St. John's in the Vale, and until recently at Adamthwaite in the Howgills, and it is referred to in Langdale also.
When this system was used the clipping and storing of the fleeces were completed while the sun was off the yard.
Those who are familiar with their Wordsworth will remember in the poem Michael , 1800, the following lines:
‘Under the large old oak, that near his door
Stood single, and from matchless depth of shade,
Chosen for the Shearer's covert from the sun,
Thence in our rustic dialect was called
The CLIPPING TREE, a name which yet it bears.’
This passage reveals concern for the points of the compass when clipping was in progress as the shepherd moved around under the tree to avoid the rays of the sun.
The descriptions of the galleries which follow are grouped mainly in areas, with the galleries which have gone and their references listed with them.
YEW TREE FARM, Yewdale, near Coniston.
Facing East.
National Trust Property.
Dates:There is a cupboard here inscribed G. W. 1685, which was probably the property of George Walker, who lived here and whose will was proved in 1695.
A metal door latch is dated 1743.
This gallery is probably the best known to the general public; standing back from the Ambleside-Coniston road, it is easily seen.
It is one of the longest galleries and is approached by both ramp and steps.
It is unusual in being partly panelled.
The National Trust is responsible for the care and upkeep and the old wooden gutters have been repaired over the years.
The barn is very large and there is ample room to store fleeces and stock winter fodder, and cattle can be housed during the hard winter weather.
There is interest amongst spinners regarding the long galleries.
A spinner with a great (or walking) wheel could perhaps work here, space being required for the spinner to walk to and fro as she worked, though the height of the canopy would be a determining factor.
The smaller galleries could not  accommodate these large wheels, and within the house floor space was not always available.
The oldest part of the farm lies at the rear of the farmhouse and is not easily seen from the road.
The sheep here are mostly Herdwicks and run on Holme Fell.
A large yew tree gave the farm its name.
It was said to be 700 years old when it fell in 1896.
LOW TILBERTHWAITE, Near Coniston.
Facing East.
National Trust Property.
There is a carved cupboard here dated 1687, though it is believed that the cottage is older.
The gallery has had the railings restored; they were originally upright, but are now horizontal.
A painting of the original gallery is within the cottage, which was once owned by Beatrix Potter.
The painting, with the two fat cats at the base of the steps, was thought to be by her.
The wool room, which is now converted for serving teas, has entrance from the house, and patrons can sit out on the gallery.
There is a flight of steps from ground level.
The original wool room had a high roof, and a large quantity of fleeces could have been stored here.
There is a theory that spindle spinners would have used the galleries, using their drop spindles over the rails to obtain a long thread.
This is an idea which has fascinated spinners.
Girls have been seen in Italy, spinning with spindles over a balcony, while their sisters sat knitting below, which lends support to such a theory.
There is also a picture (Church and School of the Carita ) by Canaletto in the National Gallery, London, of a woman on a balcony with a distaff and spun thread in her hand, which lends further credence to the idea.
BOON CRAG, Monk Coniston, High Water Head, Facing South.
National Trust Property.
Date: Late 17th Century.
The Marshalls, a well-known family engaged in flax spinning lived here for many years and many interesting people, including Wordsworth and Adam Sedgwick, were visitors.
The name ‘Monk’ links the farm with the Furness Abbey era, when the monks administered the Furness wool trade.
The Marshalls erected dams on their estate and were responsible for creating Tarn Hows.
They also introduced the Sitka Spruce to the Lake District soon after its introduction to this country, 1825–30.
This gallery follows the usual pattern, with wool room behind and stables below.
It is one of the longer galleries.
The woodwork is rough with plain wooden struts.
In early times, farmers were expected to grow a quarter acre of flax for one acre of arable land.
Hemp was also grown.
Early wills and inventories show records for fleece, flax and hemp in many areas.
THE FARMERS ARMS, Lowick, near Greenodd.
Facing South.
Previously The Fisherman's Arms.
(Listed at Spark Bridge).
The inn is ‘advertised’ as being 14th Century, but the Royal Commission on Historic Monuments,(Westmorland), 1936, writes: ‘Irregular plan, two parallel blocks joined by a cross wing’, giving the date as 16th Century and later.
The gallery was rebuilt in 1935 by the father and uncle of Miss Wendy Kyte, who provided the information.
This is a very pleasing gallery, if not entirely authentic.
The canopy slates are old and similar to the main roof and it is possible that an earlier gallery stood here.
A flight of stone steps gives access and a door from the first floor of the inn has been added.
Sturdy posts uphold the roof with a filled-in frontage.
Inside the inn there is a fine old cupboard built into the wall and a court cupboard.
DUBBER BECK, Oxen Park.
Inside House.
There were previously two cottages here and during early alterations the gallery came within the house.
The date over the door is 1708 and a fire place is dated 1758, but in an early Parish Register someone from Dubber Beck was buried in 1632.
Probably an earlier house stood here.
There is a wooden finial over the front door to keep the witches away.
The beck flows beside the cottage.
The name derives from the early practice of sheep being ‘dubbed’ or washed in the beck before clipping.
There are very fine oak beams in the oldest part of the house and the gallery is in good condition.
COLTON OLD HALL, Bouth.
Facing North.
Date: 17th Century.
The farm lies to the west below Bouth village.
Colton was a Parochial Chapel of Hawkshead in 1578.
The woodwork frontage of the old gallery has gone and a solid piece of wood has replaced the balusters.
there is a large barn behind the gallery, a granary on the left and a shippen below, following the usual pattern.
The farmhouse was one of the homes of the Sandys family.
LIND END, Broughton Mills.
Facing East.
This property has recently undergone considerable restoration and it is hoped that wooden rails will once again adorn the gallery and that it may again be used by the mistress of the house, who is a spinner.
Within the house, a spice cupboard, an open rail oak bannister and strange beehive-shaped cupboards,(possibly ovens), at low level were found during the recent alterations.
There was a large barn behind the gallery and originally a door at each end, one leading to the house.
Other buildings have been altered from the original shippens.
STABLE HARVEY, Blawith.
Facing North-East.
The farm lies on the hills above Coniston Lake on the western side.
A long farm road from the Coniston-Ulverston road brings the traveller through gates to the farm buildings.
The gallery is in the inner yard.
A door at the back of the gallery leading to the barn or wool room is boarded up, and the railings or original balusters have gone, though a stout supporting post remains.
Below is the shippen.
The Township of Torver was worked in four quarters and Stable Harvey was one of them.
The Parkes family was in residence here for many years in the 18th Century.
STOTT PARK FARM, Finsthwaite.
Facing East.
(Attached to Stott Park House, now High Stott Park House).
The gallery, now converted into the main building lies at the south end of the complex.
Over the farmhouse door is a date stone, 1712, referring to Roger and Isabella Taylor, who lived there at that time.
HAWKSHEAD AREA
PILLAR COTTAGE, Church Hill.
Facing North-East.
It is sad that only this one little gallery remains at Hawkshead, for in the days of its eminence in the wool trade there were many pentices  and galleries projecting from the houses, and the market square would have been busy with purchasers walking about and selecting goods.
H. S. Cowper, who has written in detail in his book Hawkshead , 1899, gives a lively picture of the village.
The gallery on this house on Church Hill was probably part of larger farm buildings facing the meadows.
A flight of steps goes up the left-hand side of the gallery.
Another, similar, was on a house which stood where the Institute (now a shop) stands, and many of the nooks and crannies of the wandering streets would have been tempting places to sit out and spin in summer weather.
The history of the wool trade and the association with Furness Abbey has been touched on (see Notes on the Early Wool Trade) and the Cistercian Monks and lay brothers were known for their sheep farms or Herdwyks and their Grange at Hawkshead.
The Court House, where the business was conducted, can still be seen today.
After the Dissolution of the Monasteries, the Abbey lands passed to the Crown and the wool trade to the villages and towns.
Hawkshead, already well established, became second only to Kendal.
The Market Charter was obtained in 1602, and weekly markets and three fairs were held.
In addition to the sheep and wool market, Hawkshead was well known for its cattle market.
In 1666 a law was passed that everyone must be buried in wool.
This was largely disregarded and was followed by another one in 1678.
Hawkshead Church has nearly 200 documents confirming this, one of which may be seen in the Church.
In the 17th and early 18th Centuries, Hawkshead was famous for linsey woolsey petticoats made from a mixed cloth of linen and wool, as the name suggests.
A favourite colour was red.
The garment was worn with an overdress or bed gown, bunched up the waist in front and falling behind to the hem of the petticoat.
Married women wore a cap, a blue linen apron (referred to by Wordsworth and others), woollen stockings, neb shaped clogs with buckled shoes for better wear, a poke bonnet and cloak for outer wear.
The men wore jackets of hodden  cloth, breaches , a leather or linen stock, waistcoat with brass buttons, hand-knit stockings, often blue, and rounded clogs.
The    Churchwardens' accounts of 1792 record duffel, serge, kersey and other cloths.
In 1737 a fulling mill is recorded at Hawkshead Hill.
In wintertime the spinners gathered together in their cottages to spin and knit the yarn.
This was called ‘ganging a sitting’ in Hawkshead, and it was referred to in the same terms across the country at Dent.
Going further North, Robert Burns wrote about it also:
‘One evening we had a Rockin'
To ca' the crack and weave our Stockin'
And there was muckle fun and jokin'
Ye needna' doubt.’
Villagers made their own amusements.
Births, weddings, Church festivals and Saints Days were celebrated.
One such being St. Distaff's Day, 7th January:
‘Give St. Distaff all the right
Then give Christmas sport goodnight,
And next morning everyone
To his own vocation.’
The pack horse trains went regularly to Kendal, Ambleside, Ulverston and other more distant markets.
There were no roads for wheeled traffic until after 1750.
Merchants, clothiers and hosiers came to Hawkshead on horseback to conduct their business.
When the Market House was built there were five  butchers in the Shambles and shops and stalls for produce of all kinds.
Hawkshead must have been a fascinating crowded place on market days.
The peak of Kendal's wool trade was in the 17th and early 18th Centuries and Hawkshead's prosperity waned with that of Kendal.
Looms and spinning wheels were silent with the approach of the Industrial Revolution and the work which had employed so many in the Furness area came to an end.
ATTWOOD, Outgate.
Facing East.
The practice of clipping below the gallery and throwing up the fleeces to a helper to put into the barn was followed here.
This gallery was lost during alterations.
WALTHWAITE, Chapel Stile, Langdale.
Facing East.
Langdale had a long association with spinning and weaving and there were several galleries in the area.
Walthwaite is the best example left and though it has been built in, the woodwork is still there.
A fine barn lies beyond and the wool room was in the house on the first floor away from the gallery.
Some of the original spun and woven linen is treasured here — a family heirloom.
The house has always been in the possession of the owner's family.
Another gallery at THE BIELD, Little Langdale, was lost during alterations.
It was north-facing.
The late Miss Pepper, who lived for some years at The Bield, spoke of the ‘throwing up’ of fleeces during clipping to a helper on the gallery.
At Skelwith Fold, THE OLD MANOR had a gallery over the front door, which was north-facing, and again, the woodwork is preserved within the house.
Close by, at SPY HILL, pentices were remembered by the late Mr Armer, who was a neighbour, and he told the present owner of his recollections.
Spinning by the village women fell into disuse by 1819 and the wheels were silent until Mr Albert Fleming and his housekeeper, Miss Twelves, came to live at Neaum Crag, Skelwith Bridge.
With perseverance and skill, and encouraged by Ruskin, the craft was revived and by 1883 linen was being produced once more.
The Langdale Linen Industry was formed, with instruction in the making of Ruskin lace being given by Miss Twelves.
Later, Miss Twelves moved to Keswick and the Ruskin Linen Industry was formed and earned considerable fame, Ruskin allowing his name to be used as a trade mark.
AMBLESIDE AREA
Ambleside was known for its importance in the wool trade before the granting of the Market Charter in 1650.
Unfortunately, the galleries have long since gone, but William Green's etching of the market place shows the gallery on the market building and one above the entrance to The Slack.
In 1778 he wrote about the buildings in Ambleside ‘…with their projecting porch's connecting galleries, beautifully formed chimneys and bold irregularities.’
William Green came to live in Ambleside in 1800, when he retired from surveying and map making, and painted there for the rest of his life.
Grasmere , too has lost its galleries but evidently they were there once as de Quincey wrote describing them in his Recollections , ‘A very interesting feature of the elder architecture, annually becoming more and more rare viz the outside gallery, which is sometimes merely of wood, but is much more striking when provided for in the original construction of the house and completely enfoncée in the masonry.’
Rydal is more fortunate, for the gallery at Cote Howe, Pelter Bridge, has survived in good condition.
The gallery is approached from the first floor.
It is constructed of plasterwork with inlaid wood and a window and a door, which have been introduced to form the background.
The upright wooden supports are sturdy with a narrow bar between.
The building is being restored and recently a garderobe was found.
Cote Howe was an early homestead and there was a ford here.
In 1560 it was the home of Michael Benson, wool clothier, one of three brothers, who owned most of the freeholds between Rydal and Clappersgate.
There was a fulling mill where the Rothay and Brathay join and the flat lands beside the Rothay were used as tentergrounds.
Ambleside had three fulling mills ‘above Stock’ at this time.
Nearby at Clappersgate the spinning porch at Willy Hill (now Willow Hill) has been demolished recently and a modern structure put in its place.
The old house was featured in the paintings of Julius Caesar Ibbetson, born 1759, who lived at Willy Hill for some years.
One of his paintings shows a rough wooden gallery on a house thought to be Willy Hill.
‘Women with Great Wheel, after John Harden’
Detail: Ambleside Market Place by William Green, 1760–1823
Photograph: Photograph of original porch at Willy Hill, Allen Collection.
HODGE HILL, Cartmel Fell.
Facing North.
Date 14th Century.
The gallery is over the front door.
It has fine balusters and a door to the first floor room behind.
It is too small to have been used for storage or drying, but would have been suitable for the mistress of the house to sit at her small wheel to spin.
The original Deeds show the gallery.
There was development in 1560 by the Philipson family and further developments in the 17th and 18th Centuries.
In 1686, Cartmel Register noted Hodge Hill.
It is a fine manor house, showing the development from the days of the one main hall to the additional smaller rooms of winter parlour, solar, etc.
There is an elegant staircase with a gate to keep the dogs downstairs and a page's seat at the top of the stairs, where the boy sat until called to his duties.
There are bread and spice cupboards dated 1674 in the hall.
The farm buildings here are across the yard away from the gallery.
The most famous Philipson was ‘Robin the Devil’.
During the Civil War he was King's man and was captured by Colonel Briggs, a Parliamentarian, who besieged him on Longholme, Windermere (Belle Isle), whence he was rescued by his brother.
The legend tells of his pursuit of Colonel Briggs to Kendal Church during morning service, riding his horse into the church and losing his helmet on the way out, when he found his enemy was not present.
A helmet (the Rebel's Cap) hangs in the church to this day, perpetuating the lively story, which was used by Sir Walter Scott in his novel,Rokeby .
‘The door was flung wide and in he did ride
In his clanking gear so gay.
A long lean blade he held in his hand
Our Dickon for to slay.’
(Traditional Jingle)
There are many other stories of his prowess.
The Philipson coat of arms was granted in 1581: FIDE NON FRAUDE (By Faith not Favour).
Later, the Birkett family lived at Hodge Hill for 300 years.
Hodge Hill had its ghost and a strong tradition of smuggling from the nearby coast.
Today the house is a well-known restaurant.
POOL BANK, Cartmel Fell.
Facing East.
Date 1677.
Pool Bank is a fine old farmhouse built in the shape of an L. The gallery is at the back of the house above the back door in the yard.
It is all made of wood and is in good condition.
There is a window and a door behind to the corridor, which was probably the early wool room.
We are told that tanners used this gallery.
The farm buildings so often found below the galleries are situated further away in this case.
On the studded front door is the date 1693 and initials I.H.K., thought to refer to John and Kathleen Hartley, who lived there, though there are earlier references to the house in 1677.
In the house is a fine court room with a plaster overmantel. two small rooms at either side of the fire place were used as pantries.
It is said that lords and ladies and royalty were entertained here, and known that George Fox, the founder of the Quakers, preached here.
There is a strong tradition of smuggling, illicit goods being brought from nearby Flookburgh on the coast.
Pool Bank has its own ghost, that of an unfortunate wife who was walled up in a small room and left to starve to death.
There are tales of clanking chains and doors which open and close of their own volition.
There is a pew in St. Anthony's Church, Cartmel Fell, belonging to Pool Bank.
It is interesting to compare the more rural structure of the farm house with the elegant tiny gallery of the manor house at Hodge Hill, nearby, remembering that all women were spinsters and produced wool, flax and silk on their wheels, according to their needs.
The present owners of Pool Bank were previously the tenants, and during their tenancy they cared for the gallery and strengthened it, and now as owners will watch over it with loving care.
This is a gallery with hope for survival.
BELLMAN GROUND, Winster.
Facing East.
Date 1760.
This is one of the long galleries, with a fine flight of steps for access.
The woodwork is rough, with uprights and bars.
The canopy of the gallery is below the barn roof and overlaps the house roof at one end.
The farm buildings were empty for many years, but have now been restored.
In the barn below the gallery there is still equipment for making swill baskets and older residents in the area remember swills being made on the gallery.
Early pictures show no horizontal bars between the uprights on the gallery.
Today there is a large but discreet caravan park around the farm.
HELM FARM, Windermere.
Facing South and East.
Date 1691
The property is jointly owned by the Matson Ground Estate and the Pattinson Estate.
The gallery is frail now and there has been some reconstruction, which is continuing with the whole of the property.
THE SPINNERY, Bowness.
The late Mrs Wallace, who purchased The Spinnery in 1958 and owned the property for many years, gave many interesting details of the old house and later wrote an article for Cumbria .
The house is thought to be 400 years old and one of the oldest buildings in the area.
One of the early residents was a shepherd, who worked for the farmer who owned the farm on the hill behind the building, and the stock grazed on the open fields.
The ground there is still common land.
To the right of the main buildings there was an open veranda or gallery with balusters and a sloping floor and entry was from the house.
Unfortunately, in 1959 it was found to be unsafe and alterations had to be made.
A barber worked here and Mr Nelson of Ambleside, his son, was born in the house in 1901 and later became the ‘lather boy’.
There is a fine oak staircase in the house.
The most notable people connected with The Spinnery were Annie Garnett and her sister Frances.
Annie was born in 1864, the second of six children.
Frances, who was her close companion and helper, was the youngest of the family.
The family house was at Fairfield, Bowness (the dower house of the Crown Hotel).
It was here that the stables and offices became the ‘Spinnery’ for spinning and weaving and by 1909 the large workshops employed as many as 60 to 100 part-time workers.
Annie Garnett had no formal training in design, but her natural ability, love of flowers and colour  enabled her to design all the textiles produced at The Spinnery.
She was herself a weaver and spinner and taught spinning and embroidery.
She was awarded many diplomas of merit and exhibited in London, Germany and America.
The present Spinnery was the local retail outlet for the fine woven and embroidered work.
Annie Garnett and her workers were part of an important movement in Britain and Europe when there was a resurgence of pride in the natural characteristics of arts and crafts after the Industrial Revolution.
In the Lake District a notable pioneer was Miss Twelves, living at Skelwith Bridge.
She worked with the local women at St. Martin's, Elterwater, and in 1883 linen was being spun and woven again in the Langdale Valley.
Miss Twelves moved later to Keswick and founded the Ruskin Linen Industry and Mrs Pepper continued the work at Elterwater.
At the same time Miss Butterworth was employing women at the Flax Home Industry House at Grasmere and work continued there for many years.
Annie Garnett wrote three booklets:Handspinning , 1896;Windermere Industry , 1905;Spinning Notes , 1913.
TROUTBECK AREA
Troutbeck has more galleries recorded than any other village in the Survey.
Four that were known and recorded have been lost and five remain.
TOWN END may be seen on the left of the road coming into the village from the southern end.
It is a fine yeoman's house belonging to the National Trust.
Opposite is a bank barn with ramp approach and a fine canopy and threshold.
On either side of the large doors is a gallery of Gothic arches facing west.
At each end, wings provided sleeping quarters for the farm hands.
Below, shippens housed livestock.
There is a date stone here, 1666,(the date of the Fire of London) and the initials of George and Eleanor Browne, who lived in Town End at that time.
The Brownes and their descendants lived here for many years and played a prominent part in the life of the village.
The barn was important at winnowing time, when the doors were opened at both ends to create a draught to separate the corn from the chaff.
It is not suggested that Mrs Browne carried her spinning wheel through her garden and across the lane to perform on her wheel.
She was much more likely to spin outside her door if she was in search of fresh air, but the available space may have been useful in drying yarn and cloth for display.
MATTHEW HOWE standing back from the road nearby is thought to date from between 1665 and 1700.
This house was once an inn —‘The Jolly Dragoon’.
There was a gallery here on the west side of the house and there is an oil painting of it in the house.
It is hoped that this gallery may be restored here in the future.
During restoration in the house, a skeleton was discovered of a man who had been buried standing upright.
This is a Norse custom and provides some interesting speculation.
From 1829–69 this house was the Vicarage.
The house with a gallery below Matthew Howe is of a much later date than those recorded of the 17th Century, and is not included in the Survey.
LOW FOLD FARM , 1 North Fold, near the Post Office, has a cupboard dated 1674 CBC & AB.
There were restorations to the gallery in 1826.
A fine flight of stone steps leads up to the gallery.
A barn lies behind, and shippens below.
In the farmhouse an oriel window has been blocked up.
There is a good example of corbie stepped gables here.
Considerable restoration has been done to the property recently.
Dr Brunskill, in his Vernacular Architecture of the Lake Counties , refers to a possible gallery at LOW HOUSE .
He says, ‘The roof of the main block is extended between two wings to form a gallery.’
YEW TREE is in the High Green complex, near the Mortal Man Inn.
There has been restoration to the woodwork here.
The house was probably converted from a barn.
The gallery faces west but, owing to the conversion, this point is not particularly relevant.
THE QUEEN'S HEAD , said to be a 14th Century inn has a long gallery, now glassed in, facing east, but it is not an original structure.
This inn has seen many interesting gatherings through the years.
The  installations of Troutbeck's folk mayors, who are selected by the outgoing mayor, to serve one year, and many shepherds' meets have been held here.
LONGMIRE HOUSE, Applethwaite , lies across the valley.
Over the front door is a date, 1690, but Longmires were recorded here much earlier.
Above the door on the north side is the gallery, with well-preserved balusters.
The original door from the first floor is now a window.
Besides the Longmire family, Pattinsons and Brownes also lived here.
Margaret Longmire, an indomitable old lady, lived to be 104 (died 1868) in Troutbeck village.
Auld Jackie Longmire was an enthusiastic huntsman.
Two quarrels in a window showed that the Brownes were here also.
The windows are interesting, with their association with the wool trade, though there is some speculation that some of them may have been brought from another house.
One window shows a date, 1565, another shows wool hooks, another teasels, a Tudor coat of arms and a crown and white rose.
There is close association here with Kendal's coat of arms (Motto: WOOL IS MY BREAD).
The house has fine oak panelling.
GALLERIES WHICH HAVE GONE:
WHITE CRAG, once Townhead.
HIGHFIELD SOUTH, Stephen Birkett lived here and sold furniture in 1685 and 1689.
BROW FOOT, S. H. Scott, writing in 1905 refers to a gallery on this house, which stood to the South  East and below Mr Birkett Forrest's house, and refers to the gallery being used to store peat.
These houses were Birkett houses, another family with long associations with Troutbeck.
HIGH BRIDGE END, St. John's in the Vale.
Facing East.
There is a 1702 oak cupboard in the farmhouse.
The gallery is frail, the roof in fair condition.
There are no balusters and rails left.
The access is by a side door on the sloping hillside.
Timber was stacked on the gallery floor and the farmer's wife removed her washing for photographs to be taken — a practical use for a gallery in inclement weather.
The sheep were penned in the yard, a usual practice at clipping time, when fleeces were clipped and thrown up at once to a helper on the gallery for storage.
This has been the practice followed on the eastern side of the county at Adamthwaite in the Howgills and is explained in the INTRODUCTION.
Recently, divers working in Thirlmere have found the remains of the old pack horse bridge, which disappeared when two lakes, Thirlmere and Wytheburn, were flooded to become Thirlmere.
HARTSOP AREA
Come over Kirkstone Pass towards Ullswater and, on reaching the valley, turn off to the right to the little village of Hartsop, a quiet place now, but once a centre of rural activity.
There was a kiln to dry the corn in an area where the damp climate gave a short season for harvesting and a mill, where the grain was processed.
There were four galleries here, of which two remain.
THORN HOUSE (North facing) is a good example of a small ‘long house’, with man an animals sharing the same roof.
The gallery, with fine turned balusters, is in good condition.
The entry is from the first floor.
Stone steps lead to the closed end.
The house and gallery date from 1640, though the house was derelict for many years and restored in 1920.
The present kitchen was the cowbyre and the room on the first floor, now a bedroom, was the loft and approached from the gallery.
In the barn alongside, sheep were salved and it was known as the ‘salving barn’.
Outside, a depressed circular stone was filled for the sheep dipping.
The main living room was used for Quaker meetings for many years.
There is a fine oak carved overmantel and an old door opens onto the curved stone stair to the first floor.
In the small front yard, where a few sheep could be penned for clipping, a tar costel is placed to hold the Stockholm tar.
Walking up the village, the second gallery is found.
MIRESIDE (North facing) was once known as ‘The Castle’.
It has a cupboard dated 1700.
It lay derelict from about 1870 until after the 1914–18 War, when it was restored.
It is one of the few stone galleries.
The steps and the door to the spinning loft are original.
There is access to the gallery from the inside of the house also.
These galleries face North, and, as Ms E. Little explains in her book,Chronicles of Patterdale , they would have been in a good position beside the early road to attract the attention of the wool clothiers and their servants, the broggers, passing by on horseback in search of stock.
Spun wool and woven cloth would be displayed for their inspection.
Hayes Water Gill, below the cottages, would be used for the washing of yarn and cloth.
Farther up the village is a bridge called ‘Walker Bridge’, where, it is said, cloth was walked by the feet to shrink the material before fulling mills were used.
This was forbidden by law after 1377, when fulling mills were in general use.
The sheep ran on the fells above Ullswater, as they do today, and on the higher reaches the red deer can still be seen.
There are many pack horse trails recorded in this area.
GALLERIES WHICH HAVE GONE:
LOW HOUSE,(National Trust) where there was a spiral stone stair.
SIMPSONS, the house lying behind Thorn House.
THE SCAR, Ravenstonedale.
Facing East
This is said to be the first house built in the village.
There has been considerable restoration here.
The entrance to the gallery is from the first floor.
An interesting note on the inhabitants of Ravenstonedale can be found in the history of St. Oswald's Church nearby.
In 1703 Bishop Nicholson records a Churchwarden's remark characteristic of the sturdy independence of Dalesmen, ‘Except the Vicar and the Schoolmaster, we have not a Gentleman among us, nor can any remember the time we had a Beggar.’
GALLERY WHICH HAS GONE:
THINGILL MALLERSTANG.
THE BLACK SWAN, RAVENSTONEDALE, Facing East
The gallery on this inn is now built in and used for staff bedrooms, but the balusters can be seen.
It is on record that the inn provided a depot for raw fleece and wool for the spinners and knitters brought by the hosiers' servants from Kendal and later the finished work would be collected.
Ravenstonedale area provided as many as 1000 pairs of stockings a week at the height of the stocking trade.
At election times speakers used the gallery to advertise their politics.
ADAMTHWAITE, Near Ravenstonedale.
Facing East
Date 1684.
The date of this gallery was recently found in restoration work.
The property lies two and a half miles from Ravenstonedale, near the source of the Lune.
The road ends here and the rough fell sheep roam the Howgills.
The gallery stair has been rebuilt and the barn refloored.
Within the last 20 years it was the practice here to pen the sheep for clipping and for the fleeces to be thrown up to a helper standing on the gallery, who put them at once into the barn for storage.
This was the old tradition followed at High Bridge End, St. John's in the Vale, and referred to also at Langdale and Outgate.
The barn is a large one and several clippings could be stored while the farmer waited for acceptable prices for his fleeces.
Today there is a large new building on the other side of the farm house and clipping and storage is conducted there.
Recollections have been handed down by word of mouth, of spindle spinning and early spinners in wool and flax, who lived at Adamthwaite.
BETSY CROFT, Newbiggin-on-Lune.
Facing North
The access here is by an old stone stair.
Here the occupants of the house would ascend to the first floor by way of the outside steps, as originally there would have been no inner staircase.
The woodwork has, no doubt, been replaced and is in the form of narrow laths.
The gallery canopy roof, which adjoins the house, is very old and lies below the house roof.
There are many fine old beams.
There would have been little room to work or store on the gallery, but it could have been a convenient place to display finished work for the approval of the merchants riding round the countryside in search of stock, as the main road passes nearby and upon which the main flow of riders would have travelled.
According to the W.I. Survey, 1975 , there was once a cooper's workshop here.
(Indistinct initials I.H.)
TOWER HOUSE, Brownber, Newbiggin-on-Lune.
Facing South
The Fothergills have lived here for over 400 years.
The gallery, which has been built in to become a small room, faces the gate as you enter under the arch.
The wool room would be behind.
Below are the usual farm buildings.
The main house is a fine example of a Tudor building.
The Fothergills have been a well-known family over the centuries: landowners, farmers, benefactors, trustees.
The most famous of the family living here  was Mary Elizabeth Gaunt, born daughter of Antony Fothergill.
She was a devout Anabaptist and befriended James Burton, who was involved in the Rye House Plot, and gave him sanctuary, but she was betrayed and taken to London, where she was tried and became the last woman to be burnt at the stake at Tyburn on 16th October, 1685.
There is a memorial window to her in Ravenstonedale Church.
The history of the Fothergills can be followed in the book,Fothergills of Ravenstonedale .
In the woodshed the original balusters of the gallery are still preserved and Mr. Fothergill hopes to use these to restore the gallery to its original state.
In the house was a picture of the original gallery.
LOW LANE FARM lies nearby.
There is a very large spinning loft here and there was a spinning gallery projecting from the side of it.
The date stone is 1686.
The gallery would have been facing East.
THE SHAMBLES, Kirkby Stephen.
Faces East
1719 Deeds
This old building and the gallery have recently been restored.
The lower portion was originally a slaughterhouse and quoted as being 17th Century.
A butcher's shop is recorded there in 1719.
The veranda was on the ground floor and the gallery above has been preserved and strengthened.
The original roof has gone and the present roof is clad with old sandstone slates.
There are windows at the back of the gallery and a door provides access from the first floor.
This gallery is believed to be older than many in the Lake District.
Kirkby Stephen was a well-known stocking market.
Defoe mentions it in his Northern Tour, 1724 .
There is a print by Thomas Fawcett dated 1817, showing the Stocking Market and the Square, where it is said bulls were baited.
Nicholson's Annals of Kendal refer to hosiers taking worsted to the villages and collecting stockings.
This was an area where everyone knitted — men, women and children.
Today, the premises house an Estate Agents office, where the original Deeds may be seen.
In earlier days a lady barber plied her trade here, Belle Kendal by name.
It is pleasant to record that today there is again a village woollen industry.
Fine sweaters are produced in imaginative designs by local women.
RAILTONS YARD, Sedbergh.
Facing East
This is a frail old gallery in the yard next to the weavers' yard, standing behind the main street.
Access is by a stone stair and from the first floor of the adjoining building, where there is a door.
The weavers' yard close by has been a fine example of the early wool trade, with the workers' cottages down one side and the spinning and weaving loft up a wooden stair on the other.
It is unfortunate that recent re-building has destroyed the loft.
A Sedbergh cottage had a gallery; it is illustrated in the Westmorland Gazette Series,Now and Then, No. 64 , with a picture.
The gallery was pulled down in 1858.
Also the book Recollections of Sedbergh by J. G. V. mentions some old properties on the West side of the Square, ‘Ancient cottages with veranda balconies.’
J.G.V. writes about the knitters, especially one, ‘Busby’, who used to fetch water from the water spouts (the only supply), knitting as he waited for his pail to fill, he was ‘one of the incessant knitters of Sedbergh’.
The Golden Lion is said to have had a gallery but nothing now remains, though it has been referred to by word of mouth over many years.
The history of the knitting trade in Sedbergh is similar to that of neighbouring Dent Town, p 46.
BANTY GHYLL, Howgill.
Facing South
There are two cottages here above the beck which passes the church on its way down to the old woollen mill.
Water also came down to the mill from a cutting, possibly working a mill wheel.
There has been conversion here from the original buildings.
At present there are two cottages (at one time probably three).
The only access is from a window.
Clipping at Thorn House, Hartsop, 1910.
Old Gallery near Ravenstonedale, October 13th, 1847 by Rev. Thomas Austin
DENT TOWN AND AREA AND THE STOCKING TRADE
On the Eastern side of Cumbria the wool trade was greatly influenced by the making of stockings.
In addition to the Kendal green cloth, ermines and ‘cottons’(which were woollens), and many others, Kendal was famous for its stocking market.
In its heyday in the 17th Century as many as 30,000 pairs were sold in a year, the hand-knitted work being mostly collected by wool hosiers from outlying villages.
Nicholson writes in 1861 in the Annals of Kendal of ‘hosiers attending Markets to collect stockings and give out worsted.’
Kirkby Stephen had a stocking market of renown and Southey wrote of ‘the terrible knitters 'e Dent’, in The Doctor , 1834.
(They were not being condemned, but applauded by the phrase!)
Everyone knitted, men, women and children, and the method, which produced very fast knitting was called ‘striking the loop’, and, in some areas, described as ‘waving’(weaving).
One end of a curved steel needle, which was called a prick, was inserted in a hole in the top of a knitting sheath, a traditional carved stick which held the needle firm and was placed in the knitter's belt.
Sheaths were often lovingly carved and given as love tokens or dowry gifts.
They varied in design from area to area.
A container hung from the belt containing a clue of garn (ball of wool).
No one was idle.
Shepherds minding sheep, men driving carts, women with baskets on their heads, young children on their way to school — all were knitters.
When the stockings were completed they were both wide and long and shrunk to size on wooden boards.
Patterned gloves, coarse caps made from bump (rough wool) and the flat Tudor caps were also knitted.
In 1571 there was a Law ‘Every male person not possessed of 20 Marks rental should wear on Sundays and Holy Days when not on travell a wooden knit cap on pain of forfeiting 3s. 4d. a day.’
The spinners of Dent have been immortalised by Adam Sedgwick.
He was born in Dent in 1785 and died in 1873.
His father was Vicar of Dent and Adam spent his boyhood there.
He was for 55 years Professor of Geology at Trinity College, Cambridge, a friend of Wordsworth and Darwin.
In his book,Memorial to Cowgill Chapel , 1868, he wrote with understanding and affection of the people of Dent, their homes and way of life.
His description of the galleries of Dent on either side of the narrow street is all that is left to remind us of their undoubted presence, ‘I regret the loss of the grotesque and rude but picturesque old galleries, which once gave character to the streets; and in some parts of them almost shut out the sight of the sky from those who travelled along the pavement.
For rude as were the galleries, they once formed a highway of communication to a dense and rural population which live on flats or single floors.
And the galleries that ran before successive doors, were at all seasons places of free air; and in the summer season were places of mirth and glee, and active happy industry.
For there might be heard the buzz of the spinning wheel, and the hum and songs of those who were carrying out the labours of the day; and the merry jests and greetings sent down to those who were passing through the streets.
Some of the  galleries were gone before the days of my earliest memory, and all of them were hastening to decay.’
Sedgwick's description of spinners ‘ganging a sitting’, when they met before the fire to spin in a neighbour's house accords with that in Hawkshead on the other side of the County.
William Howitt, in his Rural Life in England, 1838 , wrote of the Dent knitters, ‘The knitting goes on with unremitting speed…they burn no candle but knit by the light of the peat fire.’
The main purchaser of the stockings was the Army and when there was a change from breeches to trousers, the long stockings were no longer required, and there was a great slump in the trade and gradually the industry waned in the country areas.
NADDLE FARM, Bampton, near Hawes Water.
Facing North.
Date — Late 16th Century, additions late 17th Century
(according to Royal Commission on Historic Monuments, Westmorland, 1936)
The area changed here in 1937, when the valley went under water and the Hawes Water Reservoir came into being.
There have been changes at Naddle, too.
There is a large new building for wintering young sheep (as many as 1,000 hogs) but the sturdy stone gallery remains with supporting wooden posts and a fine roof, one of the two stone galleries which have been found in the Survey, the other one being at Low Hartsop.
The Naddle flocks of Herdwicks and Swaledales run on both sides of the lake.
The ancient Forest of Naddle, with deciduous trees, is one of the few areas which remain to show the natural tree growth of the region.
GALLERIES WHICH HAVE GONE:
BOMBY WATERS was North-facing, with a cupboard dated 1701.
CHAPEL HILL, Mardale.
Now beneath the Reservoir.
this gallery was North-facing.
DALE HEAD, Martindale.
GREENROW, Penruddock.
This property is situated on the western edge of Little Mell Fell, overlooking the Matterdale Valley.
The original part of the farmhouse dates from the 17th Century.
The date above the front door, 1772, refers to the year when alterations were made.
The old gallery will be found on the first floor of the house; previously on an outside wall facing East.
It has been brought inside and is approached by the original stair.
Greenrow is one of two galleries which have been found incorporated within a house, the other being at Dubber Beck, Oxen Park.
THE RAINBOW INN, Yard 32, Highgate, Kendal.
Facing East
In earlier days this inn was known as ‘The Black Horse’, the name given to ‘Lending Inns’, where customers could borrow money.
(It is interesting to note that the sign of the black horse is the sign used today by Lloyds Bank).
The gallery here overlooks the yard and spans an archway.
The entrance is by a flight of steps and from the first floor.
The old loft and building are now incorporated into the inn.
There has been considerable repair on the gallery and woodwork has been replaced.
Wandering players performed in the yard and customers came onto the gallery to watch them.
In the early 19th Century many yards were associated with a particular guild or craft with weavers, fullers, dyers, etc. gathering together for their convenience.
There is interesting speculation about the Rainbow Inn, for the rainbow was one of the signs of the Dyers' guild, and they may well have gathered here when work was done.
An early inn sign is on record showing a rainbow spanning a fine black horse.
YARD 11, STRAMONGATE, Kendal.
Facing North.
There has been reconstruction here and the property is now a restaurant, but the gallery has been cared for and is now fronted by glass for its preservation and the old building has been restored.
The woodwork can be clearly seen and the turned balusters have been looked after over the years.
The house in Stramongate, Number 11, behind which the gallery is situated, was the town house of the first Earl of Westmorland.
The property at the rear, where the gallery lies is thought to have been the old stables and there are interesting photographs of the early stage of reconstruction.
YARD 23, STRAMONGATE, Kendal.
New Gallery.
During the recent conversions in Yard 23, leading from Stramongate to the river, a new gallery has been constructed.
On making enquiries, it seems that there are no records of an earlier gallery here, but it is pleasant to see a reminder of bygone days amongst the new shops in the restoration of this attractive yard.
GALLERIES WHICH HAVE GONE:
In Library Road and others off Stramongate.
LION HOUSE, Croglin.
Facing North.
(Once the Golden Lion Inn)
This is a very good example of a small gallery with a yard suitable for penning sheep for clipping.
There are fine stone steps; the wood room is exceptionally large behind the gallery.
One door has been blocked up.
Below is a door to the shippen.
This gallery is the farthest North found in the Survey.
BORWICK HALL, near Carnforth.
Facing South-West.
There is a mention of Borwick in the Domesday Book, 1086, and there was an early wooden structure to the East of the present building.
The Pele Tower and the gallery are thought to be 14th Century.
The present building was bought in 1567 by the Bindloss family, whose history is a fascinating one.
There  were three men named Robert Bindloss, and it is the first Sir Robert, a famous character, who is of particular interest in this context because of his fame in the wool trade.
He amassed great wealth with his success, sending his pack horses with wool and cloth to London and Southampton, where they were shipped to Holland and the Low Countries.
His wealth and influence created the saying, ‘As rich as Sir Robert in the North’.
He was little affected by the Civil War, changing sides when it suited him.
He was created one of Charles I's first Baronets, and Charles II stayed at Borwick in 1651 en route for Worcester.
The pack horse stables still stand and are used for recreational purposes by the Lancashire Youth Clubs Association, who now own the Hall.
There is a tradition at Borwick regarding the gallery, that in the days when there was anxiety over Border raids and the beacons were prepared ready for alarm, the women drove the cattle from the fields to the courtyard, which at that time was grassed, and the barmkin (a grassy enclosure), and then stationed themselves on the gallery to spin and watch.
When the alarm was given, the animals would be driven into the ground floor of the Pele Tower, the local families would ascend a ladder to the first floor, the women and children climbing again to the bower above and the men to the roof, where they would repulse the invaders.
Borwick has a ghost and many fascinating stories and traditions.
The gallery is a very fine example and in good repair.
A flight of steps leads up from the courtyard and there is entry also from the house end.
A well and cheese press are below in the yard with the farm buildings situated below and behind the gallery.
This is the largest gallery and the farthest South found in the Survey.
Spinning Gallery (location unknown) by John Harden
CONCLUSION
There are many places which may have had galleries in the past, but without reliable references, Deeds, an old painting or some remains of original woodwork they have not been included, tempting though this would have been.
It is sad that so many have been lost or allowed to deteriorate, but it is hoped that those survivors which remain will be cherished and preserved as reminders of other days.