

‘The best of times, the worst of times’
The Twitcher and the Snake
CUZCO
I
The Incas saw Cuzco as ‘the navel of the world.’
They conceived it in the form of a puma and its heart was the ceremonial site which was now the Plaza de Armas.
It was a large open square with low hedges enclosing six small gardens with bush-like trees.
The surrounding buildings were two-storeyed, the upper built out and supported by a series of arched cloisters which every evening were thick with alpaca jerseys, rugs, cheap jewellery, bargain hunters and cloying money-changers.
Wooden balconies jutted out from the upper storeys, giving the plaza not only a feeling of space but of intimacy.
Three buildings dominated the square.
The cathedral was built in the early seventeenth century on the site of the Palace of Viracocha, the Inca's Creator deity.
Despite its two huge bell-towers, its baroque façade was more palatial than ecclesiastical.
To its left the church of La Compañia de Jesus, built in the late seventeenth century on the site of the Palace of Serpents, had a similarly ornate façade.
Overlooking both, as it overlooked the whole valley of Cuzco, were the awesome ramparts of Sacsayhuaman, the teeth of the puma which legend has it cost thirty thousand lives to build.
From the balcony of the Cross Keys — available for rent to tour parties during religious processions — you had a good view of all three.
To get there you had to pass an unsteady table of jewellery and climb a flight of worn-lipped, stone steps to the second floor.
It felt rather like passing through a magic door in a James Bond movie or slipping into a speak-easy because the Cross Keys was a gringo hang-out par excellence, complete with long, oak-look bar and well-used dartboard.
Covering the walls were saddles, bridles, beermats and the personal mythology of its landlord, Barry Walker.
These included a photograph of Weisdale Voe, taken from his local  in Shetland where he had lived for five years; photographs of himself and friends on Lost City trips; and photographs and posters relating to his prime interests, those of a naturalist, a birder, a twitcher.
Like others I would meet, but none more than himself, Barry had found in Peru both challenge and congeniality, even turning its frustrations into occasion for satisfaction.
He was particularly proud of his collection of malt whiskies, some bought direct from contrabando.
There was free drink for a couple of nights for anyone who arrived at the Cross Keys with a bottle of malt.
‘Most of the time I live in the real Peru,’ he told me, ‘but the Cross Keys is designed to be Not Peru — a place where the gringo and the expat who live here all the time can escape from all the hassling, the beggars and all that crap — and relax.’
We relaxed into another large bottle of Cusqueño beer as Barry told me his story.
He had qualified at university in geology and geography, had tried teaching in Hull but found it too confining and when one of the old guard told him he should be spending more time with children who had some potential rather than those to whom he felt committed, he resigned on the same day.
Then after a year in Israel doing research on migrating birds of prey —‘I've got a great story about that, mate.
Remind me to tell you some time over a beer’— he had lived in Shetland for five years working on the rigs.
‘There was this other bloke working there.
He was a birder too and the pair of us decided to go to Thailand.
But there were no flights, so I said, ‘Look, mate, we're never going to have this amount of money and time again, let's go to the best place in the world for birds — Peru.’
‘The best place in the world?’
‘Listen, mate, there's something like seventeen hundred species here.
In Tambopata Reserve, an area of ten hectares, in the last ten years, there's been more birds spotted than in Great Britain since they began keeping records in 1750.
Yeah, about seven hundred birds.
In the whole of continental North America, there's only five hundred and fifty.
Tell you, mate, if you want amazing statistics Peru's the place.’
Barry was in his early forties, six feet tall and heavily built.
He had wide-set brown eyes and a way of gritting his teeth in a half smile, as if against the energy which coursed through him.
His thick hair was greying but he had not given up on red baseball shoes, sleeveless T-shirts or what he called his ‘cosmopolitan Lancashire accent, half  scouse, half Lancashire’.
When he was enthusiastic about a subject, and I imagined he would turn his back on anything about which he could not enthuse, he leant forward on his bar stool, his thigh beating against it.
Like now, when he was talking about his first involvement with Peru.
‘So anyway we flew straight into Iquitos — you could do that then — and spent six weeks going round Peru.
We came to Cuzco, went to the rainforest and that was it, I was hooked.
‘I still had my job but I couldn't wait to come back here.
I came back for a month, met a Peruvian girl and then I got a letter from her giving me a really good reason to come back.
I left my croft cottage fully furnished — TV, stereo and all that; two cars as well.
Don't know what happened to it all.
Never been back.’
That was six years ago, and now Barry had two ‘really good reasons’ to keep him in Cuzco.
‘You must be happy here, then?’
‘Yes, mate, I wouldn't want to live anywhere else.
I've got my ornithology, my Lost City trips — places where no white man's been.
Still, the situation's precarious.
I mean, the next election if the Right get in they're going to put pressure on the terrorists who in turn are going to hit harder; not great for tourism.
Or if the Left get in they're not going to look kindly on gringos catering for tourists.
Dodgy situation, mate.’
An unusual sight, Barry's face clouding with concern.
But it soon vanished when I mentioned my wish to visit Manu National Park.
‘Yeah, mate, the trouble with Manu is that there's no cheap way to get there, leastways this time of year.
These people at South American Explorers, they don't know what they're talking about.
They tell people, ‘You just get a truck.’
They don't tell them how infrequently the trucks leave, the red tape you've got to go through.’
I nodded a yeah-they-don't-know-shit nod and something small and mean inside me felt it had got even.
‘No,’ Barry concluded, ‘there's no way to do it for less than six hundred dollars.’
He paused briefly to confirm that with Mario Ortiz, a handsome jungle tour guide who tonight was in the early stages of a journey to explore oblivion.
‘Tell you what though, mate,’ and he was overtaken by another surge of enthusiasm, ‘if you're interested, what you could do is take a trip to Explorers Inn in the Tambopata Reserve, see the rainforest there…’
‘Or wait till I get to Iquitos…’
‘Listen, mate, if it's pure climax rainforest you want to see, southeast Peru is the place to see it.’
Mario nodded sagely.
‘Climax rainforest?’
‘Hasn't changed since the ice age.
Hasn't changed for sixty million years.
And you could see an example of ecotourism and also check out Ametra 2001 — it's a centre down there for the study of traditional medicine.’
His thigh was beating against the bar stool.
‘I'll give you letters of introduction saying you're a writer and to give you any help you need.’
‘Would you?
That would be fantastic.’
‘No problem.’
‘I'm excited, Barry, I really am.’
I beamed and slugged.
Fortuna was smiling on me and my haphazard trip felt as if it was taking some kind of shape, a dynamic and a logic of its own.
Likewise Mario's evening when two blonde Australian girls led him uncomplaining away from our company.
‘First, though,’ Barry said, ‘you've got to see Machu Picchu.’
‘Dead right.
But not before I hear that great story of yours.’
‘You want to hear it now?
All right, mate, then I really must go.
There's a game of darts waiting for me.
Here, let's get in another couple of beers first…’
(It was to be a story with a price.
In my excitement I had forgotten all the good advice about acclimatising to altitude and alcohol.
The next day I took to the drizzling streets of Cuzco with a hangover of Sacsayhuaman proportions.)
‘Cheers, mate.
Well, like I was saying I was over in Israel doing research on the migration of birds of prey.
You know birds of prey can't fly over water so Israel's part of a kind of funnel for them which makes it a great place to do bird counts.
I was paying my own way, sleeping on the beach at night, leaving my backpack in a kibbutz during the day, and the research went pretty well.
I wrote a couple of articles about it eventually.
‘Anyway I'm a twitcher, one of these mad guys who goes anywhere to see a bird he's not seen before.
And I'd seen every bird in Israel but one, the bar-tailed lark.
Now the thing with the bar-tailed lark is that it just lives in the desert where nothing else does and to complicate matters it lives in the forbidden zone.
Yeah, it makes nothing easy.
But when it got to my last week I just thought stuff it, I'm going to give it my best shot.
‘I took a bus to the border of the forbidden zone just as close as I dared, got out and saw this nice little wabi, a small valley kind of thing, and thought I'll settle down there and take my chances.
Well, then I spotted this encampment of Berbers and thought, God I gotta get outta here…
But it was too late, their kids had seen me.
‘So I'm surrounded by kids, then adults too and dragged down into this tent for tea, and you can't refuse their hospitality, that's really serious business.
But they don't speak any English, I don't speak any Arabic, so I'm gesturing away about the bar-tailed lark and not being able to go into the forbidden zone, and somehow or other the leader understands what I'm going on about and makes me understand that because they're nomads they don't have to follow international boundaries.
I can sleep in their tent and go into the forbidden zone with them tomorrow.
‘Next day this camel drops to its knees and this guy gets on and signals that I've to get on behind him.
I clamber on and he puts his great black dress over my head.
Now I've never been on a camel before and these guys, I mean, they don't wash; just roll around in the sand.
And I'm there bouncing up and down and what with the heat of the sun and the smell — I tell you, mate, it feels like days.
But really it's only about three hours.
Yeah, long enough.
‘Anyway we stop.
The camel drops; the guy takes off the sheet and I'm blinded for about two minutes.
I get down from the camel and it's nowhere.
Really, nowhere.
Just dunes.
They tell me if I walk in a certain direction for an hour I'll come across a road and by the time I set my watch and compass they've vanished over the dunes.
‘Now I'm thinking,this is it — the perfect habitat for the bar-tailed lark.
Pure moonscape.
I've got the binoculars out and I'm about to settle down when over another dune comes this armoured van bombing along, antennae waving like crazy.
It screeches to a halt beside me, three guys get out, blindfold me, tie me hand and foot and bundle me into the van.
‘We drive for about an hour.
I'm pulled out, dragged — manhandled — down a flight of stairs, my blindfold's taken off and my hands freed.
I'm in this concrete cell with just a light bulb, nothing else at all, and after the desert it's cold as a freezer.
‘Well, I'm left there shivering about two or three hours then I'm taken upstairs and interrogated by these three very heavy-looking  military guys.
I tell them all about the bar-tailed lark and the Berbers but they're looking at me in a very strange way and I mean now the whole story sounds pretty crazy to me as I'm telling it.
‘So I'm taken back down and I'm wondering what the hell's going on.
And I'm scared, mate.
Now I'm really scared.
It's got to me how these guys were looking at me.
‘I spend an hour like that — shitting myself — till this guy comes in and says, ‘We've decided to believe your story.
To believe that you have just been incredibly stupid.
What we're going to do is take you to the nearest place you can get a bus.
You will get a bus to Tel Aviv and we never want to see you again.
Never.
Understand?’
‘So I'm blindfolded again, taken to this bus stop an hour or so away and when that bus comes I'm right on it and no mistake.
And that's it.
End of story.’
‘Amazing story.’
‘Yeah, isn't it, mate?
But there's a postscript to it.
For years I wondered what the hell all the fuss was about.
Then seven years later I was reading a newspaper and there was this article about the Israeli journalist who broke the news about the Israelis having nuclear silos in the Negev Desert, and suddenly the coin dropped.
That's why they were so paranoid.
I was walking around with a camera and binoculars right on top of their nuclear silos.
Christ, they could just have topped me.
Why should they take the risk?’
‘Whew-yow-ee.’
‘Exactly.’
‘So you never did see the bar-tailed lark?’
‘No, mate.’
Barry laughed.
‘I never did.’
II
Scotland I found to most Peruvians who had heard of the place meant two things: whisky and Cubillas.
No, Cubillas was not an exotic mixer but the striker Teofilio Cubillas who, in the world cup in Argentina, pricked the inflated hopes of Ally's Tartan Army with a majestic thirty-yard shot.
He was thirty-eight years old at the time — why the hell hadn't we heard of him?
He made ‘Poor Peru/what Scotland's going/to do to you’ probably the most regretted ditty ever penned, as the goal proved to be the most stunning beginning of the end.
Peruvian taxi drivers still smiled broadly at the memory.
If this showed their somewhat thin knowledge of my country, the compliment was returned.
When I asked the woman in Lima  in charge of the government's tourist agency FOPTUR what image of Peru was being promoted to attract a hoped for 780 million dollars worth of tourists within the next couple of years, she told me: ‘I could say we have everything here — the three regions, mountains, coast and jungle; beaches and adventure.
But the main identity that people know something about is the culture.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Machu Picchu.
Cuzco.
The country of the Incas.’
I understood her logic: to anyone, or to be precise to any tourist, who cast an eye towards the subcontinent, Machu Picchu was not only a symbol for Peru but for the whole of Latin America.
Certainly the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda saw it that way and his long meditation ‘The Heights of Machu Picchu’ had ensured that the ancient city acted as a Mecca for all Latin American writers:
the cradle of lightning and of man
rocked in a wind of thorns.
Machu Picchu, however, has remained a mystery.
Quite who it was built for, how long it was occupied and why it was abandoned are matters for archaeological speculation.
It was a different matter with Cuzco, the once imperial Inca city.
There were in fact three different Cuzcos that I could see.
The first and most accessible was that used by tourists, rich and shoestring (‘poor’ was a word with a precise, living meaning here) as a base for their trip to Machu Picchu.
When the South American travellers arrived here, they were beginning to feel comfortable within or at least aware of the vast map of the subcontinent.
Above them, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela; below, the long finger of Chile; to the east, the mammoth contradictions of Brazil edging on to Paraguay and Argentina.
In Cuzco they met old acquaintances from Buenos Aires, from Santiago, from Quito.
They swopped shorthand descriptions of their routes, their distances.
They had tales to tell.
And in Cuzco there were bars enough and restaurants enough to tell them in, whether your taste was for pizza, Chinese, French or vegetarian.
Cuzco, however, like Florence, another beautiful red-roofed city, was able to retain its dignity and integrity under the tourist onslaught; to demand that here at least, no matter how flimsy your knowledge, you had to reach some accommodation with the past.
John Hemming's compelling account,The Conquest of the Incas , is a brick of a book, not the kind you want to lug around if you can avoid it.
I had read it hungrily in Lima when for a time it was the most substantial piece of luggage I possessed.
Much of his study of the often shameful encounter between the conquerors and the native Indians was hazy to me now, but the clean lines of the narrative still reverberated within me whenever I saw an Inca ashlar.
It told how an empire of six hundred miles wide and nearly three thousand miles long, so big the Incas called it Tahuantinsuyo, the Four Quarters of the Earth, had been engaged in a fratricidal war of succession when its miserable future was planned by two uneducated adventurers, Francisco Pizarro and Diego de Almagro, and by a priest, Father Hernando de Luque.
From this time on, from one point of view, it was a dramatic story of courage, endurance and greed, a South American version of The Good, the Bad and the Ugly writ large.
From another it was simply teased out tragedy which had begun with the cruelly pragmatic strangulation of the Inca (King) Atahualpa in Cajamarca, followed by the systematic looting of the empire's wealth and the suffering of its peoples till the Inca kingdom was reduced to the forest sanctuary of Vilcabamba.
But even there they were not to be left alone, and after the last campaign the conquest ended ignominiously as it had begun with the summary execution of Tupac Amaru, thirty-nine years after Atahualpa, his uncle.
The legendary wealth of the Incas sounded almost as unlikely, as marvellous to me as it must have done to Pizarro and his cohorts, many of whom were peasants drawn from an arid future in Estremadura.
When Atahualpa offered gold as a ransom for his release Pizarro had asked, ‘How much gold?’
‘This much,’ the Inca reputedly replied, his arm indicating a line as high as he could reach.
The room, twenty two feet long by seventeen feet wide, was to be filled once with gold and twice over with silver within two months.
Not much of that fabled but very real gold has survived.
Most was melted down and shipped back to Spain.
Of what has been preserved, much was housed in the Gold Museum in Lima, fortified as Fort Knox.
What the gringos left, the gringos today, a drool of tourists, pay five dollars a head to see.
Yet the lushness of the case upon case of battered gold left me as cold as the side chapels of Europe with their trésors de la cathédrale .
I warmed more to the popettes, the fat figures made of rough weave, their big faces improvised  from beads, shells and feathers.
They seemed strangely modern, suggestively effective as a sculpture by Picasso; they lived in the now .
In the gold I saw only dead artefacts from some magical past.
The Inca stones in Cuzco also lived in the now.
Each one of them.
And their preservation was not due to any touristic interest; for in a real as well as a metaphorical sense, colonial Cuzco was built on their foundations as well as on the backs of the native population.
On Coricancha, the Inca sun temple, the Spaniards imposed the church of Santo Domingo: yet Coricancha, though long stripped of its golden sheathing, was still Samson — blinded, chained, but with all his dignity intact.
On evening walks down Loreto, a lane of high stone walls, trying to decide on a restaurant, I would stop and run my hands over the ashlars, marvelling at the purity of each one as I have marvelled at the completeness of a sculpture by Brancusi; each of them so tightly locked together that I found it impossible to fit a fingernail between them.
The facilities for travellers and the ever present interest of the Inca remains made this an easy city to spend time in, but the darker side of Peru's history had found its way into the present and thus highlighted the problems of fitting a comfortable tourist face on to a Third World country.
That the economy of Cuzco depended on tourists was not in doubt; but neither was the fact that to those who did not profit directly from them, the tourists were often treated with resentment and distaste:.
a sneered ‘gringo’, a refusal to help, a wrong direction given.
In such petty ways some revenge was taken on the wealthy transient.
After all, exploitation had not stopped with the theft of the gold.
A campesinos' strike, which had paralysed Cuzco two weeks before my arrival, had had the rallying cry, ‘¡Por tierra, paz, precios justos!’
For land, peace, fair prices!
The volatility of the Cusqueños coupled with the increasing pressure among them of poor campesinos who had come down from the Andes to seek a better life stood in ironic contrast to the rigid panoply of the state; a situation brought home to me on Easter Sunday.
In the packed cathedral I looked past the broad, shining black plaits of the campesinas, the little, pert pigtails of the girls, up the aisle at the scarlet and gold draped Virgin, her arms outstretched in benediction beneath her gold pillared arch.
The suffering Christ  himself writhed on a green wooden cross on one of the huge side pillars.
Catholicism here was a lush affair, its two central images taken to their metaphorical extremes.
Easter was a good time to see them.
In Arequipa I had watched women in the church of Santo Domingo giggle happily as they dressed the Virgin for a procession;, behaving much as if they had been preparing a girl for a wedding, not a poor girl though, rather one Velasquez might be called upon to paint.
While at the other extreme the Christ on the cross was not the Son of God who had made his peace, who had just sighed, ‘All is accomplished,’ but the still-human man whose body was racked in agony.
The Christ-corpse carried in a glass coffin down Plateros, over the design of doves and flowers and cross made out of petals which had engaged so many all day, and borne round the Plaza de Armas, was one whose wounds gaped, who was chalky-white with blood-loss.
Entering the small church at Chivay at the head of the Colca Canyon, children had jumped out of two alcoves and run off laughing.
From my hotel window I had watched the tiny procession bearing its little donkey aloft, then seen the children sweep the streets with the palms, startling a piglet from a gutter.
Religion there had seemed a natural, relaxed concern.
Here in the huge cathedral I was put in mind of all the oppression that had been put in motion with the words, ‘You are all God's children.’
Christianity was the justification of conquest and exploitation: Atahualpa had died a convert; from the scaffold his nephew Tupac Amaru had denounced the religion of his ancestors as a fraud.
The archbishop and all those in his grand procession were of European extraction; his passing benediction was bestowed like a royal wave.
Some time before his entrance, campesinos had rushed and squabbled like geese when another confession box was opened, but now they stood or sat in silence holding their children to them as the liturgy was gone through.
It was all very uninvolving, or appeared to be so.
I thought again of the awe in which the Indians had come to hold their conquerors.
Initially these had been one hundred and seventy-five men and twenty-five horses laying claim to an empire of fourteen million.
But once their god-king had renounced his authority, their conversion had been easily achieved.
Then, drifting into the sombre silences, I heard the insistent, unimaginative but slightly humorous ta-ra thump-thump brass and  drums of a military band.
I squeezed my way out to find at the foot of the cathedral steps the white helmets of a military band celebrating Easter state-style, surrounded by the boy soldiers of Peru in grey, black and khaki, armed with machine-guns.
A commando unit, wearing black jerseys, gloves and skull-caps, armed with bazookas, marched past.
Always there was a machine-gun turned towards the crowd.
Still suffering occasional wooziness from the altitude, I sat on the steps, turned my face to the warm sun and was subjected to my first unsuccessful robbery: two little nicks in the zip pocket of my top.
I felt nothing at the time and naïvely smiled to myself when I spotted it later.
Perhaps the razor was in action as the dignitaries were raising the many-coloured flag of Cuzco and the Cuzco song was being thumped out:
Cuzco, Cuzco es tu nombre sagrado
como el sol del Incario inmortal
todo el mundo te lleva en el pecho
como canto y bandera triunfal.
(Cuzco, Cuzco is your sacred name/ like the sun of the immortal Inca river/ all the world carries you off in its breast/ like a song and a triumphal flag.)
In every city that Easter Sunday, I was told there would be sermons on patriotism (¡Viva el Peru!); national and civic pride would be celebrated.
Church and state would work together, as they always had done, in an attempt to create a coherent image of Peru.
It was a fiction that was becoming threadbare in the spring months of 1989.
At Lima bus station an unemployed mining engineer, who would later sting me for a few thousand intis, told me, ‘This country, something really wrong with it.
The man running it, he doesn't know what he's doing.
I think he's a fool.’
Suddenly loud music had blared over the Tannoy.
‘National anthem,’ he had explained.
‘They play it every day at twelve.
Two years ago they play it, everybody stands up.
Now look at them.’
Everyone sat slumped beside their bundles, the sellers moving unconcerned among them.
And in the Plaza de Armas in Cuzco the hollow brass could not exorcise the ghosts.
Here Tupac Amaru had been beheaded and his spiritual successor, the self-styled José Gabriel Tupac Amaru the Second, renegade leader of an attempt to restore the pride of the Incas, was himself executed in 1781.
Accounts of the dispatch of  this, the last descendant of the royal line, showed that the cruelty of the conquest did not dim.
First Tupac Amaru had to watch the torture of his son and uncle and other associates before his wife's tongue was cut out and she was slowly garrotted.
Then he himself had his tongue cut out, a rope attached to each limb and four horses tried to rip him apart.
This they failed to do and to end the sorry spectacle an order came that the executioner should cut his head off.
One eye-witness account noted: ‘At twelve noon, when the horses were pulling the Indian, there came a great gust of wind, and after this a rain shower which made everyone, including the soldiers, run for cover at great speed.
This is the reason Indians have begun to say that the sky and elements felt the death of the Inca that the Spaniards, inhuman and impious, were killing with such cruelty.’
The history of Peru since the conquest consists of such cruelty, contradiction and tragedy: a situation fully acknowledged by the poet Washington Delgado, himself born in Cuzco.
There is no past
without a multitude
of deaths.
There are no Incas, viceroys
or grand captains
without a hundred
yellowing pieces of paper
and a little earth.
A master there was who said
to his slaves: gold is good
and God is in the sky.
A soldier there was who said
to whoever would listen:.
I kill because they pay me to;
I don't know what sky is.
But there is no history
without twenty words
that say nothing.
The grandeur of history and the pathos of history were inescapable in Peru.
As I noted earlier, La Compañia de Jesus from where Tupac Amaru the Second's messy execution was orchestrated, was built on the Palace of the Serpents.
Historical metaphors can never do justice to the complexity of a country's past, but at this early stage of my trip I felt I was beginning to discern a snake's energy and inertia in Peru's past.
However, in the tourist centre of Cuzco I could take my knowledge of its markings, no further.
I wanted to meet Peruvians and speak to them one to one; and in Cuzco I encountered only the persistence of hawkers, the sullen attention of displaced campesinos, a world that turned itself or me into shadows.
I knew there was another Peru.
I had seen it when I had taken a detour from Arequipa into the Colca, reputedly twice as deep as the Grand Canyon.
Images from that trip still excited me as I contemplated my journey into the Sacred Valley and to Machu Picchu.
A CONDOR IN THE INCA'S GRAIN STORE
The road winds up the mountainside towards El Misti.
Small cairns mark sections where landslides and floods have eaten out great half moons.
At times the road is little better than a forestry track.
We approach a tight bend: the driver talks to the conductor; the morning sun shines blindingly — I peer over into pure space.
A flat tyre once we've cleared El Misti.
All males disembark.
El Misti is Fujiyama, its blown-off table-top covered in snow.
Men and boys send it arching, watery tributes.
Up on the plain the driver appears to move arbitrarily between barely visible tracks.
This is rockscape, moonscape.
And those who wait to get on, singly or in groups, where have they come from?
Bearing what?
The lone cyclist, the donkey rider heading for a distant horizon: wherever they are going the eye cannot follow.
We startle: llamas, their ears tagged with red wool, like haughty sheep; their even more effete sisters, the caramel-coated vicunas; and quivers of buff-backed sierra finches, skimming the pampas like concentrations of energy and light.
Giant cloud shadows cross the vast open spaces of Peru's interior.
On the altiplano before the drop into Chivay the height is 4,800 metres, higher than Cuzco or Lake Titicaca.
An Englishman whose bus broke down there told me he thought he was dying.
Hours on, a patch of green deep in a valley: and the valley opening on to a maze of broken fields.
Herdboys with twigs and day-bundles.
A cross-bar.
A sign: ‘Peru — land of amazing landscapes’.
Five hundred intis, a pittance for the gringo.
At Chivay, a small market town, the bus fills.
Sardines.
Good-humouredly, bundles are pushed out of the way; babies and children accommodated.
Many have stood uncomplainingly for hours.
A small boy pulls out a piece of bread, rips off a chew and puts the bread safely back in his pocket.
Women with stiff-brimmed panama hats turned up at the side and pinned with giant rosettes.
Thick billowing dresses; blouses embroidered with birds and fish.
I watch one sitting on her haunches by her bundle.
Like a subject of one of Edward S. Curtis's sepia photographs, her face is wrinkled but beautiful.
A stoical metronome, she moves only to brush a hand across her brow from time to time.
At a small village, a hamlet of stone cottages, two boys with loose felt hats and sandals, like ragged street urchins.
(Words to take you through time.)
One picks up a piece of donkey shit and throws it at his friend who runs off laughing.
A teenage girl gets on the bus, then, as if she's just remembered, takes out a comic story magazine and holds it out of the window.
The boy's face lights up.
He reaches up for it and takes it in both hands.
He holds it away from himself as if it is a mirror, or something equally precious.
As he walks away, his friend comes up still in a playful mood.
The boy with the comic brushes him away and walks off, captivated.
Cruz del Condor.
A condor in the Inca's grain store.
Some people are lucky enough to see the condors within ten feet here; to hear the wind riffling through their feathers.
Later a Canadian will tell me: ‘It was the worst bus journey of my life and when we get to the Cruz del Condor, people start saying, ‘Go on then, aren't you going to get out?
This is what you've come all this  way for.’
And I think no.
If I've got to fight my way back to my seat again, I'll punch someone.
So I say to this German girl, ‘Here, you take the camera.
You get the picture.’
Cabanaconda.
Mud and straw-brick houses.
Tin or thatch roofs.
Muddy lanes with runnels for effluent.
Pigs.
Dogs.
Hardy's Wessex must have looked something like this.
In an earthen-floor restaurant a young girl reaches up to the hatch to bring bowls of strongly coriander-flavoured potato soup to a rickety trestle table.
‘But you must
write a poem
about the condor.’
Though I, as they,
had only seen it
from the road.
It must have been
a lucky stretch
on the rocky track
that wound high
above the canyon;
for the bus held
to the condor,
as it held
to the currents
which rose up
from the valley floor,
past the terraced
hills to the snow-
capped peaks beyond.
It held its wings
like two huge
black flags — only
the great pinions 
fluttered slightly.
Then it was gone
and we were left,
craning back
into a landscape
that shimmered
with new life.
One minute?
Not more.
But there are some
moments one must
make the most of.
From time
to time, everyone
understands this
unpopular art.
At the head of the Colca Canyon behind Cabanaconda, I gaze down at the snaking brown river, at crazy paths that fall through the smoky green evening light.
A group of five boys canter up, led by one wearing a stetson.
A latecomer hides behind a boulder.
They wear torn crew-neck jerseys and, apart from the leader, felt hats over shorn hair.
They all have rough red patches like coins on their cheeks, small, tough-skinned hands, and feet encrusted with mud.
The leader speaks with an exaggerated wisdom — He Who Knows.
He names the valley for me, first in his native Quechua then in Spanish.
He points to a distant waterfall like a zag of lightning on the hillside.
He's been there.
And the city?
Sure, he's been to Arequipa (two hundred kilometres away).
It's all right but he prefers Cabanaconda.
They all nod.
They demonstrate how they use their catapults for birds; stage a frightening scuffle at the edge of the canyon, then pose for a photograph with great, old-fashioned dignity.
The bus back to Chivay is at four fifteen a.m.
No one complains or even yawns.
The driver honks and honks at each stop; peers into the distance, giving the latest comer a chance.
Girls, women and small children lug great sacks along to a spot where they can be heaved on to the roof of the bus.
What they cannot lift they put between their legs and waddle with to the edge of the bus.
In the covered market at Chivay, the cold dawn lifted, lines of people at trestle tables breakfast on huge plates of spaghetti, rice, potatoes and thick soup, served by women out of steaming tureens.
Men lift their ponchos over one shoulder to give themselves a free arm.
I buy two ripe mangoes.
I show dollars and a five pound note.
La Reina Elizabeth.
‘Ah.’
A group of women gathers, pointing.
‘La Reina Elizabeth.’
A walk to the hot springs.
The sun just burnishing the barley seas.
Stone dykes with mud and cactus on top.
A view of the snow-capped peaks of Hualca-Hualca and Ampato through sprays of golden marigolds.
The brown river flowing through the embryonic gorge, one side still soft and green, the other barren but starred with cactus like stiff fingers.
I am following two women, heavy bundles on their backs.
Their long skirts make them look as though they glide on wheels along the riverside track; both of them hold a spindle, working and talking all their way.
To paraphrase Paul Eluard: There is another Peru, but it is in this one.
Bird-sound.
No traffic.
No hawkers.
No dolares.
No comprame, señor, por favor.
The dignity of the country.
An etiquette.
Even the old women manage a slow Bue-nas, just as they're passing you.
The peace of a west coast Scottish island.
In a small restaurant for fresh trout.
EuroHits is on the TV.
The girl asks me what the woman is singing about.
I tell her she is singing, ‘I am your woman and you are my man.
Together we have the power of love.’
She stares at me uncomprehendingly.
On the wall is an advert for Arequipeña, the local beer.
A blonde Eurasian manages to turn scantily clothed buttock and breast to camera at the same time.
Outside, a camera-strapped tourist haggles before he hands over some notes for a photograph of a mother lost in a dome of ragged blankets and the two children who peep out behind her.
‘My sun, The golden Garden of Your Hair’
CUZCO TO OLLANTAYTAMBO
Like all Peruvian buses the one to Pisac, thirty-two kilometres from Cuzco, was packed.
But having arrived in the chill early morning at the point of departure, I had secured a back seat pressed hard against the thin, vibrating metal.
I had left most of my gear with the patron at Hostal America, gripping his elbow as I pointed to the shoulder-bag: ‘Muy preciosa, señor.
Muy , preciosa.’
He had shaken his bunch of keys at me with great seriousness.
I clutched my daysack on my lap as I watched the clipboard make its way round.
On every journey each passenger had to fill in name, age and profession.
Something to do with control of terrorism I surmised, but rather a pointless exercise given the haphazard nature of public transport in Peru.
I noted the young man beside me now resting the clipboard on his briefcase was Alejandro, a teacher of Spanish.
It was an easy entry into conversation and, after going through the statistics dear to a teacher's heart (hours per week -twenty-five: pupils in a class — thirty), I asked him about the problems of teaching Spanish here.
‘It's difficult,’ he began, ‘because the language and the culture is Quechua; but Castellano is imposed on them.’
I knew that Quechua, the lineal descendant of the Inca language, was spoken by the majority of the Peruvian Indians and told him that in the Gaelic-speaking parts of Scotland there were similar tensions.
There, Gaelic had always been the language of the playground;, English that of the schoolroom.
Now, ominously, that situation had reversed.
Television.
He nodded a kind, concerned face that relaxed into a shy smile; he too was enjoying our cultural connection.
I asked him the differences between the Quechua and the Spanish view of the world.
‘Total,’ he asserted.
‘The Quechua believes in magic, in the trees, in the sun.
There is more sense of community.
It's Christian yes, but also…
Quechua.’
I smiled understanding and held on to the last wedge of the broken window, catching glimpses of the brown Yucay River snaking its way between the terraced hills.
‘And you,’ I asked, hungry to question a culture I had only been able to observe, ‘what do you consider yourself to be?’
‘¿Yo?
Quechua y Peruano.
More Quechua but Peruvian also.’
‘And what is it to be a Peruvian?’
‘To be a mix of the two.
A mestizo, which is what I am’— light, coppery skin and regular features —‘is a biological result of the conquest.
Culturally I must acknowledge my Spanish blood, but my sympathies are for the Quechua experience.
You see historically the campesino has been most exploited.
The whole colonial system was set up to exploit and so it continues.
Most campesinos live between two thousand and four thousand metres up in the mountains, in the harshest land, and still they are exploited.
It's such things that get to your heart.’
A slight man, he held himself erect and drew up his portfolio across his chest.
‘Then do you feel a little bit Inca?’
‘¡Seguro!
Of course!’
And he smiled broadly.
The climb to the ruined fortress of Pisac above the red-roofed town soon left me breathless.
As I panted in the thin air, a herdboy passed me on the broken steps which zigzagged up the mountainside, joining the smooth terraces with their retaining walls of stone.
He moved like a ghost, his large upper body rigid, his short legs exact metronomes: evolutionary perfection.
As my one hundred and eighty-nine pounds in their six feet frame laboured up behind him, not for the first time I smiled, remembering the advice of the South American Handbook to ‘try and look as little like a tourist as possible’.
Two campesinos passed, a pickaxe sticking out of one of their bundles.
We wished each other good-day.
They smiled as I hammed up my exhaustion, then carried on effortlessly climbing.
‘And then you work?’
I shouted after them in hoarse astonishment.
‘Cada dia.
Each day.’
A middle-aged woman passed me, laden.
I watched her knotted calves rise and fall below her heavy, woollen dress.
One bend further on she stopped, plucked a plant and signalled that I should breathe  it.
It was for ‘¡El corazon!’ and she thumped her heart.
When I reached the spot, I breathed in the herb's mint/ammonia vapours and stared over the landscape.
It took a couple of minutes for my breathing to steady.
I would have been useless in the Inca army, covering their network of roads up and down the Andes from Ecuador to Chile.
There was always a war on somewhere in Inca Peru and all young men had to serve their time.
A huge, broad-winged, red-backed hawk, mouse in beak, soared into view.
I watched it rise on the air currents, becoming a marker for the height I was at; the space I looked across.
In other civilisations such space was left for hawks alone.
Not in the Andes.
Carl Sandburg wrote, in a poem called ‘At the Gates of Tombs’:
If any fool, babbler, gabby mouth, stand up and say
Let us make a civilisation, where the sacred
and beautiful things of toil and genius shall last —
slew him in as a lifer at San Quentin.
But it was not so easy to be dismissive of the Incas.
Throughout the Andes their toil and genius had been cut into the land itself.
Here as in the Colca I looked over a valley where utility and design had given the landscape rhythm — row upon row of perfect terraces, smoothed and buttressed, rising to the highest, green handkerchief.
When finally I made the summit, my throat parched, my thigh muscles trembling, the herb woman was waiting.
She held out a Coca-Cola to me.
‘¿Gaseosa?’
By her side, a pile of bottles of Coca-Cola and Inca-Kola lay on a blanket.
I paid and gulped.
‘¿Cada dia?’
I asked her too.
‘Si.
Es mi trabajo.
My work.’
Two small girls with almond-shaped Inca eyes wanted to press another gaseosa on me.
I refused but gave them a couple of biscuits and to their delight took their photographs.
They told me they were on holiday today and shyly peeped round great blocks of stone as I climbed on to the hitching post of the sun, the most sacred place in the temple.
The Incas believed they could harness the power of Inti, the sun, to them and each temple had its hitching post, a small column compared to the huge masonry surrounding it, but sacred.
And for that reason most were destroyed by the Spanish invaders.
To the Incas hell was a subterranean, cold place where you lived on stones: heaven was with the sun.
I lay back and turned my face to it.
Briefly I held its glow through half shut eyes, felt its warmth concentrate on my upturned face.
(In spite of the light breeze I would pay for this indulgence.
At this altitude there is no screening from the sun's rays.
For weeks I would pull slivers of skin like rice-paper from the top of my head and my ears.)
No wonder, I thought, children draw the sun so much bigger than we see it.
Is it not unlikely, incredible, that this gold coin, dwarfed by the space that surrounds it, can be the power-house for all life?
Is it not indeed a cause for constant wonder and worship?
My sun, the golden garden of your hair
Has begun to flame
And the fire has spread over our corn-fields.
Already the green ears are parched
Passed by the presence of your breath
And the last drop of their sweat is wrung from them.
Strike us with the rain of your arrows.
Open to us the door of your eyes.
Oh sun, source of beneficent light.
Quechua.
The path to the next set of ruins was steeper and less travelled than the previous one.
It turned sharply, giving panoramic views over the valley, but fell away beyond the wildflowers into nothingness.
I edged my way along clutching the banking, till a young man in a bright red T-shirt and a small boy with a grey sack, who I had seen skipping up the path earlier, forced me to adopt a more dignified, upright position.
‘Peligroso, eh?’
I ventured.
‘Oh, it gets more so,’ the man advised.
I noticed he was carrying something wrapped in a cloth and could only have used one hand for balance.
I raised my eyes heavenwards.
‘There's a tunnel up ahead but you must skirt round it.
It's not too bad.’
And they were off again.
I had reached optimum trust in my balance and my feet.
Know thyself .
I saw a broken ribbon of rock across empty space.
No thanks.
I returned to my base temple, bought a Coke from one of the girls whose face lit up at another biscuit; and chatted with the fleet-of-foot, richly named Flavio Chuquiwillca Huallpa and his boy companion.
It was difficult to breathe up there but, far from the tourist pressures of Cuzco, it was easy to talk — any silence was filled with looking.
‘Wonderful view.’
‘Yes, I'm Peruvian and this is my first time.
The air — puro, puro.’
He tensed his chest demonstratively.
‘People here live long, ninety to a hundred years.
They have their health because the air is so pure.
‘Me?
I'm Quechua, but I don't want to work as hard as they must do.
The campesinos are exploited.
Everything they grow they must take to the market to survive, but everything is expensive for them and so they have nothing.
I think if we went back to the Inca ways, things would get better.
We could be like the Japanese without the technology.
Seriously.
You see how well things grow up here; you see the size of the corn.
Well, we could grow fruit trees; fruits that people would pay a lot for, not just maize and potatoes.’
Were there mountains like these in Scotland?
What about Scottish agriculture?
I translated as well as I could a Scottish strath with its green basin, and the heather slopes rising from it lost to rabbits and sheep and rock.
I told him about subsidies and the situation of the crofters.
He nodded understanding.
A thick mop of black hair over a man-boy's smooth olive complexion.
What did he do now?
‘Me?
I went to university for five years' study.
After, everyone went into a profession.
Not me.
I don't want to be a robot, to live in a city.
I came back here to learn music.
I play in a group called Inkariy, the charango.’
And he unwrapped this small, hunchbacked instrument from its covering shawl.
Its polished frets shone in the sun.
He had played in Spain but after a car accident had come back here to recuperate.
Yet it was hard to make a good living here as the Peruvians did not seem to like their own music.
‘They prefer rock and roll.
In Bolivia,’ he assured me, ‘it's different.
People take their music seriously there.’
Still, it was good to be back.
Was he not Quechua with an Inca name which meant lanza sagrada, sacred  lance?
And the air: ‘puro! puro! puro.’
He always felt good here.
Everywhere he went running, running, running; and on the spot he mimed it.
He had brought his charango just in case of inspiration.
Would he play for me?
He bent over the small instrument.
Despite its size his playing was intensely physical, his involvement total.
The notes hovered in the still air as he played a lament then  errupted into a dance rhythm.
It was a serendipitous moment of real privilege.
The young boy, also a gaseosa seller, smiled with me.
‘Shall we go down together?’
Flavio invited.
‘Oh, no.
Thank you.
I'd either hold you up — or die!’
He laughed, tucked the charango under his arm and ran off down the track.
I shouted goodbye and soon followed at my own pace, leaving the sacred hitching post of the sun in the custody of two girls, a man lying on his back in the grass, the gaseosa-selling woman and a tethered goat.
From the small town of Urubamba the fifty kilometres, journey from Pisac to Ollantaytambo was in a colectivo so packed it was difficult to see anything.
With one foot on the platform and the other hovering over the stairwell, I had to draw myself in with real concentration at every stop when the driver came round to unjam the ‘automatic’ door.
Yet typically it was a journey not of niggle and frustration but full of accommodation, friendliness and amusement: a kind of‘in and out the dusty bluebells’ played with bulging sacks.
Stooping, what I saw of the valley were glimpses of a richly farmed landscape and a dark brown river, all imbued with a hazy crepuscular Tuscan light.
Ahead children lay like bundles of clothing on the edge of the road, only rolling away at the last hoot.
In the early morning, from the height of the fortress of Ollantaytambo, such a gentle Mediterranean idyll was mocked.
The fortress commanded a view up the narrow valley of the Yucay River, as it wound past the ancient Inca town tucked in the crux of the mountains, before it became the turbulent Urubamba.
The night before in the main plaza I had loitered beneath a canopy which had held table football and prize shooting to the pound of rock music.
Clutches of spirited teenagers had ignored me.
It could have been almost anywhere; though the narrow, cold-shouldering streets, whose blank walled houses were built on Inca foundations to make corral enclosures, had felt proprietorial, eerily watchful in the darkness.
Daylight brought the darker, more powerful gods out of hiding.
As I clambered up the ranks of steep terraces, keeping an eye on my train time, early mist still clung to the bare mountainous knives of rock, and the mountain that the fortress itself stood on was festooned with dark trailing grasses like seaweed, adding to its otherworldliness.
It was here that the Incas, under Manco Capac, staged their most successful defiance of the Spaniards in 1536, flooding the plain below to hamper Hernando Pizarro's horsemen.
At its top stood the unfinished Temple of the Moon: including six reddish monoliths the size of upended trucks knit by narrow columns of stone.
The effort involved in any age would be awesome; it was even more so when you considered the Incas had never invented even the simplest machine for cutting stone or lifting blocks from one place to another.
Instead they relied on forcing dry wedges of wood into existing cracks in the stone and pouring water on the wood to make it swell and eventually crack the stone.
Cutting stone was done with a rope dipped in wet sand and used like a saw.
Other lesser giant stones still lay, waiting.
In the most impressive Inca ruins I had seen, the stones did not seem toppled; the remains had too much dignity for that.
No irony of Ozymandias here.
Rather they appeared to be just incomplete or abandoned.
True in this case!
The Colla Indians from Lake Titicaca deserted the job halfway through.
They had left it for me to finish alone on a chill blue, lonely morning five centuries later.
But first, watching my time, I must run my hands over the edges of the blocks, must do a sun dance on top of one, pee from another, photograph the rest, and send thrilled gibberish to the lookout posts somehow built on to the sheer rock face across the valley.
In my mind I am climbing higher into the past, climbing higher towards Machu Picchu.
In fact Cuzco is several hundred metres higher than it.
And when I bribe a willing campesina to buy a train ticket for me — gringo tourists are not supposed to use cheap local transport but to stick together on the ninety dollar tourist train — I shall be continuing a gentle descent into the lushly green Urubamba valley that, eighty kilometres beyond the small town of Aguas Calientes, becomes thick, matted jungle; becomes a hideout for Sendero.
Machu Picchu
There were five in our party for the heights of Machu Picchu — two Australians, a French couple and myself.
In drizzling darkness we walked along the railway line which split the small claustrophobic town of Aguas Calientes and, a stumbling three-quarters of an hour later, began to climb the earth path from the station of Puente Ruinas.
For the two steep kilometres up the muddy mountain path the rain was relentlessly Scottish.
Every hundred metres or so when we met the road zigzagging its six kilometres to the top we turned to the landscape: huge conical mountains with valleys that knit together as neatly as in a child's drawing.
All were matted with puffs of trees; the bright thread of a waterfall was laid over one, a snail's silver trail; and one was crossed by a great rift that made it appear a giant's helter-skelter.
They changed by the minute as the clouds crossed them; the clouds themselves, impenetrable mass or the wispiest of vapours.
And then, quite suddenly free from all the thick, dark vegetation which had once reclaimed the mountain-top, the first buildings were there.
In small measure each visitor must feel some of the excitement of Hiram Bingham, the North American who ‘discovered’ Machu Picchu on 24 July 1911.
Bingham thought he had discovered Vilcabamba, the last refuge of the Incas, thus giving a romantic conclusion to his archaeological studies of the Inca civilisation.
However, subsequent archaeologists proved him mistaken, seeing in Machu Picchu an important agricultural centre serving Cuzco; others speculated that it may have been a religious centre, where handmaidens for the sun god lived.
Whatever its original purpose may have been, as with any ruin, we must hack from it the thick vegetation which threatens to cut it off from us: to find in it something of significance for ourselves.
We dried off as best we could at the expensive on-site tourist hotel  and, as the mist rose and a pale sun came out, paid our money and entered the site itself.
My first response was an involuntary whoop of delight —‘Ayee, ayee, ayee.
Mach-u Picch-u.’— which scattered my companions.
We all made our own way up the stone steps to the guardian's hut, a recommended viewing point for the classic view over Machu Picchu's maze of empty plazas, chambers, alleyways, and staircases carved out of solid rock.
It was still early; the tourist train from Cuzco would not be arriving for another two hours.
There was only a handful of tourists and a few gardeners in orange overalls and hard yellow hats batting the undergrowth down and checking the stonework.
Soon I was alone, sitting overlooking the site, the sun warm on my back at last.
My initial, extravagant cry had soon passed.
I felt now a tightness in my chest instead; the old displaced feelings of worship that come when words fall before wonder.
The ancient city was compact as a walnut, or a ship pitched like an ark on the saddle of the mountain-top.
A white fist of cloud enclosed and released the huge slab of Huayna Picchu which rose up behind it.
Around it the dipping sea of vegetation changed to a different hue of green as the light changed: rogue rainbows bridged chasms then dissolved in the warming air.
As I turned I saw no mark that the Incas had left on this landscape, beyond the forty-five terraces leading up to the thatched hut that I counted before they all became a blur.
Nor in its construction was it oppressive like Sacsayhuaman.
Though there were huge stones involved, they knitted into a whole which spoke of the possibility of life; intimate, ordinary life.
When I climbed down, unhurriedly making for the Temple and the Sacred Hitching Post of the Sun, I was amongst houses with gable ends, in narrow streets and lanes; in a place that had a human dimension.
I entered one of the roofless, small dwellings.
The thick stone walls were not awesomely perfect here, but a combination of the found and the finished that any dyker would appreciate.
There was a stout lintel over the small trapezoidal windows and door; a thoroughly familiar smell of damp moss and fern.
On a hundred occasions I have idled similarly in a deserted croft in the Highlands of Scotland and wondered about the lives that had been lived in it.
In the Sacred Plaza also the ghosts were accommodating.
Alpaca, with their short necks the most sheepish of llamas, kept the grass  down, picking next to the grey, mossed stone.
In the stillness there was the buzz of bees, bird sound — royal bluebirds darted all around the mountain — the hum of the Urubamba twisting far below.
The Incas never invented the wheel so the lived-in city must have known similar muffled sounds: soft, trotting llamas and the chatter of people in the streets.
The tourists crossing the grassy space now were respectfully quiet, smiling, as if walking down the nave of a vast cathedral.
I wondered what it must be like to work in such an atmosphere.
A stocky man, dressed in rough denim with a whistle round his neck to warn off the unthinking, stood just beyond the ruined walls of the Temple of the Sun; on the periphery of everyone's intense looking.
His closed fist shot to his mouth from time to time, followed by a few slow chews.
‘You work here?’
‘Sí.’
‘¿Cada dia?
It must be good for the soul.’
He nodded but seemed reluctant to expand; his face expressionless.
I smiled self-consciously and turned away.
Then he was behind me, showing me a good place to take a photograph, using his whistle as the camera.
We climbed up the steps to intihuatana, the hitching post of the sun.
More camera tips, but I had run out of film and mimed to avoid denting his enthusiasm.
‘You have a map?’ he asked.
I showed him the relevant page of my guide-book.
He grunted dismissively.
‘Mapa Español.
No.
Mapa Inca.
Inca.’
He led me to a large, upright scallop of rock.
He pointed to Huayna Picchu; he pointed to a chisel of rock.
He pointed across at Cerro Machu Picchu; he pointed to a curving breast.
There was the road to Cuzco.
There was the Vilcanota (the Quechua name for the Urubamba).
The sun came this way — through the Gates of the Sun, crossing the temple, to intihuatana — here.
‘Ah, yes,’ I said.
‘Yes, I see…
You are a bit Inca, yes?’
‘Sí.’
Strong and deep.
‘You believe in the sun?’
‘Si.
El papa — el sol.’
‘And the earth?’
‘La tierra — mi madre.
Mama tierra.
El agua — mi madre.
La luna — mi madre.’
‘And the stars?’
‘Eyes.
Have you not seen young girls with eyes like stars?’
‘But only the sun is papa?’
‘Sí.
Solamente el sol es mi padre.’
He spoke slowly, deliberately, first in the music of Quechua then in Spanish, or Castellano as he called it, stopping to emphasise his points with a jabbing, rhetorical ‘eh-eh?’
The lines on his forehead and round the top of his nose looked chiselled in mahogany, as if his face had not been aged but tempered through the centuries.
His round, brown eyes regarded me obliquely, a little suspiciously above the high cheekbones.
But the winking smile we had shared over ‘las chicas con ojos como estrellas’ had loosened him up.
‘Do you think life here was hard for the Incas?’
‘No.
For the Incas, easy.
Many paths; they run everywhere, chewing coca.’
And he danced a run: ‘Corriendo, corriendo, poo-poo-poo.’
‘Would you have liked to live in Inca times?’
‘Si .
Incas work hard, but they eat well.
Papas, maize, alpaca, puma, condors.
Life for the Incas was good.’
He whistled now and tinkled an imaginary drum, before offering me three teeth of golden maize.
Standing with him, chewing the chalky corn, it was not difficult to enter his vision of the only past to which he could comfortably look; a spiritual homeland to which he could never return.
When they planted the fields back then, one field was for Inti, the sun god, one for the Inca and the third for the ayllu (a clan forming part of the community; normally there were four ayllus in a village).
In an empire where no one was his own master except the Inca, was it socialism or a dictatorship which prevailed?
Whatever, my guide saw dignity and a full stomach.
The spirit of brotherhood travels not only from country to country but also from time to time.
In Machu Picchu, the most stunning, the most friendly ruin, where all elements of Inca society — the powerful, the religious, the military, the workforce — shared the same mountain-top, one hoped in harmony, I could imagine a niche for my Inca guide — and, almost, for myself.
When I come to visit you
Do not fling me from your house
In my misery.
Sun, my father, moon, my mother,
You might look at my face
Where the tears of blood run down.
Quechua.
We each make our own Inca trails, whether it be the walking route of that name which brings you to Machu Picchu spectacularly through the Gates of the Sun; the halting journey I made by bus, colectivo and train; or the tourists' ninety dollar day trip on a special train.
The experience as far as I could gather never disappoints: because of its own unique qualities, but also because of the attention we all pay it.
For Machu Picchu is the closest I have come to a Mecca, a once-in-my-lifetime destination and, like the route to Mecca, each Inca trail has deep and hidden roots in a life long before one pins Cuzco on the map.
Before I left the fortress, in the late afternoon I climbed once more up to the guardian's hut to say goodbye.
I had achieved what I came to Peru to do and, more than I could realise, this was to be the end of something.
I had wanted to hold its stillness, its mystery to me.
I had never asked my guide but if I had I am sure he would have answered, ‘Machu Picchu — mi madre.’
‘That the experience was an intense one for all was obvious from the babel of voices on the road down.
When you have shared something like that, you want to find out a little more about those who have shared it with you.
And now our small party showed the same intimacy I had witnessed in all the random groupings I had seen with a recent experience of Machu Picchu behind them.
Enough of the heights!
Let the road run beneath us for a while.
Where do you live?
Is it a good place to live?
And your job?
Your girlfriend?
Do you think you'll ever get married?
The French guy worked as a chauffeur in Paris and his girlfriend did anything while they saved to travel — America, Africa and now here.
At Puente Ruinas she lost her glasses and we all searched for them as if she had been our lifelong friend.
One of the Australians worked in real estate in Hong Kong: ‘The toughest place to deal in the whole world.’
He was in Peru for a fortnight with his tall, red-cheeked friend, a.k.a.
The Checked Sports Jacket.
Later in a  restaurant in Cuzco, the estate agent, leaning into him, began to count: ‘Miriam, now she was twenty-four, Dolores twenty-five, which makes Freda number twenty-six…‘
But on the packed train back to Cuzco we were all still soul-mates.
A family who lived there befriended us, looked after our bags and, solicitous of each other, we took turns on the one spare seat from which they had moved a child.
As we descended through the darkness into Cuzco on an endless series of switchbacks, their daughter asked each of us to sing a song for her from our own countries.
My mouth still slightly bitter from chewing a coca leaf a campesino had thrust on me, I sang the ‘Skye Boat Song’ softly to her smile and she sang a love song about a bird.
Shakily, she printed in my notebook, ‘CON CARIÑO DE KUKULI’(with love from Kukuli).
Kukuli was Quechua for ‘beautiful bird’ and even in the dim light of the carriage I could see she had eyes like stars.
The Sting
CUZCO AIRPORT
In Cuzco International Airport, the ‘queue’ for the flight to Puerto Maldonaldo, gateway to the jungle, swelled before me: a snake that had gorged itself over and over.
Whole families sat on bundles and sacks as if camped out or ready for evacuation.
In Peru distances are so vast and the terrain can be so formidable that aeroplanes are not a luxury, but often the only shakily effective means of passing between desert, mountain and jungle.
I put my bags between my feet to feel them with my legs, and took out my flight ticket.
It was still early morning and, having been unable to confirm my flight by phone (surprise, surprise), I was relieved to be here in good time.
Rattling to the airport in a taxi after despairing of the scheduled bus, I had felt a free-floating grumpiness, a symptom of the thin layers of anxiety which I had found coat the start of any journey in Latin America.
But, I told myself, by the time you are standing at the airport terminal (not the train or the bus station), you have burned off the top ones and, come on, lad, you can afford to relax a little.
And I did not want to rush this hour, not with Machu Picchu behind me; the rainforest ahead: two great wings that would beat in my memory.
I held my ticket tightly to me and smiled at the thought.
Yet in a country where the pull of the past is so strong and the future so tantalising, it is best when you are travelling to live exclusively in the present.
There is a tap on my shoulder and some mumbled words.
I do not catch the sense at first.
Then: ‘Your back — sucio — dirty.’
I turn round to see a trail of spit running down the length of my left shoulder-blade.
It must have happened around the glass doors on the way in.
Some poor gringo-hater.
I thank the man, a campesino, and pull off my top to wipe away the gob with toilet roll.
How far  does the man help me?
I cannot remember but I do recall thinking he must be sharing my feelings of pity and anger at whoever felt a need to make their mark in such a way.
I get the worst off; the light, silvery smears will have to be scrubbed off later.
I feel my face is still pinched with disgust when I look at my feet.
My shoulder-bag is gone!
A scream begins deep inside me, a scream coming through a big, empty place, deep as the Colca Canyon, arid as the Nazca Desert, where nothing can give it comfort.
And as it grows inside me so it gathers to itself all the reasons why such a bitter thing should not, cannot be.
Thousands upon thousands of words; image upon image upon image.
Time buckles and I am skewered to this one moment.
But the scream only comes in a series of small, desperate gasps: ‘Oh God, no no no.
Please, Jesus, Jesus, no.’
I look frantically from dark-skinned, blank face to blank face -a stranger in a strange, impassive land.
‘¡Mi bolso.
¡Mi bolso!’
One woman waves her hand that-a-way.
I take a few steps then, remembering my hold-all, push my way back to it like a drowning man.
I swing it over my shoulder and run aimlessly, blindly round the airport floor.
Now it is busier and difficult to tell where one queue ends, another begins.
But there are the two German girls, Ulriche and Betti, waiting for a flight to Lima.
‘I've just been robbed!
My bag, my writing, my camera, films — they got it all!’
Lord, don't let it be me speaking.
What do they reply?
We hug and I rush off.
Other gringos stand over their rucksacks: it's like watching a road accident.
Relief.
But suddenly a squat campesina is waving me to follow her.
‘Oh God, please.
Please.’
She scuttles towards the door with me at her shoulder.
We are running down the side of the building now towards a stack of fat sacks, the perfect place to dispose of what the thieves don't want.
‘Jesus, please, if not the camera, the films, please the notebooks.
The notebooks…’
I picture the few campesinos who guard the sacks moving away as we approach.
I can see the black-backed notebooks, stuffed down between the sacks like something lost in a hayloft.
She will not understand my joy when I hug her; when I dance and crush their hands with gratitude.
‘Please — the notebooks.’
Suddenly she stops and turns, calling to someone behind me.
‘You mean, it's not me you want?’
She laughs like a horse.
Too  cruel.
And I am much too disappointed to curse her, to realise that she is probably in for a cut herself.
There were no policemen on the floor of the airport.
Rumour, the Reuters of Peru, had it that they were all fighting terrorists.
But on the second landing I found small groups of them with machine-guns lazily overlooking the booking hall.
I was shown into a bare room where paper spilled from the desks then taken back round the main hall.
But I could tell no more than I have written here and I think they all knew from the start it was hopeless.
A policeman asked a few people in the queue questions which they answered desultorily.
Later a hastily assembled identification parade of three sat before me.
Poor sullen-faced campesinos shifting uneasily on their seats.
I could not tell if any of them had been involved but pleaded with them: ‘If you know anything, please tell.
It's the notebooks I want back.
For the rest I don't care.’
They were so removed from guilt or caring their denials were the merest bemused shrug.
A young policeman in a leather jacket painfully, letter by letter, typed my losses on an ancient machine.
Notebook.
Black.
300 pages.
Full.
Notebooks.
Red covers.
Poems.
Notebook.
Machu Picchu on the cover.
A play.
‘And what else?’ he asked excitedly, as if I was short-changing him.
‘What else?’
I listed all the things I could remember: camera, five films, pens, pencils, compass, maps, books, address book etc.
‘But it's the notebooks that are important.
Soy un escritor.’
Other policemen drifted in.
‘El es escritor.’
Their hands said it all: sympathy, hopelessness.
Mala suerte.
Bad luck.
‘But do you think there's a chance?
Do you?’
I was running beside the young detective who carried my bag on his shoulder towards the waiting and very late plane.
‘Yes, surely there's a chance.
Seguro.’
I held his arm tightly as we ran.
He was hope and I needed his touch.
On the steps up to the plane a group of irate Peruvians waved tickets as the embattled stewardess tried to explain that there were no seats.
I pushed past — calamity kills scruple — and explained that I was late because I had been robbed.
A steward with grey hair and neat moustache waved me rather wearily into the cockpit where the pilot and co-pilot were carrying on a violently gestured argument  which was to last all the way to Puerto Maldonaldo.
After take-off, a miracle I might have thought in other circumstances, the stewardess handed me a sickly sweet fruit drink and I tried to peer through the tight lattice of scratch marks on the window at the Andes, at the snow, at the jungle.
But all I saw was what I had lost.
Wide-eyed as any of the cockpit's meaningless dials, I flew over the most spectacular scenery, feeling nothing more than the pain from my broken wings.
PART TWO Travels with my angst.
Lost in the Rainforest
TAMBOPATA
The forest was cool where we walked a hundred feet below the canopy.
Here only five per cent of the light filters through.
For that reason the leaves are large but tapered, so the frequent rain falls from them and does not engender fungal growths.
In a few days' time the President of the Society for the Protection of the Selva Sur, David Ricalde, would tell me, ‘Some of these naturalists, it's not their fault but they don't know their stuff.
I mean, I think if someone is showing you the rainforest and he doesn't stop every ten yards to show you something, then that's not a good guide.
If he doesn't stop every fifty yards, well, I don't know but there's something very wrong.’
Chris Sharpe, a smiling, sensitive biologist from Leeds, here for as long as he could stay to study primates, passed the test easily.
Desperately I tried to hold down the rising sickness I felt about the theft of my writing to listen to all he was telling.
The other two in the party were an Australian and an Englishman, both in their mid-twenties and both stiffly uncommunicative.
We had sailed up the brown Tambopata forty kilometres south from Puerto Maldonaldo in a skiff that barely cleared the water.
I had asked the Englishman, who was tilting his clean-cut face to the sun, if I could use some of his sun cream, seizing the opportunity to talk about my robbery.
There were disgusted nods, but little sense of sympathy from either.
It turned out the Australian's baggage with much expensive equipment had never arrived in Quito, not even made it to the continent (or so he'd been told), and I sensed he had no sympathy left for any other's misfortune.
When I asked him about the Galapagos T-shirt he was wearing, he merely snapped, ‘No, I haven't been.
The T-shirt was cheap.’
His gingerish stubble I imagined was not a natural growth but a product of choleric distemper.
They had met each other on some trip early on their travels and been together ever since: two people cutting their own swathe through the continent.
They were here ‘for the nature’— everything else was just blameful hassle.
Particularly the people.
The Englishman told me that if someone came up to him in a queue he would punch him in the face.
It was the most feeling I saw in him, apart from when describing some bitter wrangle in the London ad agency which had caused his walk-out and propelled him here.
Decomposition in the rainforest is quick.
You can put your finger through the bark and into the flesh of a huge fallen tree after four months.
In Britain an oak would take twenty years to reach such a state.
(Repeat: ‘Decomposition in the rainforest is quick.
You can put your finger through the bark and into the flesh of a huge fallen tree after four months.
In Britain an oak would take twenty years…’
Hang on in there, boy!)
Here, ants and fungi race to make the most of good, organic matter and the rotting trunks themselves play host to an assortment of bright green epiphytes.
In no time at each treefall saplings and ferns sprout in the shallow crater left by the spread of the roots.
A line from a Bob Dylan song came to mind: ‘Those not busy bein' born are busy dyin'.’
Chris pointed out the strange-looking stilt palm, its dangerously spiked stilts ‘walking’ the tree towards sunlight.
He told us the story of the lapuna tree, the mother of the forest.
When it was chopped down it became the Amazon, its branches the many tributaries.
He showed us the shewanakoo, a teaching tree for shamans that menstruating women must not pass.
The rainforest is a tightly knit ecosystem but one that is only vaguely understood; which is why damage to any part of it can never be exactly limited.
As an example of symbiosis Chris showed us a tangarana tree which has an accommodation with ants.
The tree houses them and they in return protect it from creepers and other crawlers.
Tap its bark and out they come.
It is a test of a young shaman to be strapped to this tree.
O strap me to a Tangarana tree,
a Tangarana tree, a Tangarana tree,
O strap me to a Tangarana tree,
but give me back…
The forest opened at Laguna Chica, a perfect oxbow lake.
The first creature we had seen, a small turtle, was sunning itself on a rock as we climbed into a canoe and paddled and drifted round the green-speared edge of the lake.
In the perfect silence we heard a toucan's grating call.
Hoatzin, primitive-looking birds once thought to be related to archaeopterix, flopped between branches, their ochre crests like Mohican head-dresses.
Red-capped cardinals flitted from branch to light branch.
The richness of wildlife here, as Barry had told me, is legion.
As a leaflet of the Tambopata Reserve Society (TReeS), founded in 1986, informs: ‘In terms of biological diversity, the forests of Madre de Dios are the richest in the world.
Research at Tambopata over the last ten years has shown that the Reserve has more species of birds (over 570), butterflies (1,200) and many other animal groups than any other location of its size on earth.’
But such facts are both exciting and misleading.
For one thing, at twenty square miles Tambopata provides only half the territory required by an adult jaguar; for another, wildlife is wisely shy.
One listens for and looks for the signs of a presence — a call, a disorder in the green face of the forest signalling a monkey's passage — and most times one must be satisfied with that.
To believe the brochures, or for that matter the cover of the South American Handbook with its exotic bright orange cock of the rock (Rupicola rupicola), is to be disappointed.
Still, Laguna Chica itself was so beautiful in its tranquillity that my heart could not help but lift.
Then, just as we were tying up the canoe, came the first heavy spats of rain on the leaves and with a roll of thunder the heavens opened.
We all tipped our paper valuables into Chris's waterproof bag and tramped in mud back to base.
The driving force of the rain precluded conversation, sealed each of us in with his own thoughts.
Mine were of that last tropical downpour in Samaná when the potential violence had seemed so distant to me.
I felt far more threatened now.
My only pen had stopped working at the start of the walk; in the rain my watch face went blank.
‘I'm getting a bit Pissed off with this!’
I shouted against the wall of white noise to three deaf backs.
The date was April the first and it didn't end a minute too soon.
I do not sleep though.
At dinner the two cholerics carried on a huddled conversation while I sat at the end of the row feeling the cutlery might melt in my hands.
Now I cannot bear the darkness and have to keep on relighting the candle, fumbling for the matches in the total darkness.
I feel I have nothing: no one to talk to, nothing personal to act as a comforter — not a photograph, not a letter:nada .
I remember again sitting in the airline office in Lima, chanting to myself the lines of Elizabeth Bishop, ‘The art of losing isn't hard to master’, and tapping my shoulder-bag, thinking, this is the important one.
Already I had had presentiments of the satisfaction I would feel when I eventually got the bag home — the huge relief as I unpacked my treasures.
Now in the night its contents come back to me randomly, though it will be some weeks before, as a way of exorcism, I can make  
The next morning unslept I was up at five but because of rain it was much later when we started the six kilometres' trail to the larger lake on the reserve.
I had nothing to do but paddle, and my fingers blistered as we canoed around Laguna Grande while the Australian, crouched in the bow with his bazooka lens, shook his head and tutted at each audible paddle stroke.
Both he and the Englishman were collecting ‘worth-it’ shots.
‘Take your own pace back to the lodge,’ Chris said and marched off, a slight figure in butchered jeans and a torn striped shirt like a huge smock; a long feather of hair down his neck.
But I felt I could not lose him and hung on the hour-and-a-half walk firing the occasional question like a lifeline, till he succumbed to a conversation about the war poets: ‘like old beggars under sacks…we cursed through sludge…’
‘You're still there, aren't you?’
Chris asked at lunch.
I nodded  mutely.
‘You must forget it.
Or else you're going to lose this too…’
But afterwards, I found myself in the dim bathroom of my hut staring at a haunted face.
Over and over again I thought of the robbery.
Brick by brick my despair built.
‘La cabeza debe regir a la corazon.
The head must rule the heart,’ Mario Ortiz, who was passing through Tambopata, had pronounced, eying me gravely but sympathetically and tapping his head and heart in turn.
Oh please, not Hemingway's ‘grace under pressure’, I thought, I'm crap at all that; and now circumstances have found me out far more comprehensively than Petra's eagle stare ever could.
I too am a lost, insecure Colin, my feelings of togetherness an illusion.
Bugger ‘writing in interesting places’.
I want my desk!
Marcia had lived in the jungle for nine years.
A native of Los Angeles, she had been an exporter of craft goods from Lima when, on a short trip to the jungle, her plane was grounded at Puerto Maldonaldo for two weeks.
‘It was the rainy season and the runway hadn't been concreted at that time,’ she explained.
While waiting for a flight she was asked to do some translating at one of the jungle lodges.
At the end of two weeks she was hooked.
She flew back to Lima and wrote to all her clients telling them not to expect any more craft goods: she was quitting and going to work in the jungle.
She was now manager of Explorers Inn and gave all the new arrivals the same breezy, Californian smile of welcome.
‘I rarely leave the jungle now; certainly not with pleasure.
It's so interesting, so-o-o mysterious, you're always learning something.’
But she gave no impression of being a recluse.
There was a story that she had once been married to a hollow cheeked Indian tour guide called Willy Wither who had taken us up the river and touchingly offered me the use of his very expensive camera (‘A holiday without a camera is a terrible thing.’),
but I could see no special contact between them.
Slim in her dungarees, with her long, curly, chestnut hair and wide-eyed enthusiasm, some would tell you Marcia was ‘a little cookie’, but I saw someone who had the wisdom to recognise where she was happy and the courage to act on it.
Her contentment had nurtured a generous soul.
It was generosity and wisdom I was after when I climbed up the steps to her small office which was set apart from the larger  huts in the forest clearing.
I climbed hesitantly, feeling clumsy as the tame macaw which that morning had taken my fingernails for a bunch of nuts.
‘I'm afraid,’ I told her, ‘I'm going to crack up.
I feel I've lost everything; that I may just as well go home.’
‘Oh, don't despair yet.
There's still a chance of the stuff turning up; not the camera, but the notebooks, yes.’
‘You really think so?’
Impossible straws.
Better to accept it's all gone.
Gone.
‘Yeah, and besides, there's a lot more of South America to see and a lot of work you can still do in two months.’
She seemed to light up at the idea.
‘Yes, well.
Perhaps I'll go for a walk in the forest and see if I can sort something out.’
‘Do that.
It would be terrible if you lost this opportunity.
And you know,’ she added, ‘the forest soothes.’
The forest soothes.
There was a tree in it whose story I did not tire of hearing.
One afternoon in the main lodge, surrounded by displays about rainforest life and conservation, I talked to Richard, a rangy, bespectacled botanist, studying Why Trees Fall.
TOM: You know what's amazed me most of all that I've seen is Big Tree.
RICHARD: Ah, yes.
TOM: Tell me the story again.
RICHARD: Well, it's a seed from the fig family, a strangler fig, and it attaches itself…
TOM: How big's the seed?
RICHARD: Oh, say three-quarters of an inch — a thumbnail.
Anyway, as I was saying, it attaches itself to a tree.
TOM: Any tree?
Which tree?
RICHARD: Well, a lapuna if you like.
TOM: The mother of the forest?
RICHARD: The mother of the forest.
TOM: Yes.
Chris told us the story or how the man and the woman fed from this tree and, when they were away, to get at the food others chopped it down and the trunk became the Amazon, the branches its tributaries.
RICHARD: That's the story.
TOM: Back to Big Tree.
RICHARD (No trace of a sigh): The seed germinates and sends roots down to the earth for nutrients.
The roots grow huge, sculptural wings to buttress the tree and the climber wraps itself around the lapuna, which slowly decays inside it.
TOM: How long does this take?
RICHARD: No one knows.
TOM: No one!
There is no way to tell how old the tree is?
RICHARD: No.
Because there are no definite growing seasons in the tropics, trees don't have rings; so without actually watching them and measuring them grow, it's impossible to date them.
In fact there are only about three species of tree in the rainforest that have been definitely aged, in terms of their lifespan.
TOM: Well, is there a time when Big Tree stops being a plant and starts being a tree?
RICHARD: No.
TOM: It's still a plant?
RICHARD: It's still a plant.
TOM: But isn't there some physical quality that makes a tree a tree?
I don't know — woodiness?
RICHARD: Lots of shrubs have wood and they're not trees.
TOM: Ah…mmm…uh-hu…
RICHARD: It's too easy to get bogged down in the study of classifications.
Lots of scientists do, you know.
It's a problem that started with Plato and his idea of the essence of things: that there should be an essence of tree.
But it just doesn't operate here.
That's one of the reasons it's exciting for a botanist to work in the rainforest.
I mean, in Britain, if I was studying the daisy family for example, there'd be the garden daisy and a few other bits and bobs, but that would be it.
But if I was studying the daisy family here, I'd be looking at plants from the size of daisies as we know them, to plants the size of trees.
TOM: The size of trees!
RICHARD: Yes.
TOM: But they wouldn't be trees.
RICHARD: No.
(Pause.)
They'd be daisies.
Though I could see that the sun still lit the highest canopy, on the jungle floor it was already too late.
I knew I was on the wrong track  when the tall reeds broke to reveal the brown-bellied river.
By then the map was the faintest glow in my hands, the thread of tracks unreadable.
The big, light-hungry leaves were almost black now as I walked briskly back along the path searching for the track to take me back to the lodge.
Presently, there was a lightening of foliage and I thought, almost disappointedly, all that panic for nothing.
But the path took me back into darkness and I felt my first real twinge of panic.
Stupid.
Stupid.
Stupid.
To paddle around Laguna Chica enjoying the idle drift of time, the depth of natural silence; to go and rest my head for a last time between the fifteen-foot-high buttresses of Big Tree…
And without a torch.
What did Barry say?
‘Watch for ants, falling Brazil nuts, poisonous snakes and never go anywhere after midday without a torch.’
Something like that.
And now here I am, stumbling as I start to jog an my heavy, muddied wellingtons along the pale grey light of a path.
I call.
Silence.
I shout.
Silence.
I scream, ‘Hello-o-o-o!’
Silence.
The foliage absorbs whatever sound I make and returns silence.
As Annie Dillard tells us: this is nature's one comment.
I shout and shout for all the warmth of company I'll be missing at dinner — and the sweat pours from me.
Thorns snag me.
A tree trunk slams into me.
At last I stumble off the path into complete darkness.
My feet find only forest vegetation, ground creepers.
Lost.
Utterly lost.
I feel around me and find a branch to sit on.
I cover myself with insect repellent, have a drink of water (my two foresights).
And wait.
I am strangely calm now I know my own efforts are hopeless.
It is something of a relief to have let my clattering, panicking self go, to wear instead something of the forest's stillness.
I am one more black silhouette in this sixty-million-year-old forest.
I threaten nothing, but sit on my branch, attentive as any other creature; as slowly the forest reveals itself in the cry of a bird, the crash of a branch, the rustle of leaves as something moves through the forest litter; the incessant percussive music of insects.
‘If you can,’ Barry said, ‘Go for a walk in the forest at night.
Just find an old trunk, sit down and listen.
I love it, though some people just can't handle it.’
I amaze myself — I, who used to be terrified of the unlit hallway — ready to sit it out, unafraid; friends with the living darkness.
But I hear a distant shout.
And another.
Another from a different direction.
I shout back, ‘Terrace Trail!
Terrace Trail!’
But there I was wrong.
I was found by Chris sitting not ten yards from Big Tree.
No wonder I had felt so calm.
Three more torchlit seekers join us.
They feel like my closest friends.
‘What took you so long?
Lose my stuff one day, myself the next — should I be allowed out on my own?’
We are loudly human all the way back as they light up for me just how far I had strayed.
When we walk out of the forest into the candlelights of the lodge, the forest moves into our spaces like the sea into scoops of sand.
But, bathed in its silence, I am refreshed.
‘The Richest Country in the World’
CUZCO
The green world soothed, as did the ready kindness of Chris and Marcia — the comfort of strangers.
But back in Cuzco I had to fight to recall the strength I had found; force myself to remember I had been lost in a sixty-million-year-old forest but had found the still centre.
After my talk with Marcia I had tramped along the trails listening to imaginary advice from a weave of voices, the same ones I had silently and joyfully addressed at Machu Picchu.
I had decided that all my stuff was irretrievably lost; that I did not want to continue my projected journey but would strike out and do something different — go to Ecuador perhaps and if possible from there into Brazil.
I had felt at the instant the idea suggested itself to me the first glimmer of positive thought: suddenly I knew I was not going to sink.
Thoughtlessly, grandly, I had then taken a fallen branch and lopped the top leaves off some innocent plant like a child.
I found myself hanging on to that spirit, first at the office of Policia de Investigationes del Peru (motto: ‘Honor y Lealtad’) where it was never the same man on my case.
In fact there was not much of a feeling that anyone was on my case at all.
The desks were covered with piles of paperwork, seemingly beyond classification.
The fact that everything relating to my loss was scribbled in children's school jotters with cartoon covers was not exactly a boost to my confidence.
There was much coming and going and shaking of hands before a lurid calendar of a glossy, tanned blonde in a jungle setting.
Immediately after my robbery I had thought all this action would be to my benefit.
I remembered moving from one to the other, explaining: I am a writer; the notebooks are what is precious to me.
One policeman was short and stocky, his thick, wiry hair shaped into a point at the nape of his neck.
His heavy gold rings and his bomber jacket and his wide-foot stance had added up to a  man of experience in my eyes.
How I had welcomed his physicality, his touch: the tiniest sensation that yes, it might be all right.
Today he put my loss into perspective — by ignoring me.
I waited miserably for my Certificado Numero 031, stating my losses and their circumstances, and with one last appeal —‘It's the notebooks’— vanished from their casebooks.
In New York I'd sat in the winter sun on wooden steps at South Street pier and swapped cards with an old girlfriend, now a free-lance writer.
My card read ‘Tom Pow — teacher/writer.’
Somewhere I'd read that a card was an invaluable social lubricant in South America.
However that may be, I was soon to discover that I was not a natural disburser of ‘my card’, and very few people received one.
I had stared over the famous landscape: the three bridges, the brownstones of Brooklyn Heights.
How does one write a travel book, I'd wondered aloud, how describe the sheer physicality of life?
At that moment a pigeon with a stump for one leg hirpled past.
And now on the bus from the airport I could not stop noticing detail.
How can I remember it all?
How can I recapture the texture of my experiences?
The situation was beginning to feel heavy, hopeless.
I stared out of the bus window at piles of refuse on the wasteland fringes of the road.
Laser eyes.
Crazy.
In an attempt to counteract despondency, to reclaim the green world for itself, not solely as a balm for my despair, I arranged with Barry's help an interview with David Ricalde.
David Ricalde Rios was President of the Asociacion por la Conservacion de la Selva Sur (ACSS).
The association had a tidy office in the busy Avenida del Sol.
David arrived in a beige boiler-suit and trainers, fitting for his serious directness, for he was a shy man when not warmed to a subject: small-talk was not his forte.
He acknowledged this when he told me in fluent English that he wanted to do a post-graduate degree in biology in the States.
‘People say there are courses in the economics of wildlife management, but I think it's better to be a scientist than a talker.’
ACSS was set up by himself and interested friends five years before and he had been working on it since.
(He was still classed as a volunteer, but with a wife about to give birth was rethinking his situation.)
The association ran on a tight budget funded from various sources.
Wildlife Conservation International had helped them make contact with interested scientists and individuals.
‘We talk with thirty thousand people a year for two thousand dollars,’ he said proudly, contrasting that figure with the larger, better-funded organisations.
As a trained biologist and a conservationist (‘since I was nine’), it was not surprising that he was interested in the Selva Sur which boasts more plants and species than anywhere else on earth.
The Tambopata Reserve, as I have said, holds world records in birds, butterflies and dragonflies.
Manu National Park, which is more isolated up the Madre de Dios River, has two million insects, one thousand species of birds, fifteen thousand species of plants, two hundred species of freshwater fish, two hundred species of bats — some still unknown to science.
In other words this area is the greatest celebration of nature our planet has ever known.
And in the past four decades we've lost half of it.
Half of it remains to be saved.
David saw ACSS as a pressure group (‘Not like Greenpeace.
I think it's more productive to be polite,’) whose primary aim was to secure the future of the rainforest in an area stretching from the Heath Sanctuary on the Bolivian border up to and including Manu and the Tambopata Reserves: an area of one and a half million hectares, the size of Switzerland.
The figure was neither excessive nor arbitrary, but the minimum size recommended to protect biological diversity.
(It is worthwhile here remembering the jaguar's requirements.)
Besides, Tambopata for all its world records was only protected by a resolution.
Manu on the other hand was protected by a supreme decree.
Both these measures were less than laws.
Roads were built by law and roads ‘opened up’ jungles; so a constant battle of education and persuasion needed to be waged by ACSS and other pressure groups on the government.
‘To me as a Peruvian,’ David said, his deep, brown eyes alive with the topic, ‘nationalism means Manu, means biological diversity.
Nationalism is not big battles, a glorious history, but something you can feel proud of.’
However, he took a broad view of the duties and responsibilities of being a scientist in Peru.
‘We are realistic.
We are not saying, ‘Oh, we must save these beautiful species!’,
We realise that conservation is people too.
Thus a Peruvian biologist must be well trained in fieldwork, experienced in research and have an idea of priorities.
In other words not see science in isolation from economics, anthropology, politics — all these disciplines should be working together.’
David's vision of turning the Tambopata Reserve Project into the most important tropical university in the world and a model of development for the protection of the rainforest in Peru, if not the world, hinged on being able to persuade government and local interests that their benefits did not lie with the destruction of the forest.
Puerto Maldonaldo, ‘the biological capital of the world’, was a rapidly growing town boosted by thousands of settlers from the Andes seeking fine gold dust in the rivers, to work as loggers or to become slash-and-burn farmers.
Apart from the landless Andeans, the greatest damage was done by cattle ranchers whose clearance of one acre of rainforest would support 0.4 of one cow.
It was a statistic such as that which proved the best weapon in ACSS's campaign.
David also pointed to Explorers Inn which he claimed, on the same size of land, netted its owner a turnover of $800,000 per year: a
‘Ecotourism,’ said David, ‘is a very viable alternative to rainforest destruction.
But the jungle lodges should do more to make contact with the local communities, to tell them what they are doing.
The scientists too must be seen to be helpful.
Conservation must be integrated into the local community.
Instead of which too many locals see the tourists arrive in Puerto Maldonaldo and speed across it to the river without even buying a Coke.
They never see the  naturalists who work there, who can't speak Spanish anyway; so they just see science and naturalism as a gringo thing.
It's they who must be made proud of the area they live in.’
A project now in progress close to Explorers, which hoped to rekindle pride in the old customs, language and traditional knowledge of the native Infierno community, was Ametra 2001.
It was described in a TReeS pamphlet as ‘a project set up by Madre de Dios's indigenous people which aims to combine the best of modern and traditional approaches to health-care, in order to maintain acceptable standards of health throughout the region's native forest communities’.
Loss of my letter of introduction from Barry the Magus had meant that I had been unable to make the most of a brief, lacklustre meeting in Puerto Maldonaldo with its adviser Didier Lacaze, a slight, diffident Frenchman.
I had wanted to spend some time with the Infierno people themselves; but, caught between two worlds, they had a very understandable fear of their traditional knowledge being ‘stolen’, and did not open up the project to outsiders without good reason.
Crucial modern medicines, David reminded me, like quinine and curare, come from the rainforest and much more potential exists there.
In fact, only one per cent of plants in the rainforest have been fully analysed; and yet the forests are being destroyed at the rate of fifty to a hundred acres per minute.
Ametra 2001 was engaged in collecting a database of oral knowledge and in persuading local people to rely more on traditional methods rather than, as they saw them, prestigious injections.
It was also trying to persuade large drug companies to invest in rainforest protection; investment which would not stem from any sense of altruism on their behalf but because, for the industrialised world, the value of medicines derived from the rainforest runs at over forty billion dollars per year.
‘But is one of the main problems,’ I asked, ‘not that there is intense pressure on land in Peru and that, to the campesinos from the Andes, the rainforest offers some kind of an alternative?’
‘Sure,’ he said, ‘I think to preserve the rainforest it would be better to begin in the Andes.
If nothing is done there, the government's saying in effect, ‘Here's a machete and a matchbox;, get on with it.’
You know, only four per cent of the Andes can be used for intensive agriculture anyway, so the people abandon them to cut rainforest and plant rice.
Yet these areas supported far larger populations in Inca times.
It is that people are forgetting or  just not using Andean technology, so they are exhausting the soil.
We need to go back to the old ways: I mean, think of it, it was in the Andes that corn was improved, that the potato was developed.
Fourteen million people lived here in Inca times.
Fourteen million mouths were fed.’
It was becoming clear to me that agriculture and its problems were a key factor in demographic changes all over Peru.
‘Lima is now an Andean city,’ Washington Delgado had told me, ‘overcrowded with landless campesinos.’
Cuzco had seen a similar burgeoning.
And from the cities they moved to the forest where their attitudes to the locals were as racist as Limeño attitudes were to them: to the extent that David observed, ‘Tropical cultures are disappearing faster than the rainforests themselves.’
David acknowledged the complexity of Peru's problems yet he remained an optimist, becoming most heated when he talked about those who repeated endlessly that Peru was a poor country.
‘These people are living outside reality claiming we are poor.
We are the richest country in the world in flora and fauna; we have a rich sea and land rich in minerals.
We have rainfall, water, soil, food.
We are not Ethiopia.
We are incapable but we are not poor.’
‘Where then does the fault lie?’
I asked.
‘In people's misconceptions of what progress is about.
Listen, I go to places where once there were thousands of alpacas; now I see hundreds of cows and sheep.
Alpacas gave wool and meat and their feet do not impact and damage the soil as cows' hooves do.
But people decided it was only inferiors who ate alpaca meat.
Only cholos.
That is an insult for mestizos, what you would call a half-breed.
I am a mestizo, a cholo; I have eaten alpaca: the Incas ate alpaca.
There is much ignorance and unreality in Peru.
Terrorism is an unreality born out of ignorance.
The superficial Limeños who think beyond Lima is Miami and Europe, who talk of the ‘Indian stain departments’ and don't know a campesino is starving — theirs is another unreality.
I have realities because I have an education.
I have spoken with Sendero, I know how they are thinking.
But look,’— David was beginning to spray ideas around the small office in his enthusiasm —‘Peru has a rich sea but no advanced fishing vessel and yet a medium-sized ship can net ten million dollars of fish in one year!’
‘You are optimistic then?’
‘Yes, I am optimistic.
And there are others who realise Peruvians must be more responsible than they are.
There is a lot to do and we are the only generation that can do it.
For me, we are a rich country.
Brazil?
What's Brazil got to offer?
Sex, a city and a carnival.
Peru has so much more.
Genetic diversity, the oldest community of life on earth, that is the most important thing Peru has.
I'll die happy to know when I was young I was pushing ideas and I was one of the actors saving my country for my grandchildren and all Peruvians.’
‘¿Qué te parece Peru?— How does Peru appear to you?— was a question I was often asked.
The passive construction allowed for the divergent realities David touched on.
I was beginning to get a sense that people held too many differing visions of Peru, beyond the often mentioned three realities of costa, selva y cordillera.
But I would meet no one whose vision was more noble than David Ricalde's or seen with more clarity: no one who invigorated me more, at a time when I needed it most.
‘Everywhere is Robbers!’
ON THE TRUCK TO CHINCHERO
My contact with David had fired me with an interest in Peru again, a desire to engage with it beyond the level of annoyance.
Yet after the robbery it was as if everything was in a highlight: the hawkers, the ‘comprame, señor’ women, the children's shouts of ‘cigarros, amigo,’as they trotted beside me, the constant offer of ‘dolares, dolares.’
I felt my noes were more final; my hand chopped firmly through the air, my head turned away.
I was somewhere on the curve of prejudice; aware of an anger I had not dealt with, simmering beneath the surface, showing itself in bad dreams and disgruntled waking.
I had decided against Ecuador: people I had spoken to made it sound cosy, like Switzerland, and there was no easy way from it to Brazil.
Instead I would go to Amantani in Lake Titicaca, reputedly a quiet, touristless island, to try to reconstruct what I could of my journal and other writings.
‘Worth a go,’ Barry had said.
‘Sure I believe you can do it.’
And true enough, after an afternoon weaving a poem back on to the frayed ends of a loom of broken rhymes, I had leapt up and punched the air with determination.
Yeay!
But my spirits in Cuzco this second sojourn in the city had been mercurial to say the least.
Now I wanted to do something positive before I left.
That was to be a visit to Chinchero market on my final day.
I had been told Chinchero was a traditional Andean market and I was interested to see the campesino culture at its most effective.
Early on a Sunday morning I walked up Plateros and then through the narrow streets to where I had been told a bus, colectivo —some form of transport — would leave.
There was the now familiar feeling of not-a-lot-happening.
Campesinos sat around like boulders with their bundles (smaller boulders) beside them.
Dogs nosed around in piles of refuse.
I kicked my heels and ran my eye along the ruff of mountains surrounding Cuzco, like a tongue over broken teeth.
An obvious gringo approached.
He was tall and thin, with a pink, peeling nose and a couple of days' stubble.
His hands rested on the small daysack he carried on his chest.
‘Per-don-em-e,’ he enunciated.
‘¿Es por el bus por Chinchero?’
‘I hope so.’
‘Christ, you're not Scottish are you?’
‘Aye.’
‘Where from?’
‘Edinburgh — originally.’
‘Me too.
Goldenacre.
What part you from?’
‘Craigleith.’
‘Christ — just up the road.
You're only the second Scot I've met in ten months.’
‘You're the first I've met so far.’
And I had almost forgotten the lilt of a Scottish accent, the sense of pleasure that can flow behind its reserve.
A high sided truck arrived.
‘Chinchero?’ a campesino asked and waved us on.
A Norwegian lifted a small Japanese girl on and we followed.
As the truck filled we leant over the side and talked about our trips.
Ian had been travelling down from the States and through Mexico.
I told him about my robbery.
‘Oh God, that must be dreadful to lose all that work, all that effort.
I've just been lucky so far, touch wood.
But you're just waiting for it to happen.’
I told him how uneasy I had become when I was approached or touched by anyone.
‘Yes, I know.
You've got to be so careful.’
A big, broad-shouldered man pushed between us to shout to someone on the street, gesturing at him with a huge banana.
‘Hey, hey.
Watch your pockets,’ we both said in unison and moved back to give the man space.
Ian had a decision coming up: whether to fly home from Miami or to get illegal work in the States and travel some more: ‘I really want to see Alaska.’
We talked about that moment when travel became a substitute for work (…get up in the morning…find the train times…see the cathedral…); for life itself.
‘Hang on,’ Ian broke in, ‘what's going on here?’
People were climbing down from the truck and seemed to be forming another queue.
When the truck was almost empty, a campesino pointed to my trousers.
Running the length of my zipped, ‘safe’ side pocket was a neat slash: its placing and its length perfect for its purpose.
A few wispy threads stood out.
Doubting Thomas, I stared for a couple of seconds before plunging my hand in.
Two hundred dollars in American Express traveller's cheques missing, their numbers in my stolen bag.
‘Her too,’ the Norwegian said and the Japanese held up a small woven bag with a slash down its centre.
‘He is in on it,’ the Norwegian said, pointing to the stocky driver's mate.
‘He gave the man the knife.
I saw it.’
And yes, I suddenly recollected the image of the small shining triangle of a Stanley blade being passed out of the driver's cabin: an image that had only momentarily concerned me.
Now old and new furies possessed me and I had the man by the neck of his jersey and pushed up against the wall.
‘¡Mi dinero, hombre!
¡Mi dinero!
Come on, where is it?
You were seen!
We saw you!’
He shook his head as much as I would allow him to.
My Spanish cracked in the strain and I unleashed a torrent of verbal abuse whose tone he could not mistake.
He was walking off when I reached out, grabbed him again and slapped him across the head.
A campesina spoke up, saying she too had seen him hand over the knife.
‘¿Policia?’ someone suggested.
‘Oh, Christ, what can they do?’ said bitter experience.
But my frustration needed some channel.
The small accomplice waved us into the lorry.
The driver would take us to the police.
‘You've got to be kidding, pal.
We'll walk.’
We started off down the hill towards the police station; the culprit, as we saw him, leading the four gringos.
At the market he started off down one of the narrow, clothes-thick alleyways, but we pulled him back and shielded him from the warren of stalls.
At the police station we explained the situation to a policeman on guard.
The small man made his case and showed his ID.
The policeman turned to us: ‘Well, none of the robbers carry identification and he does.’
‘But we all saw him hand the knife over.’
I spoke for us with blinding certainty.
We were led into a room, bare but for a desk, a chair, a row of helmets and a set of bulletproof vests hanging on the wall like carcasses.
The case was turned over to another policeman with a mean, bony face and narrow eyes.
He slapped the conductor hard over the head for the bother he was causing and on a scrap of  paper laboriously took down my name, age, passport number and nationality.
He paused after each question, stared over our heads, then jerked out the next as if reading from a cueboard behind us.
El Capitan came in, relaxed in an open-necked white shirt.
Neatly groomed, he had gently waved black hair and a trim moustache; the roughness of a bad acne experience on his cheeks.
‘Oh, we have so many robbers here,’ he started sympathetically, ‘and once the money is taken, I'm afraid it's gone.’
He turned to the small conductor who stood silently in the corner clutching his crumpled wad of fares.
El Capitan had a baton in his hand now and was winding its strap around his wrist.
‘Who were the others, eh?’ he hissed.
We had deduced there must have been at least four:.
himself, the big, distracting man and two women, one of whom had the incisive skill of a surgeon.
But it could have been that the whole truck was a set-up: corral the gringos then fleece them.
And the evidence we had to offer?
One of them was carrying the biggest banana you've ever seen!
El Capitan poked the baton hard into the small man's stomach, doubling him, then raised it as if he was going to bring it down on his curled shoulder.
It stayed poised there for a moment and another question, another proclamation of innocence, then he brought it down ready to drive into the small man's stomach again.
Initially, the openness of the violence, the supposedly shared assumptions behind it, had shocked us.
We looked at each other wide-eyed, confused by an alien etiquette, and for a moment I was lost somewhere between memories of Samaná and Graham Greeneland.
When I got my breath back I pushed between them.
‘Please, señor, it's my two hundred dollars that's been stolen but I don't want this.
Please.’
In one movement el Capitan swivelled round and sat on the edge of the table, all sympathy and charm, as if there had been no smudging between the polite and the brutal: Jekyll and Hyde, the line was easily crossed.
‘We have so many robbers here,’ he repeated, ‘so many.
And you're leaving tomorrow.
We really need to go round markets and houses and you can say, ‘Is this the thief?’
But it takes so much time and you're leaving tomorrow.
Ay-ay-ay.
You must take great care.
Great care.
You put your money here' — he indicated a side pocket —‘they slash it.
You must put your money here,’ and he grabbed two handfuls of his crotch.
‘I don't know,’ I said, ‘I'd rather be slashed here , than there !’
Everyone laughed, but for the ashen-faced small man in the shadows, in his ragged, striped jersey and his cheap trainers with his mop of black hair and his patchy moustache which would never meet in the middle.
‘No, but really,’ el Capitan repeated, ‘you must take care.’
I wondered aloud whether it was possible to buy one of their bulletproof vests and whether there were trousers to match; but really I wanted to be away from this place where even my pure anger had been stolen from me.
‘What's to happen to him?’
I asked.
‘Oh, he'll stay here.’
‘Well, listen, it's my two hundred dollars,’ I repeated, ‘and I don't want him beaten.’
‘Sure, sure, sure.’
‘Eh,gracias , eh, señor,’ I half spat at the small man as I turned my back on him and left.
I entered the Tourist Police at the head of the four of us in a mood for answers.
Later a gringo who was in the chief's office described me as behaving ‘like a demented Scotsman.’
I felt I had good cause.
I asked first about my bag and felt my breathing quicken when the chief seemed unable to find my deposition.
Eventually he pulled it from a pile of papers.
Nothing.
Nothing other than an obvious desire to be rid of me.
But I had prepared my questions: How often does this happen?
Why were there no policemen on the airport floor?
Why is there no advice given at the tourist office about avoiding robberies?
Why do I have to buy a certificate from the Banco de la Nacion to register my loss?
Ignominiously, I was hustled out after my second question clutching my scrap of question paper.
In answer to the first the chief told me they were not allowed to divulge such information: it was classified.
Later one of the gringos in the office told me that in the book of depositions, which began at the end of January, they were already (in the second week of April) at page 152, with three entries per double page.
The second question he rejected out of hand, and that was that.
Four gringos sat in a row in the chief's office with the dejected look of the recently robbed.
One girl shouted out to me as I was bundled  out that she had lost her camera and money.
A New Zealander pointed to a grey pair of Rohans slit exactly like mine had been.
Bulging with petty rancour I pushed my way back in the door to shout to them, ‘There's a poster out here.
Know what it says?
‘Peru es todo — y algo.’
Peru is everything and something more.
Well, we all know what the something more is, don't we?’
Even the policeman at the desk laughed with us.
On the street again, suddenly I felt I was in the middle of a farce —‘POLICE SEARCH FOR THE BIG BANANA IS ON — and the discovery that actually I did have my cheque numbers in my moneybelt and that it was the photocopies that had been stolen made me almost light-headed.
With the most impressive efficiency and a phone call to Tucson, the American Express Office in Avenida del Sol issued me with a fresh set after half an hour's verification: necessary, Ian told me, because there are so many freeloaders who keep on going by selling their cheques and claiming they have been stolen.
We carried on down Avenida del Sol to Radio Tawantinsuyo where, on last-minute South American Handbook advice, I placed ten radio adverts for my notebooks.
I noted the Handbook clearly stated that you were not to expect the police to break into a sweat over your losses.
So there was nothing else to do then but head for the Vareyoc Café and try to relax.
I had done much of my writing and rewriting of poems there.
The atmosphere was of a calm Edinburgh café: classical music played softly; Peruvian newspapers were available.
It was my Not Peru .
I had also been having problems with my gut.
Though there were tasty meals to be had in Peru — seafood and chifa (Chinese)— often poor quality or bland ingredients were disguised by chili, herbs and strong seasoning.
As a cuisine it was not very attractive to the man who had left half his insides across Central Asia two years before.
But the Vareyoc offered fresh coffee and slices of pizza and harmless empanadas, meat or cheese-filled pasties, which were friendly to all tummies.
As a cheese and tomato pizza was put before Ian and me, the four gringos from the tourist police office came in.
We gathered round a large table to discuss our losses.
They had also been robbed around the Chinchero ‘bus stop’.
One English girl had fallen a few yards behind her companions and, as thirty spectators looked on, lost her daysack, with its camera, cash and diary, in a tug-of-war with the thief.
The New Zealander had  kicked off two robbery attempts, catching one man in the face, before his trousers were finally slashed in a similar way to mine.
‘It's a bloody national industry.’
‘They're like magicians.’
‘Sometimes you can buy your camera back in Puno or La Paz, the Handbook says.’
‘Yea, but not to get wild with the guy selling it because he might have had nothing to do with the theft.’
‘They probably make you pay more for it because it's of sentimental value.’
A Frenchman, who had arrived on the scene just too late to save the English girl's bag, pointed to an advert in a colour supplement for a company called grupo 4:SEGURIDAD INTEGRAL…en MANOS PERUANOS (Complete security in Peruvian hands.)
Humour was our unreality.
For although much was laughable, much was also very worrying.
As Ian said, ‘After one robbery, you've got to prepare immediately for the next.’
And how would that come about?
With another distraction?
Spit down the back, an epileptic fit, a jostling.
Keep your ears open.
In Trujillo they practise ‘the live rat trick’.
At traffic lights they throw a live rat on to the lap of a woman driver.
Usually the car is soon theirs.
Vigilance always.
But then you hear a traveller at the railway station, prepared as a medieval knight, daysack on his front, chickenwire behind, was hit by five fat women, coming at him from all directions.
On his back like a beetle, three sat on him while two ripped his daysack from his chest.
Lima Airport.
A policeman told me I should pay a policeman to escort me to a taxi.’
‘Taxis — huh.
I heard of one guy, he's just arrived, gets in this taxi.
The driver turns the engine over a couple of times; says, ‘What it needs is a little push.'’
‘Oh no, he doesn't, does he?’
‘Yeah, out he gets, pushes and of course it's the last he sees of his stuff.’
‘You're going to Brazil?
Well, we were in Brazil for six weeks; four robbery attempts.
How long you going for?’
I did not want to think about that yet.
The next day I was to take the train to Puno, yet another notorious journey.
‘What you've got to watch is that for about two hours there are no lights in the train.’
‘No lights!’
‘Yes.
And they reckon it's because the train drivers are in league with the robbers.
Like some of the bus drivers are.’
The next day also, Ian would take the bus to Lima which skirted Sendero territory.
He was not particularly looking forward to it.
‘When I was coming to Peru, that's what someone said: ‘The jungle's drugs, the mountains are terrorists and the coast's robbers.'’
‘Oh no,’ said the Frenchman with feeling, ‘I think everywhere is robbers!’
Back in Hostal America I smiled wanly at the owner as I pointed to my ripped trousers.
I went to my room and calmed myself with some invisible mending.
Then, as another kind of exorcism, I made up a list of:
GRINGO NIGHTMARES
1
The countries are doubling.
2
The dollar is falling.
$3 You're down to your last two imodium.
4
All the shoeshiners you've said ‘Mañana’ to are waiting for you.
5
‘There are those who torture and those who get tortured.’
(Graham Greene:The Power and the Glory .
According to Ian.)
Your skin is getting darker.
But it's not with the sun.
6
A bundle of rancid meatbones on a packed train.
7
Everyone near you holds a razor in the palm of his hand.
8
You've strayed off the gringo map.
Where are you?
There are no ruins.
There are no mind-blowing landscapes.
There is dust, poverty and many natural thieves.
9
You've run out of toilet paper.
10
They're training their children to rob as soon as the little bastards can walk.
11
They're laughing at you.
12
You have forgotten: where was it the terrorism stopped, the drug-running began?
13
Your clothes are all neatly cut to ribbons: you spin like a maypole.
14
You're walking down the road and in each doorway, in each alleyway, they're sizing you up.
They're laughing at you.
15
For your life, you must answer truthfully: do you think they're worth as much as you?
Though you journey so far to see their ancient endeavours.
16
You were caught by an old trick — the oldest in the book.
You are centre-stage in an old music-hall.
The place is packed with gringos, all guffawing: ‘Oh Lord, not that old chestnut!’
17
You're moving so fast, you're running out of countries…
Later that evening, going on my farewell walk round Cuzco, I fought to be positive, talking to myself like a character in a novel I was reading at the time, David Copperfield's aunt.
‘We must meet reverses boldly, not suffer them to frighten us, my dear.
We must learn to act the play out.
We must live misfortune down, Trot.’
I walked down Loreto to Coricancha.
It was good to see and touch the Inca stones again; to remind myself of the depth this city had: the dignity beyond the constant assault of the hustlers.
I had known a few evenings here when it was chilly and wet — the nights were generally cold — but now it was pleasant; warm as a good summer evening in Scotland.
Huge orange and white ascension clouds piled up behind the church of La Compañia.
Its stonework and that of the cathedral glowed a warm red in the fading sun.
Cuzco, Cuzco es tu nombre sagrado
como el sol del incario inmortal.
Todo el mundo te lleva en el pecho
como canto y bandera triunfal.
Looking down the long straight of Avenida del Sol, I saw a rainbow's end brushing the sign dug into the hillside: ‘Viva el Peru’.
‘Oh God, every day it seems I'm speaking to a mate who's just been robbed,’ said Woody, sometime Cross Key's barman, in his thick Lancashire accent.
‘It's bloody depressing.
I don't know what's happening to this place.’
He told me however that two years before he had had his journal stolen and written it out again and that it was better second time around.
‘Something about it going through the filtration of memory, I reckon.’
I thanked him for his cheering thought and walked over to interrupt Barry who was involved with a small group of well-heeled tourists at the far end of the bar.
I had a parting question for him.
‘Shoot, mate.’
‘David Ricalde says that to him Manu is Peru.
Biological diversity is the most important thing Peru has.
It's the basis of his feelings of nationalism.’
‘Right.
So?’
‘So my question is, what's Peru to you?’
‘Birds and adventure.
There are places here where no white man's ever been.
Every day is an adventure.’
‘That sounds very egocentric compared to David's thinking.
You're saying it's just a place where you're happy.’
‘Exactly.
You know the last time I went back to Britain, I was going for a month but I changed my flight and left two weeks early.
I was bored.
All these guys on the Underground from the airport, all pretending the others don't exist.
You couldn't get half a dozen Peruvians together without them gabbing away like crazy.
So let's just say I'm happy here.
I'm not going to philosophise about it.
Here though, mate, let me buy you a drink.
I mean, I'll never see you again.
And listen, be careful on that train.
Three places to watch: Sicuani, Juliaca and Puno itself.
I tell you, some gringo in your carriage will be robbed.’
This last was spoken with Old Testament certitude.
I paid Barry the fifteen dollars we had agreed on for a small, black Andean Equipment daysack to keep my new notebooks in and left him selling jewellery to his tour group.
‘No, this is expensive stuff, mate,’ he told me.
‘Hand-beaten silver with pre-Colombian stones.’
‘None of the Worst’
CUZCO TO PUNO
I slept poorly, dreaming of circuses and fairs; packed places, like David Copperfield's London, where fear and deceit were bred.
‘My aunt had…this other general opinion…that every man she saw was a pick-pocket.’
My mind played over my first robbery.
The man's face was indistinct, a tall mestizo with large, softly frowning features, but I still heard his voice clearly: ‘Sucio.’
Said only the once, but in memory so deep I could analyse each syllable.
‘Su-cz-o .’
Said slowly, but now I realised like someone acting concern — the first syllable went amateurishly low — not genuinely shocked and disgusted.
I heard the fat man who had a room beneath me retching violently to spit his all.
I imagined he was filling a plastic screw-top, getting ready for ‘work’.
My thoughts rippled out to the airport, then to the bus to Chinchero, to the large numbers of people who were there, who must have seen what was going on, who did nothing.
Was this tacit cooperation?
Acceptance?
Approval?
Or just the lethargy of the snake?
Was it part of David Ricalde's we-are-poor-therefore unreality?
And the official bodies themselves seemed to ignore the reality of all these robberies.
At the tourist office I had asked, ‘Where do I get the bus to Chinchero?’
‘Arcopata.’
And the woman put a neat cross at the spot.
No mention of, ‘But be careful, it's a notorious place for set-ups, for bag-snatches, for trouser-slashing.’
And no policemen in sight.
In the darkness I had an image of the loss of my writing.
It had to do with height and space.
As I wrote my journal I had felt the thickness of the left-hand side grow pleasantly fat — a satisfying fertility.
I mounted the steps of each morning with a neat day and date.
And then suddenly, it was gone.
It was like diving into a huge space, a timeless space.
The past — where was it?
The future — what  was the point?
It was a feeling almost of free-falling light-headedness.
I was falling, falling, shouting louder, louder:
Soy escritor Soy escritor Soy ESCRITOR.
I had never really felt it before or known what it meant.
Usually I looked sheepish — it is the custom in Scotland — and claimed ‘to write a bit’.
Now, now that all was lost, lost too was the vanity of the bulging notebook, the diversity of material, the forward-looking pleasure of unpacking my treasures and giving them some kind of independent life.
And all that was left was this bloodied, raw desire to write; to acknowledge ‘this also happened; this also will be written about.’
I saw in my eyes not just the trace of a hunted look, but a determination: ‘Soy escritor .’
Some things you cannot steal.
For five hours I had thought about and written about Machu Picchu at the highest level of my consciousness.
And certain kinds of knowledge you can only find out one way — through pain.
In this, loving and writing, I discovered, are similar pursuits.
If your love was true
and you lose it, what have you lost?
Not the act of loving.
That's yours.
If your words were true
and you lose them, what have you lost?
Not the act of writing.
That's yours too.
In loving, in writing, how can you
hold on to a finished thing?
Whether
you lose it or put it beneath glass,
it is the act itself you must cherish.
For what's left when the moment has passed,
the wind will carry.
Despite you.
Before I set off for the station for the train to Puno, I loaded up with imodium to seal my loose, nervous bowels; folded my chain and felt its weight in my hand.
There was no way I wanted to be robbed again and I determined if I had to stand in a queue it would be with this chain in my hand.
I took deep breaths and felt for my moneybelt and the stiffness of traveller's cheques secreted about me.
I thought of the  fearful apprehension of the drug smuggler at the start of Midnight Express , his heart thumping, beads of guilty sweat on his lips.
I paid the hostel owner three thousand intis for the last time and he handed me the neat slip, carefully signed and stamped twice: ‘Hostal America PAGADO.’
I shook his hand, before stepping out into the street.
It had been a strange place, Hostal America.
Situated only fifty metres up Plateros from the Plaza de Armas, it was central and quiet, yet unpopular with most gringo tourists: its staple was a thin trickle of Peruvians who had come to Cuzco for work.
Although a spacious courtyard made the small rooms light, and I was well served by a bed, table and chair of Van Gogh simplicity, I could not deny that an air of melancholy hung over the place.
The owner, a bachelor in his fifties, slept on a camp-bed in the vestibule of the hostel and cooked on a two ring stove in the courtyard, mostly a kind of vegetable stew as far as I could make out.
Every morning I heard the tinny radio play as he washed, hung up and ironed sheets.
One afternoon I had seen him painfully sewing on a shirt-button.
The outside door was always chained and, when I had rung from outside or inside the hostel, I would hear his shuffling, forward-leaning run, his muted ‘Buenas.’
His help on the other hand had been a short, rude young man with a baseball cap glued to his head, whose greetings always verged on the cheaply insulting: ‘Hey-hey-hey!
Bue-nas .’
I was sure he had had a gloating look in his eyes when he found out I had been robbed.
But then I was riding the curve of prejudice.
I arrived at the station in good time and chained my travel-bag to the luggage rack.
It was turning into a bright, sunny morning.
I had a window seat.
Breathing deeply, I told myself: ‘Relax.’
The carriage filled up.
My space was shared with a girl going to Juliaca, holding a large cardboard box on her lap, and a young family of campesinos.
The mother of the two children, a toddler and a baby, could not have been more than twenty.
The husband was drunk.
I had seen his arm around the weeping mother he was leaving.
His eyes were hooded and white spittle had formed at the corners of his mouth.
He leaned over the breastfeeding baby, giggling inanely.
Occasionally I heard ‘el gringo’, followed by some mumbled comment and a laugh.
Relax , I told myself again; but was relieved when finally he slumped over into sleep.
I came to know the mother's breasts well.
She left one out as both she and the baby dozed; or she placed the baby on the table and lifted a breast to its mouth.
It was impressive how she coped with the two children for the twelve hours to Juliaca while her boorish husband slept, the baby's shawl across his face.
Like most of the Peruvian children I had seen, the toddler appeared self-sufficient already.
She made few demands on her parents but sat quietly, playing with an orange in a plastic mug.
A quarter of Peruvian children die before their first birthday and those who survived, it seemed, learned early not to expect anything; there were never any toys.
Though she had the liquid brown eyes, the shiny black hair of a child, already this toddler had the little rough hands of a campesina.
The landscape changed from the lushness of the Urubamba valley into the sweeping emptiness of bare hills, the sky holding the rare fleck of a red-backed hawk or the huge wingspan of the black-chested buzzard eagle.
The train chugged down to the mountain-ringed plains where sheep and alpaca were herded by bowler-hatted women.
Every so often a mongrel dog would run from a mud-brick farmhouse and race the train furiously.
What improbable thoughts could they have been having?
The track was like a river bringing life, custom and commerce.
At the bigger settlements small groups of ‘merchants’ squatted along the track selling everything from sheep's heads, staring blindly on the blanket before them, to rusting automobile parts.
All around the region of Lake Titicaca the women traditionally top colourful costumes of billowing skirts and woollen jerseys with bowler hats.
I thought of the corruption of the North American Indians' dress and the sullen dejection Robert Louis Stevenson had observed in the ragged groups of defeated Indians which gathered around his train as it moved through the Great Plains.
This train — every train!— was so packed you would think there was no way through the carriage, but a constant stream of vendors, women and boys mostly, moved through between stations, dipping and ducking, squeezing past passengers.
‘¡Chicles!
¡Chicles!
¡Chicles!’
‘¡Chocolate!
¡Cigarrillos!’
‘¡Ceramicas!’
‘¡Patatas rellenas!’
‘¡Gaseosas!’
The women entered with great baskets on their shoulders.
They pulled away brown paper to reveal chunks of roasted lamb or ribs or potatoes stuffed with spicy rice.
Portions were given in scraps of paper and eaten with the fingers, the locals expertly peeling a boiled potato like a squirrel with a nut.
But through it all, the forbearance, stoicism and good humour of the Peruvians was again impressive.
Some of them stood uncomplainingly for ten hours, only shoving a bundle past them a little more forcefully than necessary.
I could not imagine such sweet temper if the Edinburgh to London train had been similarly jammed, or pace Roland, the Frankfurt to Cologne.
Still, it was not only the thick smells of fat and spices, making me clench my buttocks, which dulled my enjoyment of this journey.
I had felt for the first time a gnawing loneliness, finding echoes of familiar landscapes in the sweep of a glen, the gentle bend of a river.
I was thinking it would be nice to spend some time travelling with someone else, to share the strain but, as we entered the darkness which had me constantly glancing up to check the shadow of my bag, my only companion was the bearded, dark-eyed twin who stared back at me from the occluded window.
The tracks split Juliaca like a western cow town.
I had noted that the Handbook called Juliaca ‘lawless’.
But, with its dimly lit rows of mud and brick house-huts and deeply rutted mud roads, it looked more abandoned than free.
Just before we arrived at the station, the lights came on.
People gathered their belongings, my ‘companions’ among them, and most of the train emptied.
I stood up to stretch my legs, to rub my put-upon bum, when suddenly there was an eruption at one end of the carriage and an American shouted, ‘Hey, watch it!
They tried to set us up!’
And three men hurried through the carriage before an American woman's shout, ‘They got my bag!
They got my bag!
Everything!
They got everything!’
My heart sinks and the lights go out: the carriage doors are mysteriously locked.
‘Some gringo in your carriage will be robbed.’
A Swedish couple and a German guy sitting near me were on their feet, that sickened expression on their faces too.
The Frenchman from the tourist police the day before had been sitting opposite the victims.
He called to me, ‘Hey, watch your stuff, eh!
Here, there's space.
Come and join us.’
I unchained my bag and did so.
I remembered the overweight, middle-aged American couple  when they boarded the train; both carried green backpacks on their chests and had what looked like an assortment of small army hold-alls on a belt around their waists.
Easy meat.
It turned out the travel agent had told them their tickets were for tourist class where they would be safe.
But they had been issued with first class tickets.
Tourist class: 30,000 intis.
First class: 5,800 intis.
‘Everywhere is robbers.’
A tall French-Canadian and a Japanese-American girl who sat with them had taken the precaution of handing their luggage over to someone in tourist class where the doors were locked for the duration of the journey.
How it happened.
Five guys.
Two talk to the couple, offering them special hotel deals etc.
The other two crowd round while the fifth crawls or reaches beneath the seat and grabs the bag.
‘I told them,’ Bernard whispered to me, ‘tie your bags up on the rack but they wouldn't listen.’
Bernard was on a round the world trip and he had a system worked out for the South American leg that seemed to be based on the storming of Himalayan peaks.
He had a large backpack with him but he was going back to La Paz: he had left another bag and more valuables there while he made his assault on Cuzco.
He would then take these on to Lima to leave with a friend for the next stage of his journey.
He had photocopies of everything everywhere.
Still, he was not optimistic.
‘So far I am lucky, but I know sometime it will happen.’
With his long face and straw-coloured hair pulled back in a half-hearted ponytail, he reminded me of a youthful Donald Sutherland; the same doomy seriousness suddenly lightened by a wry humour.
What the lady had lost were clothes and make-up.
I told her to make up a list of the contents now for her deposition the next day as I had forgotten to mention much of what was in my bag.
I told again how it had happened to me, and the trouser-slashing too.
‘Tell as many people as you can how it happened,’ Barry had said.
And I did so: the Ancient Mariner but without his enthusiasm, knowing that my story would spread out in waves, carried by travellers inside and outside South America.
‘And there was this one guy and he was a writer and he lost…’
‘Wow, how dreadful.
I wouldn't mind losing my stuff but I'd hate to lose my films.
I mean, they're memories.’
And in my mind I saw them reaching between their legs to clutch their precious bags.
As a dim, brown light from Juliaca station filtered through the carriage, a league table of the most dangerous Latin American  countries was drawn up.
It went: Colombia (‘It's worse there, they don't do tricks, just knife you and rob you.’),
Peru (‘Machu Picchu, Okay.
But lots of people aren't even risking that, just flying over the whole mess.’)
and Brazil.
The sandy-haired, handsome French-Canadian, Gilles, worked as a tour guide in Rio.
Now standing commandingly in the aisle, he delighted in telling stories about the city.
‘Rio is big, it's fast and it's dangerous.’
But he knew where to go, where to avoid and nothing had happened to him.
He had plenty of tales of what had happened to others, though; the most gruesome being a double-headed story about an American tourist who had refused to pay a taxi driver's extortionate rates.
‘He put down the money that had been initially agreed upon.
The taxi driver waited until he was twenty yards away and then shot him.
Both legs.
It's happened twice this year.’
as if it was something only experience could teach, he advised, ‘If they have a gun or a knife, whatever you've got, hand it over.
It's not worth dying or having a slashed face.’
The American woman had tabulated the contents of her sack at four hundred and fifty dollars.
‘Well, clothes are cheap here anyway,’ said Gilles.
‘Yeah,’ she drawled, ‘but I'm sized about twice what these local women are.’
Ten minutes after the robbery, the lights came on.
When the train reached Puno we left it as if on a military exercise.
‘Watch, don't get too close to those in front.
Make space.’
‘Watch those three guys with the limping one in the middle.
Could be a set-up.’
It was raining and it was threatening.
Bernard and I took a taxi to a hostel.
A German tourist we met there, who had come tourist class from Cuzco, told us how she had given money and pens at each stop to the children who crowded the carriage windows.
‘I don't like doing it,’ she said, ‘but I don't like not doing it.’
Whether you beg from the gringo or steal from him, he can afford it, eh?
I remembered some graffiti scratched on the inside of a toilet door in the medina at Fez:.
‘This is the only place they can't get your dirams from you.’
In the morning Bernard went off to La Paz.
I gave him the wish I had decided was most appropriate for South America.
‘Hey, Bernard, none of the worst, eh.’
‘None of the worst.’
I went to change money, then strolled down to the small port to talk to the boat owners about getting to Amantani.
It was a relief to be out of Cuzco.
Compared to that city, Puno had the improvised feel of a settlement.
There was nothing to do, or demanding to be done, but hang around; to visit the market where gringos stoked up on alpaca jerseys much cheaper than in Cuzco.
I felt my shoulders relax a little, thinking of the tranquil week ahead.
I met Gilles holding court with some fresh tourists in a café.
An Israeli couple were going to Cuzco then flying to Lima.
I warned them about the airport.
‘How did it happen?’
I sketched the details.
‘Oh, that one.
I found out about that in Buenos Aires.’
‘Yea, they do it in Rio too.
It's in the Handbook .’
‘You've got to wrap the strap around your foot.’
I thought to myself, they would have razored that easily; but I suddenly felt inadequate.
I remembered our family friend chalk-haired Auntie Irene, Great World Traveller, whose suitcase had been slashed in Cuzco, looking up at me and saying, ‘Oh, but they won't try anything with you.
The size of you!
You'd just give them a real good biff.’
I had obviously forgiven myself far too easily; and saying to myself I had gained from the loss in any way was just pure sophistry.
It was like revisiting that horrible first sinking feeling.
The talk had moved on to Brazil's thieves, particularly Rio's, leaving me feeling vulnerable again — like a man with one leg.
I went to the busy market with Gilles to buy fruit and candles for Amantani.
Being robbed is losing the confident skin you have grown naturally; it is to know it can happen to you and if it has happened once…
The non-robbed make more relaxing if complacent company and Gilles, big loudmouth that he was, gave out an air of confidence that was appealing to me at the time.
Also, he had given me his number in Rio.
‘Call me, eh.
It's a big city; you've got to know what you're doing.
But you've got a friend there now.’
I did phone him when I got to Rio a couple of months later.
His wife answered and I heard a background conversation before she came back to the phone.
‘You the Scottish guy, right?
Leave your number and Gilles will call you.’
I knew he would not but I was not too disappointed.
I had got over my nerves by then (was even  thinking Travels With My Angst might not be the most suitable title for my book) and was able to take a more even view of the handsome tour guide who had confessed to me, ‘This has been a good trip for me.
Three things I've always wanted to do: go to Machu Picchu, put my foot in Lake Titicaca and make it with an oriental chick.
And this trip I've done all three.
You've seen my little Japanese, yeah?
Not bad, yeah?
Yeah?
And she's a lively little thing too.’
That night, sleep once again eluded me.
Dogs barked in the cold, thin air.
One started a base line ruff…ruff…ruff …
Another overlaid that with a more improvisory woof-woof…woof-woof-woof …
More joined in.
Like a camera my restless mind followed the rabid mongrels of Puno as they roamed down the narrow streets, through the tight patchwork of market stalls, over the rubble-lined railway track, to fight at last over a pair of cow's horns I had seen earlier topping a pile of refuse.
Still joined, the central bone was spotted with gristle and blood.
Adrift at last 
AMANTANI
I
It was a three-hour ride to Amantani in a small, partially covered boat across Lake Titicaca: one hundred and thirty miles long by forty-one miles wide; at 3,812 metres the highest navigable water in the world.
I had bought my one-way ticket from an agency near the harbour for five thousand intis (roughly three dollars at that time).
A serious American tourist had bought his round trip ticket from an agency in the centre of Puno and had paid twenty-eight thousand intis.
(‘Everywhere there is robbers.’)
‘I don't mind,’ he mumbled unconvincingly, ‘I've only got two weeks' vacation.
Don' wanna waste it haggling.’
Of course Lake Titicaca is renowned for more than impressive statistics and a name like a birdcall.
For it was from its icy blue waters that the first Sun Emperor Manco Capac and his sister-wife emerged — one legend has it they came from the Island of the Sun, now in Bolivian waters.
Manco Capac carried with him a golden staff.
Wherever it sank, there they would found a new kingdom.
They journeyed through the Andes, the rocky landscape repelling the staff until it sank in a valley in the centre of the earth.
This was to be the site of Cuzco.
However, centuries before this mythical event, the Tiahuanuco culture had swept across Peru, earning Lake Titicaca its historical reputation as ‘the cradle of Andean civilisation’.
Our boat took a short stop-over at one of the unlikely floating islands of Uros.
These islands, of which there are about forty, are made out of layers of tortora reeds, and each year the islanders must add fresh straw as the floor is tramped down and the bottom of the island rots.
Simple tent-shaped straw huts stood on the spongy surface with fish-tails at their doorways and rumpled blankets inside.
Pigs rooted about the matted floor.
Women offered tapestries and models of  the moon-shaped canoes moored there, made out of tightly bound bundles of reeds.
Three to four hundred Indians, most of them Catholics, now live like this on the scatter of islands.
When the Incas controlled this area, I was told by The Rough Guide to Peru (my chattier, more colourful back-up to the ‘bible’), ‘they considered the Uros so poor — almost sub-human — that only a section of hollow cane filled with lice was required from them as a monthly tribute.’
I doubted they could afford much more today, but the small dirty children seemed happy enough on their thirty by twenty yards of straw.
A cynic among us suggested the people were brought out in the early morning for the tourists to snap their unlikely habitat.
Whatever the arrangement, neither side let the other down.
Give.
Give.
Give.
Snap.
Snap.
Snap.
And again snap.
Yet when Luzma, my sympathetic travel agent, took me in a taxi down to contrabando in Cuzco, it had not been to buy a camera.
I had needed to replace my torch, nicked in Nazca, and my alarm.
‘Bring nothing with you,’ she had advised and, laughing uproariously, told me to keep the taxi window up.
This was Peru as farce.
‘They just reach in and snatch,’ she squealed.
‘What a place!’
The market had been dense as a souk, tables heaved with cameras, yet I had not been tempted.
For long before my camera had been stolen I had noticed the unhealthy reliance people had on photographs, and their ability to take them, to make sense of what they saw.
What was a suitable response to beauty?
‘The Valley of the Moon was really good.
I shot a whole thirty-six in an hour.
That's how good it was.’
A suitable response to grandeur?
‘Machu Picchu?
I took about four rolls.
Beauties.’
Or to poverty?
The same.
It precluded any necessity to make sense of something yourself, to make real connections.
For me, not having one was strangely liberating and concentrating: there was no way I could postpone the moment.
Still, sometimes when I saw a camera lifted to a scene I would like to have shared back home, I felt a twinge of loss and was suddenly conscious of my idle hands, like someone who has recently given up smoking.
Out of interest and this bitter loss, I had even started to collect snippets of ‘Camera Stories’ instead.
Like this conversation I overheard on Uros.
ENGLISH GIRL (walking around the island as if she's lost something important): I left my camera in Ecuador.
I just didn't  want to risk it.
But there are times like now when I really miss
AMERICAN (whose girlfriend is furiously snapping): Yeah, know what you mean.
After we lost our camera we could have bought another one at the market, but we thought they were over-priced.
So what happened?
We spent the most exciting six weeks of our lives without a fucking camera because we didn't want to spend eighty dollars.
Fade on two heads, shaking.
The island of Uros we visited lay in the middle of the sheltered Gulf of Chucuito.
The rooted islands of Amantani and Taquile lay beyond it, like guardians, one at each side of its neck.
A Californian with a thick blond pelt, face daubed with sunblock and a group leader complex whooped away the silence on the roof of the boat.
But the sun's rays reflected wickedly off the intense blue waters of the lake, so it was from the small window of the launch that I — a different creature by far— watched the pyramid shape of Taquile drift by, and the few kilometres of Amantani come into view.
From the approach Amantani looked barren, rocky and sparsely inhabited.
I wondered if this had been the right place to come at all.
From our mooring at the pier, panting in the heat, we walked up a long steep, straight track, which led to the main village where accommodation in private houses was to be allocated; there were no hotels or pensiones.
The Handbook suggested a Ricardo Quispe Mamani who also had a small restaurant on the main square.
His heavily built wife showed me my room and soon I was on the end of a bench in the small dark restaurant, supping soup with the few day-trippers; listening to their stories.
‘There was a field of women working and I thought, that'll make a good photograph,’ the camera-bereft girl began.
‘I climbed down the banking and took this photograph.
All of a sudden this woman downs her hoe and runs up to me demanding money.
Well, I don't have anything on me, so she grabs my sunglasses and races away across the field.
She wasn't young either.
Anyway, gallant Chris comes down and rescues my sunglasses.
It ends up they stone him as he walks away.’
Snap!
The next day I would take a brand-new notebook from my bag.
It measured six inches by four and was three quarters of an inch  thick, with thread-bound pages.
I would open its black and white marbled cover and, beneath my name and address, write ‘Amantani, 12 April 1989’ and then, as neatly as possible, the plagiarism, deeply felt, ‘SPEAK MEMORY’.
And to ease my memory, to free from it some of the words, the phrases I had already written — precious seeds — I would walk and walk; walk like a man without a camera, who only has his diary to record what he sees.
II
I am standing with Joe, a round the world Australian, beneath eucalyptus trees, looking over a landscape that can be read like a Breughel.
(‘If you can just get me between these trees with the mountains in the background.
Oh yes, that's one for the wall!’)
Neat fields slope down to the still water.
A woman bent with a bundle of vegetables passes along a stony path.
A young girl skips down the steep path with a small sack of potatoes.
There is a slurp in the silence, as a man digs with a hand-plough.
The sharp smell of the eucalyptus surrounds us.
‘Well, I've only got one thing to say to you,’ says Joe, as I wave him and the other day-trippers off: ‘Lucky bastard!’
I walk round the rocky coast, clambering over many walls, and am baited by three small boys.
They go off whistling when it is obvious I'm not going to give them anything.
Something in me still revolts at an outright demand: it draws me into explanations of the connection between money and work.
Calvinist dullard!
The boys agree.
With the catapults they use to keep birds from the crops, they launch a couple of parting stones far over my head.
I climb up to my room from the small courtyard by a steep wooden ladder and stoop through the doorway, as I must through all the doorways here.
The room is about ten feet by twelve with pink adobe walls and a buckled floor.
Three small windows — and the door left open — make the room light.
If I squint at one window, I look over the plaza.
Somehow on this rich, fertile island, a centrepiece has been contrived of dull concrete.
Four sparse squares of grass surround a clumsy stone plinth with the incongruous bust of Miguel Grau, a seriously mutton-chopped Peruvian hero, sitting sternly on top.
On two sides of the square are houses of mud-brick and concrete; on the other two the barn of a church with its squat, square bell-tower and  the municipal building.
Any sense of proportion these two buildings may have had has been ruined by the crudest crazy-paving kind of plasterwork.
The other two windows look over the thatched roof of the kitchen hut to a stand of eucalyptus trees, the waters of the lake and the mainland peninsula of Capachica.
The room is furnished with two iron beds, a shaky table and a stone stool that Roberto, the thirteen-year-old son, has dragged in for me.
The sun has just gone down.
I sit in my room by candlelight, the distant black silhouettes of land through the window strangely calming.
I am adrift at last.
I hear steps up the wooden ladder.
It is Juanita, the girl, with baby Sophia on her back.
I noticed her hanging around the bar, staring through its window, while I ate my fish and potatoes.
Claris, the toddler, comes in soon after her.
Juanita smiles shyly: ‘She is heavy,’ and nods her head backwards.
Claris looks out from under her limp-brimmed woollen hat and asks me for an orange with a charming broken-toothed smile.
I give her one and they stay watching me — which I gather, in the absence of any attempt at conversation, is the point of their visit — as I write.
‘Muy bueno,’ says Juanita before she leaves.
When the last shouts of the kick and chase footballers have died, Roberto arrives.
He too leans beside me, watching me write.
He flicks through an edge of the notebook.
‘Hay mucho.’
It pleases me to hear it.
‘Come on, Roberto, I'll buy you a Coke.’
I drink a beer as the family move around me, smiling.
Then at eight o'clock, the señora says, ‘Well, shall we go?’
Branches are jammed against the doors and we all retire for the night.
In the night a ferocious hail-storm rattles on the tin roof.
At six in the morning I hear the children laughing, hear the radio, then the scrunching as they rake and stamp through hail which lies like a covering of snow on the shadowed courtyard.
Water drips from the ledges of white hail caught on the straw roofs.
Soon, though, smoke is coming out of the straw-stack and hot sun is turning the water into steam.
The English couple and the blond Californian who are staying one night arrive.
I walk with them round one point of the island, till we see the pyramid of Taquile.
It is very beautiful: the azure  water clear and cold.
Chris, tall, lithe and manly, strips off and goes in for a swim in his panda-briefs.
Two boys arrive after spotting us in the distance.
They pull toy boats made out of old soya bean oil cans.
Pico Flor one boat is called;San José the other.
I give them lollipops, so they perform enthusiastically, showing us the speed of their boats as they skiff them through the water and how many stones they can carry before sinking.
When they decide to go for a swim there's a real rigmarole because of the presence of the English girl.
Eventually they take a plastic sack they've found on the beach, drape it round the pair of them and walk into the water, giggling.
It's soon forgotten though, as is their nakedness.
I think of Frank Meadow Sutcliffe's ‘Water Sprites’, watching them dive badly and execute impressively unimpressive water-tricks: slim, brown sprites.
We return to the village by a twisting route over the back of the island.
‘Didn't I just know it!
Didn't I just know it!’ the Californian curses.
‘The minute I take that last photograph, ten yards on the view's even more beautiful.’
In the afternoon there's a big volley-ball game in the school grounds.
The girls, all the same small, stocky build, play in bare feet or in sandals in thick, flared skirts and white, embroidered blouses.
They play with good humour, their identical pigtails bouncing on their backs.
As I write by candlelight Ricardo Quispe Mamani himself climbs up to my room.
The visiting is unannounced, relaxed and natural.
I think of the visiting in a Scottish west coast crofting community described by Alasdair MacLean in Night Falls on Ardnamurchan .
There, you knew you had a night visitor when he was sitting beside you.
Ricardo sits on my bed holding his radio to him.
When we start to speak he turns it off.
He asks me my country and comments on my notebooks.
I tell him I am a writer and that I was robbed in Cuzco Airport and lost camera, films and all my writing, so I have come to a tranquil place to try to remember.
‘Mala gente.
Bad people,’ he says.
‘Mala, mala gente.’
He is slightly built, his shoulders hunched.
Tonight his face is framed by one of the intricately patterned, knitted skull-caps with earflaps that are traditional wear here for the clear, cold nights.
He has large, wide-set, brown liquid eyes and a broad, ready smile.
He exudes gentleness and honesty and, for me, speaks slowly and deliberately.
‘Here,’ he says, ‘we work.
The men and the women and the children.’
He shows me the  calluses on his palms.
‘We work hard because it is all done by hand.
We have no machinery, no animals to help us, not even a donkey: we need all the land there is for ourselves.
But it is better than robbing.’
‘Yes, I think so.’
‘Here on Amantani, there is no problem.
You can leave everything, anywhere.
No one will touch it.’
He picks up a novel I'm reading.
‘This book: if you lose it somewhere, someone will pick it up and return it to you.
Once, in one house a tourist left passport, money, everything in the bed.
The house owner found it and ran with it to the boat.’
He smiles.
‘The tourist was very happy.’
Roberto arrives and Ricardo tells him about my robbery.
‘They do the same to us,’ he continues.
‘They do like this,’ and he pulls his son's woollen hat over his eyes and frisks him.
Roberto blinks and smiles, then picks up the novel and my small dictionary and balances them one in each hand.
‘Feel the difference,’ he tells his father.
The señora now arrives to be told the story.
She skims through the novel which seems to fascinate them.
(It wouldn't if they could read it: an overblown sci-fi called Contact by Carl Sagan.
But beggars can't be…
) She sits in silence for a few minutes, simply to breathe in the company of others, then goes and brings me my soup, followed by potatoes, onion and a fried egg.
At half past seven it's curtains.
I drift off to sleep smelling the sweet smell of the straw mattress, but I'm woken by driving rain.
There are no dogs here; the only sound is the weather.
All morning it pours.
The lake has become a grey, forbidding sea.
Speak, Memory .
When the rain stops I set off for a walk in the cool, after-rain air.
Along the main trails, the width of a pavement with walls like bulwarks on each side, there's a constant traffic, involving all ages.
Husband and wife pass, the wife either spinning or knitting; for the island economy depends on sales of its fine weaving and knitting.
(The tiny straw baskets they weave are almost bird-like in their perfection.)
Behind them tramp the children like miniature adults, small hoes sticking out of their bundles.
From the high fields, figures come down the track laden with potatoes or with a bundle of mint, the scent of which lingers in the air after them.
In the stillness you can hear calls from the hillside half a mile  away.
Some are calls to each other; some to the gringo.
‘Hola!’ they shout, ‘Hola!’
I hear pronounced heavy breathing behind me.
A small boy catches up with me.
‘Dame caramelo.
Give me a sweet.’
I tell him I don't give to people who can't say please.
He tuts disappointment.
I repeat and he catches on with a flowery ‘Por favor’ and a heartfelt ‘Gracias.’
Many of the children are shy: some girls pass, tilting their heads away from my greetings.
But others, like the small boy I recently encountered, are hardened and bold.
‘¡Dame plata!’ they shout.
‘¡Dame caramelo!’,
‘¡Dame lapicero!’— Give me money/a sweet/a pen — their rough brown hands extended.
It's just a try-on that's worked before, delivered like a statement, not with the desperation and dependency of the displaced, urban campesino child whose need has become so much greater.
When it doesn't work they turn away, none the unhappier it would seem.
At times I think of the first contacts the people of St Kilda had with the outside world.
I imagine the same shyness, the same brazen demands.
The geography of the island is simple.
On each side the inhabited coastal strip rises steeply from the water's edge; rises to the two volcanic peaks of Pachamama and Pachatata.
‘Peaks’ is actually to give the wrong impression, anywhere else they would be no more than hills; but on Amantani they give a commanding view of Lake Titicaca and make you feel as if you're on top of the world.
A trail marked with simple stone arches every half mile or so leads to Las Ruinas on top of each, but it's easy to lose yourself in the maze of secondary trails which weave between the small fields.
The landscape reminds me of the west coast of Ireland, of Inishere, the smallest of the Aran Islands on which I once spent a few days — the same tradition of building walls to clear land as much as to protect.
And everywhere you look there's evidence of the back-breaking work it's taken to create this landscape.
Walls burst with volcanic stone, a rich, porous red, like vegetables that have flowered and spoiled.
Coming to the top of Pachamama, panting like a dog in the torrid heat and thin air, I trudge over a mass of grey shale, each shattered step clear in the silence.
I look down the other side of the island on to tall fields of barley, stands of eucalyptus.
Pachamama has a round walled enclosure about sixty feet in diameter.
The entrance has been filled with stones, but I can see  a sunken area inside making a small arena, in the centre of which there's a red stone three feet high the shape of a cotton reel and, in a round black patch, evidence of a fire.
Pachamama, the mother, looks over to Pachatata, the father, its square enclosure obvious about three quarters of a mile away.
More thick dry stone arches connect the two ruins and lead the eye into a singular landscape.
Pachatata is a perfect high arc.
From its stone quadrangle, fields ripple out in neat sections, organic as the ribs of a leaf.
As elsewhere in Peru, this whole hillside has been ploughed by hand: the animal-drawn plough was unknown in Inca times and is still unsuitable for use in the Andes.
Generally, though, the effect is one of stillness, of supreme design: it is only in passing a family raising picks over their heads to break the deep brown clods that you consider the huge effort which has made this landscape.
I pass through the small valley between the ruins, through a field where a group of women and children are shearing the small island sheep.
It's like a pastoral.
The older woman and two younger work while the three girls dance around, jump on and off walls, till my presence quells them.
A few fields have the remains of small sunken stone dwellings, intimate as those at Skara Brae.
I sit on a flat stone in one — the straw thatched roof would just have cleared my head — imagining what was kept in the neat stone alcoves.
It's cool in here, watching the green lizards' short bursts over the stones, feeling the sun's work on my ear tops.
‘¿Inca ruinas?’
I ask a man whose family are working in a row at the digging.
‘Sí.
Todo.’
Pachatata's square is larger than the circle, but has a similar arena;, in the centre of it too the tell-tale black scar of a fire.
From here you can see clearly the frieze of mountains around Lake Titicaca rising steeply from the water and the spits of land which thrust themselves towards Amantani.
(In the far distance are the snow-capped peaks of the Bolivian Cordillera Real where I will be heading soon.)
Taquile sits like a huge limpet on the peerless blue waters.
The effect is such you would think a giant mountain range had been flooded and only the peaks are left showing above the waterline.
Walking down towards the pueblo again, seeing the roomy spread of small farms, the elegant eucalyptus trees which shade them, a handful of birds break from the tall lupins.
They are shaped like giant  kingfishers and in the sunlight they appear to be golden.
Yes, not the bright, vivid yellow of yellow-hammers, but golden.
Their call is like the peewit, but here it doesn't sound melancholy like those peewits over Scotland's moors and ruined crofts.
Here its two-syllable song is for COLOUR: the yellow of the small flowers called solinas, which grow wherever is not cultivated, the bright green health of the plants, the light on the red volcanic rock and that glancing sapphire blue of the lake
I am intrigued by the fires — the continuation of some ancient, Inca ceremony perhaps?— so when Ricardo climbs up to my room this evening, I am ready with questions.
He tells me the ruins have nothing to do with the Incas, that they were built after the Incas were here.
‘But the Incas were here?’
I ask.
‘Yes, but they never left anything.’
‘Then who built the ruins?’
‘The people of Amantani after the Incas.’
‘And what is their significance?’
Ricardo tells me they are part of a very ancient belief.
‘That's still celebrated?’
I advance slowly.
‘I saw evidence of fires.’
‘Yes.
It is on the Day of Pachatata and Pachamama, the twentieth January each year.
At midday all the people from Amantani dress up in traditional costume and they go up to the two centres.
Everyone eats coca leaves and makes good prayers — oraciones — for one hour.’
‘And when you pray, who are you praying to?’
‘A Dios y a la tierra.
To God and the earth.’
‘And what do you pray for?’
‘For the flowers, for growth, for our food.’
He explains there is a man called a curandero, a shaman, on both sites.
After the prayers the curandero ritually burns coca leaves on the fire and everyone leaves the enclosures for a feast of specially prepared local food.
The feast over, both groups descend into the valley where they dance and sing for about an hour.
‘Without alcohol,’ Ricardo assures me.
‘We are not drunkards.’
Then each dancer goes back to his own community.
‘And what,’ I ask, ‘is the origin of this belief?’
‘Many years ago the people worked the land.’
This is a living tale told by a living flame.
‘They worked hard but things wouldn't grow.
The plants bore little food.
Then an old man came from Bolivia to Amantani.
He burned coca and he prayed.
And the plants grew and bore food.
The ruins are for this man.
I do not know how old this belief is, but it is very ancient.
My father had it and his father and his father.
I have it and Roberto has it.’
‘And the Day of Pachatata and Pachamama — is it more important to you than Christmas?’
‘Oh yes, much more.
It is the most important day of the year tor the people of Amantani.’
‘I met a man at Machu Picchu who was a little bit Inca.
He said the sun was his father, the earth was his mother, the water was his mother…’
‘Yes, that is the Inca belief.’
‘Do you believe in anything like that?’
‘No, no.
Nothing like that!
Solamente en Dios y la tierra.’
I nod understanding and think of Hugh MacDiarmid's lines in ‘Island Funeral’ about the islanders being ‘Priest-ridden by convention/And pagan by conviction.’
‘The small stone houses I saw up there — are they Inca ruins?’
‘No,’ he says decisively.
‘These were the houses of Los Hinteles.’
‘Los Hinteles.
Who were they?’
‘They were the first people here, before the people of Amantani.
They lived before the sun.’
‘Before the sun,’ I repeat matter-of-factly.
‘Si, en la oscuridad antes del sol.
In the dark before the sun.
And when the sun appeared they all died and then the people who were to be the people of Amantani came from other islands, from peninsulas in the south…’
Ricardo shows great patience with me as I reach for the dictionary or, using a book and his long fingers, he makes the rituals clear to me.
When his wife arrives to sit quietly on the end of the bed I tell her I've been working her husband very hard.
Many questions.
She smiles with pride.
And the golden bird?
Its name in Quechua, the language of the family, the first language, is ilako .
I walk down the steep path to the harbour.
The small fleet of Amantani boats with their distinctive green plumb-line idle there.
I sit on a rock and listen to the water lap and the boys whistle as they pull their tin boats across the long sweep of the stony bay.
When I climb back up to the pueblo there's a meeting in progress.
The square is full of islanders, the men in trilbies or baseball caps, the women with embroidered black shawls round their shoulders or over their heads.
I lean in the shade against the cool church wall and listen to the Quechua of the mayor, a small man in brown trilby, patterned jersey and jacket, deliver his weekly oration about island matters.
He stands on a set of stone steps which run the length of the square.
Beside him sit the other island dignitaries, the representatives of each of the six communities into which the island is divided.
Around el alcalde (the mayor) there is a respectful, attentive silence.
Behind him, behind the last of the houses, the ancient terraces, which his forebears have shaped and which now shape this community, rise up steeply to the rock escarpment dominating this side of the island.
Left of it, the swell of Pachatata begins.
I continue my afternoon stroll.
From the tall shining broad-beans a little girl in pigtails, wearing a large floppy woollen hat like a flower, raises her head; a small hoe in her hand.
A boy in a baseball cap runs to the wall: ‘¡Dame plata!’
Just fishin'.
A small boy rounds up chickens with a stick twice as long as himself.
Two small, scruffy, dark brown pigs snort in their mud-pen.
Skirts make flashes of colour, passing through the green.
Everyone carries something: potatoes, pails of water, oca — empty hands and backs are few.
Each family-sized field adds to the richness of its neighbours: the shiny, watery mass of barley heads next to the tall spears of broad-bean, the clumpy rows of oca with their bushy heads of clover-like leaves, the delicate purples of pea-flowers.
And all those different greens: the green of rawness, of ripeness, the yellowing green of what's flowered and past, the silvery green of the eucalyptus with the last light on it.
This is a landscape that is always drawing you into itself.
On the Day of Pachatata and Pachamama, you too might pray for its continuance.
But I wonder, how is such an intricate landscape realised?
Tonight Ricardo draws the island in my notebook — two small circles for Pachamama and Pachatata — and divides it like a pie-chart  into four main sections or suyos.
Three of these are allocated to different crops and the fourth lies fallow.
The crops — puro papa (potatoes), pura oca (sweet potatoes) and trigo cebada (wheat)— rotate each year.
Each family has their own fields in each suyo, but everyone works together on the same crop.
‘And who decides which suyo will grow what?’
‘Los Envarados.
Ten men chosen from one of the six communities.
It is an obligation to accept if you are chosen.
No, there is no election;, the choices are usually obvious.
These ten men change each year.
Their duty is to take care of the island.
Cuidar la isla.’
Spoken with pride and affection.
‘It sounds like a good democracy.’
Ricardo smiles broadly.
‘Yes, it is.’
Halfway through a morning's work, I climb down for a coffee.
The children's room is below mine and I can see clothes strung from the ceiling, shoes flung beneath the bed, blankets cast aside.
At the end of Roberto's small bed are cardboard boxes for shelves and his tiny array of treasures: a miniature straw boat, a small pottery bull, a coloured-in picture of an eagle.
I cross the small vegetable patch to the open toilet with its wedged branch support.
The pen of guinea pigs squeaks twice.
Juanita sits in the kitchen and looks up with her embarrassed half-smile/half-laugh when I bend down and step inside.
The stone-built kitchen hut which stands alone is the hub of the house.
It is about nine feet square, its walls and thatched ceiling black with soot.
At one end is the raised stone floor which at one time must have been a sleeping area.
Now it's where the family sit each evening cosy on a rug in the dim smoky light; like the black house dwellers in the Western Isles preferring the warmth of the hearth to the luxury of space.
Along one wall is a low stone table-top, no different from those in the houses of Los Hinteles.
On it there's a paraffin stove for immediate needs (my coffees!), but most food is boiled or fried on a metal construction the size of a large upturned basin which has two openings into which long pieces of wood are fed.
On wooden shelves lie the round, blackened pots and the ends of vegetables, herbs, a bowl of eggs and one of rice.
On the stone floor is a charred-looking frying pan.
The musty smell of concentrated earth, which the people also faintly carry, stirs a memory of dipping my head  deep into the darkness of empty potato bunkers on farm holidays as a child.
Juanita is fourteen.
She tells me she doesn't have to go to school after twelve.
She gives her half-laugh and tells me she doesn't know how old people generally are when they get married.
Last night I remember a young man running past me with a very animated ‘Buenas tardes’.
I saw him later, standing at a meeting of walls, a shy girl keeping her distance.
Island courting.
It's Roberto's thirteenth birthday.
He is small for his age with large brown eyes, a toothy smile, sloping shoulders and a readiness to please.
His uncertainty with strangers is nothing like Juanita's, more the island child's natural reserve.
During his lunch-hour I give him the last orange, a biro and three lollipops, all I can muster, and wish him a happy birthday.
‘Muchas gracias,’ he says.
‘Muchas gracias.’
Like a miniature adult, his head bows slightly and his small hand comes up for a firm adult shake.
In the square I hear the schoolchildren enthusiastically chant one to fifty as I start a late afternoon walk away from the Pachas into the suyo of trigo cebada.
The main path splits the cultivated area.
Above me the reddish escarpment and the red stone of the terraces contrasts with all the fresh greens sketched in long lines.
Below, I look down on the differing surfaces, the differing states of ripeness from light green through to gold.
The late sun setting over the mainland lays a bright path over the water, coming right in at the small bay.
A fisherman is silhouetted there, standing on a rocky promontory.
The light gives a honeyed sheen to the barley and wheat.
I sit on a smooth stone and watch yellow-breasted finches in their dipping flights across the still-warm air.
Following an ancient rhythm people are wending their way home before the light fails.
I hear the panting of a barefoot woman behind me.
She looks about fifty, but bent over and weather-beaten it's hard to tell.
She rests her sack on the wall, reties it and is off, the bulging sack covering her head and her thighs.
‘Enjoying the view?’
It's a young man in sweat top and tracksuit bottoms.
‘Oh, yes, it's beautiful with the sun on the wheat.’
He laughs concurrence.
‘Do you have islands as beautiful as this in your country?’
‘Yes, I think so.
But not at this moment!
At this moment there is nowhere more beautiful than this in the whole world.’
He laughs again, and as the light is fading we walk back to the village, past small boys running hurdy-gurdies; he teaching me plant names for which I can find no translation.
My last day, I walk right around the island.
On its far side the ringing pitch of two men chiselling draws me over.
They wear trilbies over woollen hats and the stones they quarry are large as suitcases.
‘Hello.
It's hot.
Too hot for walking, never mind working.’
‘Yes, it is.
Are you walking round the island?’
‘Yes, it's beautiful.’
‘Yes, it is.
We're working.’
And back they go, their clear notes alone punctuating the silence.
At the archway which divides the suyo of puro papa, where women sit on their hunkers, feet planted in the soft earth, and hack small potatoes out with their hoes, and the suyo of pura oca with its neat rows of bunched, dark green leaves, carriers stop and rest their bundles on the wall.
I stop too; climb the natural embankment and look over the homeward stretch down to the pueblo.
There is a stillness over the waters, a stillness which stretches to the most distant mountain-top.
Reach out: what is not included in this lucid air?
And look for long and, like one of Cézanne's views of the Mediterranean, the water seems as much a vertical blue screen as a horizontal lake.
A man with what appears to be two sacks of potatoes on his back stops and looks up to where I sit.
‘Hola.
Buenos dias.
¿Que tal?’
‘Muy bien, gracias.’
‘¿Qué pais, amigo?’
This is one place where amigo doesn't sound like derision.
‘Escocia.’
‘Escocia,’ he nods.
‘Bueno.
¿Cuantos dias aqui en Amantani?’
‘Mañana, una semana.
Me gusta mucho Amantani.’
‘Si.
Es tranquilo.
Hay aire libre, ameno.’
He trips off on his way.
I look up and sense Amantani floating in this stillness, in a blue limpidity.
Ricardo comes up to my room unannounced as usual.
We shake hands and he sits.
‘You go tomorrow?’ he says.
‘Yes.
I don't want to but I must.’
Again I tell him my route.
He repeats it to himself as if he has trouble lodging it in his mind.
‘Puno.
La Paz.
Lima.’
Slowly, deliberately, as if these places are remote, unlikely destinations.
Even saying them, never mind introducing Brazil, I feel an extravagance, a showy greed for experience.
‘Tomorrow,’ he says, ‘we will sail round the island.
The whole way round.’
His finger makes a wide circle.
‘Muy bueno,’ I say.
‘It'll be like a holiday.’
He smiles.
‘You go tomorrow.
Can you not stay another day to sail round the island?’
Ah, Ricardo, I can see it.
You at the helm of the small, wooden sailing boat with the green line around it.
It will be called Flor de something.
There is just the sound of the water lapping gently at the prow, the occasional laughter from Claris and Victoria.
At each suyo I say, ‘Trigo cebada, puro papa…
Muy bonita,’ and you smile and nod, proud of your island and my delight in it.
‘Will you come back?’ he asks.
‘Ah, it's very expensive between Scotland and here.’
He shakes his head.
Yes, he understands that.
I show him how much I've written here, how good a place it has been for me.
He smiles.
‘All on Amantani?’
‘All this,’ I say, flicking through the pages.
Señora Mamani arrives, edging into the room with her duster, waging her constant war against the flies.
She sits on the edge of the second bed.
She has a flat, round face with eyes close together and a wide smile.
It is a face I have seen on Inca pottery.
She is the quiet and strong mother figure, her full breasts kept half in check by a curtain pin on her blouse.
But tonight both she and Ricardo are pale, earth-tired — the cost of the landscape.
‘Muy cansada,’ she says.
‘Mucho trabajo con puras papas.’
Ricardo bends his head and puts a hand to a yawn that seems to come from deep inside himself.
Always there have been unembarrassed silences between us, but this time they are filled with their exhaustion.
Ricardo takes a finished biro to bits with tired fascination.
He looks up at me.
‘Ah, Tomas, tomorrow, amigo, when you are not here and I am alone, I will be sad.’
He says this twice.
And twice I say it and mean it: ‘Me too, Ricardo.
Me too.’
And sometimes things don't work out the way you expect them to.
When I walk out of the house and through the square on my way to a final peaceful meditation at my favourite bay view in trigo cebada, the young man from last night comes out of a doorway with a large cassette in his arms.
‘Going for a walk?’
‘Yes.’
‘Same place?
Come on.’
He tells me there's no work for him in Amantani, certainly not for the whole year, and he must go to Puno.
He works in the craft business there, making rugs from alpaca.
As he talks a train of small boys returning from school tramps behind us to the beat of the folk-pop tape.
They wear the grey regulation jerseys common throughout Peru and carry small shoulder-satchels.
When we arrive at the spot the cassette is placed on a flat stone and the boys, all high from après-school, gather round, their bright, smiling faces meaning mischief to us both.
They laugh Quechua at me while one removes the volume control and drops it some distance away.
They run off laughing like parrots as my companion shouts after them in disgust.
I sense his slighted dignity and mouth some platitude about boys being boys the world over.
I ask him his name again.
Last night I had no idea how to pronounce it and assumed it was pure Quechua.
He writes it for me.
‘DISLLOKEY’: the double ‘1’ in Spanish gives a ‘yi’sound.
Still I am puzzled.
‘You know,’ he explains, ‘they have them on the radio.
People call me it because I'm always talking.
My real name is Martin Callata Calsin.’
‘Ah.’
We nod at each other.
‘Is your country democratic or communist?’ he asks.
Explaining the politics of my country, the standing of my country, the relationship of my country to England, to Britain, to Mrs Thatcher is one of the great quagmires facing the Scottish traveller.
Not something I want to talk about at this moment.
‘Democratic,’ I answer conclusively.
Then the sun is gone and it's suddenly cold and the distant mountains are their night time black cut-out.
Well, I think, that was it.
Last night was really the night I must value — the night when I was aware of all the gifts Amantani has borne me.
We start off back to the pueblo.
I turn around; one last look.
In one dip in the mountains, where the sun has just sunk, there is a red volcanic brilliance.
Above it, is a cloud so dense it appears to be like a girder, half of it molten.
An orange swathe covers the centre of the island; wings of red cloud hang in the still-blue sky.
I turn back to the path; before me, a bright full moon seals Amantani's late gift.
Back at the house Ricardo immediately pays me another visit.
It is as though he wants to get my record straight before I leave.
This is not paradise either.
We discuss the lack of work, of land.
Land passes from father to son: his is split between himself and his father.
His father grows enough to ‘export’, while all Ricardo's produce is for the family.
His four sisters have all had to leave to find work in Lima, all in artesania.
And if in Amantani there is a season without rain, he also must work in the leather trade in Lima for three or four months to support his family.
No, he doesn't like Lima: ‘Muchos robos en Lima.’
I see the metallic lid of its sky next to Amantani's perfect blue.
‘If it rains in Amantani there is food,’ he says, summing up.
‘If not, triste la vida aqui.’
So I see Amantani at its most fruitful; all the crops shining and tall.
But there is a margin of sufficiency which demands vigorous work and quarter-mastering; earth that takes its tribute of sweat.
Roberto has failed to deliver the promised trout.
The señora sighs relief when I tell her more soup will suffice.
I walk down the broadest thoroughfare on the island, that which leads to the harbour.
In the early sun the quinoa glows a light yellowish-green like cabbage on the turn.
The boatman wears a traditional thick navy woollen three-piece suit over a white woollen shirt.
‘I don't want to leave this island,’ I tell him.
The boat fills up with sacks of produce; with islanders wearing faded trilbies over their woollen skull-caps; with mothers and babies.
Their voices are never raised in greeting — the whole week I can't  remember a shout bar the occasional ‘hola’.
These are island people with an island self-sufficiency in their deep brown eyes.
Silence does not panic them.
When one kneels on the seat I see heels cracked like earth and, on some, toes that seem almost to be growing together like tubers.
The hard life of the earth is the life they know and the one they want to live.
When Disllokey nods to me this morning it is with a distant seriousness, as if he is already bracing himself to lose his identity in the harshly impersonal world across the water.
A Small Matter of Perspective
LA PAZ
‘Well, I burnt all my writing.
It's no big deal .’
‘Huh?’
Had I misheard?
With his amused, unshocked expression, his bush-hat set so jauntily on the back of his head, this American was difficult to take.
‘I'm just trying to get some perspective here,’ he said as I twisted the last coldness from my beer bottle.
Our solitary eyes had arranged this meeting at the restaurant of Hostal Rosario, La Paz.
Now I was thinking my loneliness would be far less bruising.
‘Perspective?’
I gulped.
‘Exactly.
Look at Hemingway…’
‘Oh, aye.’
‘Yeah.
His first wife, Hadley, left a whole valise crammed with manuscripts in a railway carriage.
And Malcolm Lowry…’
‘First draft of Under the Volcano lost when his shack in British Columbia went on fire.
And Carlyle's History of the French Revolution that the maid lit the fire with…’
I knew all these; had already played with them in my mind, from the most inconsequential (Mickey Spillane's ‘another three days' work never hurt anyone') to the most tragic: the story of Joseph de Jussieu and his search for the fever tree.
I reached for my notebook.
‘Here, though, listen to this one.
In 1735, Joseph de Jussieu, aged thirty-one, set out to find the fever tree which cured malaria.
In 1761, that's twenty-six years later’— the American nodded tiredly —‘he was preparing to sail home from Buenos Aires.
The night before his ship sailed, Jussieu left all his material in the care of a servant with strict instructions to guard it because it was of great value.
The next morning the servant and the baggage were gone.
Jussieu wandered through South America for the next ten years.
In I771 he returned to Paris, a broken man.
He was committed to an asylum where he died soon afterwards.’
I looked up, my eyes wide, expecting to find in his an echo of the chill of waste.
But there was only a slight, impatient nodding.
His story was obviously more important than Joseph de Jussieu's — or mine.
Perspective.
His story.
Well, it turned out he used to be a ‘pretty successful writer’, but then he found he was just getting into ‘things that were too weird.’
So he just stopped —‘made that decision’— burned everything he had written and now he just took pictures.
‘Just taking pictures’ was supported by a philosophical edifice that took two bottles of beer to explain and provided lots of opportunity for amused, patronising glances.
It was like spending an evening with a character from Catcher in the Rye , one Holden Caulfield would have designated ‘a phoney from some crummy place like Des Moines or somewhere.’
Once, though, his cool slipped.
‘I was climbing up through this favela; I shouldn't even have been there.
Anyway, I came to this old cemetery and against one wall was this kind of beehive grave affair and someone had broken into one of the graves and pulled out this baby's coffin and smashed it open.
Well, I've never even seen a dead body before — imagine, what with the bones, the shroud and the flies; if I hadn't had the camera between me and it, I don't think I could have looked.
God, I don't know if I should even be talking about it.’
In the end we both felt more comfortable talking about stealing.
But whaddayaknow?
‘Same thing happened to me in Arequipa.
In a café.
Someone picks up a bill from the floor, opens it.
‘Is it yours?’ they ask.
Then I look.
My camera, months of film — gone.
And this happens to me after spending five months in Brazil — in Rio, Salvador, f'chrissake.
Crazy.’
‘So?’
‘So, I run out the café.
A woman points one way but I see a man with a bulge in his coat and I leap on him.
O-o-o-h, man, do I feel the adrenalin!
He just gave right up without a struggle.
They do if you can catch them.
No, Peru's just not the place to be at the moment.’
And why was he in La Paz?
He had been in advertising.
This was how it happened.
‘I was doing a lay-out of a woman in a mink coat and I'm trying to get the flesh tones right and I'm asking myself: hey, how is it every time I do this it comes out wrong?
Then it dawns on me: the model is a Barbie doll , f'chrissake!
Yea, a real Barbie doll.
I gave up the job there and then and headed for Brazil.
I'm not ambitious now.
I just want to  keep travelling.
I go home and people are either getting divorced or remarried and they haven't seen through it all yet.
But I just arrive in La Paz and I think, whew, here I am.’
‘For what?’
‘Well, I was five months in Brazil and I thought then, if I want to get further into South America I need Spanish.
I came here briefly last year and found it the most comfortable of cities to walk about in, so I'm here for two months to learn Spanish.’
‘And then?’
‘Who knows?’
The line, thrown away with a toss of the hand, was a familiar blend of contrived ease and arrogance.
The status of Top Traveller is one that is self-appointed and only has currency among the knots of those tacking their way through the continent with varying degrees of frustration and ill luck.
My American ‘friend’ basked in this small lonely pool and appeared to revel in the uncertainties of the traveller's life.
Not this traveller.
Oh no, not this traveller.
Not that there had been anything problematical about the journey to La Paz — just the normal anxieties.
My gut, after a period of glorious dependability on a diet of potatoes, was bailing everything out again, spurred on by a meal of Lomo (pork)a lo Gordon Blyed from Puno International Restaurant.
A diet of imodium with imodium chasers had meant my moneybelt sat more comfortably around my shrinking waist.
In fact, with my spartan diet and my gentleman's bag which could accommodate only the tiniest of souvenirs (a freedom I thought, compared to others' great domed rucksacks), I began to feel like some travelling ascetic, roaming through ‘the vast cinema of sensation.’
It was an often spectacular bus ride on which the waters of Lake Titicaca were rarely out of sight.
The lake has no drainage system — excess water flows south to the marshes of Lake Poopo then evaporates into sand — so the last of Peru was a sodden plain fringed by snow-capped mountains.
Here colourless villages and mud houses, seemingly built at random, scraped a tired sustenance from the soil and the scrappy flocks of sheep and isolated, tethered cattle.
With Amantani fresh in my mind it seemed to me that more than the cattle were tethered here.
It was some relief to come to the Bolivian town of Copacabana with its huge white cathedral.
From there, after a change of buses and yet  another lunch-time fast, the road climbed up into a bare landscape of mountains sweeping into each other, before it settled into the endless vistas of the high altiplano, a treeless puna 3,962 metres above sea level; home for llamas, alpacas and the Aymara Indians.
It was a strange, discomfiting and disorientating landscape.
I thought about the early Scottish settlers of the Great Plains of America who endured terrible confusions because of the pure space they had never experienced before, except perhaps at sea.
Many hallucinated that they were shrinking or else expanding to fill it.
Here houses looked to me like Monopoly chips: seeing a man cycling over the pathless tundra I scanned hopelessly for a possible point of reference he might have.
Then the shanty-towns began to thicken till suspiciously flimsy concrete blocks announced La Paz which sat cradled deep in the mountains, a crush of modest skyscrapers and stone churches, glowing red in the late sunshine.
After the stasis of Amantani, the joys of travel: movement, new sights, a new country, a new capital, fellow-travellers with whom to swop notes about other countries, other capitals.
And La Paz was a very attractive capital, the highest in the world, built on hills, walkable.
I thought of cold nights in Edinburgh and went everywhere with a relaxation I had rarely felt in Peru.
‘Our position as an extension of the working class is to ally ourselves with the miners and to fight the government's relocation programme,’ read a banner outside the university, which was on strike.
Its forecourt was taken up by miners and students writing such signs, while women and children were stopping traffic, thrusting paper signs over windscreens: ‘We need to eat.’
Mining and the condition of miners has been a running sore in Bolivia since the colonial period when Indians were herded off for certain death in the silver mines of Potosí, at that time the wealthiest city in South America.
I had planned to take a train there; to head south and see more of South America.
Yet I milled around the edge of the crowd at the demonstration feeling completely detached.
It began to pour and I took shelter in a basement café.
I wrote a few postcards — I had more faith in Bolivia's postal service than Peru's — and wondered what I was doing here.
I had worked hard while I was on Amantani, reconstructing the bones of my experiences without the satisfaction of cradling them in apposite language.
Yet I felt at last I had straightened out the  time that had buckled when I lost all my writing.
Now I was in a position to move on; but something had taken root deeper than the superficialities of travelling — a feeling that my story was not here, that something was drawing me back to Peru.
After the initial decision to continue my trip had come the fight to quell bitterness.
The third stage back to health would need to be an attempt to make sense of what had happened to me and why.
The effort of understanding was not being made by me alone.
For months now,El Comercio , Peru's leading daily, had been running articles on Peruvian identity which it called ‘the theme of our time.’
It was the 450th anniversary of the birth of the Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and a double-page spread in El Comercio proclaimed, ‘Garcilaso, simbolo de la peruanidad.’
Garcilaso, the son of an Inca princess and a conquistador, was the author of Comentarios Reales which for four centuries provided the fullest and richest account of Inca society.
He had argued that Spain and Inca Peru had reached a parallel stage of social and cultural development at the point of the conquest, allowing the possibility of fusion.
The subsequent dismemberment of Inca society showed the faint enthusiasm the Spaniards had for this opportunity, yet it was such an idea which had given the term ‘mestizo’ a dignity beyond its racist translations of ‘half-breed’or ‘half-caste’.
In the article Garcilaso was touted as the first American and his work seen as the starting point of ‘a sensibility absolutely new, absolutely Peruvian.’
If so, it was a sensibility developed largely in exile: Garcilaso left Peru when he was fourteen and his history was written decades later.
I had read similar claims for ‘the Peruvian sensibility’ of the poet Cesar Vallejo on the back of an edition of his first collection,Los Heraldos Negros .
This was said to be ‘the first Peruvian book of poetry that does not make tribute to a colonial aesthetic.’
It was published in 1918, over four hundred years after the conquest, and five years later Vallejo began his miserable exile in Paris.
However, titles taken at random from a bookshop in Lima had made it obvious to me that being a Peruvian was a more problematical condition than the simplicity of the Garcilaso/mestizo solution would allow:Peru in Crisis, Who Are We?,
Violence and Crisis of Values in Peru, The Labyrinth of Crisis, The Peruvian Nation — The Trajectory of a Fallacy, Peru in the 90s — A Possible Road, Reports from Anonymous Peru .
(Peru: the very name arose from  a misunderstanding on the part of the Spaniards when Indians told them the name of a river: originally, it was known simply as ‘New Castille’.)
Such a fragile sense of identity, such a ceaseless, hopeless questing, I could not help but sympathise with: how many books had I seen which asked Who Are The Scots?
I sat in the café as the rain showed no sign of letting up and drew up a short list of people I had met with whom I could air my perplexity.
My journey, I realised now, was not one that had begun at fixed point ‘A’ and would run to ‘B’: crossing space — by canoe or donkey or in the footsteps of — was not what it was about.
I felt the whole continent slipping through my fingers, leaving me Peru — a claustrophobic room filling up with terrorism, hyper-inflation, drugs and thieves.
If, as Shiva Naipaul commented, ‘All travel is a form of extinction,’ then Peru seemed a perfect place to experience it.
Rain bounced off the steps at the café's doorway.
It triggered an image of a diver shooting to the surface with a pinhead of breath, his arm like Excalibur.
In his hand he holds the precious end of an old frayed piece of rope, the kind pedlars sold piles of on Lima's Abancay — the beginnings of an answer.
A grand image I have to admit, but then re-entering that room still gave me some anxiety: as my American ‘friend’ surely recognised, I was in need of‘positive visualisation.’
When it stopped raining, I walked streets like rivers to a travel agent and bought a ticket for a flight back to Lima — a real twitcher, in search of‘B’.