

Cleaning as a Science
Historically cleaning has always been a low status occupation.
Despite its importance to society and the fact that it is common to almost all industries cleaning in the main has been regarded as menial, relegated to servants and slaves in the past and, all too often, to the drop-outs, illiterates and failures of today's society.
There is even a saying that indicates how poorly cleaning is regarded ‘Well, if I can do nothing else, I can always sweep the roads’.
Yet the modern road sweeper, more likely than not, is the skilled driver/operator of a highly sophisticated and expensive machine.
Few managers, junior or senior, would qualify for the task.
So it is with cleaning in the food industries.
The tasks involved are sometimes difficult, hard physical labour and at times dangerous.
They also demand skills at least equal to, if not exceeding, the level of skill demanded of the cook, process worker or retail assistant.
They may require elements of microbiology and chemical science as well as organisational ability but they are still generally regarded as unskilled work.
Food industries are somewhat unusual, differing from most activities, in that skilled and sometimes professionally qualified men and women are required to take an active part in the cleaning of their own work areas.
Nevertheless there is an increasing tendency for such workers to regard this function as a separate job, not part of food production or handling, to be carried out by other unskilled people.
This is only to be expected.
The glamorous secretary does not clean her desk space; a skilled fitter does not sweep his part of the factory floor so why should a food worker have to clean?
It is a waste of skills, demeaning to the status of the individual and a deterrent to the recruitment of high quality entrants or so the argument goes.
There is nothing demeaning about cleaning in the food industry.
Some of the problems are highly complex and unique in that lives are at stake depending on their successful resolution.
The life of a business or operation may also be at risk for few industries have such a strong and demanding legal code where failure to comply may result in immediate closure or prosecution.
The function is of vital importance.
Far too important to be left to the position dictated by historical accident or cultural prejudice.
Cleaning does not contribute anything positive in terms of product manufactured or meals served so results must be achieved efficiently at minimum cost and disruption to the main operation.
This apparent conflict is resolved only by the application of materials and techniques brought about by scientific developments and, in this context, cleaning is a science.
Cleaning Defined
As a science the process of cleaning may be defined in scientific terms as follows:—
The systematic application of energy to a surface or substance over a period of time with the intention of removing dirt.
The result of which is a state of cleanliness.
Central to this definition is the concept of the removal of dirt by the application of energy.
It is the proper understanding of this relationship and the nature and application of energy that is crucial to scientific cleaning.
Energy in Cleaning
Energy is available to the cleaner in four distinct readily identifiable forms:
Manual labour
Mechanical energy
Heat
Chemicals
In terms of effect achieved the form of energy applied is immaterial but in theory the four are totally interchangeable; a concept evident from the example of cleaning a dirt layer from an oven interior.
Action with a scraper and wire brush, using manual labour, would give the desired result.
So too would a power tool with a suitable attachment which is the application of mechanical energy.
The same dirt could be burnt off by the use of heat which is a method available in some domestic ‘self cleaning’ ovens.
A powerful chemical could be used to dissolve the dirt allowing it to run clear and this is the application of chemical energy.
In practice energy forms are used together and within the actual cleaning process each form inter-relates.
An increase in manual or mechanical energy, known as kinetic energy, leads to a reduction in the need for chemical energy and heat or vice versa.
Systematic Cleaning
Systematic cleaning is the adoption of the right combination of energy for the circumstances with regard to time and cost.
For example a particular combination of kinetic and chemical energy at a certain temperature may give a cleaning time of ten minutes.
An increase in temperature may halve the time but the total energy cost may increase.
Generally, in a close system, speed of chemical reaction increases by a factor of 1.5–2.0 for every 10°C increase in temperature.
The balance between energy cost and time will vary with the circumstances and type of soil.
There is no single solution applicable to every operation.
Economic studies of cleaning, however, have shown that manual labour accounts for some 89 per cent of energy costs which themselves account for as much as 96 per cent of the total cleaning bill.
In ergonomic studies cost per unit of energy applied manually significantly exceeds other energy costs with chemical energy being the most cost-effective.
Labour is also the most difficult energy form to control.
It lacks versatility and is often difficult to obtain.
For practical and economic reasons, therefore and in general, the main objective of systematic cleaning will be to reduce the use of manual labour as far as possible and to substitute other forms of energy mainly chemical.
Chemical energy however is particularly easy to waste, through misuse or overuse, so levels of skill and control may need to be higher.
Unless manual energy substitution is matched with the necessary level of skill and control these factors may so distort the economics that expectations are not realised.
Chemicals for Cleaning
The basic cleaning chemical is water.
It will dissolve most dirt forming a solution that can be rinsed away.
However some dirt, or soil as it tends to be called, is not dissolved by water.
It is said to be water insoluble.
In addition commercial water, that is water from a tap, is not a pure substance.
It contains a number of impurities the sum of which are known as water hardness salts.
Under certain conditions these salts will be deposited becoming a type of dirt.
To overcome the inability of water to remove certain soils, and to counteract the effect of the impurities, chemicals are added to water to improve cleaning performance.
These chemicals are, by general definition, detergents although the term has now come to be restricted to a group of synthetic chemicals which have very specific effects the result of which is that dirt is taken into suspension in a stable form that allows it to be rinsed away.
Throughout this book the term ‘detergent’ applies only to that specific group of chemicals unless otherwise stated.
Principles of Detergency
Detergents, as defined in this book, are characterised by three basic properties the combination of which in synthetic form makes them effective.
The properties are:
Surface wetting (surfactancy)
Dispersion
Suspension
Surface wetting : Contrary to expectations water is not very wet so the initial purpose of a detergent is to improve the wetting power of water.
By this is meant the ability of a fluid to make complete contact with a surface at the point where they meet namely the interface.
To a casual observer water on a surface may appear to be in complete contact with it.
Those familiar with electron microscope pictures, a number of which have appeared in the popular press, will recall that apparently smooth surfaces reveal to the microscope scenes reminiscent of a lunar landscape with steep cliffs, peaks and ravines.
It is into these, the minute irregularities, that water cannot penetrate.
The water is in contact with the peaks only bridging the ‘valleys’ and it is in these ‘valleys’that much of the dirt is trapped.
The inability of water to penetrate is the result of a phenomenon known as water tension.
In the structure of water the basic components or molecules exist in a free flowing state loosely bound together by forces of mutual attraction.
Normally the forces from one molecule are counterbalanced by equal attraction by other molecules but at an interface the forces become unbalanced.
They can only be exerted within the body of water so the outermost molecules are drawn inwards away from the surface.
This effect is known as interfacial tension.
A detergent introduced into water reduces the forces of molecular attraction thereby reducing interfacial tension and enabling the solution to penetrate more freely.
This property is often termed surfactancy.
For this reason detergents are sometimes called, erroneously, ‘surfactants’ which is a condensed version of ‘surface active agents’.
All detergents are surfactants but not all surfactants are detergents.
Dispersion : This is the ability of a detergent to break up a body of dirt into fine particles.
The mechanism by which this is achieved is complex, intricate and  fascinating and stems from the particular characteristic of the detergent molecule.
The active part of which is able to join mutually repellent substances such as oil and water.
Each part has a head and a tail analogous to the shape of a tadpole.
The head ‘likes’ water and is attracted to it.
It is termed hydrophilic.
The tail, in contrast, ‘hates’ water and seeks to attach itself to substances, of similar disposition, such as grease and oil.
It is termed hydrophobic.
With a detergent in action millions of tadpole-like components, led by their hydrophobic tails, seek out and attach themselves to the surface of dirt at any interface and congregate there in order to avoid the water.
Those that cannot find room form spherical clumps, hydrophobic tails innermost, called miscelles.
These miscelles form reservoirs of activity which are ready to break apart when fresh surfaces become available.
The concentration of detergent, at which they form, is known as critical miscelle concentration (CMC) below which the detergent is of limited capacity.
Above this point no improvement in performance occurs no matter how much concentration is increased.
The detergent parts which are so attached orientate themselves with tails in the dirt and heads in the water.
However the individual parts are mutually repellent and while attached to the dirt also seek to escape their neighbours.
In the ensuing conflict the dirt suffers.
Battered from side to side and up and down bits are torn from the main body and break away exposing parts from the reserve miscelles.
In this fashion dirt is broken up into particles until activity is exhausted.
(See figure 1).
Suspension : If dirt was merely broken up into small particles cleaning would not necessarily be able to take place as there would be nothing to prevent the dirt reforming and re-attaching to a surface.
However the detergent pads, in surrounding the dirt particles, form a repellent coating preventing reformation.
The forces of repulsion keep the particles buoyant, in suspension, enabling them to be rinsed away so completing the cleaning process.
For this reason the suspension capability of a detergent is sometimes referred to as rinseability.
The  processes of dispersion and suspension are often described together in texts under the description ‘emulsifying action’.
Technically this is incorrect as an emulsion is a suspension of small liquid droplets in the medium of another liquid.
In detergent activity the distinction is important as dispersion may occur, without suspension necessarily following, either because of premature exhaustion of activity or a drop in solution temperature.
Where dirt does drop out of suspension the term re-deposition is used.
Detergent Activity in Solution:
Detergents are generally used in hot water.
The total cleaning effect of the solution is not solely a function of the detergency characteristics.
The activity of the detergent causes physical disturbance which agitates the solution.
The effect of which is similar to stirring a cup of tea.
By agitation the rate of uptake of soluble residues is increased.
Whilst a rise in temperature increases the rate of activity of the detergent it also increases the capacity of water to dissolve solids.
Also a rise in temperature melts fats making them more fluid and easier to remove.
Cleaning, using detergents, is therefore a function carried out using a detergent combined with heat and water 
Types of Detergent
Within the group of chemicals which exhibit the characteristics of a detergent there are four types each with distinct characteristics.
Three when made up into solution form ions from splitting of molecules.
One does not split up or ionise.
Each type is classified according to its behaviour and the electrostatic charge of the active ion, if formed, as follows:
Anionic
Cationic
Non-ionic
Amphoteric
Anionic : are detergents which ionise with the active ion being negatively charged.
They form the basis of most modern detergents and are frequently mixed with non-ionics usually in the ratio two parts anionic to one part non-ionic.
In this form the mixture exhibits a property known as synergism whereby the performance is better than the total effect of each working alone.
Chemical names of anionics are rarely used in commercial literature but if names are used alkyl benzene sulphate, alkyl aryl sulphonate or dodecyl benzene sulphonate (DOBS) will be most commonly encountered.
Alkyl isoethionates are found in hand soaps and sulphated fatty ethers and amides are sometimes included in small proportions as foam boosters.
Cationic detergents : ionise in solution with the active ion being positively charged.
On their own they are relatively poor cleaning agents.
They are usually mixed with non-ionics in which form some types exhibit significant disinfectant properties.
(See chapter 2).
Not all cationic detergents, even those termed quaternary ammonium compounds, are capable of disinfecting although they have commercial uses as fabric softeners and conditioners.
Non-ionic detergents : do not ionise in solution.
They are used mainly as components with other detergents to form commercial blends.
Used alone they exhibit a specific characteristic known as inverse solubility by which is meant that as temperature increases they drop out of solution contrary to expected behaviour.
This is sometimes used in mechanised cleaning where a cold water rinse can facilitate the removal of detergent from a system.
The temperature at which an inverse solubility occurs is often termed cloud point.
Chemically most common non-ionics will be termed alcohol ethoxylates.
The term polyethylene glycol may be encountered in some formulations.
In general, however, reference to non-ionic by chemical name in non-technical literature is rare.
Amphoteric detergents : ionise in solution with the active ion being either cationic or anionic according to the pH of the solution.
They are generally anionic in alkaline solutions and cationic in acids.
The point where the changeover occurs is known as the isoelectric point.
This varies with different types and can be important when assessing compatibility with other chemicals.
Amphoterics are high foaming and extremely efficient detergents but their expense tends to rule them out for all but specialist applications.
A disinfectant capability is claimed by some manufacturers.
Chemical titles are rarely used.
Other Cleaning Agents
Most dirt responds well to the action of a detergent.
Some types of soil are, however, so tenacious or chemically inert that they are partly or wholly unaffected.
To enable this type of dirt to be removed it is often treated with a chemical to convert.
it into a substance that can be easily removed using a detergent.
Alternatively the chemical may react with the dirt so that it becomes water soluble and it can be rinsed away.
Bearing in mind that soil itself is a chemical or a mixture of chemicals the basics of cleaning in this context are identical to those of basic reaction chemistry typified by the following equation:
Other cleaning agents are largely those which, when added to dirt, cause a chemical reaction to occur as specified in the equation.
Chemical groups that have these characteristics are as follows.
Alkalis
Acids
Solvents
Oxidising Agents
Alkalis : react mainly with fats and other organic materials.
The result of the reaction with fat is the formation of soap.
A process known as saponification.
In the classic fat/alkali reaction the soap thus formed further assists in the cleaning process.
However, as a result, an insoluble scum is formed that can interfere with cleaning.
To prevent this happening chemical agents known as sequestrants are used which bind up the residues preventing them from dropping out of solution.
The sequestrant mechanism is also used to combat the effect of water hardness salts.
Alkalis commonly used range from mild materials such as sodium carbonate (washing soda or soda ash) to sodium metasilicate which is stronger and sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) and potassium hydroxide (caustic potash).
The latter two are extremely strong.
Acids : react mainly with inorganic substances.
Those used range from mild organic acids such as citric acid to phosphoric acid highly reactive sulphuric and hydrochloric acids.
Solvents : It should be recognised that the mixture of soil with a solvent does not result in the change of state described in the reaction equation.
Since, however, the effect is a dispersion at molecular level, rather than at particle or droplet level, for practical purposes the end result is the same.
Solvents are usually mixed with detergents and are rarely used alone.
Methylated spirit is an exception.
Other solvents suitable for cleaning operations are acetone, used for spot cleaning, butoxy ethanol and glycol ethers which are used in degreaser formulations.
Methylene chloride is a powerful chemical used for the removal of heavy grease deposits and as a paint stripper.
Oxidising agents : are chemicals which alter the chemical composition of dirt by a process known as oxidisation usually by contributing oxygen or chlorine to the dirt.
Two agents are commonly used sodium perborate (which is a compound of  hydrogen peroxide and sodium metaborate and acts as a solid source of hydrogen peroxide) and sodium hypochlorite (common bleach) although other chlorine release agents are used.
Both chemicals are also used as bleaches and sodium hypochlorite is an important disinfectant
Abrasives
In addition to the purely chemical agents there are also a number of abrasives which, in powder form, are frequently mixed with detergents.
The hardest, pumice, is used in a number of proprietary compounds.
Silica or sand is used in scouring powders and feldspar and calcite or chalk are used in cream cleaners
Soil and Cleaning
Although a particular soil may be a specific and well defined chemical substance, or a mixture of a group of chemicals, it is not generally necessary in cleaning practice to elaborate on the exact composition or structure of these materials.
It is important, however, to identify characteristics of particular soils which relate to their ease or difficulty of removal and the methods and chemicals that must be employed.
It has already been noted that there is a variety of cleaning agents each of which affects specific types of soil.
In practice it is necessary to classify these soils.
This is done by relating the soil to the type of cleaning agent most appropriate for its removal.
In other industries a preliminary grouping would be the distinction between water soluble and water insoluble soils but in food industries all soils can be regarded as water insoluble.
Soils which are water soluble are so often mixed with water insoluble soils that they are not readily dissolved by water on its own.
Another grouping can be between organic and inorganic soils which relates to alkali soluble and acid soluble soils.
As alkalis and acids are not the only cleaning materials used in food environments this grouping is not sufficiently precise.
Since there are five basic types of cleaning agents soil encountered in catering maybe grouped as follows:
Detergent responsive
Alkali soluble
Acid soluble
Solvent responsive
Oxidising agent responsive
Detergent responsive soils : are uncoagulated proteins including blood, meat extracts and gravy either alone or mixed with animal or vegetable fats or oils in their natural state.
Starches, sugars, soluble food wastes, loose mineral and organic dusts are also included in this group.
They are the ever present generally light soils that occur everywhere in manufacturing, catering and retailing.
Alkali soluble soils : are organic soils normally found in heavy layers adhering to surfaces or which have been compacted or allowed to dry out and become hard.
Within this classification modified forms exist.
Primary heat modified soils are alkali soluble soils which change from their characteristic greasy texture on heating when they harden and darken.
Deposits can sometimes be peeled from surfaces in rubbery strips this is a change known as polymerisation.
Sugars harden and darken in the process of caramelisation and proteins break down chemically.
This is a process known as denaturisation 
Carbonised soils are also alkali soluble and are further forms of heat modified fats or oils which have undergone radical changes whereby a large proportion of volatiles have been burnt off and a high proportion of free carbon remains in the residues.
One form, known as carbonised grease, at its most extreme, becomes almost black being both brittle and highly tenacious.
It is so far different in reactivity from primary heat modified fats that it it affected only by the most aggressive alkalis and certain powerful solvents.
Acid soluble soils : are inorganic soils from an inert source as for example water hardness salts, rust and metallic stains from metal oxidisation as well as uric acid salts (toilet stains).
They can also be deposited from certain foods such as milkstone which consists of calcium salts derived from milk.
Solvent responsive soils : no particular type of soil tends to be related to solvents.
In general, with the exception of the inorganic soils one or other solvent will affect any soil found in food industries.
Certain specific soils, occurring mainly as problem stains, are best treated with solvents.
Typical examples are biro marks (methylated spirits), nail varnish, certain dyestuffs and lipstick (acetone) and paint (methylene chloride).
Solvents are used instead of alkalis, if they are more convenient or faster acting, particularly butoxy ethanol on heat modified soils and methylene chloride on carbonised grease.
Oxidising agent responsive soils : Only one main type of dirt is affected by oxidising agents, namely tannin, derived from tea, coffee, wine and certain fruits.
If tannin occurs built onto a layer of scale it is best treated as acid soluble Dirt attachment :
In addition to the type the way by which soil is attached to a surface has a material effect on the cleaning required.
A well broken, loose and particulate soil will have characteristics different to a uniform and unbroken film of the same type.
Degree of attachment varies from slight to a firm chemical bond.
Attachment may be the result of friction, locking soil into irregularities in the surface or electrostatic attraction where soil and surface have opposite charges, or from chemical interaction between soil and surface made possible by a change of state of both at the interface.
Sometimes a change of state of the substrate results in formation of soil.
This is the case with rust and oxidation films.
More complex mechanisms can arise.
Porosity in the substrate, even in a layer not more than microns thick, may allow absorption of soil which forms a key for further deposition.
Oxidisation films, such as those which protect stainless steel, similarly provide a physical key for soil that might otherwise not adhere to the material.
Soil mixtures provide the means for some types of adhesion: an inorganic soil may form a matrix with another or it may form a discreet layer to which another soil might adhere if it cannot adhere to the base substrate.
Soil films probably react differently because of partial oxidation, heat modification or drying out of the uppermost layers, forming a ‘case hardened’ skin which protects the body of the soil.
Also a film presents less surface area to a chemical than does particulate matter.
Where a series of films build up, into a layer, the soil may have differing characteristics throughout its depth 
soil release coatings
As an alternative to modifying the soil, by the use of chemical agents, coatings may be applied to clean surfaces to prevent or interfere with soil attachment.
Most common of these are the ‘non-stick’(PTFE) coatings.
Recently heat stable water soluble coatings have been developed.
These allow soil attachment to occur normally but to the coating rather than the substrate.
Cleaning is carried out with hot detergent solution during which the coating is dissolved enabling the soil to be floated off.
By this means soils, that would normally be resistant to all but the most aggressive chemicals, can be removed by light cleaning methods
Principles of Chemical Cleaning
Where the systematic approach dictates the use of chemicals as the predominate form of energy the practical relationships with other factors extend beyond energy and time to include the equipment needed to apply the chemical if costs are to be minimised the general relationship is as follows—
The right CHEMICAL is applied with the correct EQUIPMENT at the optimum TEMPERATURE with TIME to function so reducing physical WORK
Chemicals do not work in isolation.
The way in which they are applied has a crucial effect and having determined ratios between chemical and kinetic energy and heat it is important that a full allowance is made for the time required.
This time is not the period required overall but the actual time the chemical is in contact with the soil and is known as contact time.
In many applications this is the limiting factor.
In the human context hard physical work is not necessarily an indicator of efficiency or performance often it is the reverse.
Hard physical work is frequently necessary because the other factors have not been fully employed.
Disinfection
Cleaning processes and chemicals do not necessarily kill micro-organisms and a clean surface is not always so from a bacteriological aspect.
Indeed cleaning may be a major vehicle of bacterial contamination in some food environments.
Where cleaning is insufficient, or is the cause of contamination, another process, known as disinfection, is required.
This is defined by British Standard BS 5283: 1976 as: the destruction of micro-organisms but not usually bacterial spores; it does not necessarily kill all micro-organisms but reduces them to a level which is neither harmful to health nor the quality of perishable foods.
A disinfectant is a chemical product used for disinfection and despite the association of the term with hospitals, toilets and drains disinfection is a vital part of modern food practice.
The term ‘sterilisation’ relates to the total destruction of all micro-organisms and spores.
It applies only to a few high risk processes and is invariably achieved by means of heat.
Chemical sterilisation is not practicable and the terms sterilisation and disinfection should never be confused or used as synonyms.
Spores do not need to be killed in normal operational practice as the infectivity of the common spore former,Clostridium perfringens , occurs when the vegetative cell is ingested and converts to a spore.
Ingestion of the spore is harmless.
Only high risk process operations dealing with food preservation, including canning, need to take account of spores but these are usually dealt with during food processing.
Where to disinfect
Disinfection is not a universal requirement nor is it necessary on the majority of surfaces within any food operation.
It is the exception rather than the rule.
The test of whether a surface needs disinfection can be made by applying the definition to a working situation.
If, after cleaning, the level of micro-organisms remaining is so high that there is a potential danger of food contamination which may constitute a risk to health or cause accelerated spoilage, disinfection is needed.
The number of surfaces where the test applies is extremely limited and includes:
Food contact surfaces
Hands and skin
Hand contact surfaces
Cleaning tools and equipment
For the rest disinfection is usually irrelevant.
Micro-organisms on floors, ceilings and walls, except if the latter come into contact with food, have no bearing on food safety.
Efficient cleaning will remove most organisms and the residue, being largely static, will cause no harm.
Studies on floor disinfection have in any event shown  that within hours and sometimes minutes, of disinfection, numbers of micro-organisms revert to their pre-treatment levels.
Almost constant treatment would be required if disinfection became necessary.
Toilets and drains, often major targets for disinfection, are also best left alone after efficient cleaning.
They are the natural repositories for micro-organisms as something approaching 60 per cent by weight of faeces is made up of bacteria.
Toilets are designed for their safe containment and removal.
Smells, so often the reason for disinfection, are more appropriately dealt with by improving ventilation, remedial maintenance if necessary and more effective cleaning.
Food contact surfaces : Although all food contact surfaces can transfer contamination the potential for causing infection or spoilage depends on the type of food handled and the stage of manufacture or preparation.
Foods that do not sustain microbial growth, such as bread, or raw produce which is so heavily contaminated that the bacterial loading on a surface is insignificant, are not likely to require handling on disinfected surfaces.
Nor are foods which are for immediate consumption.
Transfer of micro-organisms from a surface at this stage is unlikely to be harmful as the numbers involved are too low to cause immediate infection and there is no time for multiplication on food.
The requirement for disinfection of food contact surfaces, therefore, applies in general only to those areas where high risk foods are handled or to situations where levels of micro-organisms must be kept down to an acceptable level to maintain shelf life.
Hands and skin : are primary food contact surfaces so, in general, similar provisions apply.
However, the skin is a living material and reacts differently to disinfection.
In its healthy state it will harbour millions of bacteria, known as resident flora, which are not only harmless but are essential to the proper functioning of the skin.
Invading bacteria known as the transient flora, particularly food poisoning bacteria, will not normally survive on healthy skin.
Studies of food workers' skin have shown die-off times within half an hour.
Introduction of a bactericide alters the natural balance by killing off residents and transients indiscriminately and replaces natural defences with a chemical residual activity.
This activity is unreliable and, in general working conditions, is prone to inactivation by other substances handled, including cleaning materials, leaving the skin unprotected.
Skin disinfection should, therefore, be avoided unless absolutely necessary invariably confined to high volume, high risk production with the disinfectant being applied after washing as a separate process before starting work.
The term skin disinfectant is synonymous with antiseptic and has largely replaced it.
Hand contact surfaces : This is one area of disinfection not necessarily confined to high risk zones especially in catering.
Surfaces that come into contact with hands, such as light switches, telephone handsets, door handles, drawers, refrigerator panels and machine controls, may build up levels of contamination that can temporarily overcome skin defences and so cause the transfer of potentially harmful microorganisms to food.
Hand contact surfaces are also the main route of infection from the toilet.
Hands may pick up overwhelming levels of bacteria from toilet seats, flush handles, door knobs and panels.
After washing sufficient numbers may remain on the hands to cause harm and the skin may become recontaminated from taps, the towel dispenser and the exit door of the washroom.
Cleaning tools and equipment : may be disinfected if it is necessary to prevent them from becoming vehicles of contamination.
However, since they are often used on surfaces which are already highly contaminated, the need may be less than at first thought.
Thorough cleaning will often be adequate particularly if combined with complete drying.
Laundering of cloths in the ‘hot wash’ cycle of any machine may be regarded as disinfection.
Where a cloth or other equipment is to be used for applying disinfectants it should be disinfected before use.
Alternatively disposable materials may be used
When to Disinfect
Disinfection cannot be a continuous process.
Between treatments contamination levels invariably build up.
The level at which build-up becomes harmful to health is indeterminate and will vary with the circumstances.
With all but the most virulent and rare food borne infections, however, tens of thousands and sometimes millions of pathogens per gram are required to cause illness in the healthy person.
A certain level of contamination can therefore be tolerated.
Experience of food poisoning outbreaks has shown that build up within the span of one working day of the type of bacteria that will cause major explosive outbreaks rarely occurs where hygiene practices are satisfactory.
In most situations, therefore, it is sufficient to disinfect after cleaning at the end of each work cycle.
In places of special risk, such as hospital kitchens serving meals to the very old, the very young, or immuno-suppressive patients or the factory producing large quantities of cooked cold meats, disinfection may need to be more frequent.
In these cases the recommended period will usually be determined with the aid of microbiological analysis.
More frequent disinfection may also be required to overcome the effects of inherent bad practice.
For instance where machinery or surfaces, through lack of space or layout limitations, must be used for both cooked and raw meats disinfection should take place after each use with raw meat and before changing to cooked meat.
In all cases disinfection should be preceded by thorough cleaning.
With certain disinfectants activity continues after application.
This is known as the residual effect.
A property which has enabled claims to be made for extending disinfection intervals or conferring protection against re-contamination.
Excepting skin disinfection however residual effects are difficult to measure and unreliable.
They should be ignored in normal practice and disinfection should be assumed to have taken place only at the time a chemical has been applied and after the requisite contact time has elapsed.
If recontamination arises after disinfection, to a level where a surface is suspect, the disinfection procedure should be repeated after cleaning if necessary.
Questions are often raised in this respect as to whether disinfection should be carried out at the end of a day, after work or the following morning before work.
In many operations the only possible source of recontamination is airborne which can be generally discounted.
Once a surface is disinfected it tends to remain so until used.
If anything the effect is enhanced by a period of drying.
However a surface likely to be recontaminated between use needs to be disinfected immediately before use bearing in mind that a higher concentration may be necessary to compensate for a reduced contact time or reduced time in a dry state.
Disinfection Modes
There are, essentially, three modes available for disinfection.
These are by use of:
Heat
Chemicals
Irradiation
Of the three heat disinfection is the most reliable and effective and, depending on the operation, usually the cheapest.
Chemical disinfection is reliable and economic, if applied correctly, but is subject to mis-use and misunderstandings which often limit its effectiveness.
In many situations, however, there is no substitute for the use of chemicals as the application of heat is impracticable.
The use of irradiation is a limited specialist application, mainly confined to certain parts of the dairy industry and for the treatment of shellfish, for which ultra violet light is used.
Experiments with ‘hard’ radiation such as gamma irradiation have been conducted and this method is occasionally used for the packaging of some high risk foods.
Work has also been conducted with high frequency sound, ultrasonics, usually in conjunction with heat.
Reports to date are interesting, if somewhat inconclusive, and without immediate practical application.
For most operations, however, disinfection methods involve either heat or chemicals:
Heat Disinfection
Heat can be applied in several forms and by several methods with a variety of equipment the more common of which are as follows-.
Washing machines : In the catering and industrial environment mechanical dishwashing and traywashing machines both usually incorporate a rinse cycle where water, at a temperature in excess of 80°C, is applied for a period of 15 seconds or more.
This combination of wet heat and time is extremely effective for disinfection.
As a rule this application tends to be under-exploited.
In catering all manner of items can be passed through a dishwasher, to secure disinfection, including kitchen utensils and tools, slicer parts, baines marie tubs, chefs' knives, cutting boards and savoy bags.
In food manufacturing any item that can be conveniently passed through a traywasher or similar equipment, with a suitable rinse cycle, would benefit from so doing.
It should be noted that degree of disinfection depends on heat and time.
The chemicals used in these machines have no influence whatsoever on disinfection.
Bactericidal agents may, however, suppress the appearance of a pinkish bloom of bacterial origin,Micrococcus roseus , in the wash compartment, which would otherwise require separate disinfection.
As a rule of thumb guide, to the effectiveness of a machine, items coming out should be visibly clean and too hot to handle with comfort.
Because of the corrosive nature of some machine washing agents some care should be exercised on items selected for this form of disinfection.
Wooden handled tools, composite rubber or polyethylene materials and aluminium will suffer.
Wood cutting boards will survive for a period but tend to crack after about a year of continuous washing.
To enable full use to be made of a machine materials used in the food environment need to be ‘dishwasher proof’.
Alternative washing agents may be used to reduce corrosion to aluminium.
‘Sterilising’ sinks : These are heated sinks usually in combination with a washing sink and thermostatically controlled to maintain a temperature of at least 82°C.
They may be heated by steam coil, electric immersion heater or gas and provide a hot rinse and disinfection capability.
Despite their name they do not sterilise but articles fully immersed in them, for 30 seconds or more, after cleaning, may be rendered free from harmful micro-organisms provided operational temperatures have been reached and are maintained.
They are used with effect for disinfecting crockery and cutlery where a mechanical dishwasher is not available and for small items of equipment in industry and retailing.
Apart from the disinfection role a sterilising sink has a useful secondary role in providing heated soaking facilities for heavily soiled small equipment although it cannot be used for both roles at the same time.
Variations of the ‘sterilising’ sink include a variety of custom made tanks for such uses as knife disinfection in slaughterhouses, small equipment disinfection in cream rooms and other high risk operations.
Often wall mounted in or near the working area they can be a useful provision provided they are kept clean, emptied after use and operating temperatures are maintained.
A display thermometer should be fitted to assist temperature control.
Steam disinfection : Environmental disinfection using lances powered by steam generators has been popular in large food factories, slaughterhouses and meat cutting rooms where large areas must be treated or where machinery or surfaces are difficult to reach.
The disinfection effect is dubious as heat transfer from the steam is rarely sufficient to heat surfaces for sufficient time to effect destruction of micro-organisms.
Reductions in bacterial counts experienced after steam treatment are invariably the result of the cleaning effect.
Efforts to improve the efficiency have included the introduction of disinfectants into the steam but this has proved extremely wasteful and the effect offers little that cannot be achieved by cleaning with hot high pressure water jets and the separate spray application of a suitable disinfectant.
In addition to performance shortcomings steam disinfection also has several operational limitations.
Some materials will not withstand steam treatment and local heating effects may cause differential expansion of sheet materials causing warping, cracking and the springing of fixings.
Undesirable removal of lubricants may occur in machinery and hazards may arise in the use of steam lances.
These hazards may lead to complications with regard to insurance.
Also, with the use of steam in large rooms, high volumes of condensation may occur which may drip onto food contact surfaces bringing with it bacterial and physical contamination.
For certain applications however steam is effective.
Injected into closed ‘steam chests’ at atmospheric pressure for 10 minutes after the temperature reaches 96°C it can disinfect milking equipment, churns and other items.
A similar routine is applied for the disinfection of tanks and other closed vessels for 10 minutes after the outlet drain condensate reaches 85°C.
Under pressure steam is the only means of sterilisation in food process industries.
Temperatures of 150°C are needed such as those achieved in UHT pasteurisation plants.
Boiling : The simple expedient of placing articles in a bucket, boiler or other suitable container and boiling them in water is a highly effective way of disinfecting.
Even boiling, however, should not be regarded as sterilisation.
A temperature of 121°C is normally regarded as the minimum needed to achieve sterility.
Boiling is particularly valuable for cloths and cleaning tools as well as nail brushes  and savoy bags.
It is to be preferred to chemical disinfection which is rarely effective and can be counter-productive for these items.
Items should be withdrawn and dried rapidly after boiling has finished and on no account should they be left soaking.
Domestic washing machines operated on a hot cycle and commercial laundering are also effective means of disinfecting cloths, protective apparel and other laundry items.
Dry heat : This process is rarely applied as a means of disinfection as dry heat is less effective than wet heat.
Nevertheless as part of the cooking or heat treatment process dry heat is often applied in a widespread manner.
Every utensil or pan used on top of a stove or in an oven is subjected to dry heat which effects disinfection irrespective of any other process.
For this reason it is often unnecessary to disinfect saucepans, roasting trays and the like as they are disinfected as an automatic part of the cooking process.
Chemical Disinfection
Many chemical agents are used for disinfection.
Not all are suitable for food contact surfaces because of their odour, toxicity, corrosiveness or tainting properties.
To be suitable for food environment application a disinfectant must be odourless, of low mammalian toxicity, non corrosive and non-tainting.
It must be highly effective against a wide range of micro-organisms on a wide variety of surfaces and operating conditions while being fast acting and unaffected by any cleaning product or other residues which may be present during application.
No single product completely satisfies these requirements so the use of any particular agent is always a compromise.
Thus the most appropriate product will vary according to the demands of a particular operation
Chemicals which are used in the food environment are as follows:
Sodium hypochlorite
Other chlorine release agents
Hydrogen peroxide
Iodophors
Quaternary Ammonium Compounds (QACs)
Bisguanides or Diguanides
Chlorinated phenols in synthetic anionic bases
Amphoteric detergents
Caustic soda
Hypochlorites : More readily known as common bleach sodium hypochlorite is a highly effective, cheap and widely available bactericide.
It is also highly corrosive, pungent smelling, food tainting and toxic, although, being highly volatile, residual toxicity is low.
In its concentrated form it is hazardous to handle especially as many commercial formulations are stabilised with caustic soda.
In dilute form it is unstable with a storage life of approximately 24 hours.
Sodium hypochlorite is also rapidly and completely inactivated by dirt and all other organic materials including detergents.
It also has poor wetting qualities.
It is generally, therefore, only used on scrupulously clean surfaces when the usual concentration is 200 parts per million available chlorine.
Even at this level it is still corrosive to stainless steel and must be removed quickly after application.
Despite the disadvantages sodium hypochlorite is a valuable disinfectant.
Its  effectiveness at low concentrations, and cheapness make it particularly suitable for high volume industrial requirements, treating large areas or circulating at relatively high speed in clean-in-place systems and for process water disinfection.
Other chlorine release agents : Commercial formulations are aimed at providing the performance advantages of hypochlorites while reducing the number of disadvantages.
Currently there are five such principal agents one inorganic and the remainder organic.
These are listed below with their percentage available chlorine
Chlorinated trisodium polyphosphate (inorganic) 3–4%
Dichlorodimethylhydanation 65%
Dichloroisocyanuric acid (DCCA) 71%
Trichloroisocyanuric acid (TCCA) 90%
Trichloromelamine 90%
These chemicals, all relatively stable powders, are less aggressive than hypochlorite and achieve similar performances.
Chlorinated trisodium polyphosphate is the combination of a strongly alkaline phosphate and chlorine and therefore has a significant cleaning capability although it suffers as a disinfectant through its low chlorine content.
All these agents are considerably more expensive than hypochlorites.
With their improved handling and reduced hazards they are, however, widely used in small operations particularly catering where the small quantities used are generally more economic.
As with hypochlorites all are badly affected by the presence of dirt.
Hydrogen peroxide : Work on this chemical as a disinfection agent has recently reactivated interest.
The main application is for the disinfection of process water but economic and performance advantages over chlorine have yet to be fully demonstrated.
Iodophors : are disinfectants prepared by action of iodine on non-ionic detergents.
They are expensive and share many of the disadvantages of hypochlorites although they are more acceptable as they have little smell or taste.
Being a composite they have some cleaning ability.
Their acidic characteristics makes them particularly suitable for the dairy industry, breweries and soft drink manufacturers.
Iodophors stain soiling matter such as milkstone and so can assist in indicating physical cleanliness.
They do not stain metals.
When used on dirty surfaces the yellow brown colour of the iodophor is absorbed and disappears.
A useful but not completely reliable indicator of potency.
The colour change can be obscured by dirt in the solution.
Quaternary ammonium compounds : are cationic detergents with disinfection properties.
They exhibit similar odour free and taint free characteristics to anionics and are of relatively low toxicity.
When originally introduced it was thought that the availability of a detergent with inherent bactericidal characteristics would solve many of the problems associated with both cleaning and disinfection.
Performance, however, at least in the early days was misinterpreted.
Unlike chlorine which tends to kill at all concentrations, but takes longer, QACs are bactericidal only when reduced to a certain concentration after which they inhibit cell reproduction without killing.
Substances with this property are called bacteriostatic.
This led to confusion over concentration with the term minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) being used as and mistaken for  dosage rate when  it merely related to the bacteriostatic performance against certain bacteria under artificial conditions and at specific concentrations.
As a result there were many instances of incorrect use and reports of inadequate performance that were not always justified.
Nevertheless QACs are not particularly good cleaning agents and have poor rinsing and foaming characteristics.
The latter gave rise to considerable operator problems when a high foam was expected from a detergent.
Latter attempts to increase foaming activity have led to a sacrifice in disinfectant capabilities which, while normally good, are limited to gram positive organisms.
Gram negative capability is poor to the extent that one QAC is used in laboratory nutrient media to promote the growth of these organisms.
QACs are badly affected by hard water and are progressively inactivated by dirt and other organic substances.
Because of their cationic nature they are attracted to plastics and cellulose products.
If stored in or applied by these materials QACs can be drawn out of solution and become unavailable to use.
Common QACs, normally used in combination with non-ionics to improve detergency, are:
Cetrimide (Cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide) and
Benzalkonium chloride (Lauryldimethyl benzylammonium chloride).
Of the two benzalkonium chloride is less affected by hard water and has a better disinfection capability.
The limitations of QACs are of less significance when they are compounded with other products with which they can exert a synergistic effect.
In these forms they come closest to satisfying all the requirements of an ideal disinfectant.
QACs and mixtures containing QACs may not be used in brewing or the licensed trades as they affect beer head retention.
Bisguanides or Diguanides : are cationic and similar to QACs.
They are usually better in performance than QACs but have no detergency.
They are, therefore, always used in blends.
With non-ionic detergents they have the safety characteristics of QACs but have better performance and do not affect beer head retention.
As such they are highly suitable for the brewing industry, from plant to road tankers, and are becoming widely used as glass washing agents in the licensed trades.
Mixed with QACs they are widely used as skin disinfectants and are mainly associated with medical uses as are chlorhexidine gluconate and cetrimide.
Combinations of polymeric bisguanide and benzalkonium chloride, with the synergistic effect of an organic sequestering agent EDTA, are proving highly effective when used bonded onto a non woven applicator.
Chlorinated phenols : Phenol agents are generally unsuitable for food use as they exhibit high odour characteristics and other undesirable effects.
They have an extraordinary capability to taint food where they form compounds with fats which are detectable in parts per billion.
Normally phenolics should not be allowed anywhere on food premises even in non-food areas.
Complex derivatives of phenols, chlorinated and compounded with an anionic base, have been used widely as glassware agents in the licensed trades until the advent of bisguanides.
Amphoterics : They have excellent detergent properties over a wide pH range.
They have a relatively low toxicity but are corrosive in concentrate form.
Their  range of disinfectant activity is narrow and they are readily inactivated by hard water and organic materials.
Many claims are made for their disinfectant properties but the results obtained may be more a function of their excellent detergency in removing, rather than destroying, micro-organisms and their recommended method of use in sequence with other cleaning agents followed by a number of rinses.
Amphoterics by themselves are not recommended for use as disinfectants although when compounded with QACs or bisguanides they can be effective if somewhat expensive.
Caustic soda : is widely used in process industries in circulating systems where the solution is primarily used for cleaning.
The high alkalinity of working concentrations ensures adequate disinfection against brewing yeasts.
Caustic soda is also widely used in beer pipeline cleaners for the licensed trades.
The Effect of Drying
Bacteria vary in their susceptibility to chemical disinfectants.
Generally gram positive types are more easily affected by disinfectants than gram negative types.
A disinfectant introduced into a mixed flora may kill only the gram positive types leaving the others to flourish in the absence of competition.
Bacteria are also susceptible to drying and again their susceptibility varies.
In this case gram negative types succumb readily while gram positives can survive dry conditions for some time.
Therefore, under normal circumstances, the effect of drying can supplement the use of a disinfectant and it is good practice to combine disinfection with drying.
In some cases drying alone may suffice.
The use of dryness extends also to routine operational practice.
What are known as ‘wet sources’ are avoided.
An example is the soaking of equipment in an attempt to reduce bacterial loading.
If disinfection is carried out using a disinfectant there must be sufficient time for the chemical to take effect, namely the contact time, plus a small safety margin after which surfaces must be dried.
Care should be exercised not to introduce further contamination in the drying medium.
If air is not employed disposable paper is often used.
Sanitisation
With the advent of detergents with disinfecting properties (QACs) and sophisticated chemistry combining detergents with disinfectants a number of products have appeared since the early 1950's.
These claim to be able to clean and disinfect in one process known as sanitisation (BS 5283: 1976).
The advantages of the concept are obvious but more apparent than real; there are serious limitations.
By exposing a disinfectant to dirt in the cleaning process the dirt forms a physical barrier, protecting micro-organisms from attack, and as a result much of the disinfectant activity is expended uselessly against dirt.
At best a needlessly expensive chemical is used where a cheaper, equally effective detergent, would suffice.
At worst the disinfectant is prematurely exhausted, an effect known as organic overload, allowing large numbers of micro-organisms to survive.
Despite extensive evidence from numerous independent sources to the effect that there is little to choose between the performance of a well formulated detergent and the invariably more expensive combined products, known as sanitisers, a whole industry has been built around marketing sanitisation.
With it has sprung a variety of names and product descriptions with some of the more common being ‘germicidal detergent’; ‘detergent sanitiser’; ‘detergent sterilant’ and the simple ‘sterilant’These titles and any combination thereof all mean one thing namely a sanitiser.
They offer little, if anything, to the promotion of hygiene and where, for reasons of hygiene or product quality, disinfection is necessary it should always be carried out separately after cleaning.
Notwithstanding some products marketed as sanitisers can be effective disinfectants when used as such and the use of sanitisers in some circumstances should not be ruled out.
Where a sanitiser can have advantages is where a particular cleaning task is carried out on a repetitive basis as for example the daily cleaning of a retail soft ice cream dispenser.
These machines generally have a well known soil load and the appropriate amount of sanitiser used on a regular basis will give the required degree of protection against bacteria.
Resistance and Inactivation
Disinfectants act on bacteria in two main ways namely as cell toxins poisoning or destroying the cell or by interfering with their metabolism.
Certain types of bacteria, by genetic mutation, can build up resistance to disinfectants that act in the latter way to the extent that they can become totally immune to normal concentrations even utilising the disinfectant as a food source.
This phenomenon does not happen overnight but is the result of the exposure of an unbroken line of successive bacterial populations to sub-lethal doses of disinfectant.
Resistance can be very serious as there is evidence to suggest that the mechanism is cross transferable to antibiotics.
A situation could arise where harmful bacteria, having become immune to disinfectants, survive to cause illness which cannot be treated by antibiotics.
A major cause of resistance development is disinfectant inactivation.
This can occur for a number of reasons-exposure or the mixing of dissimilar disinfectants or a detergent with a dissimilar disinfectant, the exposure of the disinfectant to certain materials, especially dirt, which chemically or physically inter-react and reduce its efficiency, inaccurate mixing, the use of partially depleted solution or the topping up of depleted solutions.
Materials that cause inactivation are called inactivators and, in addition to dirt, there are many others.
Hard water, plastic containers and buckets, mops, sponges, cloths and brushes can all be inactivators.
Resistance can be readily avoided by simple precautions as follows:
1.
Reducing the exposure of disinfectants to inactivators.
2.
Ensuring that fresh solutions of disinfectant are always used.
3.
Making up accurate solutions in the correct concentration.
4.
Disinfecting cloths and cleaning tools after use
5.
Applying disinfectants to clean surfaces only.
6.
Using disinfectants of adequate performance.
7.
Never mixing disinfectant with other chemicals.
Disinfectants particularly prone to resistance are QACs especially if they are used as sanitisers.
The addition of certain alcohols or the sequestrants to formulations can reduce the incidence which is rare in any case.
Many reports of resistant bacteria are based on their exposures to disinfectants to which quite normal bacteria are simply not susceptible or the result of poor practice where a perfectly adequate disinfectant has failed, through misuse or indifferent management, without there being any change in the nature of the bacteria.
In the face of the threat of resistance many organisations alternate types of disinfectant.
This is not good practice as it leads to confusion amongst users with an increased possibility of errors that may lead to the very problem the procedure was trying to avoid.
Failures in disinfection should always be investigated for management or user default or the use of an unsuitable disinfectant before resistance is suspected.
Once a suitable disinfectant is in use resistance will not occur if it is used correctly.
Efforts are best directed towards ensuring correct use rather than suffering the disruption caused by frequent change.
The management of Disinfection
Disinfection in normal practice presents a challenge to management.
The process is complex and requires several stages yet there is no visible difference between a correctly disinfected surface and one where the process has been faulty or not carried out.
Bacteriological tests are of little value as the results may not be available for some days.
Other indicators, such as consumption anomalies and incident, of misuse, are available but tend to be unreliable.
Management therefore should be concerned primarily with selecting a product which has a realistic chance of working and detailing clear procedures as to how the product should be used as well as ensuring effective supervision.
Visual indicators of product activity, as in the iodophor colour change, can usefully augment routine control measures.
Chemical Products
A chemical does not a product make.
For it to be useful, in a working situation, it must be adjusted to give the specific performance characteristics required by the user, in the concentration most appropriate to its intended function, with a form, texture and appearance, that is operationally and aesthetically desirable.
It must be packaged having regard to the contents, hazards involved, storage condition and distribution, as well as the method of use.
It must be described not with the fierce barely pronounceable scientific tags so far used but with a simple name that describes both its function and general make-up with sufficient clarity to distinguish it from anything else.
Instructions for use and durable labelling and supportive information must be supplied in document form.
Only then does the chemical become a product.
While there are relatively few chemicals  usable for cleaning and disinfection there are many, probably thousands, of chemical products.
Not all are valid but the variables that go into product make-up justify a far greater range than that which might at first appear strictly essential.
To make some sense of this vast range, and to understand how the variables can be employed to make useful, but considerably different products out of the same basic chemicals, it is necessary to classify products according to their general function in the food environment.
This fairly arbitrary classification is as follows:—
Manual detergents
Machine detergents
Rinse additives
Hard surface cleaners
Degreasers
Decarbonisers
Tannin removers
Acid cleaners
Hand cleaners
Disinfectants and sanitisers
Drain cleaners
Each of these product classes is thus considered in terms of the effect of the differing combinations of variations in chemical formulation.
Manual Detergents
Almost without exception manual detergents are anionic and non-ionic blends but there are similarities in a vast range of product types.
Variations occur in:
Performance
Concentration
Format 
Appearance, texture and smell
Packaging
Description
Advised  usage 
Performance : Despite great similarities in chemical composition individual products do vary considerably.
A great deal depends on the skill of the formulator in optimising the synergistic effect of the anionic, non-ionic interaction, the effect of minor ingredients and the tailoring of properties to suit the precise needs of the market sector at which the product is directed.
Apart from the general characteristics of the basic blend adjustments may be made to suit regional variations in water hardness, by the addition of sequestrants.
Major variations are made in foaming levels, which can be altered at will, entirely independently of the basic cleaning power of the product.
Foam nonetheless can have an important part to play in the performance of a detergent.
It has the effect of increasing the surface area of a solution, thus increasing its speed of activity, and assisting in the total capability of a solution to suspend dirt much of it ending up trapped in the foam.
It can also act as a dilution guide, when the level of foam is related to concentration and as an activity indicator, whereby the formulation is adjusted so that when detergency is exhausted the foam collapses.
This feature is known as foam end point.
The rinseability of a product is also affected by foaming characteristics.
Too strong a foam and there can be difficulty in rinsing.
Concentration : this varies enormously from as little as 5 per cent or less active ingredients to around 30 per cent or more in liquid products and up to 100 per cent in powders.
Concentration changes are used constructively to provide the customer with a proportion of active material which is stable, readily soluble and convenient to use.
Economically it is sensible to use as high a concentration as possible and dilute on site to the required level but there is some validity in specifying low activity concentration where users consistently ignore dilution instructions.
Adjustments are made in concentration by the use of neutral fillers, water in the case of liquid products, and chemicals such as sodium sulphate or disodium tetraborate (borax) in powders.
Liquids much above 30 per cent tend to be unstable, unless alcohol or urea is included, which adds to the expense so liquid products rarely exceed this level.
It is more practicable to provide higher concentrates in powder form.
But an amount of neutral filler is desirable to add bulk to what otherwise might be very small unit quantities when measuring out to make dilutions and to prevent caking giving the powder free flowing properties.
Liquid concentrates require preservatives as they are biodegradable.
That is they can be broken down by bacteria to inert residues.
To stop this  occuring prematurely preservatives are adjusted to suit the level of concentration supplied.
For this reason it is not good practice to acquire high concentration and dilute them on site for use as stock concentrates and stored for further dilution at the point of use.
All too often concentration is used by suppliers as a means of adjusting price or profitability, and, to an extent, this can be concealed from the customer by adjustments in texture.
At times these adjustments verge on sharp practice enabled by the fact that ingredients do not have to be revealed.
Format : Two major variations in format are the production of detergents as either liquids or powders although gels and even imitation soap bars can be produced.
Format is largely a matter of preference.
It is generally price advantageous to specify  powders although in use they may be more difficult to control and dose.
Appearance, texture and smell : Unadjusted a detergent would be a thin, translucent, colourless liquid with little or no smell or a white powder generally unattractive.
It is therefore common, and quite desirable practice, to add colour dyes and to thicken and perfume products.
Detergents readily take up dyes so virtually any colour can be provided.
Care must be exercised however as certain colours have specific connotations which may be important if colour codes are used.
It is good practice in any event to use a colour that is specific to manual detergents.
Since the domestic brand leader uses a green dye, as do many other manufacturers and the colour is associated with safety, in this context meaning hand safe, green appears to be the most appropriate colour.
Unfortunately some manufacturers use colour as a means of reinforcing brand identity.
Texture in powders can be varied from a soft, readily caking powder with a soapy feel to the hand and a free flowing crystalline substance depending on the amount of neutral filler.
In liquids the texture change is confined to thickness or viscosity, which, like foaming can be changed independently of performance and concentration.
Thickeners, such as sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (SCMC), are used which is valid to enable viscosity to be adjusted so that the detergent is not too ‘runny’ and can be used with proportioners and dispensers.
SCMC is also said to improve overall detergency of a product by assisting in soil suspension and is regarded by some more as a suspension agent than a thickener.
Less valid is the use of common salt, which will thicken even very weak solution, giving the impression of a far higher concentrate without adding anything to the performance.
The use of perfumes is generally shunned in food environments but, unless highly critical processes are involved, there should be no objection to the use of lemon or similar fragrances.
These are detectable in the concentrate, hardly noticeable in solution and undetectable on surfaces after rinsing.
Such perfumes have a positive counteractive effect on food odours and markedly improve user acceptability.
Packaging : Most powders are supplied in cardboard boxes or drums, sometimes with polythene liners, in weights of 5 kilos or more.
Some products are marketed in plastic lidded tubs and others, rarely, in 500g shakers.
Unit values of powder detergents are low and the products are fairly bulky so it is difficult to pack them economically in containers that are suitable for the food environment.
The cost of a durable convenient to use pack would usually exceed that of its contents.
Liquid detergents tend to be packed in plastic containers ranging from the domestic type squeeze pack of around 1 litre capacity to the 5 litre pour pack and the 20–25 litre drum.
Perversely it costs more per unit quantity to pack in drums than it does in 5 litre quantities.
Some manufacturers pack 20 litre quantities in square sectioned metal drums but these are difficult to handle and tend to corrode, spoiling the contents, if stored for any period of time.
They are particularly unpopular with women workers tending to snag their tights during handling and sometimes such incidents affect the acceptability of a produce more than any performance attributes.
The type of packaging has a considerable influence on the way a product is used.
The larger the pack the more liberal the  usage so it is often worth incurring a packaging cost penalty.
This will save substantial amounts through reduced product   usage .
Squeeze packs therefore have a great deal to commend them but where quantities of wash water requiring dosing are high the amount of detergent thus available is too low.
The 20–25 litre drum discharging through a controlled dispenser is a better option.
Large industrial users can specify 180 litre drums (the old 40 gallon drums) with detergent being drawn from a tap to an intermediate container.
Larger fixed tanks can be road tanker supplied.
The effect of having detergent ‘on tap’ on cleaning economics can be drastic with costs through over-use usually far exceeding the advantages of bulk buying.
The practice is dubious anyway as larger containers of detergent can become contaminated by certain bacteria, often pseudomonads, and act as reservoirs of infection or spoilage.
Description : A fairly straight forward product as a detergent with defined applications would benefit from descriptions of like nature ‘Detergent’ and ‘washing-up liquid’are such, sometimes qualified by the terms ‘concentrated’or ‘neutral’where appropriate, which are perfectly acceptable.
Less acceptable is the term ‘general purpose detergent’ as it may imply a capability not warranted by such a product.
This is not as objectionable though as the host of descriptions which virtually conceal the identity of the product and refer to it by any of a number of lurid, dramatic or pseudo scientific titles which bear little if any relationship to function.
Such labels bear a striking resemblance to advertising bill boards.
The purpose of these names is to establish what is known as brand identity.
The theory is that the user, not knowing the ‘technical’ description of the product, refers to it by its artificial title which becomes built into the administrative and ordering system, emerging as repeat orders for the supplier.
This apparently unique product being available from no other source.
Around the titles is built a mystique that implies that this quite ordinary product is somehow different and better than anything else on the market.
This is a process known as reinforcing brand identity.
A certain amount of brand identity is no bad thing, providing it does not conceal the function of a product, as it can encourage stability in usage patterns.
But if descriptions deviate too far the products, and certainly the price structure, should be suspect.
Advised usage : on the best products this is incorporated into labelling giving concise dilution rates and applications, in a bold clear form, with illustrations where appropriate.
Safety information is clearly stated, often ‘boxed’ for emphasis, as even with a manual detergent there are some precautions to be noted.
Labels are often supplemented by well written ‘data sheets’ giving additional information some of which are usable as wall posters.
Machine Detergents
These products are invariably the most expensive, and heavily used in many operations, accounting for the bulk of expenditure in the cleaning budget.
Despite their sharing the title ‘detergent’ with their manual counterparts they are completely different products with little or no similarities in formulation.
They are used in many applications from catering dishwashing machines, pressure jet cleaners (qv) mechanical bottle and tray washers to complex clean in place systems and pipeline cleaners.
Consideration of the products is complicated by the fact that invariably they are mechanically dosed, their performance depending on the dosing apparatus as well as that of the machine used and its serviceability.
Water conditions have an important effect on their performance as do the correct functioning of water softeners if fitted.
Many cleaning machine manufacturers and suppliers often seem unable or unwilling to provide routine servicing for the machines they sell.
This responsibility is often taken on by the detergent suppliers who takes care of the chemicals, dosing equipment and the minor repairs and adjustments on the machine.
The machine detergent product is often therefore a ‘package’ and needs to be considered as such.
This package is:
Chemicals
Dosing Equipment
Service
Only where there is a strong ‘in-house’ maintenance capability, and good liaison between users and the machine supplier, is it wise to treat chemicals as products in isolation.
Chemicals : Used in machines chemicals replace direct manual energy such as wiping, scrubbing and scraping with chemical energy.
While there is a substantial mechanical input from the machine this is mainly in the form of water agitation, either from high or low water sprays, or from turbulent flow in circulation systems.
Agitation does not completely compensate for the lack of direct activity.
Chemicals, therefore, need to have a high energy potential i.e. they need to be highly aggressive.
Since most soils requiring removal are alkali soluble the active base of a machine detergent tends to be sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) or potassium hydroxide (caustic potash).
Because of the mode of action of alkalis, in producing insoluble residues via the saponification process, the formulation must be adjusted by the addition of high levels of sequestrant.
Complex polyphosphates are used for this purpose such as sodium tripolyphosphate or tetrasodium pyrophosphate.
Another polyphosphate used is sodium hexametaphosphate the choice of which is often governed by availability and price at the time.
These also contribute significantly to the detergency of the product and sometimes are augmented by the organic sequestrants EDTA or sodium gluconate.
Polyphosphates are sometimes referred to as builders and products containing high proportions as built detergents.
Machine detergents used for cleaning aluminium ware are often highly ‘built’ omitting caustic soda and substituting sodium metasilicate to reduce corrosive effect.
Total alkalinity is often modified, downwards, by the use of less aggressive alkalis, such as sodium carbonate or sodium metasilicate, and, not infrequently, especially in dishwashing formulations, chlorine release agents such as di and tri chloroisocyanuric acid salts.
These are added to remove stains and oxidise matter thus assisting in the cleaning process.
In dishwashing formulations sodium aluminate is added to prevent attack on china glaze.
The anionics used in manual detergents are not used; the foam produced would cause problems but specific non-ionics are sometimes included to suppress foam that is generated.
Major variations in formulation only occur in levels of alkalinity to deal with differing soil load expectations, the proportion and type of sequestrants, to balance the alkalinity and to cope with water hardness and the inclusion of minor ingredients.
Cost differences between products are mainly attributable to the differing proportions of sequestrants as these are the most expensive components.
It is often more economic to use softened water to supply machines rather than combat hardness salts with a sequestrant load detergents.
Format varies between liquid and powder as in manual detergents, requiring differences in dosing equipment.
While liquid systems are in general more reliable powder systems have their advocates.
Other variables are of less importance.
Dosing equipment : This is dealt with more fully in Chapter 4 but, as far as the effect on the product is concerned, it is important to have equipment that can be finely adjusted, that delivers an accurate and consistent dose of chemical and is reliable.
Service : being such an indeterminate quantity it is difficult to set parameters.
The size of the supplier's organisation, the technical back-up available and the competence and experience of field personnel are important.
But there are several small highly competent organisations, operating on a regional basis, that can provide the necessary level of service.
They are staffed in the main by former members of large organisations
Rinse Additives
Not strictly speaking cleaning products these chemicals are used in conjunction with machine detergents.
They are added to rinse water to speed up drying and to achieve shiny finish without spotting, smearing or other blemishes.
They are sometimes acidic to neutralise any alkaline residues carried over from the washing process and sometimes include disinfectants.
Other formulations include chlorine release agents or perborates but all are powerful surfactants to promote film spread which is the basis of rapid drying.
Rinse additives tend to be very expensive but are used in very low concentrations and are invariably mechanically dosed.
Hard Surface Cleaners
Products thus described, and suitable formulated, essentially perform the role of the manual detergent but in locations or circumstances where the detergent is unsuitable.
Formulations are varied because there are three ways of achieving the same capability with combinations and permutations.
These are:
Solvent based
Abrasive and detergent based
Alkali based
Solvent based cleaners : The active base of these products is almost always butoxy ethanol solvent.
A glycol ether of the same chemical group from which antifreeze is derived.
The solvent is usually compounded with an anionic or non-ionic detergent although amphoterics are sometimes used.
Such formulations are identified by a not unpleasant sweet smell.
They are fast acting and extremely effective as products and will rapidly remove grease and other organic films using  spray-wipe techniques.
Harmless to most surfaces used in food industries, particularly aluminium, they are however relatively toxic when mists are inhaled.
Extended use in enclosed spaces should be avoided.
Solvent based hard surface cleaners are always supplied in liquid form with industrial packs usually being 5 litres or thereabouts.
Because they are commonly used for spray applications packaging frequently incorporates a spray device or a hand sprayer is supplied.
Concentrates can be quite expensive but dilution rates of 1:100 are often specified.
Abrasive cleaners : At their simplest these are the scouring powders formulated from little more than sand or feldspar, the aggregate and a small amount of chlorine release agent.
They rely for their action on enhancing the mechanical action of manual scrubbing and do not have a true chemical activity.
The aggregates are very hard and damaging to most surfaces.
The modern, more acceptable, alternative is the scouring cream often called a cream cleaner.
This uses a softer aggregate, calcite (chalk), with a high proportion of detergent, either an anionic blend or an amphoteric, to produce a creamy liquid consistency.
Unlike solvent cleaners there are no important safety implications and, being supplied ready-to-use, they are easy and convenient to apply.
Directions can be misleading in that the product is shown squirted onto surfaces a practice that leads to over-use, rinsing difficulties and a residue of fine white powder if rinsing is not complete.
Cream cleaner should always be poured onto a damp cloth and applied to dry surfaces.
Overwetting leads to product dilution and loss of efficiency.
Packaging tends to be in domestic style 500–700g squeeze packs supplied 10 to 12 to a case.
Larger pack sizes are available some with screw tops which, for the purpose intended, are useless.
Alkali cleaners : These products are often little more than mildly alkaline detergents formulated from anionic-non-ionic detergent blends with a very small proportion of caustic soda and balancing sequestrant.
Potassium, rather than sodium salts, are sometimes used as these are more soluble although more expensive.
Sometimes ammonium hydroxide is added which functions as a mild alkali.
The pungent smell gives the impression of a powerful cleaning agent.
Alkali cleaners, generally, are marketed in the same way as solvent cleaners.
They are not as effective or fast acting and are damaging to some surfaces particularly aluminium.
The ingredients are cheaper than solvents but this is not always reflected in the price of finished goods.
The product is sometimes styled as ‘solvent free’ with prices to match this apparent premium feature
Degreasers
In liquid form these products are often a more concentrated version of solvent based hard surface cleaners.
In some instances degreaser concentrates can be used when heavily diluted as hard surface cleaners.
They can, however, be strongly caustic.
Mixtures of alkali and solvent are also produced.
Powders tend to be polyphosphates blended with sodium carbonate and sodium metasilicate.
They have entirely different usage characteristics from the solvent cleaners being more able to remove thick layers of soil but requiring a hot solution to work effectively.
They are often promoted, correctly, as floor cleaners and for  cleaning friers and other fat using equipment where the soil has not reached carbonisation stage.
Degreasers can, with care, be applied to aluminium surfaces as silicates are less corrosive than the caustics.
Prolonged soaking of aluminium utensils should, however, be avoided.
The product is usually packed in plastic lidded tubs, 10–20 kilos, in which a measuring scoop is provided.
Colour tends to be important.
The yellow powders from some manufacturers are acceptable but some degreasers are marketed as white powders and may be mistaken for food ingredients.
Decarbonisers
Often as oven cleaners formulations of these products can also employ either the solvent or alkali route.
The solvent used tends to be methylene chloride thickened with SCMC to a gel consistency to slow down the evaporation of the solvent and to make the product easy to apply.
In this form it is brush applied to cold surfaces and therefore marketed as a cold oven cleaner.
Used hot it can be dangerous.
Liquid formulations are also produced for tank soaking of carbonised utensils.
A particular feature of methylene decarbonisers is that they can be used safely on aluminium, copper, brass and other metals normally badly corroded by alkalis.
Where these materials have to be cleaned methylene chloride is the only chemical option once items are soiled.
One compound based on methylene chloride also incorporates ammonium hydroxide to give it a characteristic smell.
The expense of solvent decarbonisers usually rules them out when caustic cleaners can be used.
Caustic cleaners are essentially formulations of detergent and either sodium or potassium hydroxide.
They are used on hot surfaces and are often marketed as hot oven cleaners.
Some formulations, incorporating a solvent normally glycol ether, have a useful low temperature activity.
Caustic machine detergents are sometimes used as decarbonisers under certain circumstances where costs are comparable.
Caustic products tend to be in liquid or gel format.
With the latter some confusion can arise, between ‘hot’ and ‘cold’products, so packaging and direction for use are important, if both are found on the same premises, to avoid use of the solvent on hot surfaces.
Concentrated powder should never be supplied as the mixture of caustic with water creates a violent heat generating (exothermic) reaction which can be very dangerous.
Colours again are important as all decarbonisers are hazardous to handle and some sort of warning label is appropriate.
Red is used by one major manufacturer but this is difficult to reconcile with the use of the same colour for acid products.
Perhaps orange would be more suitable with the promotion for the slogan, ‘orange for ovens’ etc, to reinforce its identity.
Packaging is usually similar to that used for liquid degreasers and, as the packs are similar, clear descriptions, labels and hazard warnings are essential
Tannin Removers
Sometimes tannin removers consist of a low concentrate sodium hypochlorite or common bleach.
They are often described as speciality products and are priced as such.
The most effective formulations are made from perborate and  polyphosphates.
Thickened bleaches are also effective.
As tannin is bonded onto an intermediate layer of scale an acid cleaner is usually more successful
Acid Cleaners
A variety of formulations is available usually consisting of hydrochloric acid which provides the aggressive reactive power and phosphoric which reduces the corrosiveness of the mix, in which role it is known as a corrosion inhibitor.
These formulations are commonly described as descalers or as toilet cleaners the latter being a frequent application.
Hydrochloric acid is sometimes replaced by nitric or sulphuric acid.
These formulations are supplied in liquid form and are similar in texture to detergents although with a slightly acrid smell unless perfumed.
Acid cleaners can be supplied in powder form.
They are generally compounded from sulphamic acid and sodium bisulphate and when added to water sulphuric acid is liberated.
Sulphamic acid is often blended with a non-ionic detergent for use in descaling expensive equipment such as dishwashing machines and as an acid wash in ‘clean-in-place’ systems after the use of an alkali machine detergent.
Sometimes chemicals known as buffers are added to slow down the reaction rate thereby reducing corrosiveness.
Sodium bisulphate is often included in powder toilet cleaners.
Packaging, description and colour are critical because if an acid is mixed with other products, particularly common bleach or ammonium hydroxide based formulations, dangerous fumes are released.
Sometimes the release is explosive and the result can be fatal.
Some manufacturers package acid cleaners in quantities, no greater than 500ml, in a nozzle pack to assist controlled use.
The clear identification of the product as an acid with prominent warnings and instruction should be firmly attached to the container and the colour should be used only for acids.
Perhaps red is most appropriate.
Too many manufacturers use green promoting confusion with other products.
Hand Cleaners
At their simplest these products are pure bar soap which is a refined compound made from animal fats and caustic soda.
The danger of contamination through the use of shared bar soap, the need for improved skin care, when washing is frequent, and the requirement for control over the bacterial skin flora has led to the development of a range of more sophisticated products.
These are usually in gel or liquid form and supplied at point of use via dispensers.
In general, these products may be supplied as ‘bactericidal’ or ‘non-bactericidal’.
The former are termed ‘skin disinfectants’ and were previously known as antiseptics.
Bactericidal products may be cationic detergents consisting of QAC-bisguanide combinations or liquid soaps compounded with disinfectant.
Non-bactericidal formulations are usually blended from an anionic detergent base and a skin conditioner either lanolin or glycerine.
These are known as emollients and restore natural fats to the skin.
Thickeners and preservatives also are added and for some less critical operations the use of a lemon perfume is tolerated.
Most hand cleaners are supplied ready to use.
Modern packaging styles include cartridge dispenser inserts which are to be recommended.
Disinfectants and Sanitisers
In the transition from chemicals to product the packaging, description and advised usage are critical as the formulation, however sophisticated, will not be able to overcome mis-use or mis-application.
Unlike cleaning chemicals which still perform even if they are grossly misused and, at worst can hardly leave a surface dirtier after application than before, misuse in disinfectants and sanitisers can result in an increase in bacterial contamination.
Dispensing devices include single dose sachets, measuring dispensers integral with the packaging and graduated containers or measuring caps which assist in the correct dilution of liquids.
Scoops may be provided for powders, although shakers are preferred, where the product is sprinkled neat onto the surface to be treated provided that the product is packed in shakers so users are not required to decant from a bulk container.
Product description must make clear the function of the product, using the appropriate British Standard term, so that it is less likely that the product will be used as a straightforward cleaning agent without the necessary controls.
Instructions should not only advise on the method of use but also indicate the product limitations and the checks and controls that can be applied to make sure that those limitations are not exceeded.
Drain Cleaners
These products are often caustic cleaners, sometimes nothing more than caustic soda, in granular form, packed in a tin.
There are however two specific product types that have some value and are known, collectively, as biological agents.
One is a preparation of dried bacterial cultures which when added to the drain is reactivated and break down fats into soluble form.
It is particularly useful for dosing grease traps and routine drain treatment and, despite its improbable description, is safe and effective.
The other, which works in a similar way, is an enzyme a lipolytic type that breaks down fats.
It is, however, less effective over a period and tends to be more expensive.
Both are ‘poisoned’ by the use of disinfectants in drains, high temperature or caustic effluent.
False Descriptions and Ambiguities
There are no statutory controls or codes of practice governing the description of products apart from the British Standard on terms used in disinfection which is widely ignored.
Safety legislation requires the disclosure of hazardous contents but this seems to be ignored as well.
The supply industry therefore has no standardisation in terms.
As a result differing terms are used to describe similar products.
The same terms are used to describe very different products and some terms are wholly inappropriate.
Misunderstanding and confusion are rife sometimes causing unnecessary damage or expense, personal injury or even death.
Common false descriptions and ambiguities are as follows:
General purpose cleaner : There is no such material applicable to the food industry.
The attraction of such a product is obvious and thus there is a strong temptation for manufacturers to supply and for purchasers to buy a product so described.
Invariably such products are sold at a premium price quite unjustified by the cost of their components.
Further cost is incurred by the buyer through increased labour costs when cleaners are given inefficient and unsuitable materials.
The nearest material approaching a general purpose cleaner is a concentrated caustic cleaner but the food industry requires more of a product than just cleaning power.
The range of products described earlier exists for valid and necessary reasons although there are often similarities in formulation between different products.
Aluminium cleaners : There is a wide range of products formulated specifically for cleaning aluminium cladding and vehicle bodies.
These products are invariably acid based, designed to strip dull oxidisation films from aluminium window frames decoratively finished and commercial vehicle bodies.
In this context they are not so much cleaning agents as ‘brighteners’ and would benefit from being described as such.
If they find their way into food operations and are used to remove dirt from aluminium surfaces they will not only be ineffective but may also cause considerable damage to the finish.
Anodised aluminium is particularly prone to attack.
The products appropriate for the food industries are either solvent based degreasers or decarbonisers.
Degreasers : Although a suitable description for specific products this term is also applied to engineering products which contain mineral solvents and other chemicals quite unstable for use in food environments.
Products thus described should only be used if specifically formulated for food industry use.
Even with food industry products there is some confusion over the application of the term.
There is a general assumption that degreasers are less aggressive products, based either on a glycol ether or sodium metasilicate, but some manufacturers apply the description to highly caustic products that would be more appropriately defined as caustic cleaners or decarbonisers.
Stainless steel cleaners : Many products so described are polishes or include substances which may leave undesirable residues on food contact surfaces.
Only products specifically formulated for food industry use should be considered.
In which context they are more accurately described as hard surface cleaners.
Frier and floor cleaners : These are examples of the tendency of some suppliers to name products in such a way that their application is restricted and an unnecessary number of products is stocked.
Many floor cleaners are alkali powder degreasers and are eminently suitable for friers and other applications.
A product marketed as a frier cleaner will invariably have other applications.
Product names therefore should not be so specific as to exclude wider use where appropriate.
Toilet cleaners : The use of such a description, unqualified, can be exceedingly dangerous as such products can be either bleach or acid based and the different products need to be kept apart.
A similar title in current use is ‘sanitary cleanser, which could describe anything.
Small print at the bottom of a label is not enough; identification of primary hazardous ingredients needs to be incorporated in the main description.
The restriction of the title ‘acid cleaner’ to toilets is also unfortunate as these products are suitable for much wider uses.
One product described as a toilet cleaner is highly effective for cleaning vending machines but operator resistance to this application would be expected.
Sterilisers : There is no such material as a steriliser in the context of cleaning in the food industry.
Products thus described are more accurately termed disinfectants.
Products which are capable of sterilising are either so noxious or corrosive in the concentration required that they cannot be used.
The use of the term steriliser implies a chemical capability that is not possible in the food industry.
An Overview
The chemical supply industry has been remarkably adaptable in formulating a wide variety of products to solve specific cleaning problems.
It is no fault of that industry that such a wide variety of soils and circumstances exist which dictate in turn a need for such a variety of products.
Whilst one objective is to reduce to an absolute minimum the range of products held there is a point at which rationalisation leads to a loss of efficiency and results in increased, rather than reduced, costs.
Irresponsible cleaning material suppliers may play on this fear and even the more responsible are prone to overstocking their customers.
Inevitably the onus rests on the buyers and users to specify the products needed.
On the part of the buyer this includes getting to know complex names and not being intimidated by them.
After all they are just names in the same way that ‘gravy’ is the name for a brown fluid that is poured over meat.
Equipment
A growing range of equipment is available to the cleaner from the more mundane items like mops and buckets to the highly sophisticated, automatic, computer controlled process cleaning systems.
Classification is still possible according to their mode of use as follows:
Sinks and tanks
Dosing equipment, dispensers and sprayers
Hand aids (including non power tools)
Mechanical (powered) tools
Clean-in-place (CIP) systems
Safety equipment
Within each class of equipment there exists a diversity which can satisfy the widest range of needs from a hot dog stall up to the multi million pound food processor.
Sinks and Tanks
Sinks, generally regarded as fixtures, are the basis of any cleaning operation big or small.
Cleaning invariably begins and ends at the sink whether installations use domestic equipment or the 450 litre giants or the catering ‘plonge’.
Construction materials will always be stainless steel.
No other metal is acceptable.
Most are fitted with hot and cold water supplies which should be clear of the sink well to allow the manoeuvring of large items in and out of the sink.
Integral drainers, also of stainless steel, should be part of any sink installation.
Additional areas of flat drained working surfaces are always useful for the dumping of dirty, and the temporary storage of clean, items.
Sinks are available as single or double units press-formed from a single sheet of steel.
Fabricated triple sinks can be specified.
Single sinks are rarely suitable for cleaning operations.
A separate rinse is normally required for every operation so twin sinks are the most common.
Some authorities specify three sinks for dishwashing and allied work but it is hard to see any justification for them.
Double and triple installations can be arranged so that they use a constant flow of water, which is introduced into the rinse sink, overflowing by weirs wash sinks, to discharge continuously via an overflow pipe fixed in the wash sink.
Usually strainers are fitted.
The same principle can be used with individual sinks contents continually discharging to the overflow.
This is a useful way of maintaining water temperature which may be augmented by heating devices.
Thermal insulation of sinks is rare and would probably be beneficial.
Sound deadening panels are often fitted in the form of bitumastic paint on the underside to reduce water drumming during filling.
Tanks can differ from sinks more in terms of function than design as a sink can also be used as a tank.
The difference is that the tank provides for the passive task of soaking items rather than for the active role of washing.
Improvised cleaning tanks may be used in every operation from  baines marie, jacketed boilers, bratt pans and friers in kitchens to process vats in major operations.
Even a dustbin on a gas ring or glass fibre bottle skips, unheated, may be employed and it is not unknown for an old enamel bathtub to be pressed into service.
Custom built tanks can also be obtained made to fit expected loads with castor mounting, heating elements, strainers and drain cocks.
Stainless steel is the preferred material, more expensive initially but more durable than other materials.
Dosing Equipment, Dispensers and Sprayers
This classification applies to devices used to deliver or control chemicals either at the point of use or for making up accurate solutions to be applied elsewhere.
There is a considerable variety both in type and level of sophistication.
Common devices are as follows:—
Tap proportioners (injectors ): Commonly used with manual detergents these are small devices screwed, or otherwise fitted, to the end of a tap spout with a feed pipe from a bulk chemical drum.
They operate by what is known as the venturi principle: water from the tap is forced through a restriction in the body of the dispenser which causes suction in the throat of the restriction.
The feed pipe is fixed at the throat and as water flows from the tap the suction draws up chemical from the drum to mix with the water.
Since the suction is proportional to the flow of water a constant level of solution results.
There are two common types both of which can be switched on or off according to need.
On one type the switch-off is automatic when water ceases to flow and the proportioner must be re-set before more chemical can be drawn again.
With the other type switch on and off is non-automatic.
Both types are adjustable and can be calibrated to give the desired strength of solution by turning a small screw set in the housing next to the discharge orifice or by a hexagonal key slotted into a screw at the back of the device.
Uptake of chemical varies with viscosity and if the product is changed a proportioner may need recalibration.
Dirt and scale deposited on the venturi throat can affect accuracy.
Tap proportioners should never be fitted to taps used to supply drinking or cooking water.
Bellows dispenser : These are wall mounted pumps hand operated by pushing a plunger set in a housing.
The effect is to draw chemical from a drum, via a feed pipe, to a projecting delivery spout.
Early models had the appearance of small bellows hence the name.
Delivery is not adjustable between 1–2 fluid ounces being delivered per operation.
Restrictors can be fitted on the feed pipe delaying the return of the plunger after operation and thereby limiting over-use of the chemical.
Swan-neck and mushroom dispensers : These are simple spring loaded push operated pumps, usually made from plastic, which are screw fitted to a chemical container in place of the cap.
One downwards push will dispense between 7 and 60 ml depending on the type.
The smaller dispensers are called swan-necks and the larger, with domed heads, are called, mushroom dispensers.
They are used respectively with 5 and 20–25 litre containers.
Neither dispenser can be used with corrosive fluids  as these materials tend to corrode the return spring and cause  discoloration and contamination of the chemicals.
Trigger sprayers : These hand sprayers easily recognisable by their trigger pump action are known widely to gardeners.
They are commonly supplied with 600 ml plastic bottle reservoirs into which the trigger head is screwed.
They provide an effective way of delivering all types of liquid products from hard surface to caustic cleaners.
Delivery can be adjusted by turning the nozzle head, fitted on a screw thread, to give a fine jet with a range of 2 metres or more or a fine mist comparable with aerosol sprays.
Variations include larger reservoirs of 1 litre or more and a heavier version with a longer range fitted with a separate pistol grip and a flexible feed tube that can be used to draw directly from a bulk container.
Hand pressure sprayers : Again well known to gardeners these sprayers consist of a rigid plastic or metal container with a screw on or integral hand pump assembly, a spray wand and trigger.
They vary in capacity from the hand held 2 litre version to the back-pack mounted 25 litre sprayer.
They are very useful for spraying large areas or inaccessible or elevated surfaces for which purpose some spray wands can be fitted with extensions of up to 2 metres.
Hand soap dispensers : Commonly wall fittings these can also be supplied as a pack in which a small swan-neck dispenser is inserted.
There are three basic types of fixed dispenser the swivel, the lift pump and the gravity feed.
The first type is basic and cheap.
It is inverted on a pivoted bracket whereupon soap drains through an orifice.
Prone to blockage they are unsuitable for general use.
Lift pump types are distinguished by having the pump mechanisms on top of a fixed reservoir.
They have a history of being unreliable.
Gravity feed pump types are acceptable especially those which are cartridge filled.
One type has a feed tube which feeds into a lever operated peristaltic type pump and there is no contact between the soap and the pump mechanism.
Hand soap dispensers can also be used to dispense certain less viscous types of barrier cream.
Machine detergent dispensers : These commonly serve dishwashing machines, bottle and tray washers and basic clean-in-place systems.
Often described as automatic dosing equipment they have one or two delivery systems for the detergent and for the rinse additive if fitted.
Detergent systems operate by means of an electronic sensor fitted in the wash tank of a machine or the re-circulation tank of a CIP system.
The sensor measures alkalinity and when the level falls below a pre-set value it activates a pump that delivers product from a bulk container to the tank in sufficient quantity to make up solution to the desired strength.
Rinse additive systems work by having a sensor linked to the rinse cycle actuator so that while rinse water is being pumped a metered dose of rinse additive is delivered.
Feed systems vary according to whether liquid or powder detergents are used as the same system cannot be used for both.
Powder systems either have a facility to pressurise the detergent drum, into which water is fed to solubilize the powder which is then fed by air pressure to the dispenser pump, or sachet filled hoppers which are auger fed into a chamber where water is mixed and thence to the delivery pump.
Both types are prone to blockage.
Liquid systems are straightforward having  a feed pipe from the product container direct to the non-priming delivery pump.
Accuracy and consistency, largely a facet of pump design, are the key requirements for these dispensers.
Modern installations usually use electrically powered cam driven diaphragm pumps.
Output is constant and can be infinitely varied within operating limits by vernier screws.
Once set they cannot be altered.
Obsolete systems use venturi feeds, similar to the tap proportioner, which are neither accurate nor constant.
One system uses a peristaltic pump which, although very accurate, cannot withstand back pressure.
If a fault develops in the machine water feed the product container can fill with water.
Sophisticated systems incorporate audible and visual signals to warn of product exhaustion, or malfunction, and interlock to prevent the wrong product being fitted.
The units are frequently enclosed in sturdy lockable metal cabinets fixed to the side of a machine.
Remote stepdown transformers are also fitted for safety reasons so that the dispensers can operate at 6 or 12 volts
Hand Aids
Items ranging from cloths and brushes to mops and buckets make this class of equipment the widest and most diverse.
Most are commonplace but no matter how sophisticated an operation some of them will be used.
They are thus examined, as follows:
Cloths : There are four main types used in the food industry, woven textile, non-woven synthetic, sponges or cellular cloths and disposable paper.
Woven textile cloths are manufactured mainly from natural fibres such as cotton or linen although some have a proportion of man made fabrics.
The most common type encountered is 100 per cent linen or cotton in an off white loose weave fabric known variously as stockinette, mutton cloth or scrim.
It is supplied to commercial users in a roll and usually by weight in 1 kilo quantities to be cut to desired lengths.
The fabric displays good mechanical cleaning properties, is chemically resistant and has high absorbency characteristics.
Lint or ‘fluff’ shed from conditioned cloths is minimal and tensile and tear strengths are good.
Typically stockinette is used as a dishcloth and for most general cleaning purposes.
Non-woven cloths are manufactured in a similar way to paper using wood fibres or synthetic fibres, often rayon, bound with chemical binders.
Marketed frequently under proprietary names their properties vary considerably.
Mechanical strength, absorption capacity, weight, bulk and lint shed are all adjustable by altering the types and ratios of fibres and the binders although optimising any one feature means reducing others.
For example it is possible to have a highly absorbent fabric but the fabric would have the strength of blotting paper.
Non-wovens therefore tend to be a compromise suited to particular applications.
All tend to be regarded as semi-disposable but life can be extended by bonding reinforcing woven mesh or synthetic sponge laminates.
Sponges are always synthetic and are usually made from polyurethane foam or similar expanded plastics.
These are cut to size and thickness, coloured to virtually any shade and are a useful alternative to cloths in some operations.
They have good mechanical and absorbency properties the former sometimes enhanced by bonding abrasive pads to one face.
Cellular cloths are basically thin sponges usually reinforced by a loose textile weave.
Disposable paper is also non-woven cloth in a lighter weight form.
Often recommended for cleaning purposes, to avoid the spread of contamination inherent in the use of cloths, it does not have the mechanical properties necessary for anything other than very light soil removal.
Paper is best reserved for drying particularly hand drying.
Available commercially either in interleaved sheets, rolls, or drum shaped coreless rolls, from which the paper is drawn from the centre, paper is invariably obtained from a dispenser of which there are several kinds.
Abrasive pads : These are random nylon fibres coated with adhesive to which abrasive particles are bonded with the whole being compressed into sheets and cut to size.
Quality varies considerably and with it durability and price.
They are a useful cleaning option, supplementing chemical activity, although they can be damaging to some surfaces.
Some pads can be fitted with holders and others are supplied with holders already fitted.
Pads with holders can form a useful cleaning tool.
Scouring pads : Formed from mild steel, copper or stainless steel mesh, manufactured into pads, these have little to commend them.
Steel wool and soap filled pads are useful although much frowned upon by many authorities.
Despite many attempts to provide alternatives they remain however the most effective way of restoring dull finishes particularly on aluminium utensils.
Brushes : Considerable development has taken place with these tools.
From the bristle tufts and wooden handles of old, brushes are now available with high density nylon tufts secured by stainless steel staples to polypropylene handles.
In this form they are durable, hygienic, heat and chemical resistant and excellent cleaning tools.
The variety in shape, size and function has also improved and specific brushes are now manufactured for a myriad of tasks in food industries.
Some of the more versatile are as follows.
Churn or utility brush : A short handled, stiff bristled brush shaped for use in awkward areas and for general cleaning.
They are a useful, if only partial, substitute for cloths.
Turks head brush : A dome shaped brush mounted usually on a 600–900 mm handle similar in general appearance to a toilet brush for which purpose they are often used.
They are ideal for reaching into restricted or less accessible areas such as the corners of rooms, equipment pockets and channels.
A twist action is employed in use.
Bulk tank brushes : Designed for use in the dairy industry, for the application that their name implies, these brushes have the elongated profile of a hedgehog and are also fitted to 600–900 mm handles.
They are ideal for such application as scrubbing walls and equipment.
Brooms : The modern broom is also a high density polypropylene or nylon construction with, hard or soft, long or short, tufts and a metal handle.
The soft broom is used for light sweeping on smooth surfaces and the hard type for rough or wet work.
Deck scrubbers : Essentially scrubbing brushes on broom sticks (stails) these are purpose designed tools for manual floor cleaning.
In this role they are more effective than, and preferable to, mops.
Bottle and ‘spout’ brushes : Tufted brushes in a wire spiral to form a cylindrical shape these brushes can be specified in lengths from 150 mm to nearly 1 metre and in diameters ranging from 5 mm to 150 mm.
They are vital for cleaning machinery tubes and spouts from vending machines and milk shake dispensers to full blown  process machinery.
A development is to include a small piece of cloth in an adapted end loop of a brush.
This is pulled through from the tufted end, a technique particularly useful for vending machine parts and similar to that used for cleaning rifles.
This, predictably, is known as a pull-through.
Wire brushes : More common in engineering and building trades these brushes, nevertheless, have applications in the food industries particularly for heavy cleaning.
Mops and Mopping systems : The common domestic type string mop is known as the socket mop and is generally unsuitable for food industries.
More acceptable are the kentucky mops which have flat, longer stringed heads, clipped rather than screw fixed to a wire frame.
The head is removable for washing or autoclaving.
Kentucky mops are supplied in various sizes and described by weight.
The main ones are 12oz, 16oz and 24oz the smallest being preferred by women users.
These mops cannot be used with an ordinary mop bucket because of their shape and are employed with hand or foot operated roller compression buckets or geared press wringers which are bucket mounted.
Two buckets are often used together, one for the cleaning solution and the other for the rinse water.
With the wringer and mop they make up a mopping system.
Other mops in use are the domestic type sponge or squeegee mop which is useful for immediate floor spill control because it is easy to use and does not require a special mop bucket.
The twist mop is a modern development of the socket mop with the handle being twisted to wring out the mop.
Heads on both these mop types are detachable for cleaning.
Squeegees : These are flat rubber blades mounted in a wooden or metal frame acting rather like windscreen wipers.
They may be hand held, for which they are the most effective tool for cleaning glass windows and large mirrors, or stail fixed for clearing water from floors.
If water can be diverted to a drain in a yard, rather than lifted by mops, squeegees are preferred.
Squeegees are easier to use, faster and dry a floor more completely.
Buckets : Often little thought is given to these humble items but the demands of the food industries are extreme.
Buckets therefore should be made of good quality, high density polythene, polypropylene or fibre glass with steel handles.
Cheap domestic buckets with plastic handles should be avoided.
The black buckets styled as builders buckets are useful for cleaning in low risk areas.
Stainless steel should be used for critical risk areas or for handling very hot liquids.
Scrapers : Another basic aid but nevertheless an indispensable tool particularly for heavy cleaning.
One with a plastic handle or bolstered rosewood with a rigid 25 mm wide blade is to be recommended.
Improvised scrapers can be used.
A 150 mm cut off length of 25 mm vanadium steel hacksaw blade sharpened at one end and wrapped in PVC insulating tape at the other makes a very useful scraper.
A two handed scraping device is a promising development.
Mechanical (Powered) Tools
This class of aids includes an assortment which have one common feature; some form of power is employed usually electrical.
Flexible drives : These are frequently marketed as pot wash aids but have application elsewhere.
A typical model would consist of fractional horse power electrical motor, wall mounted, delivering power via a flexible drive to which nylon  or steel wire rotary brushes are attached.
Compressed air, if available, can be used to power these tools.
Drill attachments : Similar to the previous category, but powered by direct drive from a hand held electric drill, these have some application in the drier phases of cleaning.
One ingenious attachment consists of a rotary wire flail, which is particularly useful, for carbon removal and is not as fierce as it sounds.
Floor scrubbers : These are essentially powered deck scrubbers available in two general types namely rotary disc brush and cylindrical brush machines.
Disc brush machines have limited application being effective only on smooth flooring.
Profiled, slip resistant or quarry tiled surfaces require the more effective cylindrical brush action with its greater ground pressure generally higher rotational speeds and more efficient brush action.
Certain types of cylindrical brush machines are arranged to flick dirt and used cleaning solution into d collector tank via a rotating collection drum so cleaning and drying the floor in a single pass.
Such machines have an incidental use on carpeting and may find therefore a role beyond the kitchen door.
Pressure jet cleaners : Often mistaken for steam cleaners, these are mobile high pressure pumps usually electrically powered with a lengthy pressured hose, spray wand and trigger assembly.
Petrol engined and tractor PTO drive versions are available for outside work.
Models may be termed ‘hot’ or ‘cold’depending on whether they are fitted with integral heaters.
Most ‘cold’ models are capable of accepting feed water up to 80°C.
Pressure delivery can be from 500 psi to 2000 psi or more 1000 psi is usually the limit for interior use.
Sizes range enormously from a towed compressor to a portable unit not much taller than a litre bottle with the former capable of delivering 3000 psi from a 3 phase supply.
Refinements include adjustable pressure options, detergent feed, dead man's handle and  attachments such as spray hoods and changeable nozzles which can shape the water jet from a fine pencil to a broad fan.
Fixed installations are available, feeding ring mains with take on points.
Despite their name, pressure jet cleaners are more rinsing machines than cleaners as preparatory work usually has to be carried out.
The detergent feeds often fitted are expensive ways of using chemicals.
It is usually better to pre-treat areas with a hand sprayer to allow adequate contact time.
Water volume can be a problem as about 10–15 litres a minute are produced which is equivalent to the flow of a running tap.
A pulse technique can reduce this to a controllable level.
Steam cleaners : Basically similar to pressure jet cleaners these machines incorporate a steam vessel and deliver high pressure steam rather than water.
They can offer little advantage over pressure jet cleaners, are sometimes dangerous and are generally more expensive to run.
Wet vacuum pick-ups : are vacuum cleaners capable of picking up water.
Better known since cheap domestic models became available these are valuable and indispensable tools that should be part of every food operation.
Trolley mounted pick-ups can be used with effect to replace floor mopping.
These models are fitted with a floor level squeegee-suction combination that all but dries floors on a single pass.
Crevice tools with a wander hose can deal with less accessible areas.
Other uses include cleaning blocked sinks, toilets, draining equipment and dealing with liquid spills.
With the addition of dry filters they can be used in the conventional  vacuum cleaner role with the particular feature that they can cope with much larger debris.
Sizes vary enormously from the 5 litre domestic model and the professional version of the same capacity that can be back-pack mounted for use in awkward areas to giants capable of holding 200 litres or more.
Some models have a secondary pump which can allow the collection tank to drain while the machine is still operating thus allowing extended periods of continuous running.
Centralised installations are also available similar in principle to the pressure jet installations with a fixed remote suction pump and collection chamber and with a ring main and suction points to which wander hoses may be connected.
Dishwashing etc. machines : Despite being used for a variety of functions, including cleaning crockery, bottles, trays, crates and numerous other items, these machines all operate on the same general principle.
They consist of a cabinet or tunnel in which items are placed and where they are subjected to hot spray of detergent solution followed by rinse water.
Older types and some glass washing machines use powered rotary brushes.
Within this general description there are two basic types namely the batch and continuous loader.
The batch loader is a single cabinet in which items remain stationery while spray bars direct solution over them at pressures around 5 psi.
Rotary platforms are sometimes fitted.
Detergent solution is usually recirculated from a tank which forms the lower part of the cabinet while rinse water is drawn fresh during each cycle from a heat exchange unit known as a calorifier.
Continuous flow machines form a tunnel made up of separate sections, wash and rinse, which operate continuously while items are drawn through on a link conveyor.
Pre-wash and intermediate rinse stages can be added.
Development includes low temperature dishwashers (LTDs) which use a higher spray pressure around 15 psi and more reactive chemicals to supplement heat.
As a result a lower water temperature can be used between 50–6O°C.
Drying and disinfection is achieved by chemical means sometimes in an additional stage.
For plastic tray washing the standard continuous flow system has been modified to route items into the wash tank in which there is a high power ultrasonic generator.
This is able to remove dirt resistant to normal energy combinations
Clean in Place (CIP) Systems
CIP systems are fixed systems commonly used in food factories, dairies, breweries and other operations with large runs of pipework and/or tanks to clean.
They enable food equipment to be cleaned without dismantling the plant.
Systems vary but the essentials are a detergent reservoir or reservoirs, solution pumps, dosing injector and control valves.
They may be very basic, as in the beer line cleaning equipment used in licensed premises, or highly sophisticated fully automatic computer monitored and controlled.
Beer line systems have a pressurised detergent solution vessel which takes the place of a keg and use the pumps and controls of the beer dispense equipment with a standing period.
They are not typical as CIP systems in industrial use tend to be complete add-on units.
There are three main types:—
Single-use systems
Re-use systems
Multi-use systems
The first two types are respectively those which use the detergents only once, discharging to drain after cleaning, and equipment which recovers detergent for re-use.
Multi-use are more sophisticated types combining the principles of both single and re-use systems.
By using automatic equipment that can serve several installations with a different programme for each if necessary.
Some degree of heat recovery is usually incorporated in all types of modern design.
The general sequence of operation tends to be the same for all types with a pre-rinse, to purge the food residues, followed by a hot caustic wash and then a highly diluted cold acid rinse.
Refinements to this basic theme centre on additional intermediate and final rinses and the circulation of disinfectants or the inclusion of a hot water disinfection cycle.
Air purges are sometimes included to maximise detergent recovery.
Operation is dependent on using the correct chemical products at the appropriate dilutions in the correct sequence with correct temperatures and a flow rate that will ensure maximum turbulence.
Maximum efficiency is achieved when these factors are optimised in relation to each other.
Tanks, rather than relying on turbulence, require multi-directional sprays.
These sprays can be delivered either via spray heads positioned strategically in the tank or by rotating jets.
Plant design is critical.
Pipelines must be fitted so as to maintain continuous flow at turbulence producing levels with valves, glands, seals, junctions and outlets so designed and positioned as to avoid causing ‘traps’ where food deposits can accumulate or cleaning solutions can stagnate.
The plant should also be self draining.
Given a correctly operating system advantages are considerable.
More sophisticated process equipment designs are available eliminating the need for routine dismantling and manual cleaning.
Labour requirements are also reduced and chemicals are used more efficiently.
Cleaning is faster, reducing down time and thereby increasing utilisation of machinery.
Food product quality is more easily maintained thereby reducing spoilage losses and production time through unscheduled cleaning.
All of this saves considerable cost without which the production of many foods would be uneconomic or impracticable.
In addition safety through the elimination of tank entry, component and chemical handling and dismantling is enhanced.
Sometimes personal skill levels can be reduced or different more available skills can be employed in better working conditions
Safety Equipment
Safety equipment can be grouped as follows:
Access equipment
Protective equipment
Other safety devices
Although often regarded as an on-cost safety equipment is an integral part of cleaning.
Safety equipment contributes directly to efficiency and productivity and indirectly to financial savings from a reduction in accidents.
Access Equipment
Access equipment can range from a simple stool or step-ladder to complicated mobile hydraulic lifting gear.
Equipment used in the food industries is often shared with general cleaning and maintenance departments.
Main items are as follows:
Ladders : Either as single piece ‘pole’, extension, or step and platform ladders these  are the workday tools of cleaning.
Most ladders are of aluminium construction for lightness and ease of handling.
They may be modified for specialist tasks such as roof work when they are often fitted with restraint devices or stabilisers.
Adaptations of the basic step ladder design, allowing use as an extension ladder and for uneven surfaces such as stairways, are particularly useful for light cleaning work in small operations.
Pairs of multiple step ladders or trestles can be bridged with purpose designed staging as a basic form of scaffolding.
A plank between two ladders is not considered adequate.
Independent scaffolding : So called because it is self supporting and not tied in to a structure except as temporary restraint.
It is usually formed from lightweight prefabricated sections which are locked together to form scaffolding of the desired length and height on which boarding is placed for the working area.
High level assemblies are called towers which may be castor mounted for limited movement.
Mobile platforms : Designed for straight vertical access and generally operated by one man.
There are three basic types: manually operated, powered and scissors.
Manual types are basically lightweight extension ladders with a base frame and stabilisers and a top mounted working cage for one man operation.
Powered versions change height by means of a C02 or nitrogen cylinder supply, or hydraulics, to an extensible pole and can be operated from the working platform.
Scissors types are extremely versatile powered by battery, propane gas or diesel.
They can be raised or lowered as well as moved horizontally from controls on the platform.
According to size they can accommodate two or more persons.
Horizontal cantilever extending platforms are fitted on some models.
Restraint systems and suspended cradles : Both types of equipment are designed for high level access.
They are usually, but not exclusively, used on building exteriors.
The restraint system incorporates strategically positioned ring bolts installed in the structure of a building which act as anchor points for a personal safety harness.
A similar system can be used for ladders.
Cradles, of a modern design, are often built into the building.
They are electrically powered and operate from supports built on rails with vertical and horizontal movement controlled from the cradle.
Manually operated temporary installations can also be used.
Most access equipment can be hired if outright purchase is not warranted.
Protective Equipment
This group covers personal items used to protect the wearer from top to toe against specific hazards.
Items include:—.
Safety helmets : Strong rigid plastic hats for use anywhere there is a danger of overhead items falling.
Although often a marginal need in food environments, where hygiene regulations require the use of head gear, it is often cheaper to use safety helmets which can be wiped clean rather than incur laundry costs from the use of linen caps.
Less rigid helmets may be provided for workers in enclosed spaces where injury can occur through contact with the structure.
They are designed to be less restrictive than full safety helmets and are known as ‘bump caps’.
Goggles : Available either as safety spectacles or fully enclosing goggles they are for use where there is the risk of high speed particle shed or fumes that may be injurious to the eyes.
Full transparent face shields or visors may be specified as an alternative and are sometimes an integral part of a safety helmet.
Ear defenders : Are supplied in the form of plug or fibre ear inserts or earphone types which fully enclose the ear.
The latter can be fixed to helmets and can  incorporate communication speakers.
Masks and breathing apparatus : Types include non-woven disposable covers for the nose and mouth, intended mainly for dust and large droplet fallout, half face rubber masks with replaceable filter cartridges and full face masks also with replaceable cartridges.
These are for use where dust, gas or fume emissions reach levels that are harmful.
In some situations air streamed integral visors and helmets are more appropriate especially in humid areas.
Breathing apparatus is intended for any situation where oxygen exclusion is a possibility or toxic gas levels exceed those which can be safely neutralised by masks.
Where this situation is a remote but real possibility escape or rescue sets should be stored for emergency use.
Sets may be independent cylinder supplied or air-line fed.
Overalls : Full bodied boiler suit style overalls are sufficient protection for most activities.
Nylon should be avoided as this material provides little water resistance and can cause the most appalling injuries in the case of fire.
Polycotton is more acceptable and smart, for light duties, but for heavy work 100 per cent cotton is the most suitable.
Fastenings need to be stud or velcro to avoid risk of button loss, causing food contamination, and to allow speedy removal in case of spillage or injury.
Aprons : Either full or half length, with or without bibs and made from thick rubber or cotton mesh reinforced PVC aprons may be highly desirable where hot corrosive liquids are handled in any quantity or where splashes are likely to occur.
Lighter weight aprons are invaluable during prolonged sink and allied work.
Gloves : Range from domestic grade, flock lined rubber for light cleaning, to heavy PVC styles with 450 mm cuffs which extend almost up to the armpits.
The latter are particularly useful when reaching into solutions to recover soaked items and for overhead work where drips from shorter length gloves can soak the upper arm.
Very light latex rubber gloves, similar to surgical gloves, can be used for light sensitive work when skin protection is needed.
Footwear : Non slip soles are essential to both wet and dry wear.
Rubber boots or wellingtons need to be fully waterproofed and unlined for ease of cleaning.
Steel toe protection is needed if heavy loads are handled and ankle support is always desirable.
British Standards
Most safety equipment is covered by British Standard specifications.
Equipment made to a British Standard Specification should always be supplied whatever the financial or other considerations
Other Safety Devices
Include warning signs such as‘wet floor’, ‘out of use — cleaning in progress’ and cones to mark off excluded areas.
Also in this group are ‘safe to work’ systems which physically lock out mechanical parts or electrical power supplies preventing them being inadvertently used while cleaning is in progress.
Key piece and other interlocks, which prevent cleaning solutions contacting food lines (accidental discharge) in CIP systems, may also be considered as safety devices 
Choosing a Supplier
The chemical and equipment supply industry is highly competitive with over 1000 suppliers serving 280,000 plus outlets.
Prices are highly variable and no guide is available whatsoever with regard to quality or performance.
Product ranges are immense with several thousand products to choose from.
In the absence of official or other standards this range can be overwhelming and often sufficient information on which to make comparisons and buying decisions is unobtainable.
Despite this materials must be bought.
Too much expenditure is involved for decisions to be made on the basis of the influence or favour of suppliers' representatives.
Few buyers in any event fully realise the extent of their cleaning materials purchases as the various items are distributed amongst diverse cost centres and attributed budgets.
As a result purchasing power is rarely exercised to its fullest extent with its  attendant cost savings.
Many operations deal with dozens or more suppliers when one or two at most could satisfy all needs.
It makes unarguable sense to concentrate materials purchases as much as is commercially desirable and to obtain supplies from as few sources as possible.
Where this happens though choice of suppliers is critical.
Since the economic advantages are overwhelming and a greater and more expert level of service can be expected it is appropriate and justifiable to spend some time on supplier selection.
In this context it is essential that the buyer retains the initiative, to end up with the products, materials and levels of service needed by the organisation and not those which the supplier wishes to provide.
A fairly standard selection procedure therefore is involved as follows:—
Identification of tasks
Matching materials with tasks
Preparation of a materials specification
Identification of suppliers
Invitation to supply
Preliminary screening
Product trials
Trial evaluations
Negotiation of a supply agreement
These stages, apparently complex and certainly time consuming for both buyer and supplier, are less problematic and time consuming than the effects of buying and using incorrect or inadequate products.
Responsible suppliers, who have everything to gain by maximising product penetration, will welcome the chance to contribute and usually will assist in every way.
Even to the extent of formulating new or repackaging existing products to suit specific requirements.
Identification of Tasks
This cannot be done from behind a desk as it requires direct observation of the operation, sometimes for an extended period, to find out what is actually done on site as well as what should be done.
Details should be taken regarding all equipment and areas under four headings:
Soil type and extent
Surface materials involved
Situation of cleaning
Safety implications
Conveniently this embodies a checklist of four ‘S’ s.
Soil types should be expressed in terms of the classification described in chapter one.
Surface materials should be identified in terms of how they may be affected by chemical attack and the situation should identify any special problems, locations, and preferred methods of cleaning.
Safety implications include the level of staff training and capacity to absorb training as well as operational hazards.
The successful conclusion of this activity yields a list of tasks undertaken with details relevant to chemical selection.
Matching Materials with Tasks
Matching is carried out initially by grouping all the tasks with similarities in soil types and levels.
Against each group a preliminary choice of chemical is made based on chemical types that are also listed in chapter one.
The group details are then re-examined for surface materials that might rule out the preliminary choice because of corrosion problems and choice is modified by the addition or substitution of a chemical type that will not affect the surfaces involved.
Again the choices are examined but this time in view of the specific application requirements in the situations of use with respect to the product classifications in chapter three and taking into account disinfection requirements from which products are selected.
The choices are assessed taking into account disinfection requirements from which products are selected.
The choices are assessed in relation to any safety requirements or limitations.
Finally each choice is reassessed against all criteria to verify selection.
An example illustrates this procedure in action.
Observation has revealed extensive areas of detergent responsive light soiling.
The preliminary choice is obviously a detergent.
There are no limitations imposed by the materials.
So the situation is considered.
The situation is that some of the cleaning is manual, in sinks, some on hard surfaces away from the sink and machine cleaning is also used.
Four products therefore are needed a manual detergent, a hard surface cleaner, a machine detergent and a rinse additive.
Re-assessment of the product choices confirms the requirement although it emerges that the surface material of the machine washed items is frequently aluminium so a non caustic machine detergent is specified.
By a similar route, also taking into account product choice, equipment types needed are identified.
Experience and common sense will often allow short cuts to be taken in the procedures with relevant product choice being determined from direct observation.
Preparation of a Materials Specification
This is a crucial step with no short cuts.
The specification is the ‘shopping list’ that is to convey to potential suppliers exactly what is needed against which products may be proposed.
The document should list products by generic name with a breakdown of chemical components to avoid confusion.
It should also state the specific variations required in terms of concentration, format, appearance etc.
General areas of intended use can be included, as a cross check, in case of errors in selection.
Identification of Suppliers
Not all, by any means, of the 1000 plus suppliers will be suitable.
To ensure the widest scope for getting the best deal it is necessary to exclude those which cannot supply on the terms required.
A preliminary identification can be made from the type of supplier.
There are four main types:
Manufacturers
Janitorial Supply Houses (wholesalers)
Composite manufacturers/wholesalers
Cash and Carry's
Manufacturers : these tend to be specialists and in the main offer a limited range which often does not include equipment.
Some will not deal direct except in very large quantities.
Those which trade generally tend to offer technical expertise and support service that includes training facilities and delivery.
Prices can be, but are not always, keenest from this source.
Most operate nationwide.
Janitorial Supply Houses : largely the ‘jack of all trades’ supplying anything and everything on a commodity basis.
Unbranded or own label products may undercut substantially manufacturers lines but some are suspect on concentration and others, particularly detergents, may be contaminated as a result of d.i.y.
formulation and packaging in unsatisfactory conditions.
They are not necessarily the cheapest but can sometimes offer a package deal supplying all requirements from a single source with own stock and products bought in for the purpose.
Few can be relied upon for any technical back-up or support services although they can draw upon the services of their manufacturing suppliers for this purpose.
Most operate on a local basis but there are some national groups.
Composites : essentially manufacturers in their own right which stock and sell other manufacturers' products.
They can at best offer all the advantages of the manufacture and janitorial house.
Cash and carry's : tend to offer a ‘no-frills’ service on a price basis although they are not necessarily the cheapest and to their prices must be added the cost of collection.
Some combine with, or are part of, a Janitorial Supply House.
Ranges in ‘pure’ cash and carry's tend to be limited to fast moving items so specialist products may not be stocked.
Determination of the type of supplier required, having regard for such factors as delivery arrangements, credit agreements, the need for technical support and the administrative convenience of single source supply, plus the supply area will considerably reduce the numbers of suppliers to be approached.
Names and addresses of relevant suppliers may be drawn from a number of sources namely  references in trade magazines and yearbooks, representative calling and ‘yellow pages’ provide details.
Local and national trade exhibitions often yield a valuable crop.
Invitation to Supply
Potentially suitable suppliers are approached at this stage with an invitation to be considered for a supply relationship.
The invitation should make it clear that a selection procedure is in progress and that all that is required are details, including prices and, if appropriate, samples of products for evaluation, the result of which might be an invitation to conduct trials.
The specification produced earlier should be included and to assist the supplier in providing information it is reasonable to supply information on the following:
Expected consumption rates
Period of supply
Approximate total value of the business
Nature and number of units and location
Delivery requirements
Trading terms expected
It may also be necessary to request suppliers to provide the details by post refraining from sending a representative.
Unless all representatives are to be seen it is fairer to refuse to see any representatives at all until preliminary screening has been carried out.
Those that do call can be given a copy of the invitation document if they are not already aware of it.
To ensure prompt attention it is also advisable to set a time limit for the return of details after which submissions will not be considered.
The possibility of postal misdelivery and of an administrative mishap at the suppliers  ' office may be taken into account and it may be appropriate to send out reminders prior to the closing date.
Product leaflets and other materials in support of submissions should not be discouraged and suppliers may well be requested to enclose relevant literature.
Preliminary Screening
Submissions made by suppliers may well be greater in number than can be handled for trial, so selection is needed to produce a short-list.
Elimination may be made on the following basis.
Product range inadequate
Information supplied insufficient
Delivery arrangements unsatisfactory
Style and quality of submission
A submission which contains sufficient, well prepared and relevant information in an attractive, well presented form, indicates a competent supplier.
Prices at this stage should be ignored as they are only relevant in respect of proven performance.
Product Trials
Suppliers selected for trial should be notified and invited to participate in the planning organisation.
A period of between four and six weeks should be allocated  for each competitor.
For each trial various details need to be agreed as follows:—
Commencement date and exact duration
Supplies needed and delivery date
Staff training requirements
Trial conduct
Supervision and monitoring arrangements
It is also appropriate to forewarn staff, especially supervisors who need a full brief, to seek their co-operation and to involve union personnel if relevant.
In as much as the purpose of the trials is to establish the suitability of a package of products, used for maintenance rather than remedial cleaning, it may also be necessary to arrange for a ‘deep clean’ prior to the trial otherwise the results may be distorted.
Commencement date : should be on a day sufficiently quiet to bear the inevitable disruption and to accommodate staff training and on a day when staffing is not unduly affected by holidays or other absences.
Supplies needed : should be sufficient to last the period of the trial with a small reserve.
These should be delivered in advance, but locked away securely, from the rest of the cleaning materials.
There is no reason why reduced prices or free stock should not be accepted providing this does not prejudice the outcome.
Any dispensers needed should be fitted and filled on the day of commencement, not before, otherwise they may be misused before their function is known.
Staff training : this should be carried out on the day of commencement or the day immediately preceding.
Suppliers staff may be involved in training, particularly for product demonstration, if this is representative of their normal support.
Training documents if available should be distributed during or after the training session.
Trial conduct : Supplier's staff should be prepared to accept restrictions on access during the trial to prevent distortion and for planned visits to be controlled to cover specific aspects previously agreed.
In general any interference should be minimised and once training is complete staff should be left alone.
Supervision and monitoring : If possible one person from the buyer's staff should be appointed in overall charge of the trial.
Supervision should be rigid and aimed at reproducing the style and level typical of normal operations.
Formal monitoring should commence with an inspection of cleaning/disinfection standards, immediately preceding the trial, a record of which should be kept.
Consumption monitoring should take place after a settling-in period has elapsed to take account of staff learning curves and untypical use during product familiarisation.
A period of a week will usually suffice for this purpose after which a stock-take is conducted and the level taken as the opening stock.
Further formal monitoring should then be reserved for a defined mid-point and the trial end.
Mid-point should be confined to a standards inspection reproducing that conducted pre-trial.
At the end of the trial a closing stock should be taken, a further inspection made and staff should be asked for their views on each product under trial.
Informal monitoring may be conducted throughout the trial together with discrete observation of staff behaviour about which notes may be written.
As far as possible monitoring should be undertaken by the person in charge of the trial except where specialist techniques or material are needed such as bacteriological monitoring for disinfectant performance.
In this case the supplier or a consultant may be asked to assist if facilities are not available ‘in house’.
Trial Evaluations
The purpose of the trials has been to obtain raw data which must be assembled and evaluated to provide a basis for comparison.
The data thus gained can be assembled under separate headings for each product as follows:
Performance
Acceptability
Convenience
Economy
Safety
These five evaluation criteria conveniently form the acronym ‘PACES’ which is highly appropriate in this context.
Performance
This is assessed entirely from the objective assessment derived from inspection reports or bacteriological data.
Given that pre-trial standards were acceptable, the maintenance of, or an improvement in those standards is to be expected during and at the end of the trial.
In case of doubt, or where results may be not representative of the product capability for reasons outside the scope of the trial, such as staff sickness with certain cleaning tasks not being carried out, a typical situation may be set up and a specific cleaning operation carried out reproducing typical use conditions.
User opinion, while not to be completely disregarded, is almost totally valueless in respect of performance as judgement is too often obscured by extraneous factors.
Some criteria, such as bacteriological standards are not capable of being visually assessed.
In any event the user's opinion of a product is reflected in the standard achieved so actions speak louder than words.
Acceptability
To a certain extent it does not matter how well a product performs if the user takes a strong dislike to it then it will not succeed in the long run.
Acceptability therefore is important and almost entirely expressed in user comments gained from questioning.
It will be manifest in opinions about appearances, texture, smell and packaging and can sway the choice between products with comparable performance.
If there are strong performance reasons for wanting a user unacceptable product changes in appearance or other factors can be negotiated with the supplier.
Other aspects of acceptability relate to the product behaviour in relation to taint, corrosion and harmonisation with house colour codes.
In some respects however lack of acceptability is desirable.
For products that are expensive and only used sporadically an unattractive product may be chosen if it has an exceptional performance as its handling characteristics will ensure that it is only used as a last resort and not used casually when other cheaper products would suffice.
With regard to safety, if a product is misused or overheated it is better if unpleasant or acrid fumes are given off rather than sweet smelling, pleasant fumes that may be toxic 
Convenience
At first sight a matter of user opinion, assessment of convenience is more involved and should be the subject of objective rather than subjective analysis by a technique known as decision path analysis (DPA).
The basis for DPA is that physical effort is freely expended and wasted in a work context for want of care and thought required to perform a task efficiently.
To achieve correct use of a product certain steps must be taken.
At each critical juncture an assessment should be made regarding the correct dose, correct equipment, product activity etc.
A product where the dosage must be finely calculated arithmetically from the instruction data provided to arrive at the quantity of product needed required more thought and more decisions than a product dispensed semi-automatically via a dispenser or one which is supplied ready for use.
In user terms it is less convenient.
By counting the actual number of critical steps or decisions involved in the makeup and use of a product an objective figure can be arrived at as a measure of convenience.
The lower the figure the more acceptable is the product
Economy
Economy is a measure of how much the product costs over the period of use with regard to the performance achieved.
It is not a measure of price for no matter how cheap a product is if it does not achieve the desired result it is expensive.
Cost is derived from the consumption figures, obtained by stock taking, applied to unit price of the product.
The figure thus derived can however be suspect.
Variations in workload and other factors between trials may affect comparability.
Under the circumstances it is more accurate to carry out comparisons as follows:—.
Liquid products for manual use : This is calculated by standardising arithmetically the price to achieve a true cost which represents the price the product would be if it were at a standard concentration of 30 per cent.
To begin with, find the price quantity and the percentage active ingredients (concentration) that is required which should be available from the specification returns.
Then:
If a product quantity is given in kilogrammes and volume is not obtainable divide the kg figure by 1.1.
If figures are given in gallons multiply by 45 to obtain litres.
Percentage may be expressed either as volume or weight ratios.
Standardise on volume ratios by dividing weight based percentages by 1.3 in order to make them comparable.
The lowest true cost represents the best value.
Powder formulations can be compared in the same way, although since the concentrations tend to be higher this formula can be used:
Machine detergents : Comparative costing is a little more difficult as two or more chemicals are involved, such as detergent and rinse additive, and it is often necessary to compare powders with liquids.
Here trials are used to establish the concentrations necessary to achieve optimum performance.
From these are calculated the doses required for a quantity of water, usually 100 litres, if water consumption for each process requiring chemical is the same.
Otherwise 100 litres is taken as the base for the highest consumption process and for the others doses are expressed proportional to the highest level.
For instance in a tank dishwasher roughly 90 litres of rinse water are dosed to every 100 litres wash water dosed.
Calculations are then carried out as follows for a dishwasher:
1.
Calculate detergent cost = dose/100 litres × unit price.
2.
Calculate rinse additive cost = dose/100 litres × unit price
3.
Add: detergent cost and rinse additive cost.
This equals the comparative cost and again the lowest figure represents the best value.
Package costing : Where complete packages are being compared price mix may vary considerably between suppliers.
So that while the true cost of the manual detergent may be cheaper from one supplier the cost of the degreaser may be more expensive.
What is needed in this case is a single figure that gives an indication of which package as a whole is best value.
This is known as the package index and is obtained in the following way for each package:
1.
Obtain the total cost of products used in the package from trial data based on consumption and price.
2.
Obtain the cost of each product used in the trial.
3.
List each product type in the package
4.
Calculate the cost of each product as a percentage of the total cost and enter the results against each product type.
5.
Calculate the true cost of each product and enter cost against the percentages entered earlier.
6.
For each product multiply the percentage by the true cost then add all the figures.
The result is the package index.
The package index is not a precision tool but in practice variations between packages can be in the order of 2–300 per cent so the differences are likely to exceed percentage error.
Once more the lowest figure represents best value.
System costing : With some products the cost of dispensers, applicators or other ancillaries can be a significant part of the total cost.
In some cases these additions can far exceed chemical costs, particularly with disinfectants, where the use of disposable paper may be the main cost.
Where this is a factor in comparisons an apportionment should be added to true costs equivalent to the cost of ancillary products necessary to dose the unit quantity of the chemical involved.
Safety
All products are potentially hazardous even detergents.
Conversely all products are safe if handled and used correctly.
Therefore considerations of safety relate mainly to operational capability to handle chemicals safely and not so much to the characteristics of the product.
If the conditions were such during trial that an actual or potentially hazardous situation arose questions of safety predominate.
Negotiations of Supply Agreement
Application of the PACES formula is almost certain to result in the most appropriate supplier becoming readily apparent given that preliminary screening took into account all the other factors relating to supply.
A quite possible result though is that no one supplier is completely satisfactory on all counts across the whole range of products.
Responsible suppliers however are extraordinarily flexible.
If the potential business is valuable enough, or of the deficiencies are such that they can be convinced that improvement will improve their trading prospects as a whole, then there is great scope for negotiation to seek changes that will satisfy requirements.
Despite this there may be points that cannot be accommodated in which case there is a valid case for splitting the business between two, but rarely more, suppliers, each providing an agreed package.
This option has its advantages as the presence of competition prevents either supplier becoming complacent.
Given that agreement is reached and a contract is established, either formally or informally, the matter of supply is resolved in a way that will ensure continuity of suitable materials with the minimum of problems.
Supplier Relationship
Despite the technical overtones of the selection procedure the supply of goods is essentially a matter of personal relationships in a mutual atmosphere of trust.
Thus if there are problems or difficulties they can almost always be solved by discussion.
Constant liaison at the appropriate level is therefore necessary to avoid a situation arising where problems have occurred about which the supplier is not aware.
Given the information and access responsible suppliers will go to great lengths to solve a real problem up to and even including commissioning full scale research projects.
Administration
The diversity of products in modern cleaning practice is part of a sophisticated answer to demands for lower costs and greater efficiency.
This approach however is not without problems and to cope with them sophisticated administration systems are needed exercising controls in five main areas:
Storage
Stock control
Ordering
Distribution
Expenditure
These words can be summed up in an acronym DOSES.
The need for these controls cannot be over-emphasised as without them every facet of the cleaning may suffer.
Storage
The storage of cleaning products is every bit as demanding as the storage of food and in some cases more so as considerable danger can arise if conditions are not satisfactory.
Moreover many products are extremely expensive and attractive for sundry unauthorised uses.
Storage is concerned with space and, conveniently as so often happens, requirements can be summed up in an acronym this time SPACES which stands for—
Secure
Protected
Adequate
Cool
Exclusive
Systematic
Secure : Any store must be secure and kept locked unless under continuous observation by a suitable person to prevent unauthorised entry.
The structure must be intact to prevent access by other means.
Adequate key security must also be maintained with key issue restricted to nominated key holders.
Protected : Most cleaning products must be kept dry or their contents, packaging or labelling will suffer.
This applies to protection from rain and other water sources.
Also relative humidity must be kept down.
A durable well constructed store is therefore indicated.
Beer cellars and the like are rarely suitable, as the humidity is often too high, neither are unheated outhouses, garages or similar buildings.
Structures akin to those required for dry goods stores are most appropriate without necessarily the same provision for ‘cleanability’.
Adequate : There needs to be enough space for the storage of all materials held for the normal interval between deliveries with provision for reserve stocks in case of extended delivery periods.
Sufficient space must be provided to allow reasonable access for sorting, stocktaking and unpacking.
If breaking bulk involves the transfer of potentially harmful materials to other containers provision should be made for a sink, water supply and worktop.
Adequate lighting is also necessary in all stores.
Cool : A great many chemicals decompose rapidly under storage at high temperature some with the production of poisonous  gases and some with the risk of pressure build-up in packaging resulting in an explosion or both.
Chemicals therefore should be kept cool.
A general maximum is 30°C with 10°–15°C being preferred.
The emphasis is on cool.
Equally temperatures should not be too low and should never be allowed to fall to, or below, freezing otherwise products may be ruined.
Boiler room or rooms associated with heating plant should be avoided.
In all stores adequate ventilation should be provided as an aid to temperature control with mechanical air conditioning if needed.
Such provision also has safety implications in that ventilation is needed to remove any toxic gas produced through normal chemical decomposition.
Exclusive : For accountancy reasons and facilitating identification of stock usage stores should be exclusive to the area or cost centre serviced.
Otherwise stock may be withdrawn to many areas without proper records being kept.
For security and safety reasons stores should be kept exclusive and the provisions of hygiene regulations usually prohibit cleaning materials being stored with food.
There is a very real danger that cleaning stores may become general junk rooms providing a home for everything and anything that cannot be stored easily.
This tendency should be resisted.
Systematic : Facilities must allow for the systematic storage of goods which means adequate racking with suitable shelf spacing.
Marked bays or shelving for each product type stocked should be allocated and reserved specifically for those products.
The arrangement of goods should be such that heavy items and liquids are kept at the lowest levels to avoid unnecessary lifting and to reduce the effect of spillage or container fracture.
Chemically incompatible liquids that could cause safety problems if mixed should be kept well apart.
Stock Control
Provisions for stock control should be similar to those applied to food stocks.
Deliveries should be logged and after checking for shortages and damage goods should be fully unpacked and stored correctly in the allocated spaces.
All withdrawals should be logged either on ‘bin cards’ or by other means.
Periodic stock checks should be made, discrepancies investigated and inventories up-dated.
Allowing suppliers representatives to control stocks is liable to misuse even if it appears to be attractive
Ordering
This function should be severely restricted to as few persons as possible.
These should be nominated in order of preference.
Only one person at any one time should  have ordering authority for any particular area passing authority to named deputies in turn in the event of absence.
Some suppliers' representatives are highly adept at pressurising junior staff into placing orders.
It may be necessary therefore to circulate all personnel to advise them of ordering procedure and nominated staff.
It is never advisable to allow suppliers' representatives to compile orders.
A strict record should be made of all orders placed which should be kept available for checking against delivery notes and or invoices.
Preferably no order should be placed without a formal document or reference to an order number.
It is not necessarily good practice to confirm telephone orders by posting a written order as confusion may result in duplication of deliveries.
Some advanced systems work on an ‘approved supplier’ basis with authorised suppliers allocated a code number.
Products for which they have authority to supply are also given code numbers and unless invoices are referenced to order number, with suppliers and product codes, payment cannot be made without investigation.
These systems have much to commend them when ordering has to be made from multiple or remote sites.
Quantities ordered should be controlled by reference to pre.set maximum and minimum stock levels determined from past consumption information with orders placed at regular intervals.
It is always good practice to synchronise times with suppliers' delivery schedules thus minimising time between order and delivery which also minimises stock holding requirement.
Artificial restrictions on ordering levels, such as pre-set expenditure limits on each order, are so easily circumvented that they are not realistic controls.
It is better to categorise products according to type and ordering frequency and apply limits on authority to order for each type.
Useful categories are
Consumables: frequent, regular orders
Semi durables-infrequent irregular orders
Capital goods: rarely ordered
A great deal of assistance can be expected from suppliers.
Custom-made order forms, listing ‘authorised products’ only, and stock control forms can be obtained from some.
They may be prepared to build their own checks into ordering referring unscheduled or non-conforming orders to unit management for specific authorisation before actioning.
Distribution
Distribution is the process of making the right materials available at the right time, in the right quantities and in a condition in which they can be used.
The key to successful distribution is having the right amount no more no less.
A plentiful supply of anything is a recipe for disaster.
It invites misuse and even theft.
So much material may be readily available that some staff can feel that a little bit would not be missed.
It is also a curious facet of human nature that the more you have the more you use so over-use will tend to be rife.
Furthermore over-liberal issue of some materials, like cloths, can lead to control difficulties which in turn can lead to contamination hazards.
As with ordering, therefore, there needs to be a system and a nominated person with named deputies in charge of each area.
Since distribution concerns access the  requirements of a distribution system, by happy chance and some contrivance, can be summed up in yet another acronym, ACCESS, standing for:
Accessible
Convenient
Controllable
Effective
Simple
Safe
Accessible : Materials should be accessible at all times when cleaning is carried out.
They are of no use to anyone locked in a store.
Cleaning is often carried out at ‘unsocial hours’ when the key holders to the store are not available or the store may be some distance from the area of operation.
This may involve the provision and limited stocking or small local stores.
Convenient : Distribution should not be confined to making materials available in the general area of use.
They should be brought right up to each individual point of use to maximise convenience.
In many operations more time is spent on searching for, collecting and assembling cleaning materials than is devoted to the pure cleaning function.
Controllable : Random distribution especially to the point of use invites other problems.
Products tend to be misplaced or even completely lost or they get in the way but somehow they never happen to be available when wanted.
Control if exercised by making the individual user responsible, by name, for the materials issued, even to the point of making a personal issue against a signature.
Shared responsibility minimises effective control.
Precise methods by which control is exercised depend on the product.
Heavy bulk chemicals are controlled by the provision of fixed dispensers.
Light and portable products both chemical and equipment are best controlled by assembling them into ‘kits’, ready for use in an improvised or specially provided container.
Larger but still portable equipment can be clipped to a wall area with the profile of the tool painted onto the background similar to mechanics' tool boards.
A missing tool is then readily apparent.
Colour coding of materials, by areas of use, is also a useful control if the colours used do not conflict with product coding systems.
Effective : In an attempt to make distribution more controllable and easier, for the administrator rather than the user, it is common for the number of products distributed to be restricted.
Inevitably efficiency suffers.
Thus the distribution system should be geared to what is needed for effective cleaning not around what is easy to distribute.
Simple : A comprehensive system does not have to be complicated.
Once materials have been booked out of a main store formalities and paperwork should be kept to a minimum or avoided altogether.
Replenishment of kit or contents or other materials should be on a simple ‘new for old’ or ‘full or empty’basis without obstacles, delays or artificial restrictions.
Safe : Distribution systems need to be safe in their own right and to facilitate or even promote safe working as far as possible.
All bulk chemicals should retain their identity with intact labelling, instructions and safety precautions.
Where products are transferred from their original containers to more convenient packs those packs  should be marked with the contents and be readily identifiable as cleaning material containers.
Even if the product is not hazardous in use it may become confused with a food product.
On no account whatsoever should cleaning chemicals be transferred to food containers, bottles or packs used for drinks or drinking vessels including paper or plastic disposable cups.
This is a very real cause of accidents and has led to several fatalities in recent times.
Breakdown packs, spray bottles and the like are particularly prone to misuse and misidentification.
With the risk of a product being used on the wrong surface or half-full containers being topped up with incompatible chemicals.
Under use conditions even durable screen printed markings do not survive very long.
Where practicable different products in physically different containers with dissimilar modes of action may be used.
In a cleaning kit for instance it is quite possible to provide one product in a squeeze pack, another in a powder shaker and a third in a spray bottle.
Where spray bottles are more widely used and there is a risk of confusion colour coding is desirable and such a provision would take precedence over our control needs.
Bottles are readily available with spray heads moulded in several colours.
Using colours readily available the following code can be applied
Green: hand safe or neutral products
Blue: disinfectants or sanitisers
Orange: corrosive alkali products
Red: acids
A further function of the distribution system is making safety equipment available.
Hazardous materials should be provided in such a way that the appropriate protective clothing should automatically be provided.
A simple cleaning kit for instance can include rubber gloves, disposable masks and goggles if necessary.
Alternatively checks can be built into the system that restrict the availability of certain specific products unless the potential users can demonstrate that they are suitably equipped.
Contrary to the general principles of distribution certain products may have to be restricted to named users who have special training.
Such is customary in hotels where bleach is ready available.
Acid cleaners are accessible to and are used only by senior supervisors.
Similar provisions may apply in other operations.
Expenditure
Financial monitoring, necessary for business reasons, is also a powerful aid in the control of cleaning.
Excessive expenditure is indicative of misuse or other problems and under-spending is equally significant as it may be the first clear sign that cleaning is not being carried out to its proper extent.
Pure business accountancy however is rarely selective enough to pick up changes in cleaning expenditure as many items are often included with more general expenditure and are thus concealed.
To be effective therefore a framework must be set up which will allow expense to be apportioned and identified and variations detected.
This framework requires:
Identification of cost centres.
Setting up accurate budgets.
Financial segregation.
Accurate records.
Cost centres : Each operational area of a department should be identified and treated as an independent unit for the purpose of accountancy with all items of cleaning expenditure identified.
This may include labour and power as well as chemical products and equipment with separate metering of electricity and gas supplies.
Budgets : These must be accurate, detailed and identified exclusively with each cost centre.
An overall cleaning materials budget accessible to several departments is useless as it invites irresponsibility as expenditure cannot be traced.
Equally a sum allocated to a department to cover all expenditure does not aid control.
Budgets should set expenditure for principal areas of expense and may with advantage be so specific as to set amounts for individual chemical products and equipment.
They should be based on a realistic assessment of expenditure requirements, for the period to which they apply, neither too high nor too low.
Historical data, on which budgets are frequently based, may not be valid and may perpetuate inherent inefficiencies and bad practice.
If they are to be used as efficiency indicators budgets should never be used as a means of containing or reducing expenditure by freezing levels or imposing artificial or arbitrary cuts.
Rather cuts should come from examination of working methods and materials and introducing more cost-effective measures.
These should then be reflected in the budgets.
In this way budgets remain the servants not the masters.
Neither should the budget be treated as the little tin god that stifles all thought, initiative and development.
Categories of expenditure should be sufficiently flexible to allow transfer of funds if increase in one category would lead to overall savings.
Surpluses on a period of account should not be automatically lost, if they can be demonstrated to be the result of efficient working and not over budgeting, otherwise controllers will ensure that there are no surpluses.
Financial segregation : Items of account must be kept strictly identifiable with the user department.
Ordering and payments should be identified and stocks of materials must be kept separate.
Transfers between stores or departments must be controlled.
The value of shared facilities or labour must be apportioned strictly in proportion to relative benefits received.
Records : All transactions, transfers and expenditure should be recorded in sufficient detail for the information to be usable.
They may be expressed in terms of overall expenditure and cost per item and include comparisons with historic expenditure and budget expectations.
The use of micro electronics in this respect is particularly useful.
Management
While the practice of cleaning is the application of science, with its administrative back-up, the achievement of cleanliness is wholly a management function without which little can be accomplished.
The fundamental requirements of good management in cleaning are the same as in any other work namely a manager needs to:
Acknowledge the need
Secure the commitment
Set the objectives
Provide the means
Organise the work
Monitor the result
Exercise controls
A state of cleanliness is rarely the main objective of a manager in the food industries, as there is no direct profit contribution or production benefit, so the emphasis on management differs from that of mainstream operations.
Acknowledging the need
Consistent cleanliness; is only achieved if a manager personally accepts that cleaning is a necessary and important part of a food operation.
The attitude of staff is always conditioned by the lead from the top and if cleaning is not regarded as a serious requirement at this level this attitude is quickly communicated to all levels with inevitable results.
Securing the Commitment
Allied to, but different from, acknowledging the need securing commitment is a matter of ensuring that everyone connected with the operation is personally committed to maintaining standards.
The state of cleanliness is not therefore just a problem for the cleaning staff.
It concerns operational staff, even if they carry out no cleaning themselves, as well as contractors, suppliers and trade customers.
It must be accepted that standards set are real, attainable and to be attained.
They are not merely abstract theory or pious statements of intent that look good posted on the staff notice board.
No one, at any level in a structure from chief executive downwards, can exclude himself from this commitment.
No one is so grand or important that concern for cleaning standards is beneath him.
Thus a chef is not a good chef and a production manager is not fulfilling his role if he neglects this vital aspect.
Setting Objectives
It is inherent in modern management practice that staff should work to defined standards.
A technique known as ‘management by objectives’ or MBO.
In food operations there is only one standard of cleanliness.
 This is defined as: A state of visual acceptability, related to the absence of dirt, where the level of dirt remaining neither significantly impairs nor prevents the function of the area or equipment in it nor gives rise to contamination of food.
Neither does the level of dirt provide harbourage or food for pests that might result in infestation nor materially affect any disinfection process subsequently applied.
Additional standards relating to disinfection may apply to high risk areas.
These may be specified in terms of acceptable bacterial counts.
The definition of cleanliness would delight a philosopher or scholar but is unwieldy in practice.
Objectives need to be much more directly expressed.
It does however embody an important principle that a working operation, no matter how good, cannot be absolutely clean.
A number of faults will invariably exist.
In practical terms, therefore, cleanliness can be defined to suit various and different operations and areas within an operation by setting a limit on the number of faults permissible in each.
A level of 20 per area from an inspection lasting 10 minutes is appropriate for some operations particularly catering.
Some discretion can be allowed on the interpretation of a fault depending on how critical the operation is.
Some of the interpretations used are:
1.
The presence of any type of visible dirt under good lighting conditions on any surface or definable area.
A surface may be counted as any continuous area of material without significant change in direction or angle.
Equipment and fittings may have several such surfaces.
(A box has six)
2.
Objectionable odour emanating from any surface.
3.
A rough or greasy feeling when any surface is rubbed with clean fingers.
4.
 Discoloration on a new white paper tissue rubbed several times over a surface.
5.
Visual difference on the same surface between a part that has been cleaned by a standard technique and the untouched area.
6.
Excessive water break from a surface while water is draining from it.
Technical confirmatory tests can be applied to prove cleanliness although they will rarely be used unless determining the relative performance of cleaning agents, or, perhaps, in judging a competition:
1.
Irradiating a surface with long wave (340–380 nm) ultraviolet light: no fluorescence should be visible.
2.
Powder dusting a surface with a powder blower-no powder should adhere.
(Fingerprint dusting powder is used)
3.
Microbiological sampling: low counts.
Disinfection standards will usually be expressed by reference to a total count or levels of particular micro-organisms obtained by a stated method of sampling.
Standards tend to be set by comparison with what is consistently achievable under the circumstances.
In the absence of a more specific standard a total count maximum of 100 (cfu) per 25 cm 2 is reasonable using nutrient agar contact plates.
Whatever standard is set it should be relevant to the operation, clearly stated and effectively communicated 
Providing the means
For the manager chemical products, equipment and power together is the minor part of the equation.
The essential element that brings it to life is staff, in sufficient numbers, physically capable of working with the necessary ability, experience and temperament for work in the exacting food industry environment.
Adequate recruitment criteria and searching selection procedures are vital as is subsequent motivation and training.
A great deal of effort also needs to be devoted to enhancing the social standing of the cleaners because they can so easily be regarded as inferior by other staff irrespective of their skills.
This can lead to friction, acrimony and lack of co-operation between functional groups.
The cleaning staff complain about the mess left by the operating staff who in turn regard complaints as insolent; cleaners are there to clean up after them.
Providing the means therefore is a question of balance achieved by satisfying the relationship between labour and other energy forms while integrating the whole cleaning function with the rest of the operation.
This should be done in a way that enables cleaning to be efficient without interfering.
Specific measures therefore are essentially directed at management to improve the quality of cleaning staff.
Such measures include.
The employment of qualified staff and the release of existing staff to vocational training courses.
The development of a career structure within the cleaning operation, enabling promotion on merit, with facilities at senior level to transfer into mainstream management.
Routine secondment of production staff to the cleaning operation and vice versa and cross-promotion
Provision of cleaning staff with high quality tools and other equipment.
Mechanisation wherever possible.
Wage or salary levels commensurate with skills and responsibility and workload not with perceived social status or the traditional position in the hierarchy.
Job titles, clothing and conditions that reflect duties.
Inadequate cleaning staff are in a position to do a great deal of damage to an organisation either through actual damage to the fabric or equipment or in terms of food product loss, reputation or image.
They can waste amounts of chemical product valued far in excess of their wages and destroy the economics of integrated energy usage and they can return such low levels of productivity that excessive and unnecessary staffing levels result.
Organising the work
Cleaning without organisation is like a moving car without a driver.
Like good driving, organisation is conducted in two phases namely planning and implementation.
Planning requires the identification of tasks and matching the means with which they may be carried out in the time available and under the conditions prevailing.
In all but the smallest operations planning manifests itself as work schedules, by whatever name, be it cleaning rotas, cleaning schedules or similar.
Work schedules are much misunderstood mainly because of the appearance of lists by cleaning product suppliers which have certain similarities.
For a work  schedule to be an effective management tool it must:
Apply to one person or team only
Specify the exact nature of each task in time order
Detail start time and duration
Include details of or reference to methods
Make provision for flexible working
Preparation is complex and time consuming.
Details of how to draw up schedules is given in Appendix I. Properly prepared they allocate resources in the most effective way possible.
Implementation is mainly a matter of using the schedules properly.
They provide a standard against which cleaning staff activities can be measured.
This will highlight tasks which can, with advantage, be delegated to supervisors once the framework has been established by management.
Monitoring the Result
Having stated the objectives and set in motion a chain of actions the most important management function is to check the result, a comparison between performance required and actually achieved.
In the assessment of cleanliness this can only be done by inspection to be carried out after cleaning has been completed.
Inspection however is not as simple as it sounds.
The process is a skilled technique in its own right.
With cleanliness inspections the difficulty is further compounded by variations in interpretation.
Essentially cleanliness is in the eye of the beholder so under normal circumstances an area is clean if the ‘inspector’ thinks it is clean.
What appears clean to one person will not necessarily appear clean to another and, even to the same person, an operation where standards are constant may present a different picture on different days.
The manager based on site has extra problems.
Familiarity with the area may blind him to the obvious.
Frequent association with the personnel, even friendship, may temper his judgement.
It is therefore imperative that inspection procedure is standardised and formalised as much as possible.
Other activities should not be combined.
A special period should be set aside solely for the purpose of carrying out an inspection.
Frequent inspections are recommended and advance warning is preferable.
The object is to build a picture of standards not to catch people out and if the expectation of an inspection causes staff to be that much more diligent so much the better.
Standardisation is effected by being scrupulously methodical and adopting a standard route and pattern of inspection examining thoroughly and carefully every surface and every item in turn.
Nothing should be missed out and nothing should be assumed or taken for granted.
If appropriate, equipment should be moved or dismantled to conduct a full inspection.
Neither should the inspector be too conscious of personal dignity.
If a good view demands squatting, climbing or even lying flat or crawling to gain a vantage point then the professional need should prevail over personal comfort.
Distortion can creep in if distractions are allowed to interfere and concentration can easily be lost.
Personal contact with personnel should be avoided.
Pleasantries or other discourse can be reserved for later or dispensed with before starting.
Inspection is not a social event.
The inspector should not allow himself to be led, often with the best of intentions, by people proud to show off the area.
He should take his own route in his own time and avoid the tendency to see through others' eyes.
Recording can also produce errors.
Details can be obscured or distorted between eye and pen and correct note-taking requires a strong discipline.
Accuracy is best ensured by writing an exact description of what is seen while looking at it and checking the completed description before moving on.
Notes made subsequently, even shortly afterwards, can be incorrect.
The mind does extraordinary things exaggerating or minimising with consummate ease.
Interpretation of data during the inspection should be avoided.
Notes taken should be matters of fact without embellishment.
Standardisation of note-taking is advantageous using the fault identification technique described earlier in this chapter.
A standard definition of a fault will ensure consistent reporting.
Also standardisation of interpretation can be ensured if objectives have been set in terms of a specific number of faults.
Comparisons can be made and standards judged on quantitive data rather than on subjective opinion.
Exercising controls
Control results from inspection and the interpretation of reports together with information derived from administrative sources.
Management authority is exerted to improve performance or remedy a defect which is distinct from supervision which is aimed at preventing things from going wrong.
Part of this process is ‘trouble shooting’ which is carried out to establish the reason for the fault.
There may be a number of complex reasons for one simple fault which need to be fully identified.
It is all too easy to see a dirty piece of equipment and to blame the nearest worker.
Apart from the embarrassment and harm to industrial relations when the wrong worker is blamed, this approach may obscure the true reasons which may originate at management level.
‘Trouble shooting’ falls into two phases, the identification of management contribution and the performance of staff in relation to management.
Nothing should be taken for granted.
Despite the fact that a worker may appear to be at fault examination should begin with the supervisor immediately responsible for the area concerned.
Careful questioning should elicit answers to four main points:
Date and time of last cleaning
The person who cleaned the area/equipment
Method and materials used
Date and time for next cleaning
It may appear that this information is already known but the point at issue is whether the supervisor knows and whether reality matches assumptions.
Vagueness or lack of information may indicate that the primary failure rests at supervisory level and negative answers may reflect inadequacies in methods or lack of supervision.
If positive answers are obtained questions should be directed to the worker named in order to confirm the information so far received.
In the event of it being correct it should be established whether any undue difficulties were involved that could have led to the fault arising and whether the approach to the task could be improved.
Discrepancies in information received may lead to the questioning of the relationship between worker and supervisor.
There may be communication  difficulties or misunderstanding, on either or both parts, in which case improvements in these areas need to be sought.
Even where it is positively established that the right person was questioned, who by being present at the time had the nominal responsibility for cleaning the surface in question, the true reason for the fault may lie elsewhere being the result of one or other of the following factors:
Lack of availability of materials
Wrong materials provided
Unrealistic or inadequate method
The object is uncleanable
Insufficient time allocated
Interference from other operations
Unforeseen technical problems
The wrong person has been given the job
One or all of these points may have to be remedied at management or supervisory level before the desired performance from staff can be achieved.
Dirty conditions are more likely to be the result of management activities, or the lack of them, and the emphasis on ‘trouble shooting’ should reflect this.
Where management has set the framework for efficient cleaning and supervision is adequate faults will rarely arise.
Management control therefore, in its true sense, is exercised only rarely.
When it is, it is exercised throughout the chain of command and not just the point at which a problem becomes apparent.
Contract Cleaning
Often regarded as a last resort the use of contract cleaners is a valid management option to replace any or all of the ‘in house’ capability.
The following factors may influence a decision to employ contractors:
1.
The unreliability of existing staff or the lack of a suitably trained or skilled labour pool from which staff can be recruited.
2.
Cleaning is carried out during ‘unsocial hours’ during which labour may not be readily available.
3.
Use of full time labour may be uneconomic.
4.
Specialist, unduly difficult or dangerous tasks may require skills not readily available in-house.
5.
Provision, use or storage of a full range of chemicals or equipment and the provision of skilled labour raise supervisory, administrative or safety problems.
6.
Time spent by management or staff may be better spent on profit generating activities.
7.
The purchase of specialist equipment may be uneconomic or insufficiently flexible.
The decision to employ contractors is made rarely solely on economic grounds.
Contractors do not replace management nor remove the need for it.
They merely supplement or replace the physical requirement.
Responsibility for the prime functions of setting standards, monitoring and exercising control must always remain with site management.
Methods and Techniques
The basis of any method is the assembly of several different actions or steps into an orderly procedure taking the most efficient route from start to finish.
A technique is the way a particular action is carried out.
In cleaning and disinfection there are six basic steps, some of which may be combined or omitted, to evolve a particular method.
For complex operations steps may be added but the basic steps are:
1.
Pre-cleaning: sweeping, wiping, scraping off or flushing away loose gross debris and/or pre-soaking.
2.
Main cleaning: penetration, dispersion and suspension of the attached dirt by chemical action.
3.
Intermediate rinsing: removal of the loosened dirt and neutralisation of cleaning agent residues.
4.
Disinfection-destruction of residual micro-organisms.
5.
Final rinsing: removal of disinfectant residues.
6.
Drying: removal of final rinse water.
Under light soil conditions the pre-cleaning would be omitted.
Disinfection is omitted on non-critical surfaces in which case the intermediate rinse becomes the final rinse.
Drying can either be natural, as in air drying, or physical using paper or cloth towels.
Disinfection can be combined in several ways.
In combination with the main cleaning using sanitisers
In combination with intermediate rinse either by
a. using high temperature water so that heat disinfection is achieved
b. introducing disinfectant into the intermediate rinse water
c. a combination of a and b in which case the final rinse is also omitted.
By combining drying with the use of a disinfectant impregnated cloth in which case the final rinse is also omitted.
To every method must be added preliminary and post cleaning actions which at the very least are the assembly of cleaning materials and their cleaning and return afterwards.
In the case of electrical installations, or procedures involving hazards, preliminary safety actions and final safety checks are needed.
Most equipment will need partial or complete dismantling and subsequent reassembly and some components may be cleaned by methods different to those used on the main body.
Techniques
Most people have cleaned something and have employed basic cleaning techniques.
Because of this it is often assumed that cleaning staff are familiar with the basics especially when women are employed.
It is taken for granted that they bring with them their housekeeping skills.
For the main part, however, basic   techniques are not employed correctly yet within the framework of a method the standard achieved is dependent on technique.
Some of the basic and advanced techniques required are as follows:
Clothfolding : The efficiency of a cloth in the wiping process is dependent on the pressure applied and the area of cloth in contact with the surface.
An irregularly folded cloth, or one with the folds bunched, reduces the contact area and thus efficiency.
Bunched cloths also tend to leave loose folds trailing which cause smearing.
Cloths used for cleaning or drying should therefore always be folded in a specific way.
The cloth should be laid flat and uncreased.
Corners are folded into the centre to form a diamond shape.
The tips of the ‘diamond’ are again folded to the centre and the process is repeated until a hard conveniently sized pad is formed with the lower surface completely smooth.
This surface is used as the cleaning face.
Wiping techniques : These will vary according to the chemical used.
With abrasives (cream cleaners) a small circular motion should be employed using a nearly dry cloth folded as described earlier.
With detergents and other chemicals a different technique is used.
The cloth is liberally soaked and wiped over the surface in a smooth sweeping motion.
The overall wiping pattern however is the same for all products.
Often a random pattern is adopted and on observation the cleaner often can be seen to cover some parts of an area many times yet miss others.
Methodical wiping is all important.
Imagine a search aircraft looking for a dinghy in the middle of the ocean.
The pattern followed is exactly the same as should be used for wiping namely a series of single sweeps each slightly overlapping the previous one.
Rinse : Effective rinsing depends on water temperature and quantity so the technique should optimise both.
A loosely folded cloth should be dipped, or otherwise copiously wetted, with clean water, as hot as the hand can bear, holding as much as possible.
Water thus lifted is spread onto the surface as the cloth is wiped in a rapid sweeping motion.
The cloth is then wrung out as dry as possible and the deposited water recovered while it is still hot.
Ideally this water should be wrung out into another container and not mixed with fresh rinse water.
It is critical that the water in contact with the surface is not allowed to cool too much otherwise dissolved or suspended residues may be redeposited.
Brushing : Brushes have superb mechanical cleaning properties but are not, as a rule, able to hold much solution.
If therefore the cleaning operation intends to combine chemical and brushing action a specific technique should be used.
The brush should be dipped and loosely scrubbed over a surface wetting the area, rather than cleaning, then dipped again and used to scrub rapidly the wetted area.
Progress is the sequence of dip-wet-dip-scrub and so on.
Spraying : Techniques centre around making the most of the sprayer.
To cover large areas at high speed the sprayer is best adjusted to provide a mist.
However to deliver high concentrates over a moderately large area of irregular equipment a sprayer should be adjusted to a fine jet.
Then, instead of working close in, the cleaner should be positioned well back just within the maximum range of the jet and roughly on the centre line of the equipment to be cleaned.
The whole spray operation can be carried out without moving position.
This technique is particularly valuable for cleaning oven interiors when the cleaner works the jet from the top sweeping across the wall and working progressively downwards chasing the dirt with it.
By this means light soiling can be removed completely.
Spray-wipe technique : This is a fast technique for dealing with light soils and has wide application where bacteriological standards are not significant.
A fine adjusted hand sprayer is used in conjunction with a well folded damp cloth.
A mist is applied to a limited area and wiped over immediately with the cloth.
At frequent intervals the cloth is turned and partially refolded to present a clean cloth surface and at less frequent intervals the cloth is thoroughly rinsed, wrung out and refolded.
This technique minimises water application to the cleaning area and is often used with solvent hard surface cleaners or degreasers.
Mopping : Perhaps the best method for large areas is to use a kentucky mop as part of a two bucket mopping system with the first bucket filled with cleaning solution and the second with hot clean water.
The mop is dipped in the cleaning solution, laid flat with the strands extended and worked in a side to side sweeping motion spanning two metres while the operator moves steadily backwards.
As solution deposition falls off the mop is dipped in the rinse bucket and agitated thoroughly, to wash out trapped dirt, and then wrung out.
The cycle then starts again with a new section keeping the cleaning solution relatively uncontaminated.
(See fig. 2).
Five separate stages are involved, dip, apply, wash and wring, dry, wash and wring.
Intermediate wringing during the drying stage speeds up the process, as mop absorption rates vary in that the more water a mop holds the slower it picks up more water.
The whole operation however is more efficient with two persons with one applying and the other following and drying.
Soaking : A valuable technique rarely fully exploited.
Chemical activity is often limited, particularly on irregular items, because the product runs off or dries out before the necessary contact time has elapsed.
The simple expedient of soaking items, especially during downtime or overnight, in appropriate solutions with heat if necessary can substantially reduce subsequent cleaning work.
Soaking items awaiting cleaning can be beneficial even if only cold water is used.
Integrating soaking with cleaning operations is also useful.
When a number of items are to be cleaned those which present difficulties are soaked, rather than worked upon immediately, and tackled when the easier items are finished.
Pressure jetting : The tendency when using pressure jet cleaners is over application with long blasts of water with the hope that the pressure will clean off all the dirt.
Maximum efficiency is achieved when heavy soiling is loosened manually and chemically beforehand.
Two operators work best when the first starts to apply chemical while the other assembles the machine and gets it running.
By this time some of the areas have been treated, maximising contact time without wasting operators time.
The actual technique is to jet a small area and as spray or steam obscures the action to stop jetting and assess the effect before continuing.
This gives time for water to drain away or to be picked up by wet vacuum.
To avoid splashing, which can reach considerable distances and soil previously clean surfaces, the angle between the jet and the surface should not exceed 45 degrees.
By reducing the angle the jet can be used as a liquid broom sweeping debris and water to a drain or pick up point.
Walls and other vertical surfaces should be jetted from above, impact point downwards if possible, even if the operator has to seek an elevated position.
Run-off, it is to be excluded from other areas such as a carpeted restaurant adjacent to a kitchen, or production areas still working, may be controlled by the use of  polythene tubes filled with sand or water and sealed at both ends.
They can be laid to direct or contain flow or to form a dam, the pooling so caused being easier to pick up by wet vacuum than widespread water films.
Waterproofing : Cleaning operations are often limited by the risk of water penetration into mechanical or electrical systems.
Large items can be protected by covering with polythene.
Plastic refuse sacks are particularly useful for this purpose secured at the bottom with waterproof pvc tape.
Small and irregular items can be covered with cling film after first spraying with silicon water  repellent from an aerosol can.
Small gaps in joints can be sealed with silicon bath sealant and 13 amp electrical sockets can be protected by blanking plugs, usually available for child safety, from some large stores specialising in goods for children.
Electrical installations that get wet can be dried out with a hand held hair dryer or fan heater although if any damage is suspected the installation concerned should be checked by a competent electrician before use.
Body positioning : Many areas in cleaning are missed because the cleaner did not see the dirt.
As with inspection, the cleaner should be so positioned as to be able to see all areas of the work even if it means squatting, kneeling or lying down.
In manual techniques it is important to position the body so that maximum leverage can be applied and so that body weight can be used to supplement muscle.
Wiping or scrubbing with the arm fully extended is less efficient than squaring up to a job and wiping an area slightly offset from the vertical bodycentreline.
Surface wiping above shoulder height should be avoided for the same reason.
The use of steps or raised platforms is recommended.
Care should be taken when positioning in order to avoid exposure to hazards and to miss chemical run-off or splashing.
Self inspection- : Every step in cleaning should be automatically accompanied by a critical review of progress and a repeat of that step if necessary.
‘do a bit, look a bit and do it again’.
Typical Methods
There is rarely a single method for cleaning anything.
Product choice, the degree of soiling and other variables often mean that there are three or four different methods of cleaning a single surface.
However some methods are fairly standard and common to all sectors and are outlined as follows:
Stainless steel worktops, etc : The classic routine centres around the use of hot detergent solution, often called the ‘soap and water’ method, in which all six stages are recognisable.
1.
Pre-clean.
Sweep off loose debris with a clean loosely folded cloth or a soft brush.
2.
Main-clean: Wash with hot detergent solution applied using a cloth.
Spot clean stubborn deposits with an abrasive pad.
3.
Intermediate rinse-Rinse with fresh hot water and a clean cloth, wring and dry to a damp finish
4.
Disinfectant.
Apply a fresh solution of hypochlorite, by a cloth or sponge, to deliver 200 ppm available chlorine.
5.
Final rinse: Rinse off with fresh cold water and dry to a damp finish with a disposable paper towel.
6.
Drying-Allow to air dry.
In theory this method is ideal.
In practice it is unrealistic as it calls for at least two freshly laundered or new cloths, a paper towel and three water changes.
Short-cuts  include the use of the cleaning cloth and solution for the intermediate rinse and the combination of disinfection with drying, omitting the final rinse.
This is a method by which standards are maintained.
A sanitiser used to replace cleaning and disinfection still requires the final rinse and the standard achieved is likely to be indifferent.
Small equipment : With straightforward equipment and parts the method is essentially the same as for worktops with the addition of pre and post cleaning actions, safety checks, dismantling and re-assembly.
Manual cleaning may be combined with the use of machines with equipment parts being passed through a dishwasher.
Typical of small equipment is the slicing machine where the worktop routine is adapted as follows:
Pre-clean
1.
Switch off the power socket and remove the plug.
2.
Set the slice thickness control (Gauge plate) to zero.
3.
Dismantle the machine.
Where the machine is of a type where the blade is removable a blade carrier is fitted for the purpose.
If the blade remains the edge should be exactly flush with the gauge plate which may require adjusting the slice thickness control.
Cleaning may then commence.
Blade cleaning is dangerous so the technique is to work from the centre boss radially outwards, with short strokes of a well folded cloth, lifting pressure as the edge of the blade is reached.
Alternatively a utility or churn brush may be used which keeps the hand well clear of the blade.
Body position is important.
The cleaner should work facing the flat of the blade which means changing position during the operation and necessitates clear access around the machine.
Post clean
1.
Re-assemble the machine.
2.
Check guards are fitted properly.
3.
Test run.
4.
Switch off, disconnect and cover
A test run is important.
Accidents have been caused by improperly fitted guards.
Synthetic cutting boards : These present special problems as organic soil physically sticks to the materials used so bonding occurs.
The effect of this is seen in the frequent yellow staining that resists detergent action.
Stains that are in fact layers of rancid fat.
More aggressive chemicals are ruled out because of possible damage and abrasives are unsatisfactory as the aggregate lodges in surface scores.
Removal can be achieved only by methodical scraping with the edge of a sharp cook's knife after which the worktop cleaning routine can be used.
Drying is critical to the maintenance of bacteriological standards.
Boards should be positioned in storage so that air can circulate freely around both main faces.
Wood cutting boards : There is no satisfactory manual routine that will achieve acceptable bacteriological standards although routine cleaning in a mechanical dishwasher is highly effective.
Chopping blocks : Despite information to the contrary traditional methods are the most effective.
Special tools should be used namely the block brush and the block scraper.
A dirty block face is liberally sprinkled with dry food-grade salt and agitated with the brush.
The residue is carefully scraped and the surface is sprinkled again with dry salt which is left to stand.
Where this routine is accompanied by a regular programme of sanding and turning the results are as good as any that can be achieved.
The use of water based chemicals, sanitisers or detergents leads to softening and expansion of the wood and the result is deep premature cracking.
Sink washing : Using a double sink for light duty functions, such as manual dishwashing, the method is straightforward:
1.
Remove any heavy loose soil by scraping.
A cold water pre-rinse is useful if there are facilities
2.
Immerse articles in the first sink in hot detergent solution (50–6O°C).
Take out one item and scrub or agitate with a brush or cloth.
3.
Re-immerse in the detergent solution to wash off loosened dirt.
Lift out and place in the rinse sink (Repeat the wash cycle for each item).
4.
Leave items immersed until the wash sink is empty and the rinse sink full.
Recharge the first sink with dirty items and lift out the rinsed items in that order.
5.
Allow clean items to drain and air dry.
Solution and rinse water may be changed between charges.
By adopting this method and providing the rinse water is kept at a minimum 82°C a two minute soak is automatically provided for, without having to specify the period, thereby ensuring disinfection.
Pots and pans, etc : The variable nature of this task with soil loads ranging from light to very heavy can impose special problems if a continuous flow of items is to be handled.
Very dirty items, if they are cleaned immediately and take a long time, can upset the flow and cause a log-jam of dirties with congestion in the reception area which restricts work further.
This is overcome by modifying the basic sink washing procedure with the provision of a mobile dip tank.
Items that do not respond to immediate cleaning are placed in to soak, rather than holding up progress, and dealt with later during slack times or at the end of a session.
Exceptionally dirty items can be left overnight.
The flow accompanying this method is illustrated in figure 3 opposite.
The dip tank operates in the same way as a break tank in fluid circuit.
It evens out the peaks coping with fluctuations in work and ensuring continuous work flow.
In the absence of congestion, that might otherwise occur, the operator is able to make full use of the work sink unhindered by items in soak.
Overall labour requirement is minimised by the use of heat and chemical energy in the soaking process.
Floors : Preliminaries should usually include zoning off the area by placing suitable warning signs or cones.
Unless prohibited, because of the possibility of dust raising, the area then should be swept, the debris collected and moved from the area.
In any event obstacles should be cleared.
From thereon a number of methods may be employed
1.
Mechanical brushing followed by wet vacuum if necessary
2.
Mopping as described earlier in this chapter.
3.
Deck scrubber, manually applied, followed by mopping or wet-vacuum or squeegee.
4.
Pressure jetting followed by natural drainage, squeegee assisted, or by wet vacuum.
5.
Low pressure hose washing assisted by deck scrubber and squeegee to natural drain.
Whatever the method, heavy or tenacious soiling removal is improved by pre-application of chemical.
A hot solution of an alkali degreaser, allowed to stand, spray applied solvent degreaser or caustic cleaner may be used according to soil type.
Heavy local deposits are best removed by scraper prior to the main clean.
Where equipment is stored and uninterrupted cleaning is taking place, overspill, from equipment and from walls, if chemically suitable, can be allowed to stand until floor cleaning takes place.
Alternatively a floor can be chemically treated at the beginning of a cleaning session and not cleaned until the end, provided cleaners are suitably equipped with Wellingtons and are aware of the increased slip hazard.
Walls : Being vertical surfaces these can present special problems because chemical run-off is sometimes faster than the contact time required.
Spray-wipe techniques with a solvent hard surface cleaner or solvent degreaser can be used on light soiling but for moderate or heavy soiling a brush applied alkali degreaser is more suitable.
A long handled bulk tank brush is ideal dipping and scrubbing in short vertical strokes starting at the bottom of the wall working upwards.
The degreaser should be kept very hot and be applied liberally, the excess running freely down the wall.
A section of 2–4 metres length should be thus treated.
When complete, a small area where solution was first applied can be test cleaned by wiping with a damp cloth.
If dirt comes away easily the whole section should be cleaned using a damp folded cloth rinsed and wrung out frequently in clean hot water.
If dirt remains stubborn chemical can be re-applied before cleaning.
Tiling joints can be extremely difficult to clean if they become filled with compacted grease.
The most dramatic method is the most successful.
Spray apply caustic cleaner and very gently agitate the compacted soil with the edge of a wire brush tilted so that the wire bristles contact only the joint area and not the tile face.
Then brush vigorously with a churn or utility brush dipped frequently in very hot detergent solution.
As a final touch spray the now exposed grouting with strong (8 percent) hypochlorite and leave to dry.
The result is tiling as good as new.
Canopies : These respond well to the spray-wipe technique using a solvent degreaser often without any further action.
First soak up any liquid oil residues with a paper towel.
Where there are access difficulties a hand pressure sprayer can be used to make application followed by a squeeze mop.
Filters : Brush off loose debris, immerse in very hot alkali degreaser solution and leave for some hours.
Do not use solvent degreasers as the loosened soil matts and can be very difficult to remove.
Finish off soaked filters by flushing with a hose or pressure jet or passing through a dishwasher.
Lightly soiled filters can be cleaned directly by passing through a dishwasher.
Ducting interiors : Avoid the use of water as much as possible as water penetrates joints and drips for some days after cleaning.
Use a sharp scraper to lift off deposits and ladle them into an empty bucket for disposal.
To finish use the spray wipe technique with solvent degreaser.
Ceilings : Apply a similar technique to that used for canopies.
Afterwards dry if necessary with a bone dry cloth to ensure that there are no drips.
Light fittings : Remove covers, tubes or bulbs and bring down to ground level unless an access platform is used.
Waterproof the light sockets with cling film and spray wipe using solvent degreaser.
Spray wipe covers, tubes or bulbs, dry thoroughly and return after stripping the protective film.
Refrigerators and freezers : After defrosting, if necessary, empty the food cabinets and other fittings including door and body seals if they are removable.
These items are best sink washed.
The cabinet interior is then swept with a damp cloth removing debris and pooled water.
Most interior surface finishes are easily damaged by abrasives.
A detergent method without the use of an abrasive pad is likely to be slow and tedious.
Solvent based products are unsuitable, because of taint risk, so an alkali degreaser solution is indicated applied in copious amounts by a soft brush.
The cabinet is then rinsed thoroughly, with clean hot water, disinfected and dried.
Cleaned fittings, after disinfection, are re-assembled and the whole is left to air dry for a short period before the empty cabinet is brought down to working temperature and re-filled.
The same method is used for freezers.
With chest freezers a long handled bulk tank brush is invaluable where bending into the cabinet is uncomfortable.
Water can be allowed to collect in the base and lifted out by wet vacuum if available.
Cold stores : Treat like small rooms in their own right using floor wall and ceiling techniques as appropriate.
Absorbent wall cladding can sometimes present problems.
Surface dirt, when liquified by chemical application, soaks into the fabric causing staining.
Techniques are thus modified by reducing the amount of water applied and lighter brushing strokes.
Heavy scrubbing should be avoided.
Walls can be finished off by spray application of strong (8%) hypochlorite then left to dry.
This considerably improves appearance and provides for the disinfection requirement.
After treatment the store should be ventilated until the chlorine smell has dispersed.
Fittings should be completely removed for cleaning.
Mobile stainless steel racks are treated as stainless steel worktops.
Chromed wire racks are best soaked, if possible, in hot alkali degreaser solution.
An old bath tub for this purpose is invaluable.
Failing that they can be taken out into a yard sprayed with solvent degreaser and pressure jetted, otherwise it is a matter of brushing with a churn or utility brush and using a toothbrush in the crevices.
Galvanised fittings are also difficult.
They are also best soaked although wire brushing is sometimes needed to remove tenacious deposits and restore finish.
Rust can be spot treated with acid cleaner using the spray wipe technique augmented by wire brushing.
Prolonged acid contact can cause damage and application should be little and often interspersed by rinsing.
Unsealed wooden slatted shelves can be treated with caustic cleaner, left in prolonged contact and pressure jet rinsed or brushed vigorously with hot clean water.
It is useful when brushing to lay them flat on the floor and to use a deck scrubber.
Finishing with hypochlorite is useful as it whitens the wood and removes stains thus improving appearance.
It should be noted that this type of shelf should be replaced with something more suitable at the earliest opportunity.
Frying equipment : The frying well and overflow collector should be drained of oil and fat and loose residues swabbed with paper or rag.
As much loose residue as possible should be removed otherwise cleaning solution is prematurely neutralised.
The well should then be half filled with cold clean water and brought  to boiling point by the frier heater.
At this point powder alkali degreaser should be sprinkled in.
The solution will bubble up immediately and sprinkling should be continued until it overflows to drain, if fitted, or reaches a stable level at the lip of the well.
Boiling should be continued for half an hour or longer during which time the well acts as a reservoir of hot degreaser solution which can be brush applied to exterior surfaces.
Overflow blockages should be rodded through.
A better tool than a wire coat hanger has yet to be developed.
The overflow should be brushed with a bottle brush of suitable diameter.
Where thick deposits of heat modified oil or fat have accumulated the judicious use of a scraper may be indicated.
Chemically softened layers can be stripped off, sometimes, like wall paper, by this means.
Control knobs may be detached and placed in the frier basket for soaking which is a process that also cleans the basket.
After cabinet cleaning is complete the frier should be switched off and the well emptied.
All surfaces then should be rinsed thoroughly in hot detergent solution, again with clean hot water and dried.
While cleaning friers the boiling solution in the well can be used with advantage to clean various other small items of equipment.
Table mounted can openers, small sieves and whisks are difficult to clean by normal methods and respond particularly well.
Ovens and grills : Lightly soiled equipment of this type may be cleaned by virtually ‘hands-off’ technique using a caustic cleaner and a solution of vinegar or heavily diluted acid cleaner both spray applied.
The equipment should be heated until very hot and switched off.
Standing well back, using the spray technique described earlier, a jet of caustic cleaner should be directed at one spot until the soil is liquified and the clean surface can be seen.
Surfaces that cool the most rapidly should be treated first.
Fittings may be left in place and treated with the rest of the interior.
Surfaces so treated dry very rapidly to a messy, streaky white finish at which dilute vinegar or acid cleaner should be sprayed.
The residue will liquefy rapidly draining clear of the surface leaving a bright clean finish.
Hand finishing with a damp cloth is then all that is needed.
The liquid residue usually drains onto the floor around the oven where it can be mopped up.
Care should be exercised with convection ovens to prevent solution ingress to the motor.
Waterproofing is difficult but air ducts may be blanked off, or sensitive parts removed, otherwise cold cleaning may be required using a brush applied solvent decarboniser.
Heavily soiled ovens and grills require different treatment.
Fittings should be removed and the body dismantled as far as possible including disconnecting from gas or electrical supply if possible.
In any event electrically supplied equipment should be isolated.
Pre-treatment is then the key to success.
Thick residues should be removed with sharp scrapers, wire brushing and occasionally hammer and chisel assisted by caustic cleaner spray.
The use of power tools with wire brush or ‘roto-stripper’ attachments is sometimes helpful.
Parts of a size that can be immersed should be soaked in hot caustic cleaner solution for some hours, the longer the better.
Fixed parts should be painted liberally with cold oven cleaner gel and left to stand.
Periodically sections are test cleaned and gel re-applied where soiling remains unmoved.
When test cleaning indicates sufficient softening, soiling should be removed by a combination  of brushing, this time nylon brushes, and scraping, with copious amounts of hot detergent solution.
Pressure jetting at this stage is useful.
Soaked parts should be inspected and loosened soil scraped and wire brushed.
The parts should then be rinsed clean in the soaking solution and then in clean hot water before reassembling.
The completed assembly may need further rinsing and spot treatment, for which pressure jetting is invaluable, followed by hand finishing with a damp cloth.
In the industrial situations where safety can be assured and skilled technicians are available the light cleaning method can be adopted followed by a very high pressure jetting up to 3000psi or more.
This level of pressure will strip paint, lift tiles and even cut thin metal so the option is not for widespread application.
Brander plates : A brander plate exchange service, swapping dirty for clean on a daily basis, may be used.
Pre-coating clean brander plates with a proprietary release water soluble barrier film is a cheaper alternative.
Griddle tops : Treat as ovens.
Either spray apply caustic cleaner or soak after which acid cleaner, rather than vinegar, should be used which brightens the surface to a metallic shine.
The reaction must then be stopped by further light spraying of caustic cleaner and rinsing otherwise the surface may turn green.
A coating of butter or water soluble barrier film prevents oxidisation and makes subsequent soil removal easier.
Boilers and vats : Unless cleaned by.
CIP methods these must be manually cleaned.
After flushing out food residues they may be brushed with hot alkali degreaser solution in the same way a chest freezer is tackled.
Alternatively they may be filled with water made up to the appropriate strength of degreaser or caustic cleaner and heated to boiling point.
The vat can be used as a hot solution reservoir for other activities or used for soaking other equipment.
As another option, on completion of cleaning, part or all of the solution can be allowed to discharge onto the floor and be spread with squeegees or mops to effect floor cleaning.
Where untreated hard water is used, for process water, some degree of acid treatment is usually necessary.
Spray application followed by brushing and rinsing is most economic.
Steamers : Where manually cleaned these are treated in much the same way as refrigerator interiors followed by acid cleaner if necessary.
Lightly soiled surfaces may be cleaned directly by an acid cleaner with good detergency properties and rinsed.
Heavy machinery : Machines can range widely from bandsaws to bottling plants.
Thus the methods, and cleaning products used, also will vary widely.
Unless omissions or combinations can be justified the method should use the basic six stages described at the beginning of the chapter.
As a general principle the bigger the machinery the more justified is the use of pressure jetting and special brushes.
For butchery and meat product work valuable use may be made of alkali degreasers and caustic cleaners if surface materials and safety permit.
Conveyor belting : Although often part of heavy machinery, belting demands its own method.
This method may be different from the machine of which it is part.
In all cases, except where specifically allowed by the belt manufacturer, solvent based cleaners, alkalis and acids should be avoided as they may denature the belting substance.
Also chlorine liberating agents should be avoided as they have a similar  effect.
Pressure jetting can physically damage belting as can abrasive or scraping techniques.
Any method used therefore invariably involves the use of a detergent solution, either spray or brush applied, followed by scrubbing and rinsing.
This is one application where the use of amphoteric detergents may be justified.
Slatted conveyors may be cleaned by whatever method is most suitable for the constructional material.
Again pressure jetting is particularly useful.
Machine dish etc. washing : Methods require minimal activity on the part of the operator compared with manual methods but certain preliminaries are essential for correct functioning of the machine together with routine checks and maintenance.
The most important are:
1.
Processing items as soon as possible after soiling and/or submitting them to preliminary treatment.
In catering this may be a pre-wash pending enough items of one type to be assembled to fill a rack.
2.
Sorting either to maximise machine usage, so that racks are completely and properly filled, or to exclude items that may not respond to the process.
3.
Racking or positioning items correctly prior to machine entry particularly when mixed items are washed and larger items may obstruct jet access.
4.
Maintaining the machine within operational parameters; temperature, water conditioning, detergent and rinse aid flow, correct time cycles or track speed.
5.
Thorough cleaning of the machine after use including emptying of scrap trays and clearance of blockages in the spray arms or jets.
6.
Rapid clearing of exit areas or track to ensure cleaned items emerge from the machine and dry rapidly.
In catering operations the procedure includes removal of waste scraps, litter and liquids.
A process known as scrapping.
Drains : A properly constructed system, in good repair, does not normally require cleaning.
Any abnormal soiling should be investigated for inadequacies or malfunctioning of traps or interceptors.
Drain inlets such as gullies and channels need cleaning, especially grids which should be removed occasionally, inverted and flushed with a hose pipe or pressure jet assisted by brushing.
Heavy fatty deposits can be broken up by the use of caustic cleaners sometimes specially formulated and described as drain cleaners.
Systems and traps discharging high organic loads can be dosed with biological cleaners.
Vending machines : Cleaning is often combined with filling and routine maintenance and an effective method uses non cleaning periods to allow parts to be soaked without wasting time.
Product of choice is an acid cleaner with good detergency properties used in the following way.
1.
Remove all contact parts from the machine.
Soak in a solution of acid cleaner.
Use the waste bucket after emptying and cleaning.
2.
Remove ingredient containers, clean auger discharges with a nylon scraper, refill as necessary, wipe exteriors and set aside
3.
Wipe the interior of the machine and dry thoroughly with a disinfectant impregnated cloth or disposable paper towel.
4.
Remove soaked parts, wipe and brush as needed.
Rinse in the soaking solutions ‘pull through’ spouts and dry all parts as in 3 above.
5.
Replace the ingredient containers
6.
Empty, clean and dry the waste bucket and replace.
7.
Flush all lines with clean hot water from the machine system.
Check all functions are operating correctly by pressing each selection button in sequence then close the cabinet and wipe the exterior.
If a machine is effectively cleaned and disinfected service can be extended to three day intervals providing there are no extreme environmental or siting factors.
Problem Solving
Sometimes, for no obvious reason, an item fails to respond to a particular method or the soil reacts only slowly, or not at all, with a chemical that would appear suitable.
Faults in method need to be investigated and are usually due to inadequate contact time or use of a chemical outside the temperature range in which it operates efficiently or a combination of both.
Contact time can be solved by repeating chemical application, changing chemical to a faster acting type such as from an alkali to a solvent, changing from a liquid to a gel or using foam cleaning.
Alternatively the method may be changed to soaking if practicable.
Temperature can be remedied by using hotter solutions, changing hot solutions more frequently, using greater volumes or preheating the soiled surface.
Other options are to change to less temperature sensitive chemicals, again from alkali to solvent, or perhaps to abrasive and/or an increase in concentration.
If immediate chemical and method options are exhausted, without success, the soil attachment mechanism may give some clue.
Soil that appears to have the characteristics of staining more than deposition, particularly on plastic surfaces, may be chemically bonded.
The options are physical scraping, bleaching in situ so that the soil is no longer apparent or the realistic if expensive option of using ultrasonics if the problem has to be handled on any scale.
Alternatively a selection of specific solvents could be tried.
For this, and any other experimental situation, a small test area should be cleaned first and examined for efficiency and surface damage before proceeding.
Soil that has been absorbed into the top layer of a substrate may be very difficult to remove.
Physical abrasion may be the only answer, such as the sanding applied to wooden blocks, although bleaching in situ may be the partial answer.
Where oxidisation films have absorbed dirt the film must be removed to effect cleaning either by use of an acid cleaner or abrasive.
This is often the problem with dull stainless steel which can be restored with a good quality cream cleanser.
The cleaner should always be aware of the possibility of mixed soils in the problem.
What may appear to be one type of soil may have the attachment characteristics of a different layer of soil beneath it in which case the underlying soil dictates the chemical.
Sometimes there may be a need to alternate acids and alkalis with copious intermediate rinsing.
Where soil is being removed slowly it may be that it has built up in layers and a ‘case hardening’ effect is experienced.
Scoring the soil film thereby allowing cleaning agent to penetrate to the substance and work from underneath is a partial answer.
In this case the soil tends to come off in flakes.
Sometimes the only answer is to bring it off the way it went on, layer by layer.
This is a strong argument for regular cleaning.