

The Betrayal
Three times in the next ten days the beacons passed news from point to point — from Rubha Nan Gall across the Sound of Mull to Castle Nan Con, back to Aros, across to Ardtornish and back again to Duart — that the threat that had first been hinted in Luch's arrival had taken solid shape.
The raiders slipped in past the Macleans' patrolling galleys, and killed and kidnapped, destroyed and looted, slaughtering or crippling what livestock they could not carry off and leaving the survivors to starve.
Eachuin Odhar was beside himself with fury.
‘God damn them!
Who are they?
That's another runner with news, Hector!
Tiree this time!
Fourteen folk dead and the houses and boats burned.
There's not six men left, and all the cattle are away, for they weren't out at the  shielings yet.
When I catch them, may God pity them, for I'll not!’
His face was puce with rage and frustration, but bearing a fist on the battlements where they stood looking out over the Sound, he brought himself back to calm by sheer willpower.
‘Well.
I've landless men to send over to take the places of the dead, and fowls and beasts to get them started again.
But that's not enough.’
‘No,’ said Hector.
‘We must avenge our dead.
It's our duty to protect the clan.’
‘Duty!’
Lachlan sneered.
‘Aye, that.
And pleasure!’
His eyes were bright.
Hector's lips tightened.
He relished the thought of fighting and slaughter less than Lachlan did.
‘But grandfather, who the devil do we fight?’
‘That's it!’ snarled his grandfather.
‘They're hiding somewhere close, but whoever it is is keeping the secret.
I'd not have thought it possible.
Let a wee thought just peep in a man's mind at dawn on the Mull of Oa and it's all the gossip at the Butt of Lewis by noon.
But not this time.
God set this Iain Og on the hot hob of hell for a thousand years — but not before I catch him!’
All this time, Luch was happy with Ruari of the bees.
At least, if she was unhappy, or fretted for her family, she didn't say so.
The folk of the castle clachan accepted her as an oddity, the way their eyes slipped over her, but harmless.
Mostly harmless; remember how the bees avenged her?
Every night she and Ranald helped the old man move four hives up the four miles of rough track to the heather moor.
The youngsters each could carry one end of a staff with two hives swinging in thick bags in the centre, while Ruari carried a second pole with a skep slung at each end.
She scarcely needed to stun the bees with smoke from smouldering moss or puffballs, to wrap and lift the skeps unstung.
The bees just crawled over her, paying no more heed to her than if she had been a treestump.
Unfortunately, as Ranald discovered, her immunity didn't extend to the others.
Ruari slept late.
Luch bedded on a bag of bracken in a corner, but she and Ranald woke earlier than the old man.
Mairi Ban would grudge them a bowl of oatmeal sowens, and then tell Ranald to see to the pig, and the sheep up on the grazing land.
Luch would be set to turn the quern to grind the oatmeal, and then she'd be sent to fetch hay, peats, water.
She often brought in mussels, gritty with tiny pearls, for the evening meal, or sometimes nesting birds, or a hare that ignored her approach to its form till she had her hand on it.
They ate well, but she got little thanks for it from the mistress of the hut.
Water was carried in leather buckets from the spring along by the castle, a quarter of a mile down the track.
Mairi was furious when after a while Luch started to take long to return with the  bucket, but it did her no good; the wee lass often vanished for hours at a time, in spite of the scoldings she got when she returned late.
She always did bring the water eventually, and to her cronies Mairi sometimes admitted she was glad to see the back of her for a few hours; but that never weakened her tongue.
If she had realised how Luch spent her time, the abuse might have been less.
Or worse, maybe.
For the wee lass started leaving her bucket by the spring, hidden under a briar, and slipping into the castle.
She drifted, quietly invisible, among the clansfolk going in and out the great gate, past the sentries, across the courtyard to the door in the far corner.
She would crouch by the steps, ignored, till there was no-one on the narrow spiral stair, glide like a slim shadow up to the hall, and when the next stair was free, on up to the bower, where Catriona, wife of the Maclean's piper, had a baby.
Luch would pause in the corridor, her own doll baby clutched tight to her side.
When everyone was occupied she would waft into the room and over to the cradle, to peer quietly into it and then, satisfied that the baby was safe and well, to slip in behind the door.
There was a hanging there of two people in a garden, with very few clothes on.
At the foot of it there was a kind of dent in the stonework where she could crouch in behind the cloth, almost hidden.
If the women had been less busy she might have been seen while she was exploring, but with Lady Marion's own baby due soon they had plenty of fine weaving and sewing to occupy their eyes.
Luch found her hidden niche before anyone noticed her.
She would stay there until Marion and her attendants left for the evening meal in the hall, then come out of her corner, stretch to ease the cramp in her legs, and check the baby again before slipping away out.
She was once found, quite by chance.
Old Lady Bridhe, widowed sister to Eachuinn Odhar and mistress of Duart Castle till Marion arrived, was late going down to the hall.
The babe was fretful with teething, but as she came along the corridor she heard a gentle humming above the baby's wails.
She looked in quietly.
Luch had laid her own doll down on a stool, lifted the child from the cot, and was cuddling him softly, singing in a tiny, sweet voice  to him till he quietened.
Bridhe stood still, afraid to move, half-certain that the girl was about to harm the baby; but when she saw Luch lay the little boy back in his cradle and tuck the coverlet round him, rock him for a moment, and then turn lovingly to pick up her own child again, the old lady felt tears come to her eyes.
She stepped aside into the doorway of the next room while Luch drifted out and down the stair.
The baby was sound asleep.
Two or three times a week after that Bridhe, now alert for her, would notice Luch, or at least the slight bulge in the tapestry where she hid.
But in dislike of the young usurper who had taken her place, memory of the nastiness in the hall, and pity for the wee lass, Bridhe kept her secret.
The visits helped Luch in her work, in a strange way.
The first night's long walk up to the moor with the hives, Ruari glanced back at the wee lass trotting along behind Ranald's lurch, gamely holding up her end of the staff.
It sloped down like the side of Sgurr Dearg, he thought to himself, and grinned.
‘Here we are, then.
Let them down gently.
Aye, we'll just have a wee few minutes before we set them up.’
He eased his own burden down.
‘Dhia, it's a new shoulder I'll need soon, never say a new assistant.’
He was wearier than he'd admit, and glad to sit and rest.
‘Ach away, granda,’ Ranald said, stretching his angular arms into the blue of the sky as if reaching for a star.
‘You're that tough, you'll outlive us all.’
‘I'll outlive you, anyway, saints preserve you,’ the old man nipped in smartly.
‘If Lachlan Cattanach ever learns it was you cut half through his bow-tip he'll have the hide off you for brogans.
They tell me he near strangled himself with the bowstring when the stave snapped on him this afternoon.’
‘Heh-heh!’
Ranald wasn't sorry.
‘Serve him right.
He shouldn't leave it lying about.
He near killed Patrick Glas two days past on the big birlinn at the far side of the bay, him and his dallta, for slipping and falling in front of his lordship when he was in a hurry.
Kicked him aside, so he did, and then Farquhar Neas threw the lad right off the side of the ship.
Patrick landed across a rock, and lucky for him the ride was in to break his fall or it's crippled he'd be this minute.
As it is he'll limp for a month.’
‘That may be,’ his grandfather warned him, ‘but it's no part of  your task in this world to avenge Patrick Glas, saints cure him.
That's for his father to do.
You just keep yourself out of mischief, saints help you.
And specially out of Lachlan Cattanach's way.
He's not a safe man to tease.’
He scowled at Ranald.
‘Or do I have to take my belt to your back?’
He never did, of course, and never would, but the fact that the threat had been made showed how strongly he felt on it.
Ranald shrugged his shoulders up to his ears, and rolled his eyes at Luch.
‘Do we tell the bees, granda?’
‘Surely.’
The old man saw Luch's puzzled face.
‘Aye, we must be told the news.
Birth, death, everything of importance.
It's our due, for we're part of the household.
All the gossip it is we must be hearing, or we'll just up and away, saints guide us.
Seumas Ban the steward whiles comes down special to give me the word, so that I can tell the bees.’
Glad of the excuse to rest a minute longer, he frowned at Luch.
‘You'll mind to tell us whatever gossip you have, eh?
But you'll have to be speaking up!’
Luch nodded solemnly.
He suddenly laughed wheezily, his few teeth gleaming blue in the moonlight.
‘Aye, maybe you'll be telling me too, then!’
He heaved to his feet.
‘Come away, the pair of you, this'll not get the work done.
Ranald, do you find a rock the size of these two, and we'll use them as a base for the first skep.
Try not to crush your toes, saints pity you!’
Luch never actually gave him any news, but hidden in the bower she heard all the gossip of the maids, and Lady Marion's occasional rages, and learned a great deal of the events in the castle.
Seumas Ban brought the news that the Maclean wanted the bees to hear; Luch knew more.
She often went to sit quietly beside the hives, in the bee-field or on the moor.
No-one ever heard what, if anything, she told them; but the hives grew amazingly heavy.
There was a grand bit of news for the bees at the end of the month.
Eachuinn Odhar had been busy with Father Patrick, dictating letters to all parts; the Abbot of Iona; the king's court in Edinburgh; even Archibald Campbell, Earl of Argyll, at Inveraray; messages had been going and coming in almost daily by boat and weary runner.
But though everyone was near dead of curiosity, he had kept it a secret what he was planning.
At last, at dinner one evening, the conversations and laughter died away raggedly as Duart stood up at the high table and raised his hand.
But though silence fell speedily, Eachuinn Odhar took his time in getting to the point.
‘Listen you all to me, now, for this is a matter of importance.’
The last of the noise died.
Even the dogs seemed to hush in expectation.
‘This past month we've suffered eleven raids, and still no man can say for sure who the reivers are.
The folk at Fanmore gave them a good fight last week, and drove them off with five men dead, and they've not been seen since.
But they'll be back, when they've gathered more men, if we don't do something about it.’
There was an eager murmur, for something in his voice promised the action they all longed for.
‘Aye, well.
Lachlan, I'm thinking you were in the right of it; there's no proof, but from the description, this Iain Og is most likely John Campbell of Cawdor, Argyll's lad.’
‘I knew it!’
Lachlan's face filled with delight, and his teeth grinned white in his great red beard.
‘The Campbells!
Give me two days to raise the clan, and oh-ho for Inveraray Castle in a blaze!
Let Clan Diarmaid rue the day they ever raised hand against Clan Gillian!’
‘Ach, be quiet!’
His father was scratching at his scar.
‘There's more to it than that!
Listen to me, now, all of you!
King James is sore vexed by the lawlessness in the Isles.
With all Scotland quiet as a flat calm under his hand, he wants us to be quiet too, and let be the Mackinnons and the Maclaines of Lochbuie for a year or three.’
There was a laugh.
‘Besides, he's wanting to take an army to England, to overthrow Henry Tudor and set the Duke of York on his rightful throne.
So who's the King's new Lieutenant in the Isles, with commission to uphold the King's justice and keep the peace?
And take for his reward the lands of the folk he decides have broken the law?
Archie Campbell, the bold man.
Aye.
Argyll himself.
The very man whose son is raiding our coasts.
What justice will we get with him as a judge, eh?’
Against the roar of rage he waved for silence.
‘But if we move against him openly, and him the King's friend, the King may call out all the clans against us, with the promise of our land as prize  for them when they've destroyed us; and we've unfriends enough would jump at the chance.’
Lachlan was on his feet, towering over Marion Aluinn biting her lip apprehensive between them.
‘Well, Father?
What now, eh, for the honour of the clan?
Fight like men, or kiss the Campbells' feet as they trample our faces?’
Eachuinn Odhar thundered on the board with his silver-mounted drinking horn for the tumult to be still, and waved violently at his son to be seated again; but it was long before there was hush enough for even his bellow to make itself heard.
‘Ach, have sense, man!
And the rest of you!
Sit down and stop your noise!
You aye think the only way out of trouble is by the sword!’
Gradually the din faded.
‘You should know by your age, Lachlan, there's more ways of getting to the other side of a mountain than by chewing through it.
There was a time Clan Gillian could put two hundred galleys to the water, but that time is past, and it may be long till it comes again.
And the Campbells are powerful, and growing more so.
The last time we fought them, five thousand Macleans died.
I'd not have it happen again if it can be avoided in honour.’
‘None of us would, surely, grandfather,’ said Hector.
Lachlan stirred, but settled again at his father's glare.
‘And I'm not getting any younger,’ Eachuinn Odhar continued, his eye hard on his son.
‘Not that I'm fair done yet, mind, but I'd like to see the matter of the chieftainship of the clan settled soon.
Hector is twenty.
Old enough to wed, and have a child to secure the line.
But wed who, that's the question, eh?’
Lachlan's hand clenched.
There was a breathless hush.
They could all see what was coming.
Who did the Maclean have in mind for Hector, then?
‘Lachlan,’ his father announced, ‘a while back you said Hector wedding a Campbell lass would stop the raiding.’
Lachlan's jaw was clenched tight as his hand.
‘Well, Argyll has a daughter.
Elizabeth.
She's sixteen, and not ill-favoured — I'd not wish that on you, Hector, whatever.
I've sounded out Archie Campbell; he's willing to take Hector as a husband for her, and the Father Abbot of Iona will wed you.
There, now.
What have you to say to that?’
There was a silence; then a growing murmur, that grew rapidly to a hubbub of comment and argument around Eachuinn Odhar, while he had his horn refilled to ease his throat and sat back, ears alert for the tone of the reaction.
Marion's urgent hand on his arm cooled Lachlan from explosive down to merely seething.
‘Dhia!’
He drained his own cup.
The ale could have been sea water for all he tasted.
‘Damn the pair of them!
Hector wed!
That settles it.
I'm back for Ireland.
Or Spain, to fight the Moors.
I don't care, as long as there's fighting!’
Farquhar grinned in satisfaction behind him.
Marion was furious too.
‘And what of me, then?’ she hissed.
‘Must I bide here, under another woman?
Hear her criticise and change my ordering?
Say aye, lady and no, lady, and do her bidding obediently?
And Bridhe grinning at me?’
Unused to thinking of anyone else, Lachlan frowned.
‘Well, come with me!
As soon as you've birthed your child —‘
‘Our child!’
She was trembling with anger.
‘Our child, then, you can leave it safe with a foster-mother here, and be free to join me.’
‘Traipse at your cart-tail?
What reputation does a camp-follower have?’
‘My wife!’ he protested.
But as he spoke, he was wondering…
She was demanding company; did he really want her with him?
Or would his freedom be more agreeable?
They were only handfasted, and the year the contract lasted nearly up…
He could set her aside…
Marion saw the thought, and could not keep her tongue still.
‘Aye, and do you truly want me, then?
I know your roving eye, gallant man.
It's wandered to every lass in Mull and Morvern while I've been carrying this babe for you!’
In her rage and fear, the good meat she had eaten rose sour to the back of her throat.
She stood suddenly, hand to her mouth, and ran out, her maids flurrying after her, careless of the gossip she would cause.
Old Lady Bridhe smiled slightly.
That bitch's turn now to be superseded!
Hector himself, the most concerned, was least concerned.
He had to wed somebody.
He trusted his grandfather — most of the time, anyway — to do his best for him.
And if it stopped the  raiding, and put the Macleans firmly on the side of the Campbells and the king — yes, the advantages were there.
He glanced aside at his grandfather, to see the old man's eye on him.
They grinned together.
‘That's shocked them, eh!’ muttered Eachuinn Odhar.
‘Another woman to queen it over Marion Aluinn!
And friendship with Clan Diarmaid, that we've been fighting off and on for five generations!
Listen to them, they're coming round to it, like Archie Campbell did.
We're still a powerful clan, and it's a good match for the Campbells.
What do you say, lad?’
Hector shrugged.
‘I'm trying to recall if I've ever set eyes on her; I've a vague memory of a plump wee lass at a cousin's wedding three or four years back.
Cuddly.
Passable teeth —‘
‘She's better than that!
I'll not say there's songs written about her, but I'm told she's fair enough.
Gentle.
Interested in ballads and songs, they say — you'll have that to talk about.
If you want to talk to her.
A bit advice, lad; best give a wife a clachan of bairns, and leave her alone to rear them.’
‘Is the lassie happy about it?’ asked Hector.
‘The lassie?
What's it got to do with her?
She'll do as she's bid, and be grateful you're young and whole.’
His grandfather was quite shocked.
It was as well he couldn't see the scene at Inveraray castle that same minute.
Lady Elizabeth Campbell, sixteen, gentle, interested in poetry, cuddly, was discussing the matter of her marriage, which had just been broken to her at dinner by her father, Archibald Campbell, Earl of Argyll, King James the Fourth's Lieutenant of the Isles, chief of Clan Diarmaid; and her teeth, which were indeed passable, were much in evidence.
‘A barefoot, barelegged, bare-arsed Islesman?
Never!’
She was throwing a fit of screaming hysterics and every plate, cup, stool, cushion and knife she could set hand to.
Her aim was excellent.
Her mother was furious.
Her brothers and sisters, sisters-in-law, all the clan dodged the ricocheting missiles, clustered in the corners, watched with appalled glee.
‘I'll wed none but Hugh Despoins!
A Maclean?
Never!
Murdering redshanks!’
A fine pewter plate glanced off her father into the fire and melted.
Her mother swore.
‘Filthy, flea-bitten reivers!
I am a lady of the Campbells!
I spit on the Macleans!’
She did.
Scarlet with fury and exertion, she heaved one of the heavy tables right off its trestles, driving her mother back.
She snatched up one of the spears racked handy beside the hearth, and her father ducked fast as it slashed just over his head into a tapestry hanging above the fire, cut a two-foot gash in Saint Peter's side and raised a shower of sparks.
She threw the spear at him, but missed.
One of the maids yelped as it pinned her skirt to a cupboard.
Argyll leapt over the clattering boards and rolling stools.
He grabbed his daughter's long sleeve, but she jerked away, ripping the flower-embroidered linen, towards the other table.
A leg of lamb bounced off her mother's head; wooden platters clattered on the walls.
‘Vile, traitorous reivers!
You'd wed your daughter to a stinking Viking!
Traitor yourself!
Tyrant!’
A silver cup whizzed an inch wide of her father's ear; her eldest brother caught it just before it sailed out of an arrow-slit window.
At last her mother distracted Elizabeth, and her father got a firm grip on her waist.
Skidding on a gravy-greased platter as she tried to kick, she lost her balance, and her mother slapped her face hard.
She screamed, more in rage than pain, but she was tiring, and her father managed to control her struggles.
‘God damn you, you bitch, would you defy me?’ he snarled.
‘Aye would I!’ she shrieked.
‘Curse you!
I'll never wed Hector Maclean!
I'm not Muriella Cawdor, easy bribed with a kind word an' a sweetie!’
In her corner of the hall, John's wife Muriella lost some of her grin.
‘Nor you'll not beat me into it neither!’
‘We'll see about that, my bonny bird!
John!
Bring me up my whip!’
The audience flowed in behind as Argyll and his tall, rawboned wife dragged Elizabeth, screaming, swearing, fighting every step, out of the hall and up the stair to the empty guest room next to his own.
They hauled her in.
John ran up with his father's riding whip, and the door was slammed on him and the rest.
But at the sounds that penetrated the heavy wood, the excited grins slowly faded, to be replaced by worried frowns.
‘I've never seen father as angry.
A-ach!
I can feel the blows myself!’
‘Well, can you blame him?
With a spear thrown at him?’
‘No — but…
For him to break it to her like that, in public!’
‘With no warning, and he knows she's in love with the English lad!’
‘He said only last week he'd no objection!’
‘They're still at it.
Listen to mother shouting!’
‘Why does she not cry out?
Maybe they've gagged her — or killed her!’
‘She's had beatings before —‘
‘No wonder, the temper she has —‘
‘But nothing ever like this!
Sh!
Hear that!
Oh, poor lass!’
At last Argyll came out, panting slightly, but white, not red, of face.
Great clawmarks down one cheek had just missed his eye.
He stood aside for his wife to leave, a bite-mark showing through a rip in her bloodstained sleeve.
The watchers caught a glimpse of a huddle of torn, stained pink cloth before the door was locked, and the key thrust into the chief's pouch.
He stared grimly round at the crowd of silent watchers.
‘Let no man nor woman enter this door.
My daughter dares defy me.
My own flesh and blood stands against my will.
Well, she'll repent of it and agree to all I say before one crumb, or one drop of water, crosses her lips.
You hear me?’
As no-one spoke, his voice fell to a harsh whisper.
‘Are you hearing me?’
Among a general nodding and murmur of assent only Morag, their eldest daughter there, dared object.
‘But father — mother — she's needing care.’
‘Care?
When she cares for me, then I'll care for her.’
His hand touched the scratches on his face.
Morag nerved herself to go on.
‘But she may die, father.’
‘Then let her!’
At her expression, his face hardened even further.
Suddenly the whip that his wife held slashed across Morag's cheek.
‘Will you also defy your father?
By God, you'll join her!
Well?’
Morag's hand rose to the crimson weal.
Her eyes sank.
Her father, under a soft, plump, vague appearance, was rock-hard.
He usually persuaded rather than forced, and her mother simply battered down any opposition with her tongue; but they could do  it, and in their present temper they would.
‘We'll do as you command, father.
Of course.’
Much later, Elizabeth stirred, and moaned in pain.
She was hanging from her hands tied to the post of the bed above her head with her own belt.
She couldn't move.
She ached all over, from the whip, from kicks and blows, from the bonds that tied her cramp-tight.
Father said she'd not eat or drink till she gave in?
Well, she'd starve, then!
She wept with rage as well as pain.
But deep inside her, she knew she wouldn't.
She'd agree.
And live.
And make him regret it — him and this Maclean!
It was a long, long night.
Next day when the lock rattled she stiffened in fear and defiance, but it was neither of her parents.
It was her third eldest brother John of Cawdor who entered.
She almost cried out to him to free her.
But she still had — just — too much pride to beg.
And besides, he had fetched the whip.
He carefully locked the door behind him, shutting out the world again.
She turned her head away in disdain.
With his dirk he cut her free.
As the last linen strands parted, she toppled, hissing with pain.
He eased her to the floor and squatted beside her, rubbing her shoulders to help her arms relax.
‘Sister mine, dear, dear sister,’ he said comfortingly, ‘that was a damn-fool thing to do.
I thought you had more self-control.
Flying out like that!
‘A lady of the Campbells’ indeed!
The Campbells would disown you if they could, you vixen!
For no Campbell lady would act so badly.
Or so stupidly!’
He turned her outraged face to him, bruised from the beating, and to her fury a tear trickled out of one purple, puffy eye.
But she still refused to make a sound.
From the pouch hanging at his belt he brought out a leather flask.
‘Here.
It's water, with a little wine.
Come, drink it, you must be dry.
Rinse your mouth at least, and let me see did he shift any of your teeth.’
‘No,’ she husked at him, ‘it was mother did that!
And you helping them!’
But her eye was drawn to the flask.
She was indeed dry.
She rubbed her wrists.
‘Well, what did you expect me to do?
Refuse?
Encourage you to defy him?
Don't be a fool, Elizabeth.
You never have been  before.
What came over you?
If you'd planned to set his mind like glue on wedding you to this Islesman, you couldn't have done better.
And of course mother supports him.’
As he spoke, he took a kerchief from his pouch, dampened it from the flask and started gently to wipe her face.
The wine's sharp sting on the grazes made her wince.
He put the flask on her lap to free both his hands for the cleaning, and before she knew it, she had raised the bottle to her lips and taken a sip.
And another.
And a swallow.
She looked up, to see him smiling at her.
‘Ach, you, John Campbell!’
In spite of her split, swollen lips, loose teeth, and the pain of the cloth dab-dabbing, she couldn't help smiling back.
‘Charm a bird off a tree, so you would, let alone your poor sister.’
Slowly, painfully, she stretched.
‘A-agh!
Damn father!
And damn this man he wants to wed me to!’
‘This man he will wed you to, sister!’
John warned her.
‘Face it.
It's his pride that's involved now.
You've made it impossible for him to change his mind, with your carry-on in public.
How can he give in to you after that?
Ach, Elizabeth, what a witless way to behave!’
Reluctantly, she nodded.
She'd been thinking just that for most of the long, aching, sleepless night.
She sniffed dolefully, and drank again.
‘How did you get this in past father?’
‘I didn't tell him.
I just said I'd try to talk you into accepting what he's decreed.
Mind you, I'll not swear he didn't guess I had it.
No man's fool, Argyll.
This way you get your drink, and he doesn't know about it — officially.
But if I go back out without you, and you agreeing…’
‘What else can I do?
I'll not die for him, or his Maclean friends.’
Her voice was tired and bitter, and she slumped against the side of the bed.
‘And there's no reason for you to.’
He nodded at her.
‘No, sister mine.
If you're clever — cleverer than you were last night — you can do as father says and have your English love.
Later.
He's not the man to rescue you —‘
‘No, he's not,’ she agreed with a sigh.
You had to face facts.
Romantic, rich and handsome Hugh was; determined, bold and practical he wasn't.
John grinned.
‘But there's nothing says your life in Duart will  be too bad.
I'm told the heir's not an ill-looking lad.
And it needn't last for ever.
The redshanks go fighting at the change of the wind.
Or murdering each other.’
There was a peculiar significance in his tone.
‘Once you've produced an heir, you'll be the mother of the next chief.
A position of some influence, even if you were to become a widow.
A rich widow.
Sooner than anyone might expect.’
As their eyes met she straightened suddenly, ignoring the stabbing pains.
‘You think so?
Would you…’
She changed her mind.
‘No.
I'll not say it.’
He smiled, helping her to her feet.
‘Wise, wise, little sister.’
‘But if I should ask you for — say, a cordial, to relieve my troubles…’
‘I'm sure I'll be able to find something to help you.’
They smiled, in perfect accord.
‘And as a widow, I can choose for myself who I'll wed next!
Well.
I'll see how I can help you in the meantime.
News of their opinions?
Or a word in my husband's ear to make him agree with whatever you're wanting?’
‘Carefully, though; he'll maybe not be ruled as easy as Hugh Despoins.’
She nodded.
‘Now that's my sensible sister again.
Come then, my dear.
Here, I brought you a cloak.
Muriella has warm water and bandages waiting, and ointments, and a fresh gown.
Oh, and you'd better apologise to her, as well as to father, for insulting her.
And me.’
‘What?
Oh, that.’
She actually laughed, wincing.
‘as if you needed sweeties to charm any girl.
Aye, I'll apologise.
And to father, of course.
And mother.
May God curse them!
No, you needn't fret.
I'll be all sweet penitence and grief that I've dared set my will against his.
And if they guess my true feelings —
‘They'll say nothing.
Not in public, at least , if you make a thorough job of your repentance.
And you will, dearest sister Elizabeth, won't you?’
‘Of course, dearest brother John.
What else?’
Plans and Plots
After Elizabeth's charming, tearful apologies for her ungodly want of duty and respect, and for throwing a spear at her father, affairs moved swiftly.
The wedding was set for October, and Elizabeth was offered a reward, for which she was sweetly grateful; the Maclean was invited to bring his heir to Inveraray for the betrothal.
They could get to know each other before they were wed.
Lachlan was being left in charge of the castle, and Lady Marion could not go to the ceremony, for the baby was near its time.
Bitterly resigned to the betrothal, she took a fiendish revenge.
She made sure that Duart and his heir would be magnificently turned out for this visit to a foreign clan.
She knew better than to urge them to dress in the fashions Lachlan had learned abroad; but all the maids were driven frantic sewing silk and linen, gold thread, fur and leather.
Eachuin Odhar and his grandson spent much effort on dodging her, for whenever she set eyes on them she tried new tunics on them.
But the worst was the day she ambushed them as they rose.
‘Would you meet Argyll like a rat-chewed, three-year-old hearthrug, Duart?’
She sniffed.
‘He'd sneer at you, him and his daughter, and at me for letting you go out so, and that I'll not have!
I have sweet soap here and hot water, and either you wash yourself, all  over, or I call in the women to hold you down and scrub you myself.
They'd laugh at you from here to Bergen.
And you needn't hide, Hector Luath.
I see you.
Shut your mouth, so, and see how speedy Ewan can be at getting that fuzz scraped off your face.
Beard, indeed!
I've seen thicker mould on a cheese.
I'll return in an hour to shear you.’
She whisked out, chuckling.
‘It makes a fair difference,’ Hector had to admit later, admiring his shining shoulder-length locks in Marion's tiny mirror.
‘Huh!’
Eachuinn Odhar muttered, scratching itchily and irritably at the newly pink scalp gleaming through his newly white hair, ‘different isn't aye better!’
And checked hastily to see that Marion couldn't hear him.
A hundred ghillies were burnishing silver and steel to an equally mirror finish; renewing silk braid and red sharkskin on belts, scabbards, quivers and the shoulder-slings of the ceremonial claymores; re-fletching arrows with peacock feathers.
The two silver-collared hounds that were gifts for Argyll were groomed to a silken sheen, and their teeth and nails polished like ivory.
The captains of the galleys chosen for the voyage drove their men to work, repainting the dragon-heads, stitching new sails and pennons.
Luch and Ruari had to supply ten pounds of wax, to polish the bulwarks.
Every clansman was determined to outdo the Campbells in display, and looked to his finery.
Each had a feather-plumed bonnet and the filabeg, the small plaid, heavy wool an arm's length wide and four arm-spans long, pleated and belted at the waist, the free end swung up and pinned over the shoulder of his saffron-dyed shirt.
Officers strutted in their brightest breacan-feiles; the same length of a finer cloth, four and a half feet wide, held at the waist by a silver-buckled belt to fall double thickness, and the outside layer at the back drawn up over the left shoulder and pinned with a great silver brooch.
The rest of the Macleans' costume was made up of weapons — dirk and sword, spear and tall Lochaber axe, javelin and bow, and even a couple of new-fangled handguns.
Scarcely needed, of course, for one Maclean was naturally worth any four Campbells.
They knew better than to insult their hosts by open mention  of this superiority; such bad manners would disgrace the clan.
Eachuinn Odhar would deal with any offender.
Personally.
The Campbell clansmen wore the filabeg also, but the castle folk of Inveraray wore the modern court fashion; knee-length gown of fine wool, linen damask or velvet, the sleeves trailing nearly to the ground, all braided, slashed, looped, laced, furred and embroidered for the occasion; bone-white shirt, long hose and long-toed shoes.
Their townsfolk sneered at the Maclean chiefs' rawhide brogans and bare knees, kilted tartans and dyed linens.
They hid their laughter, naturally, for their wild guests were touchy and sensitive.
It would be ill-mannered to make open mention of Campbell superiority.
Argyll would deal — impersonally, as was his way — with any offender.
So for the time of the visit there was a truce.
Elizabeth walked with Hector, taking care to turn away from him the last yellow stains round her left eye, and smiled sweetly to hide the deadly steel of her thoughts.
She was childishly round, of face, eye, mouth, cheek; and of figure, plump and short.
An unfortunate liking for pink satin didn't help her pink complexion.
He gave her a delicate necklace of amethysts and pearls set in Scottish gold.
Cheap, but quite pretty, she thought, thanking him charmingly for his delightful gift.
She chatted in a superior way of painting, spices, jewellery, fashions, medicines, saints' shrines, and was pleasantly surprised by his education.
She had to admit he had his good points.
He was handsome, for a savage.
His legs would look quite good in hose.
Best of all, he was tongue-tied in admiration of her.
Yes, he could be civilised.
Though he wasn't, of course, as attractive as the man she truly loved, Hugh Despoins.
She had no idea that knowing Marion Aluinn, Hector didn't think her very pretty.
He was silent only because he couldn't think what to say to her, He walked with her, looked polite, and noted that her teeth and her temper seemed fair, and she was fine and broad across the hips for child-bearing.
She'd do.
He escaped as soon as he could to the company of her brothers.
They tested each other in hunting, drinking, fencing and wrestling.
They talked of interesting things; ship-building, the invasion of England, cannon, the path newly discovered west to the Indies, chess, dogs, the king's mistress.
The Campbells  found Hector hardy, which they had expected, and intelligent, which they hadn't; while he found the same thing about them, in reverse; and they were each surprised to find that-they liked the others well enough, in spite of their ridiculous clothes.
pity they were probably enemies, marriage or not.
On the whole, considering the close contact of a hundred Macleans and three hundred Campbells each itching to do down the others, politely of course, the week's visit went off quietly.
There were only four fights, proper fights, that is, one house burned — and that was an accident that Ewan apologised for most handsomely next day — nobody killed, and just six men what you might call damaged.
Rather dull, in fact.
The Macleans' three galleys took the two-day trip back gently, rather hung-over after the farewell feasting.
But Duart Bay was empty.
They woke up smartly.
Eachuinn Odhar strode splashing up out of the water to meet Lady Marion.
‘Where are they, Marion?
Lachlan?
The other galleys?
Don't tell me —,
‘Aye, Duart.
A raid.
Noon yesterday, at Arinagour on Coll.
But there was a man captured, and Lachlan got it out of him who was behind it all.’
Hector waded ashore.
‘Well, it wasn't John Campbell,’ he said.
‘He was as drunk as us two nights back.
I couldn't have run a raid yesterday, and I'm certain sure he couldn't.
Who is it, then — Mackinnons?’
‘No, Hector Luath.
‘Iain Og’ is the second son of MacIan of Ardnamurchan.
He and his friends — David MacRuari of Moydart, Angusson of Keppoch, and Donald Dhu, Allanson of Locheil's son.
Those four.
That's who it's been.’
Eachuinn Odhar growled deep in his throat.
‘Dhia!
What have we been doing this past week at Inveraray, eh?
Just wasting our time!
Well, we can think about that later.
Do I need to ask where Lachlan is?
Ardnamurchan, eh?’
‘Kentra Bay.
He said he must go at once, Duart, for the honour of the clan.’
She spoke proudly, tossing her head at Hector.
Eachuinn Odhar snorted.
‘I'm glad he thought of that.’
He rubbed his scar.
‘Kentra Bay, grandfather?’ asked Hector, grinning.
‘Lachlan'll  never let us hear the end of it if he clears them all out and us not with him — and we've a week's good behaviour to work off!’
There was a joyous roar as the old warrior, pretending reluctance, nodded.
‘Aye, well.
Why should Lachlan have all the fun?
Kentra Bay!’
Ranald tried to slip away to join the warriors, but Ruari grabbed him.
‘What are you thinking of, eh?
What would you do there, saints save you?
Fall over your feet?’
Ranald was disappointed, but Luch smiled in relief.
Cheering, in wild enthusiasm and their best clothes still, the clansmen swung back aboard their galleys, and heaved them round and away again, a sight happier than when they'd gone to Inveraray.
The lads on the shore cheered and waved and the wives, mothers, daughters, and Ranald, sighed in resignation.
Marion Aluinn, smiling, turned to go back up the beach, caught her foot and staggered.
She suddenly gasped and laid a hand to her stomach.
‘What is it, Marion?’ asked Bridhe.
‘A pain.
Low down — like a belly-ache.
It's gone now.’
Bridhe looked at her shrewdly, and glanced at the other women.
Eyebrows raised, they nodded to one another.
As the lady walked back to the castle on Bridhe's arm, Catriona ran ahead to ready the bedroom.
It didn't matter that David Beaton was away with the ships; this was women's business.
It was a first baby, and Marion Aluinn was narrower in the hip than the Campbell lass; it was a long, hard labour in spite of the raspberry-leaf tea Lady Bridhe had brewed.
But by the time Eachuinn Odhar's great lymphad led the other galleys sweeping back in triumph along the Sound of Mull, Ruari and Luch had told the bees that Lachlan Cattanach had a fine bull-voiced boy, named Alan.
This time the waiting women got their men back — most of them.
The reivers had been burned out, they boasted.
Lachlan was a right wild fighter, and Hector fought well too, in a quiet but effective way, all credit to the lad.
And did you see Ewan Beg take off the two heads at one stroke?
Man, what a man, eh?
Singing and limping and shouting memories and boasts, they staggered off home, supported by their women, loaded with recaptured loot.
Lachlan walked slowly up to his room and stared down at his wife lying smiling at him; and at the red, crumpled face and red, crumpled hair of his son, yelling just like his father in a temper; and back to Marion again.
Her eyes were bright, her hair brushed shining, her cheeks beautifully flushed with satisfaction.
This day she need fear no rival!
‘Mind you,’ she whispered in his ear as he collapsed to his knees by the bed and clasped her in his arms, ‘I can't promise you a son every time you're away!’
And gasped in pain and content at the strength of his hug.
Next day Eachuinn Odhar stormed into the hall.
‘Hector!
Do you still want this marriage?
Now we know it wasn't John Campbell was at the reiving?’
Hector was at his breakfast, sharing a cold leg of mutton with the hounds.
‘Why not, grandfather?
They'll keep us in good standing with the king still.
And more especially now that we've started raiding back against the MacIans and their friends.
You will be going after the MacRuaris and the rest, I suppose?
Well then, you'll maybe be needing the Campbells’ good word.’
‘Hah, good lad.
I was afraid you might want out.
It would be a right insult to them to back off, and as you say, their goodwill could be handy.
She's not a bad lass, is she?’
Hector shrugged.
‘I couldn't understand half what she was on about, but either I'll be learning or she'll be giving up on me.
Or I'll go deaf.
Her brothers had a grand idea, though.
If we get two serpentines and set them —‘
‘Ach, we can see about cannon later.
We've a campaign to plan, before the king hears of it and puts a stop to it!
Aye, Lachlan!
Get a bit meat and look here.
Oh — how's the baby?
And Marion?
Fine, fine.
Now what we'll do…’
They leaned over the map, arguing, the castle fighting men all ears round them.
Loch Eil this time — leave Moydart and Keppoch for next trip?
Lachlan slapped the table, his booming laugh echoing in the rafters.
‘Aye, let's not be greedy!’
Six ships — sixty men each — just carry oatmeal — Cameron cattle are aye fat…
In half an hour it was all planned.
Next day they were off again, leaving the wounded and rejected to make life a misery for their womenfolk.
For nearly two months  they raided all over Keppoch, Moydart, Ardnamurchan, up into Cameron country.
Usually they were successful, occasionally they were driven off; but the bees could be told that the Maclean dead were amply revenged.
In the castle, while baby Alan grew out of his six-week colic, there was an added sharpness to Marion Aluinn's tongue, for she realised she had a more serious rival than any lass; Lachlan's rediscovered love of fighting.
Then, towards the end of August, Eachuinn Odhar got the message he'd not expected for another month.
The king called Maclean of Duart to Edinburgh, to explain just what he thought he was at, creating havoc all over the west coast.
‘He's fast off the mark, eh?
Ach well, we've had a good run,’ he grinned.
Lachlan, a bandage round his left thigh which had been axed open to the bone, growled from his stool, but Hector nodded.
‘Aye, grandfather.
We've aye missed their galleys, somehow, but we've cleared our name in the Isles.’
His grandfather stretched.
‘Aye, it's been a good summer.
Well-a-well, I'd best go and see what's wanted of me — an oath, most like, to keep the peace.’
‘Will you take it, father?’
Lachlan asked.
‘Well, of course, son.
Am I not a peace-loving man?’
Grinning, he gently rubbed his swollen nose, newly broken a fourth time.
‘But they'll have to take it too.
We can get a bit rest in the winter, before somebody breaks their word in the spring again.
Not us, of course.’
He grinned again.
Lachlan snorted.
‘Oh, never us, father!
Never us!’
He started to bellow with mirth.
‘We'd never dream of it, eh?
Man, this could be a right handy wee pastime for the summers.
I might just stay!’
They laughed together as Marion danced in.
‘That messenger can pour back the ale near as fast as yourself, Lachlan,’ she laughed.
‘Well?
When will we be setting out, Duart?
I've aye fancied seeing Edinburgh.’
Lachlan stretched on his stool.
‘I'll stay here, Duart,’ he said.
‘I'd not manage the ride with this leg.’
That wasn't true, and he and they all knew it.
‘And besides,’ he said ruefully to their raised eyebrows, ‘I'm too short in the temper.
I'm like you, father — I  can't abide Scotsmen.
I'd put a dirk in one of them, and then where would you be, and you trying to convince the king of your peaceable nature?’
It was sensible, if a trifle unexpected from the man himself.
‘But take Hector, and Marion.
She'll enjoy it.
Look at her!’
Eachuinn Odhar seemed about to agree when his smile died a fraction.
‘Er — no, I think not.
I'll not take any of you.
Marion, if you've things you're wanting, give Andrew a note of it.
Spices or whatever.
But this is like to be a boring trip, see you — business, just.
And then, I've little silver to spend.’
Lady Marion smiled teasingly at him.
‘Come now, Duart, you've tenants from Jura to Loch Sunart!
Silver?
Aye, and gold, enough for both of us!’
He was sheepish.
‘Ach, Marion, you're aye too sharp for me!
Well, I'll tell you.
I've never been to Edinburgh before, myself.
I'd prefer to be alone while I'm finding my way about.
And that's the truth of it.
No.’
And in spite of her charms, pleas and tears, to her incredulous annoyance he stayed firm.
Hector said nothing.
When she finally sulked out, Lachlan limping after her, he looked over expectantly.
‘Well, grandfather?
What's the real reason?’
Eachuinn Odhar nodded in satisfaction.
‘Good lad!
It's not that I don't want your company.
I'd be glad of it.
These Scotsmen fairly make my flesh creep, with their laws and papers and fancy airs and lying words.
But if you're that clever, then, Master Fox, you tell me why I'll not take you.’
‘Well.’
Hector considered.
‘It was when Lachlan said he'd not come that your face changed.
You're not happy about that.’
‘Good again!
He did the same as me; gave a poor reason and then a good one that was embarrassing, to stop us seeking further.
But tell me why, now?’
‘H'm.
Why should he really want to stay?
Ah!
You fear he's wild enough to make one last raid just while you're away promising to stop raiding.
And —’ suddenly his voice turned grim instead of gleeful —‘you want me to stop him.’
‘Aye.’
Eachuinn Odhar was grim too.
‘For if he did so he'd be proving my word worthless.
Shaming me, and the clan.
Before the king himself.’
‘Order him not to, then.’
‘And insult him, if it's not in his mind?
I can't do that.
I've been at him too much about the clan's honour.
No, lad.
I'll hint — strongly.
But that's as far as I can go.
And if I insisted he came with me, he'd likely cause trouble, just as he said.
So I must leave him here, and you to keep an eye on him.
Don't let him take out the men.
It's you are my heir, not him.
I'll hold you responsible for the clan while I'm away.’
‘I thank you for the honour, Duart,’ Hector said formally.
Control Lachlan Cattanach?
Hold a bear by the tail.
Well, he had to start sometime.
Marion Aluinn moved quietly away from behind the doorpost.
She had returned to try one more plea, but had stopped to listen.
Hector to hold back her Lachlan?
A mouse to stop a lion.
How could this be turned to advantage?
Lachlan was leaning on the battlements, watching the boats in the Sound.
She checked that the sentry was out of earshot, and told him what she had heard.
Then she had to hold him back from charging down to challenge Hector's fledgeling authority at once.
‘No, my lord.
Wait you till your father's well away.
Then we'll see can we not set you next in line for chief of Clan Gillian.’
‘What?’
He was taken aback.
‘I've been your wife for a year, Lachlan Cattanach.
What kind of fool do you think me, not to know what's closest to your heart?’
She nestled close in by his side.
‘And we'll make it happen yet, my man.
When Eachuinn Odhar goes to his just reward in heaven or hell, it's yourself will be Maclean of Duart, not young Hector Luath.’
And that, she thought in satisfaction, would surely bind him to her forever.
‘A child born out of wedlock can't be chief.’
He was testing her.
‘It has been known.
If there's no-one else.’
He glanced sideways at her, and she smiled.
‘As you know well.
It's been in your mind.’
Reluctantly, he nodded.
‘Hector could die.
I know you can't simply kill him, even with a seeming accident, or you and Farquhar would have done it long since.’
She wasn't at all shocked at the thought.
‘We'll think of something.’
Lachlan scratched his healing leg.
‘You know why I'm against him, Marion?
He's just not the man to be chief of the Macleans.
He's clever enough, and brave in spite of all I've said — in that last raid he took on four men to save Ewan Beg's life.
He's a good lad.
Too damned good!’
There was frustration in his voice.
‘Maclean of Duart needs to be more than good and honest!
We're rogues, Marion.
And our chief must be a bigger rogue than us all — and ruthless with it, when need calls.
And the plain fact is that Hector isn't.’
She smiled up at his frown.
‘But you are, my love, you are!’
They laughed together.
She wondered just how much of that rubbish was true.
Ach well, it didn't matter, anyway.
He slipped a powerful arm round her and held her tight in to his side, where she purred, rubbing against him like a cat.
‘Aye.
Marion, there's not a lass to match you in Mull.
Not in all Clan Gillian — Scotland — the whole world!’
His face was already full of triumph.
So was hers.
The guard carefully out of earshot at the far end of the battlements smiled to see Lachlan and his lady so close.
All the talk about the Cattanach losing interest in her was clearly false.
Then he sighed.
It was a pity, in a way; they could do with a kinder mistress in the house.
But then, they'd be getting one soon.
And Marion Aluinn would find her long nose out of joint…
Eachuinn Odhar had a good week in Edinburgh, in spite of the crowds and the stink.
He visited Falkland Palace, and made his duty to King James.
The Earl of Argyll, Archibald Campbell, introduced him to many of the Scottish nobles, and he found some of them less objectionable than he'd expected.
With the fathers of the lads who had been raiding him, he swore solemnly before the earl and the other Lords of Council to abstain from mutual injuries and molestation, under a penalty of £500.
The five of them eyed each other stiff-faced and stiff-necked, drank a glass of wine together with the earl to seal their new friendship, and parted in complete mutual understanding and distrust.
He'd meant to stay longer, but a wee niggle in his mind made him return early.
It was justified.
As his lymphad turned into Duart Bay not long after noon, the bay was empty.
His gnarled hands throttled the bulwarks.
His oarsmen held his great galley back off the beach, ready to  leave again at a word as Eachuinn Odhar leaped thigh-deep to surge ashore, energetic and agile almost as in his youth, and much more dangerous.
They were ranked to meet him in the misty rain, every soul from castle and clachan, fidgeting and nervous, and in front of them all Marion Aluinn, eager to break the tense silence, lovely in her excitement.
‘Duart, thank God you're back!’
‘Aye?’
His tone wasn't encouraging, his eyes suspiciously narrow.
She could weep beautifully, whenever she wished.
She did so now.
‘I have bad news.’
She sobbed, but with a gallant effort controlled her tears.
‘Word came that the reivers had hidden their galleys in the sea lochan at Arivegaig.’
That was true, at least.
‘And Hector Luath dared Lachlan to destroy them before you got back.
He said you'd enjoy the joke on the king!
Lachlan said no, it would damage your honour.
Hector said they both knew you were going to break the truce yourself in the spring anyway.
But Lachlan still refused, though it hurt him to miss a fight.
You know what he's like.
And Hector sneered at him for a coward!
And laughed!’
The old man's face was unreadable.
She sobbed again.
‘Lachlan was furious, but he wouldn't do it!
But last night a boat brought news of a raid on Coll, and it was more than he could bear!’
‘Lachlan went out to avenge them, and Hector after him?’
She was surprised by his ready understanding.
‘Aye, my lord!’
His icy hot gaze moved to Seumas Ban, uneasy beside her.
‘True it is, Duart, some nights back they were laughing like donkeys about who would first break the truce.’
At the fury on Eachuinn Odhar's face he swallowed before going on with considerable courage.
‘A boat did arrive last night, after Hector Luath had gone to his bed.
I did not hear the sailor's words, but Lachlan forbade me to waken Hector, he said the morning would do for the news.
And before dawn Lachlan left with three galleys, and Hector went after him at mid-morning with two, saying he must prevent Lachlan harming the honour of the clan.
And no-one can tell you a word more than that.’
‘I can tell you every word they said!’
Marion stormed at him.
She swung in anguished sympathy to Eachuinn Odhar.
‘I know you love Hector, my lord, but I have to say it, if you kill me for it.
It was a deliberate insult.
A challenge.
And you know Lachlan.
When he heard the word about Coll — I tried to stop him.
I knew you'd be angry.
I told him.’
She sank to her knees on the damp sand at his feet, wringing her hands.
‘I have no doubt you told him.’
The words fell heavy as an axe into a rotten tree-stump.
‘So.
You tell me Lachlan has gone out against my wish, on a challenge from Hector, who planned to disgrace him in my eyes.
This is a vile, evil thing.
Angry?
Aye.’
She was weeping, her face hidden in her hands, her heart singing.
His voice did not change.
‘And I know who to blame.’
It took her a moment to recognise the accusation.
She froze, shocked; what about her fine acting?
She looked up at him; really looked, to see him, not the picture of him in her mind.
This was not the simple old man she knew well, sometimes annoyingly obstinate, but usually easy to coax or control with a smile.
This was Maclean of Duart, Chief of Clan Gillian, unchallenged lord of life and death; her life and death; and her scalp rose at the dread of him.
‘You are lying, woman.’
His voice was cold and deadly.
‘I know my heir.
And I know Lachlan.
And you, with your smiles hiding your lies.
Am I to credit that Hector would plot against Lachlan?
Why should he?’
She didn't understand.
Her Lachlan hated Hector; so automatically Hector must be Lachlan's foe in return.
‘No.
It is Lachlan, eaten up by jealousy, who is plotting against my heir.
I have closed my eyes far too long, in hope…’
Eachuinn Odhar stood absolutely still for a long, long breath.
‘My son.
And I loved him!
I loved him too much.’
The pain, the tight-held rage at Lachlan, and at himself, grated in his voice.
‘But he knew I was pledging my honour to the king's peace.
The clan honour!
At that very moment!
God damn his soul!
And to try to set the blame on Hector!’
Suddenly he reached down and grasped Marion's wrist cruelly.
‘But it's you are the crafty one, Marion Aluinn!
You planned this.
You lied to me for him!’
Her tears and her throat had dried in terror.
Deny it?
No use.
He had somehow seen the truth.
Who would have thought the old man could be so clever?
Dhia, he meant to kill her!
How to save  herself?
Act fear?
Regret?
Ach, to hell with him!
That was her best chance, too…
But not the whole truth…
She faced his dirk bravely.
‘Aye, Duart.
I lied to you.’
He hesitated, impressed by her defiance as she had hoped.
‘But I did only as Lachlan ordered me.
As any wife would.
What else should I do?’ she challenged him.
‘He planned it?
If I find out different, I'll kill you, as I will kill him!’
‘No!’ she cried.
‘You can't mean that!
He's your son!’
His voice was ice.
‘Aye, I mean it.
He is no son of mine.
No true Maclean would do what he has done — may still do.
For I have no doubt of the welcome he is preparing for Hector when they meet.
I will destroy him.
And you.’
Lady Marion tugged at her wrist, still held in his fierce grasp, and then flung her free hand dramatically up towards the castle folk, and Alan in his nurse's arms.
The thought flashed — with Lachlan and Hector dead — he was next heir…
‘And what of my son?
Your other grandson?
Will you destroy him too?’
For a moment's shudder she thought he would, there and then.
But he paused, and nodded slowly.
‘Aye.
If Hector dies through your treachery, I will.
You and him both.’
He threw her aside.
‘Get you from my sight, woman!’ he snarled, turning back to his ship.
Her heart beat violently, shaking her.
She was free for the moment, but still terrified, for she knew Farquhar was awaiting Hector at Arivegaig…
Only one thing might save her — and her baby, of course.
‘Duart!’
Her voice was as hard as his own, and he swung round.
‘I am daughter to Maclean of Treshnish.
I am not wed to your son by church law.
After a year and a day a hand-fast marriage can be broken, by the man or by the woman.
As is my right, I break it now.
He forced me into an action which has disgraced me and my son as he has disgraced you and the clan.
I will no longer be his wife!
I am again Marion Maclean of Treshnish.’
He eyed her for a moment, spat in disgust, and ignoring her, turned to his men crowding the galley's side.
‘You have heard, men of the Macleans!
We go to Arivegaig!
For the honour of Clan Gillian!’
Within two minutes the great galley, packed with every fighting man left in Duart, was heading out of the bay.
Crouched on the shore, Marion was aware that she was defeated.
She was at least alive.
There was a space and a silence all round her.
She slowly gathered her wits, and looked round.
The whole clan was standing watching, motionless.
She stirred, trying to gather her strength, to rise.
Her damp dress dragged on her.
‘Catriona!’ she called.
‘Come help me!
Peigi!’
She pushed herself to her feet angrily, then stared, bewildered, frightened again.
Every soul there was turning away, ignoring her completely.
Seumas Ban beside her was turning too.
She grabbed his sleeve.
He looked at her coldly, but at least he admitted she was there.
‘Seumas Ban!
What is it?
I am mistress…’
She remembered.
Her voice trailed away.
He shook his head.
‘No, Marion Maclean of Treshnish.
You are mistress here no longer.
You have broken with Lachlan Cattanach.’
He coldly removed her hand from his arm and moved to join the women on the path.
‘But — what shall I do?’
This was something Marion had not foreseen.
‘Duart never turned any beggar from his kitchen door.’
‘Beggar?’
It took her breath away like a blow.
She was suddenly furious.
‘What of my clothes?
My jewels?
Will you steal them from me?
What of my son?’
At that they turned, insulted.
‘There are no thieves here, Marion Maclean.
Your property will be kept safe.’
Lady Bridhe spoke sternly.
‘And for Eachuinn Odhar's own sake we will see to his grandson.’
‘My jewels will pay me a passage home to my father!’ she shouted at them.
‘Someone will help me!
I'll take my son away!
My son!’
Eachuinn Odhar's sister shook her head, scarcely hiding her satisfaction.
‘You will not be allowed in the bower, Marion Maclean.
Nor in the hall.’
‘And no-one will help you leave.
Duart will wish to see you when he returns.’
Seumas Ban's tone was final, and the folk listening nodded approval.
Losing all control, she raced screaming towards them.
‘My baby!
Give me my baby!
Alan!’
He was something to bargain with, maybe; all she had.
And her love would impress them…
But two women leaped forward and held her, though she shrieked and struggled, till the nurse had disappeared into the castle.
Desperately, hands outstretched, Marion screamed after them.
‘Stop!
Stop!’
Not a head turned.
A lad lifted a stone to throw.
It was firmly slapped from his hand by his mother, and abashed by her glare he turned away with the rest, to leave the accursed woman alone, abandoned, shunned like a leper.
Marion's legs collapsed under her; she sank down on a rock, and wept.
‘My man!
Oh, Dhia, Lachlan, how did it all go wrong?
Lachlan!
Oh, Alan!
My baby!’
She sobbed on and on, no longer beautifully.
‘My baby!
Oh, my baby!’
A hand touched her shoulder.
She looked up slowly, dully, to find a tiny lass standing by her, silently beckoning.
The Honour of the Clan
As the great Maclean lymphad rounded Ardnamurchan Point to ship oars and sail eastward towards Arivegaig, the men rested in their places, sharpening their weapons, muttering uneasily to each other.
Eachuinn Odhar was standing alone in the bows, one hand on the high dragonhead that was no more rigid than himself, staring forward after the grey veils of rain that swept past and away ahead.
The back flap of his breacan-feile was drawn up as a hood over his head against the weather.
At last Donald Crubach approached his chief.
‘Duart?’
The old man did not move.
Donald, in some desperation, tried again.
‘What are you planning, Duart?
To take your sword to your son?’
There was still no reply.
‘Will you call on your clansmen to fight him and his men, and they Macleans too?’
Still no answer, no movement.
‘Dhia, Eachuinn Odhar, answer me!’
The bard leaned forward to peer into his chief's face.
The water drops lying in the deep creases below Eachuinn Odhar's eyes could have been rain.
Without another word Donald Crubach bowed, and returned to the stern of the galley.
Grimly he started to sing an old war-song, to lift the weight that lay on them all.
Understanding, the clansmen joined grimly in the chorus.
At last Eachuinn Odhar stirred.
Grey-faced, he walked the heaving deck towards them as if it was a firm path, and the singing  hushed at his coming.
As he climbed up from the rowing-deck onto the poop, he tossed back the great plaid and turned a bleak gaze on his clansmen.
‘My children, I am at fault.
I have drawn you in, and involved you in my own anger at my son's disobedience.’
Donald Crubach spoke for all the men, to give the required answer.
‘Duart, Clan Gillian is one family.
What affects us affects you; what harms you harms us all, for you are our leader, father of our clan.
We are one with you.
You insult us to suggest anything other.
If your heart is troubled, ours are troubled with you, for our name also is Maclean.’
Eachuinn Odhar bowed his head in acknowledgement of the murmur of assent that rose all round him.
Donald was not finished yet, though.
‘We cannot direct you, Eachuinn Odhar.
But we can ask you, for your own sake and ours; consider carefully.
Lachlan Cattanach is a wild man, impetuous and hardy.
He takes much of this from you, for you also were wild in your youth — and you're not changed that much in your maturity!’
Another murmur of approval as the bard softened his plea with a delicate touch of humour.
‘Now we cannot and would not ask you to forget the clan's honour, or your own.
If this is indeed a trap for Hector Luath, it is a terrible thing; but you — we — may be wrong to suspect it.
Could there not have been a misunderstanding?
And is a father killing his son not an act against nature, unholy and loathesome, and maybe even worse for the clan?’
Eachuinn Odhar nodded stiffly.
‘I hear you, Donald Crubach.
I have been considering this.’
He paused.
‘What I will do when I meet Lachlan I do not know.
It must depend on what we find at Arivegaig.
Let us wait till then.’
No-one looked happy; but the worst of the depression had perhaps lifted.
Hector had hoped to catch Lachlan before he attacked Arivegaig, but the packings at the base of his galley's mast started to shift.
If they rowed all the way they'd arrive exhausted.
He kept his temper and signalled the other galley to turn to the shore at Drimnin, to do the repairs.
It took them four fuming hours.
It would all be over by the time he got there!
As it happened, it wasn't.
Lachlan, racing out to set up an ambush for his nephew, insisted against his shipmaster's warning on taking a corner just too neat, and stranded his birlinn just off the Rubha Aird Druimnich.
And then, raging at himself for his mistake, he would not give the ship up.
He kept the other galleys heaving and hauling at it till the tide rose and they could pull it off the rocks.
It was, to his delight, leaking but still seaworthy; but an interested crowd of MacIans had gathered on the shore, and even Lachlan could see that to row up Kentra Bay to attack Arivegaig, with an audience eagerly running ahead to arrange a warm welcome for him, was scarcely sensible.
He mastered his fury.
‘Duncan Rua, steer away towards Eigg,’ he told his shipmaster jovially.
‘We'll try a wee trick.’
He called his officers to come aboard his ship.
‘Listen to me, now.
They're expecting us.
My fault, I admit it.
Anybody who likes can take a thump at me!’
Nobody accepted the offer.
He grinned at them, scratching his aching leg.
‘But the way we're heading, they'll think we plan to rest this night on Eigg, and raid at first light, as usual.
So they'll send to Castle Tioram for men to meet us at dawn.
But when we're out of sight, we'll turn east again, and sneak round the back of the islands and down the far side of the bay tonight, in the gloaming!
We'll burn the galleys and the whole place and get away while the MacIans are running to put the fires out.
In and out in an hour, a bit healthy exercise, and the folk of Coll avenged!’
They considered; and one by one, laughed with him.
As the officers leaped back to the other ships to spread the plan, Farquhar whispered privately to him, ‘But if the fighting men are there —‘
‘Ach, don't be a fool, Farquhar!’
Lachlan muttered.
‘Why should they be, and the oaths fairly flying at Edinburgh?
They're safe at home with their wives!
There's been no raid on Coll!
That's just the story I told the clan!’
‘Aye, I'd forgotten.
You're that convincing!’
Farquhar grinned sideways.
‘But what about Hector, then?
Maybe he'll get to Arivegaig ahead of us.’
‘Dhia knows.’
Lachlan suddenly bellowed with laughter.
‘If he does, they'll think he's the raider!
And we can go in and rescue  him!
Father'd like that, eh?’
He grabbed a leather bottle that was being passed along, and started a song.
Some hours later, under a dull red sunset, they were creeping up Kentra Bay in the shadow of Beinn Bhreac, past the bay where they'd stopped too short the first raid, through the narrow channel to the sheltered pool behind.
‘There are the galleys!’ whispered Lachlan, pointing bright-eyed to the five long ships beached safe from any storm.
Every man nodded, grim or excited.
Laughter and song drifted over the water from the clachan.
‘They'll sing a different tune in a minute, eh?
Now!’
His long arm waved the ships on.
The clansmen, grinning with him, pulled hard, driving the packed ships up onto the gravelly beach, pealing the slogan.
‘Bas no Beatha!
Death or Life!’
They leaped down and charged up the shore, yelling triumphantly.
‘Bas no Beatha!’
Screeching MacIans ran for the woods.
Easy, exciting, satisfying, fun.
Just what they expected.
A horn blew.
The Macleans, confident and happy, paid little heed.
Suddenly from every house, from the beached ships, from every garden wall MacIans were leaping out.
Four hundred well-armed, rested, enthusiastic fighting men.
At the edge of the woods the crofters snatched up waiting spears and ready-strung bows to drive the Macleans back to the huts and the eager blades.
In the first minute, twenty-two Macleans died.
The MacIans had meant their oaths no more than the Macleans.
They had been preparing for a raid themselves the next day; a big raid; five galleys of men, gathered in Arivegaig ready to board the ships in the dawn.
When word came to them of the Macleans, three galleys off the Rubha Aird Druimnich, they just sat and waited quietly for their enemies to arrive.
And though, as Lachlan had planned, they had expected the attack in the morning, they were quite happy when their lookouts reported the Macleans' approach in the early evening.
They just warned the clachan folk what to do, waited till the Macleans were well in among the huts, and then leaped out, cheering, to slaughter them.
As he saw the first men fall in the ambush, Lachlan's shipmaster yelled for his men to fall back.
‘It's a trap!’
An arrow thudded on his helmet.
Half-stunned, he struggled back aboard, to defend his  ship like a fortress.
A great wedge of MacIans had driven in to cut off the Macleans' attacking force; the few men left fighting by the ships had neither time nor numbers to relaunch them.
A blazing torch landed beside him, and desperately he tossed it away to sizzle out in the water.
Where in God's name was Lachlan when he was needed?
Suddenly behind him, out on the pool, another horn blared.
He turned, his jaw dropping for a second, before his attention was recalled to more immediate matters.
He stabbed a man scrambling up the bulwarks beside him, and cheered as Hector's galleys swept up to the shore and another horde of Macleans poured from them to the rescue of their clansmen.
The Macleans on the beach took fresh heart; they were still outnumbered, but at least they had a chance.
Hector waved to the shipmaster.
‘Get the ships off, Duncan!’ he shouted.
‘We'll keep them off you!
Where's Lachlan?’
‘Up there somewhere!’
Duncan Rua gestured towards the clachan.
Hector and Ewan set off together.
They forged up through the clachan, stabbing and striking up the crowded lane.
Ewan Beg swung a huge claymore's massive blade like a willow wand in sweeping figures-of-eight to clear a twelve-foot-wide arc.
Hector trusted him to guard his back, and concentrated on the men poking spears at him from the front and sides.
He preferred a modern single-handed sword; it was lighter for fast work.
A head flew off at a sideways flick of Ewan's sword.
‘Good work, man!’
Hector called.
He dived into a hut, found four men, kicked the embers of the fire into the heather bedpile to distract them, knocked aside a spear with his targe, and the spearsman was within reach of his blade.
Shoving the body backwards onto his friends, he swung out of the hut again.
‘Ewan!’ he yelled.
‘Have you spotted Lachlan?’
‘Up ahead there!
Dhia!
He's berserk!
He'll not move.
Never listen to sense, Hector.
Kill anyone comes in his reach, anyone at all!’
A red man alone in the midst of his enemies, helmetless, red hair flying over his red plaid, mouth red as if from drinking the blood that flowed from wounds on his cheek, his hip and his  right elbow, airy as a dancer, careless and crazy with excitement, yelling, singing, laughing and cheering, Lachlan was fighting six men together and winning.
His double-headed axe flickered in his powerful hands, light as a birch twig.
He had no shield, nor needed one, for till the fit wore off a berserker would notice no wound lesser than beheading.
Hector paused, gathering his breath, trying to decide what to do.
Farquhar?
Couldn't see him.
Maybe dead.
Lachlan didn't need him just now, anyway.
But how to make him attend and retire with them?
A berserker was a fine thing if you just wanted to kill the enemy; but if you wanted to manoeuvre, he was harder to handle than a charging bull.
‘Stun him?’ he panted over his shoulder, parrying a sword-thrust.
It was hard to think in a fight, and harder still to speak.
He'd like just to leave Lachlan, but he was a Maclean, in spite of all.
Oh, damn him!
‘Not a chance, man!’ grunted Ewan, heaving a spearsman left-handed over a wall.
‘Never get near enough!’
True.
Above all the din of the battle Lachlan's voice rose triumphantly.
‘Hear now the axe sing — Axe of Gillian — Gil-lian made me — Shaped me for slaying!’
The song was bellowing out over the din of the battle.
‘Dhia, would you listen to him!
I've heard sweeter dogs howling!’
Hector panted, grinning.
‘I wonder…
Get the clan back to the ships.
Now!’
He danced about in front of Lachlan, shouting and waving.
‘Lachlan Maclean, you bellowing bull!’ he yelled.
‘Come away and learn to sing!’
‘Hector!
Are you daft?’
Ewan was horrified.
A black dot was flying towards them.
‘Ware archers!’
He pushed his dallta aside, and the arrow pierced deep into his right shoulder.
‘Ach, to the devil with all MacIans!’ he grunted in pain and satisfaction, tugging it out and knocking aside a spear left-handed.
‘Get you away from my Hector!
Macleans!
Back!
Back to the ships!’
The fire Hector had started was spreading, and smoke was drifting all across the clachan.
Lachlan sneezed, and suddenly his crazy eyes came to a focus.
‘Hector Maclean!
The minstrel!
The half-priest thinks he can fight, eh?
The great chieftain!
Come here till I show you a real fighting man!’
Laughing still, he swept two men aside like straw wisps, took a gash in his left arm  without noticing it, and sprang straight at Hector, axe raised to strike.
Hector turned and ran.
Down the clachan street he ducked and dodged through the retiring clansmen, half-hidden by the smoke, Lachlan yelling after him, till suddenly they were clear of the huts and into the fight round the ships.
Right into the thick of the MacIans he raced, screaming the Maclean slogan.
His speed and Lachlan's bull charge through the fight, drawing their own men after him in the vacuum of his passage, ran him and them down into the water as well.
Thigh-deep in the loch, Hector swung round.
His uncle's axe was striking at his head.
He deflected the blow, and the razor edge cut deep into the gunwale of the ship.
Before Lachlan could free it Hector had tripped him and soused him, for the cold water to bring him to his senses.
As he rose from the loch, spitting salt, the wild delight in Lachlan's face was gone.
His eyes turned up, quite white, for five full seconds.
Slowly, blinking, he came back to the present.
His eyes focussed on Hector.
Hector fending off a MacIan sword from him.
He blinked again, and shook his head.
Then he glanced aside, and yelled, ‘Watch out!’ as he tugged his axe free.
At the warning Hector swung round.
‘Farquhar!’ he gasped, and was borne off his feet and down into the water by the force of the attack.
Ten feet away, Ewan saw him vanish, and with a yell left his own foe and surged forward, his huge sword swinging at Farquhar.
Lachlan's axe clashed with it in mid-sweep.
The blades caught, sparked wildly and crashed down on a head just showing through the welter of foam round their legs, knocking it under again.
Ewan's former opponent, freed for a second, thrust forward with his spear.
Lachlan killed him almost absent-mindedly.
At that instant the Maclean slogan rose again round the ships.
‘Bas no Beatha!
Death or Life!’
Eachuinn Odhar's galley, guided through the gathering dark by the beacon of the blazing huts, had arrived.
There was a huge swirl in the water and the crowd as it swept right into the centre of the fighting men, crushing more than one under its keel.
In the screaming, struggling melee, a knife blade in the wrong place was never noticed.
The fresh men piled out into the fight, driving the MacIans away from the ships for long enough to grab every Maclean they could find and heave him aboard.
One of the groaning bodies took four men to lift; ‘Hector!
Hector!’ he was crying as he was dragged up and set to an oar.
Burning brands from the huts and from two galleys the MacIans had fired were seized and thrown into the MacIans' own ships, to draw some of them away to put out the fires.
Slowly, as fast as they could, the Macleans shoved off for home.
They had to leave the two burning galleys, and a third, Lachlan's damaged one, was sinking under them; they transferred the men from it to the others just in time.
Six ships they had had; and they left with only three.
The nearest friendly land was Coll, thirty miles to row against a strong, cold wind.
But they made it, and beached the ships, made fires and tended the wounded.
A hundred and twenty-eight men were dead or missing, out of three hundred and seventy; and as many badly hurt.
They found Ewan Beg lying in a corner of the deck, and thought him unconscious, but he wasn't.
He had rowed, uncomplaining, till they were safe; bleeding silently to death from a deep stab wound in his back.
Farquhar, unhurt apart from a huge lump on his head, bandaged Lachlan's wounds quickly before joining him at the oars.
None were too serious, though he had lost much blood.
In the last moments of the retreat, Eachuin Odhar had taken an arrow deep in the side of his neck, and though he could move about and gesture to organise their camp, he couldn't speak.
But David Beaton's greatest worry was for Hector.
There was a great gash across his face, a heavy blow from a sword or axe that had smashed his nose and cheekbone, and slashed right across his eyes.
Even if he lived, he would never see again.
The year before, Ruari had built himself a wee turf hut among the skeps on the moor to keep an eye on them, but Mairi complained about having to bring his food so far, and he'd given up using it.
That was where Luch silently led Marion Maclean, slowly recovering from her shock during the four-mile walk.
‘Dhia!’
Marion exclaimed in disgust as she stooped through  the door.
‘The roof's fallen there, and the place is full of sheep droppings.
Here, lass!
Clear this — Where are you?’
The child had disappeared.
Marion ducked back out, surprised and annoyed, but there was no sign of her.
Damn her!
She looked again at the tiny hut.
Her lip curled, and she nearly turned to leave, but where else could she go?
The clachan?
The women would drive her out.
Beg at Duart gate to be let in, where she had ruled till two hours ago?
With the sentries jeering and the kitchen girls free to throw dirt, glad to see her fallen?
Never!
Better here, in spite of all.
For a while at least.
A runlet of water trickled past the end of the hut.
She stooped down to drink where a stone had been set for a firm landing beside a foot-wide pool.
Her reflection looked up at her from the dark water.
Her eyes were swollen — she shouldn't have wept like that, genuinely.
Automatically, she tossed back her hair and smiled.
That was better.
She scooped water to rinse and cool her face.
This wouldn't last.
When Lachlan returned…
She had repudiated him.
The worst insult of all.
She'd had to save her life, and their baby.
Yes, that was the right thing to plead.
His baby.
She almost smiled as she imagined the touching scene.
She bit her lip.
He wasn't famous for understanding and sympathy.
She loved him, didn't she?
She'd done it for him.
If it had worked…
It had failed.
Lachlan could never resist her for long.
When he returned, she would weep, beautifully, and he would forgive her.
She would go back, under the Campbell woman for the moment…
And the maids who had scorned her would regret it!
He might not come back.
For the first time, the thought entered her mind.
He might be killed in the fight; or his father might…
She shuddered.
A tiny glow of comfort; she'd be safe from Lachlan's anger then, anyway.
But if Hector was dead, the old man had promised…
And Farquhar was waiting…
Maybe Duart himself would be killed.
And Hector.
And  Lachlan, She'd be mother to the heir!
Or would the clan choose someone else, since Alan was only a baby?
And then what of her?
She didn't know what to wish for.
Ach, well.
It seemed she'd have to stay here for a while.
She could do without food for a day or two, or maybe the wee lass would bring her something.
Who was she, anyway?
There were aye shellfish on the shore.
She'd need a fire.
Could she mend the roof?
No, not alone.
But she could cut heather for a bed.
Make it thick and it would be soft enough, and warm enough.
No more weeping!
She set aside her cloak, kilted up her long red skirts and drew her eating knife decisively.
In the clachan Mairi Ban, predictably, was furious at what Luch had done, but Ruari for once stopped her.
‘Enough, now!
Saints soften your heart, woman!
It was a kind thought of the lass, and there'll be no more said about it!’
‘It's easy seen you've not a son or a husband risking his life for that one and her scheming!’
Her tone was vicious.
‘Neither have you, mother!’
Ranald grinned.
He aye enjoyed a row, if he wasn't involved.
It didn't happen often.
‘Or have you no thought of Hector Luath, and him maybe murdered dead?’
She glared at them, and at Luch silent in the corner.
‘Well, I'll not feed the evil bitch!
She can go up to the castle to beg her food.
Or must I wait about while the brat traipses away up there with meat for her, eh?’
‘Why, mother!’
Ranald interrupted ironically.
‘Luch never lifts a finger here, sure!’
He snorted.
‘It's yourself grinds the meal and fetches the water and guts the fish and digs the garden and scours the pot —‘
‘And you be silent also!’
Ruari snapped.
‘Don't take it on you to use that tone to your mother!
The lassie works hard enough, saints help her, that you've no call to scold, Mairi Ban.
See you, you've made me right angry, the pair of you!
I'll hear no more about this.
No more, now!’
He might not, but Luch did.
Not that it stopped her.
All the hives were up on the moor, and there was little to do except check that no fieldmice were getting into them, sniff them to detect foul brood, listen for late swarms, and cut out a comb from any that weighed too full.
Ruari and Ranald normally lazed  about, cut peat, or borrowed a boat and rowed out to do a bit fishing to stock up for the winter, while Luch did her usual tasks and her usual check on the baby — the babies, now — in the bower.
But next day she dared to go into the kitchen, under the fearsome eye and flying spoons of Iain Reamhar; Fat Iain; the only man of the clan bigger than Ewan Beg.
He sat beside the wide fires all day, overflowing his stool like a walrus on a rock, half a dozen wooden spoons ready at hand.
‘Tog ort!’ he would screech in his high-pitched voice.
‘Rouse yourself, you lazy rascal!
If that roast burns there because you've not basted it, I'll spit you in its place the morrow's morn!
And will you be turning the spit, Donal?
Or do you expect the poor beast to get off and skip round on its own for you?’
And a spoon would whirl across the kitchen to rap the skull of the offending scullion.
Through the gate and into this hot, noisy, bustling cavern Luch drifted in her usual invisible way.
Iain didn't notice her for a while, but eventually it dawned on him that the blur in the corner of his eye wasn't just a blob of grease on his eyelash.
He turned to look carefully, and saw her.
‘Dhia!’ he squeaked.
‘Who's this, then?
Ruari Beeman's lass, is it?’
His small, red mouth grinned.
‘Luch the mouse, eh?
Did you not hear, lass, that I chase mice out of my kitchen?’
All the kitchen lads and lasses laughed.
‘And have none of you any work to do, then?’
They scattered to their tasks.
He sniffed.
‘Gavin!
Mind that stew, it's burning!’
A spoon flew, Gavin ducked; it hit the lad behind him, who hadn't kept his eyes and ears open, and splashed into the soup pot.
‘Bring it back!’
Gavin fished the spoon out, wiped it on his shirt, and gingerly offered it to his master, who gripped his wrist, jerked him forward and clattered his ears for him before letting him go.
‘Take care next time!’ he snapped, and turned again to Luch.
‘Well, lass?
What do you want?’
Wordlessly she held out a bowl.
‘What's this for, then?
Soup, or stew?
For yourself?’
An old woman gutting hens told him, ‘That's the lass took Marion Aluinn, bad cess to her, up off the shore yesterday!
It's maybe for her.’
Iain Reamhar pursed his mouth.
‘Seumas Ban said she was to be fed.’
‘She was to be fed in the kitchen!’ the old wife protested.
‘Let the vixen come and face us, and beg from us here!’
She was gloating.
‘Dhia, Mor, you women won't let her off easy, will you!’
‘Would you expect it, Iain Reamhar?’
The woman's voice was sharp.
‘Ach, men will forgive anything to a pretty face!’
Iain frowned, and a spoon twitched.
Sulkily, she turned back to her work, slashing into the hens as if into Marion Aluinn's throat.
The cook looked down at Luch.
‘You're wanting stew for her?’
Luch nodded.
‘Aye, well, then.
Gavin, put a good ladleful in the bowl.’
Gavin, with an innocent air, carefully scraped up the worst of the burned shell from the stewpot, but then saw Luch watching; somehow he found himself dropping the charred scraps into the fire, and ladling out some better meat.
Iain scratched his head.
‘Wasn't it you she was teasing that time, when the bees came out?
Aye?
Well, why are you doing this for her?’
Luch stood silent.
‘Can you not speak?
Ach, well, off you go, lass.’
Put to it, Luch could have spoken, but she couldn't have told him why.
It was something about losing a baby…
Ranald went up with her to the  shieling , carrying a pot with charcoal burning in it.
Not that he liked Marion; he was curious.
She was sitting by the  shieling door as they approached.
‘What's that, then, lass?
Stew?
Well, well.’
She sighed.
She was cold, tired and aching; her bed hadn't been thick enough, and she'd been wakened several times by sheep trying to share it, or eat it.
Ranald grinned.
‘Better than an empty belly.’
She was affronted by his familiarity; but she mustn't snap at her only helpers.
‘Aye.
Thanks, lassie!’
Her smile was sweet, and Luch smiled shyly back.
‘And no need for you to eat it cold, neither.’
Ranald knelt to pull the hearth stones into place and build her a fire of peat from the fallen roof.
‘I thank you also for your kindness, gallant hero!’
Marion's charm for any man was automatic, and rather in spite of himself Ranald softened towards her, though he snorted in mockery of the title.
‘No, sir,’ she insisted.
‘A lad who'll brave the anger of all  the clachan for a wretched outcast like myself is a true son of Gillian.’
Her eyes and smile gleamed in admiration.
‘Ach away, mistress.’
Ranald was scarlet, but Luch could see he was pleased.
‘It's but a bit fire.
To put you by till —
‘Till my husband returns, and rescues me from this misery!’
But that was too much, and his mobile eyebrows flew up.
She immediately laughed.
‘No, no, laddie, I am well served, I that thought just to serve my man!
But it is hard to be parted from my child.’
She sighed, and noted his sympathy.
Men were aye fools over bairns, as if there wasn't aye another one about!
She let the tears well into her huge eyes, but bravely wiped them away.
‘No, lad!’ she whispered huskily.
‘You must not stay.
They'll be angry, sure.
Away you go — I'll do fine.’
She suddenly remembered the stew, and the lass — there she was!
How did she aye seem to slip from sight?
‘Thank you, my dear.’
She gracefully drew Luch close and kissed her cheek.
The child gazed up, fascinated by the beauty so slender and warm and bright above her.
She touched her cheek wonderingly, cupping her hand over the kiss.
Marion smiled down at her.
‘Aye.
On you go, now, and my heart's blessing go with you always.
I'll see to the roof when I've eaten.’
She drooped in pretty weariness.
Ranald offered awkwardly, ‘No, mistress, I'll — we'll give you a hand!’
‘Oh, I thank you, sir!
But you'll not get into trouble?
You're sure?
Well then…’
She smiled and let him have his way.
How easy it was!
Watching Ranald drop a rafter on his head, Marion sneered at herself that these children, this filthy hovel were all that was left to her.
But it would change…
She went over to help lift the beams, and then hand new turfs and heather up to Luch, who was light enough to clamber over the roof to mend it without breaking it.
Once Marion nearly stood on the doll baby, set carefully in a soft, sheltered hollow.
She was about to kick it aside, but luckily glanced up to see Luch's watchful eye on her.
There was something dark and threatening in the look — Ach, she was imagining it!
But she smiled and stepped round the doll.
At last Ranald wiped his forehead with a peaty hand, leaving another long dark trail across his forehead.
‘There, then, that'll be  better…’
He stopped, mouth agape, gazing down across the Sound where Luch up on the roof was pointing.
Marion turned to look herself.
Galleys were rowing in.
Three, when six had set out.
Only half manned; oars missing unevenly; like crippled beetles crawling painfully against the current.
One was Eachuin Odhar's great lymphad; but Lachlan's galley wasn't there.
The two youngsters gazed; and turned to Marion.
White as any linen, she had sunk down on a rock.
She looked up at them.
‘Go!
Go — and bring me word what's happened!’
Her tone was shrill.
She didn't dare go down herself, but she must know.
The best — or the worst — whatever it was!
The Moid
Ranald and Luch reached the shore as the galleys beached.
They watched among the crowd as Eachuinn Odhar was lifted ashore unconscious, and Hector, under David Beaton's supervision; and over a hundred others, to be carried or helped by their keening womenfolk up to castle or clachan.
Then Ewan's body, and two score more.
The others had been left to the MacIans.
Dead or alive.
Grim-faced, grim-voiced, Lachlan ordered it all, Farquhar Neas guarding his back closely.
The men were sullen and never met his eye; but someone had to organise them, and no-one cared to oppose him.
Not yet, not till they were less tired.
Till they saw whether Hector died.
And their chief.
He felt their resentful eyes burning the nape of his neck.
His own temper rose, but he held it in check.
He was in charge, while his father was injured.
He gathered his great strength, remembered the lessons he had learned abroad, and drove himself and the weary men on to do what must be done.
His father's men had told him of Marion Aluinn.
He never mentioned her.
Iain Reamhar had food ready.
Lachlan ordered it served out at once.
He set sentries, to watch in case of any raid, and the clachan was warned to be ready; the MacIans might just try it, though they were sore hurt themselves.
Messengers ran out to call for help in men and gear and food.
The smith and his sister, equally brawny, set their apprentice sweating at the bellows of the forge, to repair weapons, ship's fittings, armour.
The galleys were in bad shape.
Two of the shipmasters were dead, and three wounded; but the last was by chance one of the few uninjured men, and could be left in charge of all for the moment.
Carpenters, ropemakers, sailmakers — most were dead or hurt.
The folk of the clachan turned their best hand to work.
Ruari had the knack of plaiting leather ropes, and Ranald raised blisters on his hands cutting out long strips round and round cowhides.
Luch helped Mairi Ban for a while in the castle hall, carrying water and clearing away filthy bandages for washing.
In a lull, she drifted up to see to the babies, but misjudged mounting the stair; Bridhe, desperate for more hands, was coming down and grabbed her.
‘Luch!
Dhia, you're just what I need!
Go you to Duart's room, and watch him and Hector for me.
Come and get me if there's need, mind!
And tell Peigi she's to come and help in the hall.
Run, now!’
Late that night Lachlan visited the wounded, smiling cheerfully, near dropping with exhaustion and loss of blood; kept going by the force of will.
And at last all was seen to.
He could relax for a while.
Relax?
His mind was roiling.
Hector — his father — Marion — Farquhar — Hector again.
Wearily he mounted to his father's room.
Not noticing Luch half-asleep in a corner, he stood over the bed.
What if his father or Hector died while he was there?
Who would believe he hadn't killed them?
Or he could…
He looked down at the men lying there, unconscious, breathing shallowly; and Luch jerked to wakefulness and tensed as his hand moved to his dirk…
But he hurled himself out, across the corridor to his own room, to throw himself on his bed in rage and self-disgust.
Farquhar Neas, wordless, brought him a leather bottle of whisky.
He poured a measure into a shallow quaich, but took thought; and held out to Lachlan the whole bottle.
Lachlan lay still on his back, one arm over his face, ignoring him.
When Farquhar nudged his hand with the bottle, he merely grunted  and gripped it, rolling over to face away from his dallta as he drank.
Farquhar drew a deep breath.
His face tightened.
He drank the quaich, and tossed back his fair hair.
‘Lachlan Cattanach, there is speaking to be done between us, and no-one by to hear.’
He waited.
Lachlan lay unmoving.
‘Is it blaming me you are, for doing as you ordered?
Are you wishing it was I had rolled under in the waves, not your father's grandson, because he was hurt while saving your life?
Or are you thinking it was maybe yourself struck the blow?’
The wide shoulders winced.
He nodded to himself.
‘Think, Lachlan.
How do you know what happened to Hector?’
There was a long pause.
Suddenly, with a heave that shook the floor, Lachlan flung himself over and up on his feet.
‘What are you saying?
Farquhar?
What are you saying?’
His fingers were tight on Farquhar's shoulders.
Farquhar stood still under the pain and the pressure.
‘I am saying, Lachlan Cattanach, that whoever hurt your father's heir it was not I. Nor you.’
Lachlan released him, and sank on the edge of the bed.
‘No, Farquhar,’ he said with a bitter chuckle.
‘You'll not cozen me so.
I told you to kill him —‘
‘Is he dead so?
And have you ever known me to miss before?
Or yourself?
Look here!
See you this lump on my head!
Do you know what caused that?
It was your axe, foster-son of my mother.
That was you, trying to kill me.’
‘No, no, man!’
Lachlan protested.
‘I was trying to save you!
Ewan had seen you leap on Hector, and struck out at you — I tried to hold back his blow!’
‘Aye, so, then.
But it was your axe that hit me, borne down by his sword.
Now think again of the wound on Hector's face — a heavy blow, a wide gash.
No knife wound, that!
So it was not my doing!
And was it you, then?
But your axe struck my head, not his.
But where did Ewan Beg's blade go, when it glanced off your axe, and all his strength behind it?
Tell me that, Lachlan?’
Lachlan gazed at him in mingled disbelief and hope.
‘Think!
There was need on Ewan Beg to be silent and row till we were through the narrows, but he had time after that.
Why did he not ask help, have  his wounds bandaged?
What was in his mind — except that he had killed his dallta, and wished to die with him?’
‘It wasn't you?
You set no knife in him?
You swear it?
Nor in Ewan Beg?’
‘It was a spear Ewan died from.
A deep cut, but wider than any knife.
Ask David Beaton.
I never touched him — either of them.
I swear it, on my mother's milk that we shared.
On my hope of heaven.
Nor did you.
It was none of your doing that he was hurt.
Nor your father.’
Absently, Lachlan lifted the bottle to his mouth and drank long and deep; then handed it absently to his dallta.
‘Not my doing — after all.
Not mine.
Ewan Beg.
Poor Ewan Beg.
Hah!
Thank you for that, Farquhar Neas.’
He laughed longer; fell back on the bed, chuckling still, and started to snore.
Farquhar looked down on him, his twisted smile on his lips.
‘I swore, Lachlan Cattanach!’ he murmured, too softly to disturb the big man drifting in happy, relieved sleep.
‘When you left my mother's house, and I behind you, I swore to her that whatever was your need, I would do it for you.
And if I will kill for you, my dallta, will I not lie for you also, to make your heart clear again?
My soul for you, my heart.’
His fingers touched the dirk at his belt.
‘Aye, a heavy blow, or a deep blow — but a long knife can make them that little heavier, or deeper, and never be noticed.
True it is that Ewan Beg thought he had killed his dallta — for I told him so.
Fool.
Now Hector will die, sure, and you will be the next Maclean of Duart, Lachlan Cattanach.
And I at your shoulder.
And Marion Maclean of Treshnish just nowhere at all.’
He gently lifted Lachlan's feet onto the bed and covered him with a plaid.
Dhia!
The door was a crack ajar!
He hastily looked down the corridor, but no-one was there.
He sighed with relief, and sat down by the bed to keep watch.
The next day, the bees heard a fine secret bit of news.
Eachuinn Odhar suffered a week of fever before he came to his senses.
He was tough, though, and at last he opened his eyes and demanded some ale to wet his throat.
Luch, who was still employed watching him, ran for Bridhe and David Beaton.
As the old man reluctantly accepted a sip of water, he glanced over at the other bed.
‘Hector?
How is he?’ he breathed.
‘Fine, just fine, Maclean,’ Master Beaton said reassuringly.
Too reassuringly.
Eachuinn Odhar caught the professional smoothness, and grasped the doctor's hand fiercely.
‘Don't lie to me, physician!
Never lie to me!
Tell me the truth!’
Master Beaton shrugged and nodded.
‘Very well.
He does ill, Duart, I fear.
He has a fever.
He drifts into and out of the world.
And when he is conscious, he grows worse.
It is only when he is out of his mind that he strengthens himself unwilling.’
The Maclean stared up at them.
‘You cannot mean he wants to die?’
‘That is what I mean, Duart.’
‘But why?
Why should he —‘
Bridhe looked down at him with pity.
‘Did you not know, brother?
The wound in his face.
He is blind.
Forever.
And in his waking times he knows it.’
‘No!’
The dry whisper could scarcely be heard.
‘No!
David Beaton, as you love God, say it's not true!
He can be cured!’
But the doctor could not answer.
Hearing of his father's recovery, Lachlan leapt up the stair to visit him, but was turned from his door.
And the next day.
And the next.
The priest was aye in and out, running busily about sending letters, and calling in this one and that.
Donald Crubach; the dempster; the sennachie; Seumas Ban.
But it was three days before Lachlan received word that his father would see him.
All this time he had been working like a madman, limping about overseeing the repairs and helping in spite of his own wounds wherever his strength was needed.
This was a new Lachlan for most of the men — quieter, grim but not violent; and his efficiency and drive won him more respect than ever his temper had done.
He never discussed the failed raid; and no-one else dared to, either.
There had been no retaliation by the MacIans, but they all knew they were ready for it if any had come, and who to thank for the readiness; and no-one mentioned who they had to thank for the threat.
When the message came, he left the smithy and went quietly up to the castle.
An hour later he left his father's room and walked out, alone, along the shore path and up to the moor.
Seeing his face, no-one approached him.
Luch, returning from taking Marion some soup, drifted aside out of his way, and pattered back behind him to the shieling to find out what was happening.
Marion was sitting in the sun, her back to the hut that sheltered her from the cold wind.
Hearing a footstep she looked up, smiling, thinking the lass had returned; and startled saw Lachlan studying her.
She was afraid, and nearly scrambled to her feet.
Then, as he made no move to come any nearer, she sank back and lifted an eyebrow.
‘Well, Lachlan Cattanach?
Have you come to revenge yourself on me for failing you?’
She leaned back, seductive, her colour returning, her smile challenging.
Lachlan gazed, but didn't move.
‘Speechless, Lachlan?
I was told it was Duart was struck dumb.
And Hector near death.
Our trick has worked, after all.’
He drew a breath deep into his chest, as if it hurt him.
‘Aye.
It has worked, after a fashion.
Hector is blind.
And a blind man can never be accepted as chief of the Macleans.
A moid of the whole clan is called in two weeks, at the start of October.
I am to be legitimated, and made heir to Duart.’
At that she sprang gracefully to her feet to face him.
‘So!’
She tossed back her hair proudly.
‘I told you it would happen, my man!’
He laughed abruptly.
‘Your man no longer, Marion Maclean of Treshnish!’
‘What would you have had me do, so?’
She faced him, head up, colour high and glowing.
‘Die?
And your son die with me?
That was what your father promised.
What else could I do?’
He gazed at her in silence that she took for acceptance.
‘And it was my plan that has brought you to your heart's desire.’
She reached out a hand to him, pleading, suddenly submissive.
‘I know I should have been stronger, Lachlan.
I should never have let your father drive me away from you.
But I am weak, and I was afraid.’
The tears welled, beautifully, in her eyes as she gazed up into his face, then down in sorrow.
‘Forgive me, Lachlan.
Tell me that you understand.’
He smiled sideways.
‘Aye, Marion.
I understand you.’
She sighed as if relieved of a huge weight and leaned against his chest, waiting for his arms to go round her, her heart singing as his heart thudded fast beside her cheek.
‘Then — will you take me  back, Lachlan?
Take me again, my hero!
In church, this time.
For Duart's heir should not be wed left-handed.’
Her huge eyes, gleaming hazel, rose to his, triumph carefully hidden.
Oddly, he did not embrace her.
He was still smiling, his eyes gleaming like her own.
‘I agree with you, Marion.
Duart's wife should be his in the sight of God and man.’
He paused, and suddenly wary of something in his tone she drew away.
Head on one side, he watched her as he spoke.
‘That is why, next month, the Abbot of Iona will wed Eachuinn Odhar's heir, as agreed, to the Lady Elizabeth Campbell of Argyll.’
In the heather Luch crouched rigid, frozen by Marion's screams of rage and hatred, and Lachlan's laughter fading down the track.
The full moid was the most important clan gathering; greater even than the installation of a chief.
That was a time for rejoicing and oaths of loyalty; but now every man was called on to help decide the future of the clan.
Every head of a house attended, sleeping in the castle rooms, corridors, stables and stores, in the clachan and on the moor.
Though the clan was all one family, and every man had the right to address the chief as a cousin, yet the older and greater branches of the family had more influence than tacksmen or recently-adopted incomers.
But all were called, and all came.
Cattle and pigs, sheep and deer, fowl of all kinds both tame and wild were roasted by the dozen to feed them all with a generous hand, as Maclean honour required.
Iain Reamhar wore out a dozen spoons.
Wine and ale flowed free.
Yet they were not there for celebration, and there was neither gluttony nor drunkenness.
Maclean of Treshnish arrived the day before the moid was formally opened.
Standing at his father's shoulder, Lachlan noticed Farquhar's hand on the hilt of his knife, and gestured secretly to him to remove it.
Treshnish ignored Lachlan, bowed to Eachuinn Odhar with respect and asked, ‘Duart, will you tell me now where I may find my daughter, who handfasted with Lachlan Cattanach a year ago?
I would be speaking with her.’
Eachuinn Odhar nodded gravely.
‘In an hour, Treshnish, the wee lass who fetches your daughter her food will come for it.
She will lead you.’
Marion had seen his pennon on the galley, and was waiting for him as he walked tall and dignified behind the little girl.
She tried to gauge his mood.
Always he made her uneasy, as if he could see right through to the deeps of her scheming soul.
She braced herself to outface him.
Silently he looked round at the tumbledown hut amid the zooming bees.
Marion had to speak first.
‘Well, father?
Have you nothing to say to me, cast out here like a leper?
No word of comfort?
No greeting even?’
His face was withdrawn and severe.
‘I have heard much of you this year past, Marion Maclean,’ he said distantly.
‘Your man, they tell me, adorned you with jewels and fine gowns.
He did not beat you, and gave you a fine son.
And yet this was not enough for you.
No, do not interrupt me.
You set your man to slay his chief's heir.
And when your treachery to your clan was discovered, you tried to lay all the blame on your man, and left him, betraying him also.
She had never been able to stand against those pale, cold eyes, that flat, unimpassioned voice.
She started to argue, stammered, bit her lip.
‘Father!’ she pleaded.
‘I had to save my life!
I did only what Lachlan wished!
Oh, father, take me away with you!
Back to Treshnish!
Or to a nunnery on Iona.
But help me away from here!’
As she flung herself down to clasp his knees he stood rigid.
‘It is true, then.
Stand up, Marion Maclean!
Have I reared a coward as well as a traitor?’
She shrank away from the icy condemnation.
‘Tell me, then, what would my wife your mother do if I took you home with me?
It's your lying tongue she would tear from your head.
Aye, for so she told me.
Or what nunnery would take you, in your dishonour?
No.
Bide you here, where you have a fitting home for yourself.
As you have made your path in life, continue on it, so.
Your jewels Eachuinn Odhar gave to me, to return to you or not as I judged you innocent or guilty.
They would repay me for the dowry I wasted on you, but I have no wish to be reminded of you.
Here.’
He pulled a handful of gold and silver chains from his sporran, tossing them beside her where she crouched.
‘Wear them, if you have the stomach.
When  you are returned in honour to your man's side, come you to my house again.
Until then, you are no daughter of mine.’
He turned, ignoring her, and walked away.
She pulled herself to her feet.
‘And what of Lachlan, then?’ she screamed after him.
‘It was his plan too!
Will you put as hard a blaming on him?
Damn you and him both!
Father!’
But he neither turned head nor slackened speed.
Marion's curses stopped abruptly.
She stared after him, malevolent fury filling her face with ugliness.
‘Damn you both!’ she whispered again.
‘Aye.
I'll wash my hands — up to the elbows, in Maclean blood!
Some day!’
She swung round.
Luch was by the fire, fishing a heating stone out from the soup bowl.
The little girl hesitantly offered the bowl to Marion, who for a moment looked as if she would snatch it and throw it at her.
However, she controlled herself.
She knelt down by Luch and started to drink the soup.
‘Aye, lass!’ she hissed.
‘I'll take all I can get, from you or anyone else.
And some day…
Some day…’
She lifted the thin chains, set with amethyst and agate, pearls and one round, glowing ruby.
‘If I have the stomach, he said.’
She laughed abruptly, tossed them over her head, and smoothed them on the red dress.
‘I have the stomach for anything, Treshnish!
No, you did not rear a coward!’
Next day, the clan met out on the shore, where Eachuinn Odhar could stand up on the rocks among his officers, Donald Crubach at his side, and speak to all together.
As he whispered, Donald's resonant, trained voice repeated each sentence after him so that all could hear, from the Macleans of Morvern and Coll and the seven other members of the Clan Council away past the tacksmen and subtenants to the farthest cottar on the damp sand.
He began by welcoming each man by name.
He knew nearly every one, and where his memory faltered, his sennachie behind him knew them and could prompt him.
Then he came straight to the cause of the conference.
‘You have all heard of the tragedy that has struck my house.’
There was a general murmur of assent.
‘I thank you for your sympathy, my children.
God bless you for it.
But now, we must think of the clan.
My son's son, Hector Mac Lachlan Mac Eachuinn, is a fine lad, strong and  brave, learned and thoughtful beyond his years; he would be a great chief.
But he has been blinded.
Can the clan accept him?’
Maclean of Ardgour, the second branch of the clan, answered him.
‘Our hearts are sore with yours this day, Duart.
But no man who is crippled so can be acceptable.
In war, how could he lead the clan?
In peace, how could he judge us?’
A murmur of reluctant agreement arose behind him.
Eachuinn Odhar nodded.
‘I had expected no other reply.
And —’ grimly —‘I have to agree with it.’
He paused, strangely shrunken, while Donald repeated his words, to fly round the walls of the castle to the women watching from the cliffs and battlements, and to the window where Hector lay staring into multicoloured darkness, wishing the blade had struck harder.
‘So now, my children, we must choose a new heir.’
Heads nodded.
This was what they were waiting for.
‘I have few male relations left, and all too young or too old, or equally crippled with my grandson.
These are changing times.
We need a man, a strong man, now; for I am myself old and must soon die.’
They murmured agreement again.
In spite of the weight of his grief, he felt a twitch of annoyance.
‘My children, there is only one man who can be considered; a proved man, a trained soldier, brave, strong, sharp of mind.
Lachlan Mac Eachuinn Maclean, my son by Morag Maclean of Salen.’
His voice was a breath; he did not look at Lachlan as he drew him forward beside him.
The tall man towered over his father, vigorous and proud.
His red beard and hair were combed and trimmed, his silver belt-buckle and the huge silver clasp that held his red breacan-feile no brighter than his eyes.
There wasn't a man watching, or a woman, who hadn't had an eye on him in admiration.
But there was no instant roar of approval.
He knew why.
For three days the discussions and arguments went on.
Every man had his say — some at extraordinary length.
That, after all, was what they had come for.
Lachlan heard rehearsed over and over his rages and violence.
But against that stood the report of his excellent behaviour over the last month.
He held his temper tight-reined, in face of all offence.
If he let it loose here, his chance of becoming chief would vanish.
His control was noted, and approved.
He was grimly prepared to face criticism of his trick on Hector, but Eachuinn Odhar was determined that Lachlan should be chosen.
He kept a kind of official silence on it, though it was in all men's minds and considered quietly in private talk.
They all condemned what had happened to Hector, but there grew a feeling that well, it was only natural for a strong young man to be ambitious…
Young Hector was a bit soft, after all…
Maybe the clan could do with a leader who wasn't afraid to risk everything, his honour as well as his life, for them…
A man who knew all the tricks…
And of course, it was that evil bitch Marion who had made the plan…
They didn't notice the contradiction.
And so at last, though not happily nor of one mind, Lachlan was named as the legitimate heir of Duart.
He, not Hector, was to wed Argyll's daughter, and be their next chief.
Being no fools, the clan noticed that of all men there Duart himself seemed least joyful.
Well, it was only natural.
He loved young Hector.
He'd just have to accept it too.
They didn't hear Lachlan stop his father, as the old man returned after seeing the last visiting galley off the shore.
‘Duart!’ he said steadily.
‘I have to thank you.
Without your support I'd never have been accepted.’
Eachuinn Odhar did not look up at his tall son.
‘Never thank me,’ he husked, for the three days had been hard on his injured throat.
‘If there had been another — any other — I would have backed him, not you.’
Now he looked up, and Lachlan was hard put to it to meet the bitter glare.
‘I curse the day I got you.
I curse myself for not strangling you in your cradle.
And I set my curse on you if ever again you betray the clan.
May God's punishment be a thousand times worse on you than the harm that you have done to Hector.’
Lachlan's hand fell from his father's arm.
Fury at the rejection welled up in him, but he forced it down.
The old man was upset, but he'd soon change when he saw how well his son behaved in future.
Soon, he'd accept Lachlan as a better heir than Hector would have been, and all would be well again.
But he wished his father had let Hector die…
At Eachuinn Odhar's order, David Beaton had kept the lad well dosed with poppy, till he slept himself all unwitting and unwilling  back to health.
Donald Crubach played to him by the hour.
‘For you must have something to pass your time, Hector.’
Expert in controlling his tone, he scarcely hesitated as he passed over the customary nickname, for Hector Luath would be swift no longer.
‘You'll practise on your harp, and you'll soon be making your own songs again.’
‘Never!’
Hector whispered from the bed.
‘Aye, surely!’
Donald insisted.
‘Maybe not soon, but some day.
And the great lays — you can learn them, meantime.
Come, now.
Again.
‘Mac Mogachoirb.’’
Hector, passive, repeated in a whisper the Lament of Maeve over her lover.
‘Mocharb's son of fiercest fame, Known his name for bloody toil, To his gory grave is gone, He who shone o'er shouting Moyle.’’
As he sang, the tears flowed from the bandages, sliding slowly down his pale cheeks, till Donald, playing for him, wished he could play one-handed to wipe his own eyes.
Hector never asked what had happened at the moid.
He knew.
Every day his grandfather came to sit with him.
With him and Donald, David Beaton, Father Patrick, his aunt Bridhe and the other lasses, Hector had many folk to fill his day.
None was as close as Ewan had been, but they did their best, bringing him the gossip, chattering, urging him to rise, to dress, to come out, come down and eat his dinner with the other folk.
But he wouldn't.
He felt the wreck of his face with delicate fingertips, and refused to leave the room.
He couldn't face the world.
Not yet.
He sat dreaming, weeping, hating pity, driving away his well-wishers.
One day towards the end of October, a week before the wedding, Eachuinn Odhar surged in, Bridhe protesting behind him.
‘Dhia, Hector, will you rise?
It's not natural for a young man to be frowsting away indoors, in a fine crisp day like this!
The sun's fairly scorching the bracken.
Come out!’
‘Why?
Would you have me run a race against Lachlan?
Or hunt?
Or dress ready to greet my bride?
Lachlan's bride!’
Hector laughed, low and fierce, and turned to beat his fists on the wall.
‘Aye!
That's exactly what I'd have you do!’
Eachuinn Odhar snapped.
‘Will you rot in here till you die?
Come!
Now!
Or do I drag you out?’
‘Lay a finger on me and I'll — Let go!’
Eachuinn Odhar had  gripped his arm, and started to tug at him.
Hector struck out, and his blind fist hit his grandfather's throat.
Not knowing what he had done, he yelled, ‘I mean it, man!
I'll come out when I'm ready, not before!
Now leave me be!’
The old man, gasping, held his neck, where the blood was oozing again.
He shook his head fiercely at Bridhe; in silence, lips tight, she helped him out.
Hector was lying back exhausted, the weak tears creeping shamefully from his ruined eyes, when he suddenly realised there was someone else in the room.
It wasn't the first time he'd thought that, but this time he was sure.
He cocked his head, trying to hear.
‘Who's there?
Who is it?’
His voice, too, was weak.
‘Speak up, then?
Who is that?
What do you want?’
He stopped, and braced himself.
‘Lachlan?
Is that you, come to finish what you began?’
He gave a snort of laughter.
‘You can scarce know how little I care!’
Silence.
Then the rushes on the floor rustled faintly, and a gentle drift of air raised the hairs on his bare arms with its chill.
Something brushed his arm, without warning, and he leaped with shock.
His yell was strong, this time, and Bridhe came running.
‘What is it, then, Hector?’
He couldn't admit to being afraid of a breath of air.
‘I didn't call, Bridhe.
Maybe someone was shouting in the courtyard.’
She nodded, then bit her lip.
‘Aye, that would be it, Hector.
But is there anything I can be doing for you, my heart?
Will I send for Donald Crubach?’
‘No, no.
Nothing.’
Then his conscience bothered him.
‘Bridhe — tell the lasses I'm sorry for aye shouting at them.
It's just —‘
‘Ach, Hector Odhar, we know, so.
Never let that rub at your heart, my dear.
Dhia, have you never heard your grandfather, then?
You shout at us as much as you like, if it eases you.’
She patted his hair.
He hated being touched unexpectedly, and winced; then sighed as she apologised and flustered out.
He waited, listening hard.
Sure enough, in a moment the rushes whispered, and the tiny drift of air came again.
It seemed to be heading from the far side of his grandfather's bed towards the door.
‘Whoever you are — whatever you are — stop!
Tell me — who are  you?
Why are you here?’
The thought chilled his mind —‘Are you a ghost?’
He waited, the hair crisping up the back of his head.
‘Ewan?
Is that you?’
Silence.
The movement came closer to him.
He tensed, waiting.
Something — someone — lifted the rumpled wolfskins over his feet and smoothed them gently.
The movement came up towards him.
Half-terrified, half-relieved, he reached out a hand.
After a moment a tiny hand slipped into it.
He gripped tight, and heard a slight hiss of pain; relaxed the tightness of his grip, and gently pulled the hand towards him.
He felt up the arm, discovering the small person not quite dragging away from him, a tight bundle clutched in its left arm.
‘Luch!
It's you that's in it!
Luch, the bee-lass!
Dhia!
What a fright you gave me!’
In relief, he started to laugh, and she smiled with him.
She came in every day, after seeing to the babies, if there was no-one about.
When he realised that if he had company already then, she'd stay away, Hector made sure that he was alone in the early afternoon.
He didn't tell anyone about her visits; he had a kind of superstitious fear that if he spoke of her, she'd vanish like the fairy folk.
Besides, she was his secret, something that he knew and nobody else did.
Day by day, he grew more cheerful.
Return to Duart
The autumn was a busy time for Luch.
Apart from her visits to Marion and Hector and the babies, she was busy at the hives, for it was the end of the season, and they had all the honey to draw and store.
Dawn and evening the three, tall Ruari, gangly Ranald, tiny Luch, tramped in uneven procession up to the moor carrying a dozen bags of leather.
‘Right, then,’ Ruari would say.
‘Luch, go you and get a spark from that woman's fire.’
Though he'd not stop Luch helping Marion, he had no intention of speaking to her.
Luch ran across to the little hearth and smiled at Marion, who smiled back, her eyes growing larger as her face thinned with every day that passed.
Luch would light a length of heather stem, and carry it back carefully to Ruari, who touched the red tip to a handful of broken, dried puffball, and held it in a leather bellows bag in front of the busy entrance of one of the hives.
He puffed softly, then strongly, to force the smoke from the smouldering fungus into the skep.
Gradually, as the bees stifled, the buzzing faded.
At last, listening to the sound, he nodded to Ranald.
‘Now, lad!’
Carefully they cut round the base with a knife, to free any wax that was sealing it down, and eased the skep up off the base stone.
They set it tilted for a moment, leaning one side on a stone that Luch slipped under for them, while Ruari listened and sniffed and  weighed the hive in his hand.
Then, usually, he set more puffball to smoke in underneath, to kill off all the bees, and they would move on to the next hive.
Often, though, he nodded approval.
‘Aye, we've a fine strong hive here, saints bless us, my children,’ he muttered.
Then the bees were not killed off.
Instead, after the buzzing was muted, they turned the hive on its side.
‘Ranald, steady now, up with it.
Careful, saints strengthen your foolish hands!
Now, Luch, will you be puffing smoke in at us still!’
As the half-stifled bees crawled drunkenly across the stone and straw, they swiftly cut most of the heavy slabs of honeycomb off the sticks and laid them in the leather sacks.
‘Take care now that we don't take away the king, or we'll die on us!’
The skep, with some comb still hanging to feed the bees through the cold times, was lifted onto a cloth, the spare bees scooped back into it, and it was wrapped to be carried back down to overwinter in the bee field.
The weaker hives had all their comb cut out and packed into leather sacks for easier carrying, and the skeps stacked by the old hut to collect later.
Twenty pounds of honey each hive, they gathered, or more; sometimes twice that.
Ruari was delighted.
‘Man, Ranald, we've not had as good a season in years!
Was I not right about the wee lass, saints preserve her!
She's been a grand help!’
And Ranald grinned and winked at Luch.
When they got it all home, the honeycombs were cut and drained through cloth into jars.
The wax was put into a huge wooden bowl, warmed at the fire, and worked by hand to get the last honey out.
Luch hated that task; Ranald loved it — he never seemed to get sick, though there was aye less came out of the bowl than went in.
Then the wax and the brood combs, with all the pollen, dead bees and larvae, were dropped into a pot by the fire, and hot water poured in.
The wax melted, and rose to the top.
The rubbish stuck to the bottom of the wax, and could easily be scraped off to leave the scented fawny cake clean and pure.
The sweet water was strained, and used to make mead.
The castle took most of the honey and wax, but Ruari and Mairi naturally made sure they kept a fair bit to barter with their crofting neighbours for oats.
They had their own calf and two lambs to kill and salt down in November, and a pig to smoke, with  a ham sent to the castle that had provided the piglet in the spring; they had dried and smoked fish.
The hens that roosted on the rafters would scavenge as usual along the shore, and hunt for dropped oats in the straw and bracken Luch had been gathering from the moor all summer.
The cow would be brought in to live in the far end of the hut when the weather finally broke; they'd all keep each other warm.
Their hay would be fed as it had been cut, handful by handful, and should be enough with seaweed and oat straw to feed her till she was helped out in the spring.
As Luch hurried gently about her many tasks, she often wondered how Marion would manage with just her bowl of soup from the castle.
She only had the one dress, and a cloak, both worn and thin.
The hut roof was fairly whole now, and she had built a tiny hearth under the highest part of the roof where she might risk a fire.
She had gathered plenty of heather and bracken for a warm bed; she had made a fishing line from the hem of her dress, and caught some codling from the rocks to dry and smoke; she had gathered mussels and cockles, and dried them by her fire.
But it was not enough.
There was little Luch could do, apart from laying aside a few blocks of honeycomb for her.
One cold, windy day Marion nerved herself to take it down to the clachan to barter for food and wool, and found herself still ignored.
Wanting the honey she offered, the folk walked by her.
They didn't even spit.
At last she left, her head still high, her heart black with fury.
A few men were willing to forgive or at least forget; but the women hated her, for by deserting her man she had somehow disgraced every woman, and where the women were still united against her, what man dared help her openly?
And she'd not deal with them in contemptible, contemptuous secret — Lachlan would never take her back then…
Would he ever?
She'd not think of that…
She would not give them the satisfaction of seeing her beg.
She raked round their rubbish heaps at night; she stole from them — peats from the stacks outside their huts, oats gleaned at night from the fields where they drove her away by day, once a half-grown lamb with a broken leg, that she killed with her knife and carried furtively back to the hut, praying they'd think an eagle or fox had  taken it.
It gave her meat for now and to smoke for the winter, and a jacket, stinking but warm.
But she'd not beg.
They saw her sometimes, watching them from the hillside as they carried peats or hay, wood or baskets of fish that they'd not sell her; and each one could feel the chill as she silently vowed vengeance on them all.
And on Lachlan Maclean and his new bride in particular.
The Earl of Argyll had made no protest about the change of bridegroom for his daughter.
Indeed, when he read Father Patrick's carefully-penned letter he had seemed almost relieved.
‘Eachuinn Odhar's own son, eh?
Legitimated by the moid.
Aye, well.
He's a fine big man, they tell me, Lachlan Cattanach, and more fitted to control that hellcat down the stair there than young Hector.
I agree.’
And Elizabeth could, like the Macleans, make the best she could of it.
As the day of the wedding drew closer, the young Campbell lass found herself caught up in the arrangements.
Try as she might, memories of her true love faded before the fascination of satin and velvet, furs and pearls, braids and laces.
Whenever she settled down, posed gracefully like a romantic heroine, Isolde or Deirdre, gazing wistfully out over the battlements south towards her beloved, her mother's sharp voice would echo up the stair.
‘Lizzie!
Is that you mooning about again?
Come down here, and be brisk!’
Poor dear Hugh's face was somehow much less vivid than the tall hennins a married lady could wear, that gave her extra height.
She could wear longer trains on her high-waisted gowns, and longer toes on her shoes.
She could even pluck her eyebrows!
She did wonder what her new bridegroom would be like.
John told her what her father had said; ‘He's not so Western as his nephew.
He's been abroad, fighting.
Knows the modern fashions of dress and behaviour.’
It shouldn't be too bad at all, she said to her brother, if he was as charming as Hector had been, and more polished with it!
And if John looked dubious, she didn't notice.
In fact, Lachlan was working very hard at being polished and charming.
He was determined to let the clan see they'd made no mistake in choosing him, and was off on a round of visits to all the main families, to impress them with his strength and intelligence, good sense and good humour.
He could please folk when he wanted to, and for the moment he did.
Let his father see that he truly merited the chiefship, in spite of his wild past!
Farquhar, at his shoulder, turned a cynical eye on all this worthy, pious mildness, and wondered to himself how long it would last.
In October, three days before the wedding, Abbot Kenneth of Iona was the first to arrive, followed by ship after ship bearing not just the heads of the Maclean households from Colonsay to Loch Eil, but their wives and children, cousins and friends.
This was a great chance to meet the family.
And while one marriage was in the air, many others would likely be arranged.
The next day, when the galleys from Inveraray bore into Duart Bay Lady Elizabeth Campbell, her mother, her maid, her chests of clothes, her dowry, her brother John Campbell and his wife Muriella, they were met by Abbot Kenneth and Lady Bridhe.
When the guests had been carried ashore Bridhe, smiling welcome, made Eachuinn Odhar's apologies; ‘My brother is unwell from a recent wound.
There are rooms awaiting you, my ladies, and you, my lord, and hot water being taken up to them this instant for you.’
In the middle of the crowded path, Lady Campbell stopped and reared her rawboned head like a balking horse, neighing, ‘And the bridegroom?
Lachlan Cattanach, we understand?
Is he not here to greet us?’
She sniffed, loudly.
‘He is expected tomorrow.’
Bridhe's smile tightened slightly.
Among the crowd helping unload the galleys behind her, Ranald grinned to his grandfather.
‘Turned into a saint he has, they're saying!’
‘Aye, for the last two months, saints preserve him!’
Ruari nodded.
‘But a wolf doesn't turn into a watchdog just by folk wishing it.
Mind now — drop that bale and the captain'll have your ears for belt buckles!
Dhia, what a great mountain of bundles!
The men from the castle should be here to help, saints give them strength, instead of pouring ale into their gullets!’
‘Ach away, grandfather!
You had not a bad skinful yourself last night!’
His grandfather shook a fist at him and turned to take a chest  from a Campbell sailor.
They tramped with it across the mud to the grass.
‘Whoo!
Not as young as I used to be!
Ranald, lad, I must sit for a while.’
As Ranald looked at him with some concern, the old man waved him off.
‘On you go for another, then!
Would you let the Campbells think we're feeble?
I'll do fine!’
But the lad slipped aside to find his mother.
One good look at Ruari's strained face and Mairi Ban had him on his feet, his arms over their shoulders for them to help him home.
‘There's not a thing that's wrong with me!’ he was protesting, breathless, his hands and knees trembling.
‘Saints have mercy, woman, I've drunk too much before this!’
‘Aye, father, often,’ Mairi agreed.
‘Mind your head on the lintel, now.
But you've been working too hard this past while.
That lassie hasn't —‘
He reared up suddenly, much like the countess.
‘Now you be listening to me, Mairi Ban!
I'll not have you blaming that lass!
She's worked this summer like a lad three times her size!
If we've done well this year, and we have, it's thanks to her —’ Gasping, a hand pressed to his chest, he collapsed on his bed.
When she spoke to him and tugged at his arm he just moaned, his face grey and twisted with pain.
Mairi, as pale, sent Ranald racing for David Beaton.
A few minutes later Luch drifted in from the castle.
Mairi turned on her, focussing her fear onto Luch in a flood of complaint, scolding and slapping.
The lass cowered down by the bed until Mairi shoved her aside.
‘Out of my way, you useless lump!’ she snarled.
‘Here, father!
Warmed ale, to put heart into you!’
The blue lips were slack under the horn cup.
‘Dhia!
He's gone!
He's dead!’
A few of the women, coming back from the shore, were drawn in by Mairi's screaming.
‘Dhia, Mairi!
Is it dead he is, Ruari?
Oh, the poor old man!’
‘Aye, and it's this bitch that's to blame for it!’
Mairi launched herself again at Luch, tearing at her hair and clothes, beating, kicking, punching her till Ranald, racing back, pulled her away from the child.
‘What did she do, then, Mairi?
Ach, here's David Beaton  running.
It's too late you are, then, physician.
The poor man's gone from us.’
Mairi was still shrieking and striking at Luch while Master Beaton bent over the bed.
Trying to control his breathing, he laid his ear to Ruari's chest.
The women were starting to wail, when he hissed at them to be quiet.
‘He's not dead!
Nor like to be, unless you drive him to it with your noise!’
There was a sudden hush.
In surprise Ranald let go of Mairi, who had hit Luch another half dozen blows before the sense of what the doctor had said reached her.
She stared at the doctor.
‘Not dead?
It's not dead he is?
Oh!’
She started to sob again.
‘Are you not glad, then?’
Master Beaton panted, pressing rhythmically at Ruari's chest.
He beckoned Luch forward with his head.
She had the start of a fine black eye, and her face was scratched and swelling.
‘Luch, isn't it?
Dhia, lassie, it's the hard finger she's put on you there!
But nothing damaged, eh?
Fine, then.
I'll see to you in a minute.’
He returned to his rub-rubbing.
Under the kneading fingers they could all see the fluttery movement of Ruari's thin, bony ribs, and the doctor timing his pressure to work with the breathing, not against it.
‘Here, wife!
You see what I'm doing?
You do it now!’
But she was wailing among her friends.
Ranald spoke up, an arm round Luch's shoulders.
‘Let me, sir?’
The doctor, knowing him, looked doubtful, but the lad's hands, strong from working the wax, settled smoothly into the rhythm.
‘Fine that, lad!’
Master Beaton turned to Luch.
‘What did you do, then, lass, to make Mairi Ban so terrible angry at you?’
Luch shook her head.
It was Ranald who explained, always keeping on at the massage.
‘It's not her, sir.
It's my mother.
She's never taken to her.
But she's never hurt her before, not like this.’
‘H'm.’
Master Beaton pondered.
‘I thought she was going to kill the lass!’
‘Luch can't stay here, sir.’
Ranald was worried, but definite.
‘Not now.
My mother'll drive her out.
Sooner or later.
She'll not forgive her.’
Luch bit her lip.
Where could she go, then?
‘Could you not take her up to the castle, sir?’
Ranald suggested.
‘It was Marion Aluinn ordered her away, and she's gone herself now.’
David Beaton clapped him on the shoulder.
‘That's it!
This new lady may let the lassie stay.
And I've got the very task for her!’
He knelt, to gaze level into Luch's eyes.
‘Lady Bridhe told me, lass, that you come to visit Hector every day, if there's no-one else about.’
After a pause, she nodded.
‘Aye, so.
He seems to be at ease with you, more than with anyone else.
Will you come look after him for us?
And see can you get him back into the world?’
Luch considered.
She looked at Ranald, who grinned, toothy and encouraging.
‘That's grand, sure!
You can come down and see us whiles, lass!’
She looked at Mairi, who happened to glance over and catch her eye; and the woman howled and started to moan at the very sight of the wee lass.
She looked at Ruari.
‘He'll be fine in a few days, my dear, with an infusion of clover and foxglove to steady his heart.
Rest is all he's needing.
And will he get that while you're here, and Mairi Ban shouting?’
At last she nodded again, almost reluctantly.
And so it was that Luch was taken up to the castle for the second time.
Ranald walked up with her, but at the gate he halted, shy, ready to turn and run back to his grandfather.
David Beaton stopped him.
‘Come in, lad, come in!
You'll not be noticed in the crowd, and your mother will never forgive you if you don't stay to see the visitors, and tell her about them!’
The doctor's elbows were awkward on the youngsters' shoulders, one high and jolting, one low and smooth.
But somehow, he thought, the lanky, lively lad and the small, dull-looking lass fitted together in friendship.
In the bower, a rigid veneer of courtesy hid Lady Bridhe's mounting fury.
The Campbells' rooms had been given up by the officers of the household for the visitors.
But Lady Campbell was less than happy.
‘In Inveraray, the rooms are far grander.
And better furnished.
Elizabeth, my dear, we'll have to see to that at once.’
Bridhe smiled, and seethed.
Iain Reamhar had been working his spoons to splinters, but  Lady Campbell still found fault.
‘Cinnamon with the venison?
Heavens!
Elizabeth, dear, we'll have to see about training a new cook.’
Bridhe seethed, and smiled.
Then the countess started on the family.
‘I understand that Lachlan Cattanach is away.
I trust he will return in time, eh, Elizabeth?
Heh, heh.
But is Duart himself absent?
No?
Then when may we see him?
And Hector?
Elizabeth does wish to express her condolences.
They liked each other so well — what a pity!
But she will do her duty — won't you, my dear?’
Bridhe, smiling, cast a desperate eye at Abbot Kenneth.
He fended off the awkward questions diplomatically.
‘Duart is forbidden visitors today, my lady, so that in two days he may be fit for the ceremony.
We do not wish it to be postponed.’
That stopped her.
Abbot Kenneth went in to the attack.
‘And will Argyll not attend his daughter's marriage?
A pity, so.’
‘He would have done so, Father Abbot, but he was called to attend King James.
And as you must realise, that summons takes precedence over any other.’
The lady smiled triumphantly, more like a mare than ever.
‘Besides, with four sons and six daughters —’ more than the Macleans could manage, her sneer said —‘a wedding is no novelty.
Our third son John here will represent him.’
Elizabeth, nibbling at her food in unaccustomed silence, glanced down the table at John.
The reality of her marriage was coming frighteningly close.
John winked.
‘Not for ever.’
That was a reassurance.
She looked round the bower.
Only one hanging, and that a tattered old thing of Adam and Eve!
The whole place was darker and colder and more echoing and empty than Inveraray.
Hugh Despoins' home had bright panelling and carpets on all the walls.
Oh, Hugh!
Sensing the atmosphere, David Beaton led Luch and Ranald past the bower door, and on to Eachuinn Odhar's room.
The old man, pretending an appetite over a roast leg of mutton, grinned greasily across at him.
‘Seen the Campbell mare?
No?
I kept well clear.
Good excuse, eh?’
As he touched his neck his face almost brightened with glee, but his weak, hoarse voice grated on the doctor's ear.
Something was far wrong there.
And there was a new red stain seeping through the cloth.
‘Put a huge bandage on it  tomorrow, David.
It'll get me away from them.
Hellish woman.’
His eyes sharpened.
‘What's that behind you?’
Luch drifted shyly out into plain view.
Hector, picking at his food, sat up suddenly as the rushes moved gently under her feet.
‘Luch!’ he exclaimed.
‘Is that you?’
She put a hand on his, in her usual way of announcing herself, and he covered it with his own.
‘What are you doing here, lass?’
The doctor explained, signing to the old man to look at Hector's face.
He ended casually, ‘So till the beeman is well again, Duart, I thought she might return here.
And I brought her friend Ranald along too, to — er — escort her.’
The wee lass had picked up a cloth and was wiping Hector's unshaven chin free of grease; then his hands, and the handle of his knife.
When the other women had done so, Hector had flared out at them.
Now he submitted, laughing.
‘Are you done, so?’ he demanded.
‘Am I tidy enough for you now, my lady?
Can I go on with my meal?’
He drank a good draught of ale, and ate another slice of meat.
‘Ranald?
What mischief have you been at this last while, then?’
Ranald, his shyness fading, started on a long story of honey and ants and his mother's bed, that set Hector smiling, then chuckling, and at last rolling about with laughter.
‘Dhia!
In her hair, even!
No wonder she was near demented!’
David Beaton caught Eachuinn Odhar's eye, frowned, set a finger to his lips and shook his head.
Eachuinn nodded.
‘Aye, well,’ he said, pretending reluctance.
‘We'll maybe find a use for the lass in the kitchen.’
‘No.
She can stay here, grandfather.
She doesn't bother at me.
And the lad, too.
I can be doing with someone to run errands, now Ewan's gone.’
Satisfaction was broad on Eachuinn Odhar's face.
‘Aye, well, so, a pallet for them will not take up that much room,’ he grunted grudgingly, his heart leaping.
Hector had never said Ewan's name so easily, nor shown such interest and determination in weeks.
Maybe this would be the turn for him.
To their surprise, Ranald wanted to refuse the honour.
‘My mother, my lord, she'll need me, and my grandfather ill!’
But it was soon settled that he would stay at home only till Ruari was  better.
Bumping and alarmed shouts rose behind him as he ran out in ecstasy, tumbling heels over head down the last twists of the stair, to tell his mother he was a castle ghillie now!
Next afternoon, when Bridhe was just starting to panic, Lachlan's galley at last drove in from Glensanda, red and green pennants brave in the breeze.
His father wasn't down at the beach to greet him.
Nor at the gate.
Nor in the hall.
The Campbells were waiting to greet him in the hall, and Elizabeth saw him for the first time.
Her heart suddenly thudded hard.
He was the finest man she had ever seen!
But he ignored them, leaping straight up the spiral to his father's room.
John Campbell frowned at the rudeness; his mother was furious.
As Lachlan knocked, Luch opened the door and he strode past her unseeing.
Huddled in his great chair beside the window slit, Eachuinn Odhar was coughing, a dry, hacking bark.
Abbot Kenneth was holding a cup of medicine to the old man's lips, but Eachuinn Odhar pushed it away and turned, eyes hooded, to face his son.
‘Well, Lachlan.
You're in bare time for your wedding.’
‘Duart,’ Lachlan said respectfully.
‘Father Abbot — you are welcome.’
He knelt beside his father's chair, reaching to take the knotted hand that his father surrendered absently to him.
‘Father — is it your neck again?’
‘These two-three days, it has bothered at me,’ Eachuinn Odhar admitted in a whisper.
In spite of himself his expression softened at the sight of his fine son, till his eyes moved beyond the handsome face turned up to him.
His lips tightened.
‘But have you no word for Hector, then?’
Lachlan spun to his feet, and froze.
Hector was behind the door, as if he'd been hiding there, painfully thin, still unshaven, a stained rag over his eyes.
He was smiling, but not in welcome.
‘Greetings, my uncle, returned to take my place, my bride, while I — no, I cannot watch, can I?
I'll listen, then.’
It was the first time Lachlan had seen Hector awake since his blindness.
Now, bearded to bandaged face, they stood in utter stillness.
The watchers all waited tensely for the first word, the first greeting between the two.
At last, Lachlan moved.
He stepped forward slowly, and set his hands on Hector's shoulders.
He drew closer till at last his  forehead was leaning forward, touching Hector's.
He stood still again for a long moment; then lifted his head, sighing deeply.
‘My heart, Hector.
What can I say?
I led you, from my pride and greed, into danger.
Nobly, you saved my life, and were struck down in the doing of it.
My grief for you, Hector.
If I could have any day of my life over again, at the price of my right arm, it would be that day!
But I cannot.
All that I have now, I have only because of that blow which blinded you.
And yet I cannot refuse it.’
Utterly sincere, he was near weeping in repentance.
‘For the good of the clan!’
Hector mocked him bitterly.
‘A thought of that two months back might have spared you this grief now.
Have you not made confession, then?
Abbot Kenneth here will hear it, and give you a sweet little penance, and then you may be easy again.’
The monk shook his head in frustration.
‘Be at peace, Hector!
You must turn your mind to forgiveness before the fires of hate consume you.’
Hector's head turned as if his eyes were seeking the abbot.
‘Fires of hell, Father Kenneth.
Say what you mean, in God's name.
What fires could be worse than this?
Death or life, eh?
I have both, and neither!’
He swung back to Lachlan.
‘Or is it not Farquhar who should be seeking absolution?
Was it not his knife that blinded me, at your order?’
‘No!’
Even Lachlan could feel his denial was scarcely convincing, but he had to try.
‘I swear it to you.
He did not do it!
Nor did I!’
He urgently gripped and shook Hector's shoulders, trying to make him believe.
‘Then who did?’ the younger man spat at him.
‘Tell me that, Lachlan Cattanach?
If it was not you or your dallta, who, then?’
Lachlan drew breath to name Ewan; but a rush of generosity stopped him.
Why say it?
He'd not be believed, and would just hurt the lad more.
‘How should I know?
But I swear to you, nor Farquhar nor I blinded you.
On my hope of —‘
Furious, disgusted, Hector interrupted him.
‘Hope of what?
Can you hope for Heaven, then?’
At his tone, rising sharply, Luch lifted her head.
Something was wrong…
Worried, she moved gently towards him as his speech grew ever faster.
‘Dhia, what more do you want of me, Lachlan Cattanach, that you take the  trouble to lie to me so?
My forgiveness, to ease your weeping heart?
Then you must stay wanting it, I fear.
For you'll never have it!’
He raised his left hand to touch and grasp Lachlan's plaid.
The abbot started to cry out, far too late.
Hector had judged his distance, drawn his knife and was striking like an adder at Lachlan's face — at his eyes.
But someone clutched desperately at his hand, dragging it down, tugging it with astonishing strength and speed away to the side, while Lachlan twisted himself free of Hector's grip and ducked away.
The blind blade missed by a foot.
Luch, swung off her feet by the force of Hector's thrust, let go.
Hector stood poised for another blow, but there was no clue to tell him which way to strike.
He slashed wildly, and heard a tiny gasp.
‘Who's that?
Luch?
Is that you?
Have I hurt you?
Oh, God!’
His knife clinked to the floor.
He sank on his bed, shaking with great dry sobs.
Abbot Kenneth stepped between them.
‘The child is not badly hurt, Hector.
No thanks to you.
She has a cut on her arm.
Thank God she was here.
For if not…’
He turned to Lachlan.
‘It will be best if you leave now, my son,’ he said firmly.
‘I beg you, say nothing of this to anyone.’
The big man's face was as bitter, as resentful, as Hector's had been.
‘Protecting him again, Father Abbot?
As my father aye did.
Aye does.’
He turned his back on Hector, and walked deliberately over to Eachuinn Odhar's side, waiting in vain for him to look up from his fingers, nervously rubbing at his fur coverlet, and meet his son's eye.
‘The monk would warn me, father, but not you.
That child would save me, but not you.
Why?
Did you want him to kill me, then?
Or blind me?
And who would you find to lead the clan then, Duart?’
Abbot Kenneth interrupted again.
‘Enough, my son.
Do you not see your father regrets what he did?’
‘What he did not do, rather!
All that holds him back from doing it himself is the desire for an heir to the clan — an heir of his own blood!’
The monk's face was stern.
‘Go now, my son.
Go in peace.’
‘Peace?’
Lachlan stared at him in amazement.
‘Peace, after this?
Dhia, are all monks such fools?’
He swung back to his father.
‘This marriage — aye, I'll go on with it.
For the honour of the clan!
But when I have got you an heir, I'd best be careful, eh?
There might well be a knife on a dark stair for me!
Eh?
Father?’
He laughed again, his face twisted in disgust and grief, and a strange relief, and swept out, his plaid swinging.
As he leaped down the stair he was shouting for Farquhar Neas, and whisky to take a foul taste from his mouth.
‘God be with us all!’
Abbot Kenneth prayed, his face stern and accusing.
‘I was thinking that responsibility, and maybe guilt, had turned Lachlan Cattanach onto the straight road.
He might well have settled to be a good chief for the clan that you say you're so concerned for, Eachuinn Maclean.
If you have between you driven him back to his old ways, your souls will bear a heavy charge on the Day of Judgement!’
He sighed.
‘I will go and speak to him.
Will you come with me?
Either of you?’
Neither of them moved.
‘God pity you both, then.
See to the lass.’
He went out, leaving them in a bitter silence.
Down the stairs, in the hall, a noise of rough laughter and shouting arose, and grew.
And grew, unchecked.
Soon the only sound came from the carousing in the hall below.
At last the choruses dropped to a quartet, to a duet, and finally even Lachlan's fine solo baritone petered out.
There was a crash as the big man stood up, tipping his chair over.
Two sets of footsteps, one heavy and unsteady, and the light ones aye behind them, mounted the stairs and paused long at Eachuinn Odhar's door, before turning into the room opposite.
Elizabeth, awake and nervous beside her snoring mother, heard them.
Eachuinn Odhar heard, lying still not to waken Hector.
Hector, lying rigid not to waken his grandfather, heard as he stared into the great burning swirls of furnace-fire and blood that roared in front of his darkened eyes.
All three thought of their hopes, and dreams, and the changes and chances of fate.
Luch slept quietly on a pallet in the corner, her sore arm bandaged, her baby tucked safe beside her.
Mistress of Duart
Before first light the castle was bustling.
Lads were hanging bright flags and cloths in the hall.
Fresh barrels of ale and wine were rolled from the cellars.
The scullions sweated and ducked at the spits and bake-ovens built around the exercise ground for the clan to feast.
Elizabeth's wedding dress was vivid rose-pink velvet, the sleeves braided in scarlet and lined with ermine, over a quilted silver brocade undergown.
It made her look even plumper, and clashed vilely with her mother's regal crimson and gold.
Her sister-in-law wore canary yellow trimmed with black marten fur.
When John Campbell — who had refused to go bare-legged under his breacan-feile; there were limits!— saw them, he blinked at the dazzle of colours, the triple-layered jewels before controlling himself and advancing steadily.
‘Well, John?’ his mother said warningly.
‘How does your sister look?’
He knew his duty as she did hers.
‘Beautiful, mother.
As are you all.
The three finest flowers in Scotland!’
His wife and mother beamed at him as he kissed them all in turn.
Elizabeth clung to him, trembling, but their mother glared; not in front of the Islesmen!
She stiffened her spine.
As they went down, the two married ladies were in high spirits.
It was quite true; there wasn't another woman in the castle  dressed as richly and fashionably, not even the Maclean's sister.
They preened like popinjays.
Eachuinn Odhar was awaiting them among the crowd in the hall.
Hector had refused to be present.
The lad was better out of it anyway, his grandfather thought as he bowed, and wished he was away himself.
And where the devil was Lachlan?
The Campbell mare was sneering.
He sighed grimly, and sent his own man Andrew to help Farquhar get his son down; if not sober, at least tidy.
There was hot, spiced wine to hearten the bride, who drank it gratefully.
Maybe he'd refuse?
What would happen?
It would be an insult to her father.
And herself, of course.
Maybe there would be a feud over her!
Exciting!
At the second cup she warmed slightly, and her hands stopped trembling.
At last Lachlan descended the spiral and stopped on the final step.
Aye, a fine man, Elizabeth thought admiringly.
His red hair and black leather gleamed equally polished, his breacan-feile was bright and full, the silver on his belt, brooch, sword-hilt and knife glittered in the morning sunlight.
The tall eagle feathers on his bonnet cocked proudly over his head.
Behind him, Farquhar propped him up unobtrusively as he swayed slightly, his glazed expression half-hidden by his neatly-brushed beard.
With the wild night, after two months, sobriety, he had a hangover would stiffen an eel.
He opened his eyes, blinked, and saw the bowl of mulled wine.
In three seconds he was tilting it down his throat, ignoring the cups.
He sighed with relief, wiped his beard and looked round more clearly.
As his bloodshot eye fell on the brilliance of the three Campbell ladies, he winced.
John Campbell felt a sudden amused sympathy for him, but couldn't show it, of course.
Lachlan looked the women over.
‘Dhia!’ he muttered, not quite under his breath, and visibly braced himself.
‘Well, which of you is it?’
It could have been a compliment; it wasn't.
Elizabeth's jaw sagged; John's clenched rigid.
His wife's mouth, under less control, was twitching, and they carefully avoided each other 's eyes.
Lady Campbell, crimson with rage to match her gown, indicated her daughter.
‘This lady is Elizabeth Campbell, your bride.’
Lachlan stared at the dumpy, over-dressed little figure gaping and gasping in shocked astonishment.
Dhia!
He recalled Marion, slender and exciting.
He sighed deeply — Elizabeth's fury joined her mother's — and turned to his father glowering beside them.
‘Well, let's get it over, then.’
Such enthusiasm, John Campbell thought wryly, taking his sister's hand to lead her towards Abbot Kenneth standing waiting at the head of the hall.
But it couldn't be avoided, not now.
As the happy couple took their places there was a stir and a rising babble behind them.
Eachuinn Odhar turned to glare; then, his face changing to incredulous welcome, abruptly pushed back through the crowd towards a young man at the foot of the stair, newly washed and shaved, tall and striking in his best breacan-feile, a clean white cloth over his eyes; led by a little girl.
‘Hector, my heart!
Come in!
I thought —‘
‘I decided to come, grandfather.’
Hector's voice was quiet, almost lost in the buzz of welcome around him.
He smiled and nodded to the words of greeting from the crowd, and his blind face searched for someone.
‘Lachlan?
Elizabeth?’
Eachuinn Odhar led him forward.
‘Lachlan?’
Hector reached out his hands to find his uncle.
‘I pray you forgive me for what happened yesterday.
I was wild — not myself.
Forgive me as freely as I forgive you.’
Looks of surprise were exchanged all round them as he set an arm round Lachlan's shoulders that stiffened and then relaxed; and then the cheering erupted.
Under it, Hector turned his head to the bride.
‘Elizabeth, I wish you every happiness that my uncle here can bring you.
He is a far finer figure than I arm — as fine a man as you are a woman!
You'll make a well-matched pair.’
John Campbell caught the double meanings, and lifted an amused eyebrow.
Aye, the lad was clever.
He said nothing, though.
The assembled crowd rejoiced at this unexpected joy, and Luch stood quietly unnoticed by the steps as they all turned away to where Abbot Kenneth stood in a perfect haze of delight.
The feasting lasted the whole day.
The bard was fair, but she must teach them some court dances, Elizabeth thought.
And at last the  roistering procession when the castle ladies escorted her to her room.
Giggling — even her mother!— they undressed her to her shift and set her in the bed, uncomfortably decorated with  fruit and sheaves of barley, to await her husband.
He in his turn was carried in by the men.
Shouting rude jokes, they dumped him in beside her, drank a toast of long life and many babes to the happy pair, blew out the candle and reeled out to continue their feasting in the hall.
She sat stiff with apprehension and excitement.
At last, as nothing happened, she grew puzzled.
‘Lachlan?’ she said.
There was no reply.
She tried again.
She reached out a tentative hand to the heavy body beside her.
‘Husband?’
This time she was answered; Lachlan grunted, rolled over slowly as she tensed, settled comfortably on the pillow and started to snore.
Well!
What an insult!
A relief, too.
Between a snoring mother and a snoring husband, what difference?
Oh, Hugh!
Sniffing, she fell asleep herself.
Next morning, she yawned, wakened, saw his beard, and yelped in alarm before she remembered where she was.
He opened a bleary eye and growled, ‘Who the hell are you?’
Then he remembered too, and started to laugh.
After a shocked second, she joined him.
Poor Hugh never came to her mind at all.
When her husband rose she lay a while, dreaming.
Slowly a glorious joy filled her.
She was married!
She was no longer only her parents' daughter.
She was the Lady of Duart.
She sighed in delight at the delicious possibilities for revenge…
And her husband — her handsome husband — would back her…
But no.
Regretfully she dismissed dreams of dungeons and torture.
It must be done politely, for she was a great lady now.
She had a position to maintain, as her mother kept reminding her.
And after some thought, she knew exactly how.
The next days were filled with meeting her new relatives, feasting, and listening to interminable songs praising her beauty.
She didn't believe a word of them, of course.
Not really…
She was busy, and astonishingly happy.
She never knew how often Lachlan looked at her and thought of a slenderer, more elegant figure.
But one day a visit to Glensanda on Loch Linnhe was planned.
Elizabeth, knowing her mother was a bad sailor, cried off at the last moment, claiming she was tired — she was surprised at the laughter that raised — and as she expected, her mother took the chance to stay behind with her.
Standing on the battlements waving the galley goodbye, Elizabeth looked down — down the wall, and then down again.
Lord, she'd not realised the cliffs were so high!
On the hillsides all around, the sun-dazzling orange of the bracken against the black of the heather startled the eye.
Fishing cobles were scurrying about the Sound like water beetles, black dots on the deep blue.
The hills to the west and south, and over the water to the north, were Maclean land; it was pleasant, rich land, and would soon be hers!
The long, low island of Lismore away to the east was Campbell ground, and the great fortress of Dunstaffnage out of sight beyond it on the mainland.
She wasn't so far from home, and help if she needed it…
But she wouldn't.
This was her home now.
It was time.
She turned courteously to Bridhe.
‘Lady Bridhe?
If you have leisure, I'd be grateful if you would kindly show me the castle?’
At once the countess's nasal voice arose behind them.
‘Aye, and not before time, we'd best see right round the place.
There's a deal needs clearing out, and we've to decide where to start.’
Mother, dear mother, she knew already exactly where she'd start!
Bridhe, treated with charming deference instead of Lady Campbell's arrogance or Marion's former insolence, declared herself delighted to guide the young mistress.
They clambered back down the ladder and visited all the little rooms in the top floor to a steady stream of disparagement from the countess.
The bower they knew well already.
It was a large, old-fashioned nursery-cum-workroom, with piled baskets of wool and two looms at the far end.
The lasses carded wool or span whenever they had nothing else to do, just as at home.
At home…
Here was home for her now.
Not for ever…
Well, maybe…
Elizabeth felt a thrill now, instead of a chill, at the word ‘husband’…
By the hearth lay two cradles.
One babe was Catriona's.
No-one had said whose the other was, but from the tone of their glances Elizabeth guessed he was her husband's — she glowed inside at the word.
She'd find out soon.
The three ages of woman, Seumas Ban thought, greeting them in the hall; the plump young mistress, her harsh-boned mother, and old Bridhe, softly wrinkled like an old pear.
He showed them the huge chest, far too heavy to lift, with the silver cups and plates for special occasions.
Not as much as at home — at Inveraray, Elizabeth thought, but more than she had expected.
As they moved on, the countess constantly and caustically criticised the small rooms, the narrow corridors, the dirt, the cold, the lack of all civilised amenities.
Elizabeth listened intently, till she could practically see steam puffing out of the ears of Seumas Ban and Lady Bridhe.
The time had come!
She stopped dead.
Her mother jolted to a halt just before bumping into her.
‘Mother,’ she declared firmly, ‘I feel I would prefer your absence.’
Her mother gaped unattractively, turning a blotchy red to match her gown.
Elizabeth cast one happy glance at the dawning delight on the other two faces, and continued with the joyful work.
‘I pray you remember, dear mother, that it is I who am Lady of Duart.
You arranged it for me.
Indeed, you insisted.
You will recall?’
Let her remember that night too!
‘I know I have much to do and learn, but with the able assistance of Lady Bridhe and Seumas Ban, I feel quite capable of running the household to my husband's satisfaction without your interference.’
But with your expert suggestions in mind, ha-ha!
Childishly elated, she saw her mother's fury growing and her hand rising to strike.
Let her try it!
She almost welcomed a pitched battle, and her fists clenched.
But Bridhe stepped between.
‘Very well, my lady!’ the countess snapped.
She swung on Bridhe.
‘Do you advise her, then.
You'll find her not so well-tempered as she might seem!’
She stalked off like a scarecrow in a rage.
Elizabeth took Bridhe's hand.
‘I thank you for your support, lady,’ she said, gasping slightly.
‘I was afraid for a moment that she'd strike me.’
Bridhe beamed at her.
‘Afraid?
No, no, my dear!
I'd have scratched the eyes from her head, countess or no, before she laid a finger on you!’
Hard tried not to giggle with triumph, Elizabeth leaned tremulously on Bridhe's shoulder, and let the old lady comfort her.
From now on, she knew, she couldn't set foot wrong.
Her  mother, defeated, would be away home as soon as she could.
And Bridhe and Seumas Ban would make it plain to everyone that the new mistress had their approval.
It had been a grand few minutes' work.
That same day, before the galley returned, Bridhe told her the story of the strange baby.
They were looking through a box of embroidery threads when the child started to cry.
Elizabeth turned and lifted him.
Strange how warm she felt with him in her arms.
She rocked him gently while Bridhe told her the story, and she felt a confusion buzzing in her head.
This was Alan; Alan Mac Lachlan Maclean.
Her husband's legitimate child and heir, for a handfast marriage was valid while it lasted.
She had, after all, expected something like this.
A fine, vigorous man like Lachlan…
But only his heir till she had a babe of her own.
Well; that would be as soon as she could manage it.
She felt a hot urge to strangle the child, but controlled herself.
No.
Better to be good to him — be specially good to him.
It would put her husband in her debt.
And he was a fine wee lad.
She wished he'd stop crying…
She tucked him carefully into his cradle, smiling, very aware of the warm approval of the women round her, and suddenly found the cradle rocking under her hand.
She jumped back with a startled squeak, but Bridhe laughed; and then she saw the little girl who had slipped in under her arm to comfort the baby.
‘That's Luch, Elizabeth Roisin,’ Bridhe said.
So that was to be her by-name — the Rose?
Not bad, she thought…
She had missed some of what Bridhe was saying.
This lass had been the first cause of Eachuinn Odhar thinking of an alliance with the Campbells?
Dear God, who would ever have thought, looking at the insignificant scrap, that she could affect the world more than a dry leaf?
She'd need to get the lass a new dress — she was a fair disgrace…
This Marion woman, though.
Should she make a fuss?
No.
Time enough for that later, if need be.
Lachlan would be glad of her understanding.
It was before he wed her, anyway.
And it was the woman had cast him off; she knew him well enough already to realise how much that had hurt his pride.
Marion was living in a hut up on the moor.
With a little luck, the bitch would die in the winter.
Should she stop the lass from taking the food  up to her?
Again, no.
She wanted to be loved for her kindness, and that would spoil her reputation…
No, she decided.
She'd do nothing.
She had nothing to fear from Marion.
By the next evening, she was of a different mind.
A great drive of deer had been organised for the wedding guests.
The ghillies had been gathering the herds into the area for days.
All the clan from six to sixty were up on the hill before dawn, ready to drive the deer that would help feast them.
John and Muriella, who was an excellent archer, were eager to be out at the butts.
Elizabeth herself hated exercise, but her husband's company — her husband! she shivered in delight — and escaping the glowers of her mother in the castle were well worth a ten-mile ride.
Hector could entertain the countess for her, for this once!
It was a gorgeous golden day.
They all shot well; even Elizabeth slew a deer, loosing too high at a stag and accidentally killing a hind beyond it.
She accepted their praise, sharing a private smile with her brother, who knew her too well to be fooled.
Nobody was killed by a panicked deer or a stray arrow to spoil her happiness.
But as they headed triumphantly home, a scree slid under the hooves of Muriella's garron, which fell.
When they helped her up, blood was streaming from her face and hands, and although Muriella made little of it, Elizabeth insisted they had to bathe the scrapes.
‘There's a hut over there, past those beehives.’
John Campbell pointed, and Elizabeth was leading Muriella towards it before Lachlan could stop her.
Well, why not?
Let Marion be reminded of what she had cast away.
The clan held back politely as he swaggered down after the others into the sheltered hollow.
Marion came out of her hut at the noise, straightened, and found herself staring into Lachlan's eyes.
She froze, but almost at once gathered herself.
She welcomed them politely, sat Muriella down on a stone by the fire, gave her warmed water to clean off the blood.
She did not look at Lachlan again.
‘I have a little mead, if the lady would care for it?’ she offered.
Muriella, more shaken by her fall than she had expected, was glad to sit for a while.
‘You are kind,’ she said.
‘A cup would be  most grateful.
What is your name, wife, that I may know whom to thank?’
Wife!
Marion's face and smile were angelic.
‘I am Marion Maclean, lady.
They call me Marion Aluinn.’
‘And with good reason,’ Muriella agreed pleasantly.
She whispered to her husband, as Marion stooped gracefully into the hut, ‘Did you ever see such beauty?
That hair, and those huge eyes!
Who is she, Lachlan?
Lachlan?’
He blinked, and came to himself with a start.
‘Oh — oh, just a lass, Lady Muriella.
A witch, some say.’
He avoided his wife's eye.
Elizabeth was finding it hard to breathe.
Marion Aluinn, in a hut.
Dark chestnut hair.
And her husband couldn't take his eyes off her.
God!
Dear God!
Muriella laughed.
‘A witch?
I could well believe it.
Eh, John?’
Her husband smiled, coming back rather more smoothly than Lachlan from his own thoughts.
‘She's no more beautiful than yourself, my dear.
She's too thin.
But if she was dressed and fed —‘
‘That has been a stylish gown.
And a gold chain, in such a poor place!’
Yes.
Yes, indeed.
And Elizabeth knew who had paid for them.
Politely, Muriella hid her curiosity as Marion returned and offered her a horn cup.
‘My, but that's good!’
She sipped appreciatively.
Marion refilled it for each of them.
She came last to Lachlan, and for the first time since he had startled her raised her head to look him in the face.
‘I have but the one cup, sir,’ she murmured, ‘but you are welcome to share of it.’
He flinched.
Elizabeth's heart was turning cold.
Lachlan was standing quite still, gazing at Marion, who stared right back at him, head high, challenging him.
Not another word was spoken, till he tossed back the mead in one gulp.
Noticing the stiffness, Muriella chattered on to cover it.
‘Is it not excellent, Elizabeth?
It should soon find you a husband, lass!’
It did.
Oh, it did.
And it may find him for her again.
The sweet drink was sticky in Elizabeth's mouth.
She swallowed desperately, feeling sick.
Someone touched her hand.
She looked up with a start.
Her  brother John was smiling warningly down at her.
‘Brace yourself, lady of the Campbells!’ he murmured.
Of course he would know the gossip — he always did.
‘Half the Maclean clan is watching.’
Tautly, she forced her mouth to smile, her head to lift, her tense shoulders to slacken.
He nodded approval.
She should have known he would notice, and be there to support her.
Her husband — there was no glow now — had clearly forgotten he was wed to her; the link between him and this woman was almost visible.
Slowly Lachlan moved to the side, to where he could see his two wives, one on his left, one to his right.
Both looking at him, smiling.
One dark, slender, vital, exciting; one mousy, dumpy, childish, politically useful.
Oh, Dhia!
He knew which one he wanted, then, now, still, always.
Suddenly he relaxed.
He was daft!
As soon as the Campbells were away, he could have both.
He could come up here every day!
His wee wife would keep the castle warm for him, down there, and Marion would welcome him up here, for food and warm clothing.
And the pleasure of his company, of course!
For they both loved him!
He was out of date there.
Each of them had loved him.
Once.
Marion's great eyes were gleaming.
The hook was still in the fish…
Elizabeth's solid little spine had stiffened to iron.
Not for ever…
On the way back, Elizabeth's husband, in high spirits, tried joking with her.
Disappointed by her dull response, he moved away to talk to Muriella.
‘What will I do?’ she asked John, beside her, in an anguished whisper.
‘What do you want to do, my dear?’
‘Kill him!
Kill them both!’
‘But not until you are mother of his heir.
That's your position safe.’
‘But until then?
How can I cope?’
He smiled that charming, sardonic smile.
‘A nettle stings if you brush it lightly, dear sister.
Grasp it firm, you go unharmed.
And it can make a good soup, if well cooked.’
She considered, the confusion and anger slowly clearing from her head.
‘Aye, John.
Aye.
And who feels sorry for the nettle?’
‘That's my fine sister again!’ he approved her.
And when her husband cracked another joke, she found she could laugh with the rest.
They didn't notice Farquhar, walking just behind with the hounds, watching them carefully and listening very intently for their half-lost whispers.
Two days later, rather sooner than was polite, Lady Campbell was cold and distant as she and her daughter kissed formal goodbye; Muriella Cawdor was warm and encouraging; John's smile hid a deeper one.
Elizabeth saw them off with a sense of loss, and heartfelt relief.
She had things to do.
It was nearly noon.
She watched her husband and his dallta head off along the path that led to the clachan, and then on beyond it, up to the moor.
He might have waited an hour, she thought, and returned briskly to the kitchen just as Luch drift ed in for the soup.
‘Wait you!
Luch, is it not?’
Elizabeth's tone was pleasant enough.
‘Is that the soup for —’ she had more difficulty than she'd expected in saying the name —‘for Marion Maclean?
I'll come with you.’
There were a good few raised eyebrows as she marched out with the lass.
She smiled to herself.
There would be more when she came back.
The weather had changed to cold, steady rain.
As they tramped up the hill, Elizabeth's hair started to soak and drip down her neck, under her silk-lined hood.
She was panting.
That dratted child never seemed to hurry, but slipped along like a cloud shadow, faster than you'd expect.
At last there was the hut, crouched near its grove of hives.
And squatting in what little shelter there was beside the door, just where she'd expected him, Farquhar Neas.
It was no part of her plan to rush in on them.
She picked her way gently down to the door, nodded pleasantly to Farquhar and bent under the lintel, to find her husband sitting by the tiny fireplace, watching Marion turn a hare on a spit over it.
They looked up, a touch too surprised.
She took a deep breath to steady herself.
‘God bless the house!
May I enter, lass?’
The lass  was not much older than herself, but not a married woman.
Not now.
Luch knelt beside Marion with the soup.
With four of them in it, the hut was crowded.
Elizabeth, smiling, settled on another rounded stone and stretched her hands to the warmth.
They waited warily for her to speak.
‘Dhia, the year's coming to its ending at last, I fear.
Are you not soaked through, husband?’
With the least little stress on ‘husband’ she leaned forward and wifely felt his shoulder that twitched under her hand.
‘What are you doing here, Elizabeth?’ he demanded.
‘I might be asking you the same thing, my lord.’
They stiffened.
To giggle would be childish, and spoil it all.
‘But I see you're on the same errand as myself.’
She gestured towards the roasting hare.
‘Charity.
Christian kindness.
Kind it was of you to bring the lass solid meat in this cold weather.
Turn the spit, now, lass, or it will be burning.’
She smiled as they relaxed a touch.
‘But you must not think it is only to bring you charity that I came.
I have a thing to ask you, Marion Maclean.’
They tensed again as she paused.
‘Your mead.
I have to agree with my good-sister that it was exceptional.’
She could have laughed at her husband's struggle to hide a strange mixture of emotions.
Marion bowed.
‘I thank you, lady.
It is the herbs I add.
I never told —’ she hesitated before making the mistake —‘told anyone exactly what they were.’
She quirked an eyebrow, starting to enjoy the risks of the moment.
‘It seemed to me that it did not please you greatly when you first tasted it.’
Elizabeth shrugged, maliciously apologetic.
‘I fear I was paying you little attention.
But it was much to my man's taste, I could see.’
At the seeming-innocent jab Lachlan suddenly leaped up, forgetting where he was.
He walloped his head on a beam.
Lumps of turf thumped down on them and into the fire.
Farquhar, listening outside the door, dived in, knife drawn, and was nearly trodden on by his half stunned dallta.
‘Dhia, Lachlan Cattanach, it's clumsy you are!
You've not hurt your head, have you, my dear?
And what are you after, under our feet, Farquhar Neas?
Out, now!’
Elizabeth chased him back into the wet again with no compunction.
‘Lachlan, sit you down again  and see have I not got a grand idea.
Sit, sit!’
He sank down, head awhirl with more than the knock.
Luch fished the worst of the earth from the soup bowl and offered it to Marion, who didn't notice.
Her eyes, and Lachlan's, were on the plump, round lass smiling so confidently in the firelight.
How could such a guileless young face be anything except honest?.
‘That's better.
Now.
I came all this long way, Marion Maclean, to ask you to be coming back with me to Duart.’
‘What?’
Lachlan was half-way up again before he remembered and ducked.
He looked wary, like Marion; but then he started to think what this might mean for him.
His wife, inviting his ex-wife to come live with them!
She couldn't know, of course!
And she loved him so much, and was so innocent, she didn't dream a beauty like Marion's might draw him away from her.
He glanced at her draggled hair beside Marion's flowing curls, and started to grin.
It was just as Elizabeth had expected.
She forced kindness into her voice.
‘I need you — we need you, Marion, to make our mead and ale as good as yours.
Lachlan eagerly approved.
‘Dhia!
Why did I not think of that, then?
Elizabeth, it's a fine suggestion, that!’
‘It is my duty and my pleasure to attend to your welfare, husband,’ she smiled.
‘I hope to take care of you thoroughly.’
‘I'm sure you will, my dear!’ he praised her.
She smiled the more as he preened and kissed her hand gallantly.
The conceit of the man!
Marion was studying Elizabeth carefully.
To give herself time to think, she dribbled some sea water onto the hare from a half-pot, lifted thankfully from the clachan rubbish heaps; and looked at it and round the hut afresh.
Dhia, was this what she was reduced to?
Two months of cold, loneliness and hunger had changed her, and not just by making her thinner.
She was harder, and more self-controlled.
She could wait for her vengeance.
She'd do almost anything to get away from here, especially with winter coming in.
But what was in the mind of this fat wee lass?
More than mead, for sure.
Elizabeth was smiling at Lachlan.
Something — some wryness in her lip — caught Marion's attention.
That was no look of  innocence or ignorance.
The little wife knew exactly what she was doing.
Jealousy, then.
Hurt pride.
So why invite her into the castle?
To push her down the cliff?
It could be, so.
She'd need to be careful.
But she could maybe turn Elizabeth against her husband.
The two of them could even end up working together against Lachlan.
That would be a good joke!
And then…
Anyone could fall from a cliff, even great ladies…
If she'd known, little turning was needed.
Within two breaths, Marion made up her mind.
Whatever the Campbell lass planned, she was too young, soft, inexperienced.
Marion could match her!
She smiled sweetly at Elizabeth.
‘My lady, it's happy I'll be to accept your gracious offer.’
Lachlan's smug look spread her lovely smile even wider.
‘May I invite you and your lord to share my meat with me before we leave?’
She waved a hand round the bare hut.
‘As you'll see, it's a great pile of belongings I have to carry with me, and the hare can travel easier inside than outside us.’
They all laughed heartily.
Every one satisfied, and looking forward eagerly to future developments, they cut up the hare and called Farquhar in.
He had been listening carefully.
What in the devil's name was the Campbell lass up to?
And her speaking so close with her brother, just after she'd seen Marion the first time!
As he knelt down by the fire with a hare leg to gnaw, Farquhar Neas studied her again.
And Marion.
They were each one plotting something against his dallta, he'd swear it.
Lachlan would heed no warning, of course.
He thought he was irresistible.
Always had.
No, it was for himself to protect his dallta, as usual.
And that he'd do.
An odd thought came to each one of the four as they chewed,; they were sharing a meal, eating meat and salt together.
By the laws of hospitality, they should be bound by the strictest rules of honour, custom, decency, each one to help and preserve and defend all the others.
And each of them smiled, publicly and privately, and looked at the rest, and thought what fools they were.
Luch drank the soup.
The Birth of an Heir
‘Didn't I tell her myself, Eachuinn, who Marion is!’
Old Bridhe was distressed.
‘Why should Elizabeth Roisin be asking her to come here?’
‘Never fret yourself, Bridhe!’
Hector was laughing on his stool beside his grandfather's chair.
He was in better spirits and colour now, for he had been out walking several times with Luch since she had gently persuaded him to dress and go to the wedding.
‘I'm thinking your rose-like Elizabeth has a right sharp thorn or two.
We'd best be remembering she's a Campbell, so she's not born a fool.
She knows what she's at, whatever it is.
It's in my mind, grandfather, that Lachlan may rue the day he called in on Marion Aluinn again!’
‘But why —
‘Leave it, Bridhe!’
Eachuinn Odhar's voice, though weak, was firm.
He was sitting by the window, wrapped in his great plaid, his head twisted to one side to ease the wound in his neck.
David Beaton poulticed it every time he could get the old man to stay at peace long enough, but as soon as it started to heal Eachuinn would be up and about, restless, until the deep puncture festered and broke out again.
‘Leave it, now, I say!
The lass has set her hand to something.
We'll find out soon enough what it is.
If she expects you to treat that bitch politely, then you'll do it.’
‘Polite!’
Bridhe spat into the rushes.
‘I'll be polite.
There's nothing more cutting than politeness, if it's used right!
But how will Lachlan handle a wife that knows what he's at, and has a great clan of powerful relations at her call if she's ill done by, then?’
‘I've warned him I'll give Argyll his head on a plate if he causes any trouble.’
Eachuinn Odhar plucked absently at his bandage.
The thought came to them all; ‘While you live, Duart!’
Hector broke the silence.
‘It should be interesting to see!’ he commented.
His grandfather sighed with silent, deep relief.
Ten days before, the lad couldn't have said that.
And he was clean and tidy now, and civil, and could even crack a joke.
It was the wee lass had changed him somehow, God bless her.
In ten angular jerks and a trip Ranald rose from his seat in the corner by Luch to open the door for Lady Bridhe to leave.
Nodding her thanks, Bridhe asked, ‘How is Ruari doing, then, Ranald?
Is he up and about yet?
Good, so.’
Hector grinned.
‘He's fine now, Bridhe.
We visited him yesterday.
You'll mind it was pouring rain?
Ranald was first in the door, the water fair drip-dripping off him, and shakes himself like a dog.
The water sprays off him that his mother's screaming at him for soaking us all.
‘D'you think it might be raining soon?’ he says.’
Ranald grinned sheepishly as they all laughed.
Luch smiled, and Bridhe saw her.
‘Well, lassie!
And are you happy that you've no need now to be traipsing away up the moor every noon-tide, eh?’
Luch considered, as she always did, and slowly nodded.
Bridhe patted her gently on the head.
‘Aye, you're a kind lass.
You're still carrying your baby, I see.
Is he well?’
Luch gathered her bundle in more carefully and nodded again.
‘Will you come then and get a cup of milk for him?’
It was a game in the bower, for the cup would be returned empty after a while, but no-one ever saw where the milk went.
Luch looked over at Hector for his smile before bowing grave thanks.
Entering the bower, Bridhe stiffened as she felt the resentful hush.
Marion was kneeling by the cradles, hugging her son, tears rolling down her face.
Elizabeth, watching, felt an unexpected sympathy for her, remembering how she had felt herself, with  baby Alan in her arms and him not even hers.
But the other women noted that Marion's face was unbroken by her weeping.
Elizabeth glanced up.
‘Lady Bridhe!
I have been wondering where Marion Aluinn could sleep.’
One eyebrow liked to quell a snigger.
Her face, still chubby with puppy-fat, was unexpectedly stern and demanded equal seriousness from all of them.
‘I wish her to sleep in here to tend her child.
Will you see to it?
She can share a mattress with one or two of the others.’
Bridhe realised that Hector was quite right; the Campbell lassie was no fool.
‘I'll do that and welcome, Elizabeth Roisin.’
She looked round.
‘Jean.
And Catriona.’
Jean, the toughest and nastiest, nodded grimly; her brother had died at Arivegaig with Catriona's husband.
‘Aye.
You'll both share now with Alan's mother, over by the cradles.’
And she'd not rise and slip out unnoticed!
Marion looked up, the tears still welling beautifully.
‘I thank you, Lady Bridhe,’ she whispered.
‘Your kindness — when I have behaved so badly —‘
‘Now, Marion Aluinn!
You'll not be lonely here,’ Elizabeth said briskly.
‘And if anyone bothers you, you'll let me know.
Anyone at all.’
She glanced round.
‘All of you note that.
You'll keep Marion constant company, and if she is — bothered —’ her light voice paused just enough to give the word extra significance —‘you will tell me.
At once.
Whoever it is.
You are hearing me?’
Gathering their satisfied nods and muttered agreement, she smiled and whisked out.
From malice or revenge those women would stick to Marion tight as nits in her hair.
Now she had to let her husband know, oh-so-artlessly, that she had set a guard on Marion that he couldn't break without scandal.
And let him — let all of them — think that was all she had had in mind!
As the winter passed, Elizabeth found, rather to her surprise, that marriage agreed very well with her.
Seumas Ban and Bridhe ran the household as they had done before.
She could order all the alterations her mother had mentioned, but tactfully.
At first it went slowly, but in December Luch could tell the bees, warm in their straw wrappings, that an heir was on the way.
From then on Elizabeth's whim was law.
Wine?
Spices?
Dishes?
Carpets?
Silk threads for tapestries?
Panelling?
Shutters?
She could have asked for the moon, and seen the clansmen climb on each other 's  shoulders to reach it down for her.
Hugh — poor Hugh — was seldom thought of.
She had a fine, strong man, power that she'd never had before, respect and position as Lady of Duart.
And she specially enjoyed the extra malicious thrill of her husband's frustration.
Marion worked hard.
Whenever she was free from the brewing she hurried up to the bower to spin with the other women.
She never tried to escape from their constant supervision, avoided both Lachlan and Farquhar like lepers, took sly slaps and pinches in silence, made much of loving her son, and could, they discovered, tell a story to make a corpse laugh.
Slowly, in spite of their enmity, the women of the castle let her make a place for herself among them.
She became Elizabeth's companion, rather than servant, to their mutual surprise.
They sat often at their sewing, discussing mead and medicines and men.
As they laughed together, enjoying the unexpected sharp play of minds, their liking deepened.
Not to friendship; each knew that the other would see her dead without a qualm; but to respect and a queer, unstated confederacy.
Although they never spoke directly of Lachlan, each knew the other's mind; though not as well as she believed.
Marion even helped Elizabeth gain a touch of style.
She turned her from pink to soft blue and grey-green and gold, to the satisfaction of everyone with an eye for colour.
She brushed the girl's long, rough locks five hundred times, morning and evening, till they started to shine, uncomplaining when her arm ached.
It was hard, but better than the hut.
Her greatest pleasure was to pass near Lachlan, see his deep breath and his head turning to follow her, and retire as if unnoticing, straight to the company of his wife.
Whenever Lachlan sought Marion, he always found both of them, close as praying hands, murmuring together, and raising their heads to smile sweetly at his frustration.
Once, he ordered Marion to come with him; Elizabeth set a hand on her wrist to detain her.
‘But I need her here, husband.
I am sending some recipes to my father, the Earl of Argyll,’ to remind him.
‘Marion is helping me.
Have you any message I may pass on to him?’
What would Argyll do?
Maybe nothing, but…
Marion Aluinn was not — not quite — worth the risk.
He whirled away, not looking back.
He'd done so once, and seen them writhing in silent laughter.
He never turned again.
The situation he found himself in was a source of much amusement to the rest of the clan too, but also considerable tension, for a frustrated Lachlan Cattanach was an unchancy man to encounter.
Not a few men lost teeth because they had met the big man at the wrong moment.
And that winter, if Eachuinn Odhar was sick and Lachlan was judge, the accused quailed.
A many men were hanged who other years might have escaped with only a whipping.
Hector spent the winter learning how to cope with his blindness.
He had a staff, long and slender, to aid his unsteady feet, and Luch and Ranald never left him.
He walked and walked, in fair and foul weather, pretending that he was training the young hounds to stay at heel; and did so.
But his real reason was that he was blind; he was crippled in a land where a man's worth was judged mainly by his physical ability.
He had some pleasures.
He enjoyed handling Glic's pups, that Luch, alone in the castle, was allowed to lift from their dam's teats and set warm and wriggling in his hands while they were as blind as he was himself.
He studied with Father Patrick.
With Donald Crubach's help, he played the harp and sang, and started again to compose songs and poems.
Elizabeth, and Marion of course, heard him practise, and were kind enough and wise enough not to admire too uncritically, but to give fair, helpful comments.
He played in the hall some evenings, and took pride in their applause.
He was naturally unaware of Lachlan's scowls.
Elizabeth and Marion delighted in them.
But oft en, away up alone on the moor, Hector would break from Luch's hand and run across the rough ground till his blind feet tripped and he fell crashing, to lie striking his face and fists against the rock, snow or heather, screaming in despair and hatred and cursing Lachlan, Farquhar, Elizabeth, Marion, his grandfather, Ranald, Luch, the whole world; and himself most of all.
Luch, of course, told nobody about these hour-long outbursts; except the bees.
More than once, though, she slipped in close and slid his dirk from its sheath, in case he should use it  against himself.
If anyone came near, Ranald would wave them away.
The clan quickly learned what he meant, and in pity and love allowed Hector privacy for his lonely suffering.
The children helped him find a better cure, too.
Ruari's work started again in March.
Most of the overwintered hives had survived, with the help of bread soaked in ale every couple of weeks, and now they were unwrapped, one or two at a time in case of a late frost, and set up in sheltered corners.
Ruari had recovered well, but tired easily and needed help even more than before.
Mairi complained, wishing that Ranald was still at home, and Ranald repeated the need to Hector; who thought about it, and then started to come down himself with the youngsters.
The new interest gave him the encouragement of success, to help him over the worst of his terrible despairs.
He learned quickly with his sharpened hearing to distinguish the exact hum that said a hive was too hot, or near swarming.
And facing the fear of the bees helped prove to himself that he was still a man.
Eachuinn Odhar had his ups and downs, but more downs than ups.
It was Lachlan Cattanach who started the Beltane fire for Clan Gillian that Mayday, and later, in the sacrifices of ale and blood to the old gods of the sea and the fields, Lachlan led the clan again.
The chief was slipping steadily away.
Lachlan travelled widely that spring, trying to escape Marion's poisoned sweetness.
Building a new lymphad; hunting; fighting — a wee private raid or two for cattle from the Camerons, nothing serious; other girls; even whisky by the barrel could not blot her out of his mind.
‘Lachlan Cattanach,’ Farquhar said sternly one day, ‘will you for God's sake be either forgetting the lass, or letting me carry her away up the hill for you?
If she just vanishes, Elizabeth Roisin can say what she likes, but there's nothing she can do!
If I'm caught, I'll say I was lifting her for myself.’
The new galley was sailing into the Sound of Mull after its sea trial.
Lachlan himself was handling the thick steering oar with casual strength, hauling steadily to keep the lymphad's head straight across the wind.
The shipmaster was down by the mast, ready to lower the cross-spar with its square sail, and the crew  were flexing their muscles and setting oars in the rowlocks to slide out for the turn up against the wind into Duart Bay.
‘Don't tempt me!’
Lachlan muttered.
‘She'd find out, and she'd cry insult to her father.
And my own father, damnation take him, he'd not support me.
The old man's lost all his spirit this last year.’
Farquhar sneered at him.
‘He's not alone, then, Lachlan Cattanach!
For what would you have done this time last year if a lass had been held back from you like this?
Dhia, every girl's fair throwing herself at you from Ardgour to Jura.
Why make such a fool of yourself over this one?
These two!
I have to tell you, my heart, the whole clan's laughing at you, mooning about like a weaner calf seeking its dam.’
‘Laughing!’
The thick steering oar bent as Lachlan heaved angrily at it.
It was the truth, and he could not stand it.
‘Let me see them laugh, just —’ The sailing master called up to him to take care, but he paid no heed.
‘It's not likely that you will see them, for who would be foolish enough to be laughing before your eyes?
Or mine?
It's behind our backs I'm hearing the sniggers.
You do not do me justice, my dallta, for what you do reflects on me also, and they laugh at me with you because you let a wee Campbell lassie put a petticoat on you!’
With a roar, Lachlan let go the rudder and leaped at Farquhar.
They crashed from the raised platform at the stern, down among the feet, of the rowers who hastily jumped out of their way.
The shipmaster raced to grab the rudder as the ship swung broadside-on to the swirl of the tide, shouting to his men to hold the ropes, but they were distracted by the fight and the sudden tilt of the deck, and lost their grip.
The spar and sail clattered down, burying under the heavy red canvas both the sailors and the men fighting.
By the time the shipmaster had practically blasted the sail off them with his cursing, the tide was carrying the lymphad sideways up into the mouth of the Sound.
Oars were thrust out, and the ship got under control.
The brawl was not.
Lachlan was still snarling and kicking when they uncovered him, and they nearly broke his fingers trying to unfasten them from Farquhar's neck.
‘Lachlan Cattanach!’
The shipmaster's bellow and a wallop on the head from a daring sailor finally pierced the berserk rage.
‘Will  you let go, now, or you'll kill him!
Your dallta!
Your milk-brother, you great fool!
Let go!’
The big man suddenly collapsed like a wet parchment.
He and Farquhar sat on the deck side by side, panting and groaning.
Deep sobs were shaking Lachlan, and abruptly he swung round to clasp Farquhar in his arms, the tears streaming down into his beard.
‘Farquhar!
My heart!
I near killed you!
Pray you forgive me!’
He held his foster-brother away from him to get a good look at him.
‘Speak to me, then, Farquhar!
Tell me you're not dead!’
‘Leave me get a breath of air, and I'll do that!’
Farquhar croaked.
He coughed painfully, and swallowed with care.
‘Dhia!
You've a grip like the father and mother of all lobsters, Lachlan Cattanach!
But kill me — never, my heart!’
He was more upset at having caused this worry to Lachlan than at the near-strangling; and it hadn't once occurred to him to draw his dirk to save himself.
Lachlan rolled to his feet.
‘Duncan Rua!
Why did you not stop me?’
His shipmaster was too angry to be daunted.
‘Stop you, is it?’ he roared, his hair less red than his face.
‘Tell me how a man can stop you, so, and you in your rage!
Dhia, you near sent us all to our deaths!
Look you there, Lachlan Cattanach!’
Only a few feet from the side of the ship a sucking swirl dimpled the water ominously.
‘Was I the fool who let go of the rudder when the ship was on top of the rock there?
If the wind had been stronger or the tide just a touch faster it's broken on it we'd be this minute!
Will you make a habit of running your galleys on the rocks, then?
For if so, you can be finding yourself another shipmaster, for it's not me that will stand responsible for your mistakes!
Do that to me again, Lachlan Cattanach, and I'll heave you overboard!’
Lachlan was near heaving the shipmaster overboard, but he knew he'd been wrong.
He must control himself!
He could not bring himself to apologise.
Instead, he tried to make a joke of it.
‘Will you so, Duncan Rua?
And yourself dead with me, then, for killing your chief!’
‘Hah!’
Duncan Rua snorted.
‘Not my chief yet!
And I'll not kill you!
I'll maroon you on the rock there at low tide, for the waves rising to take you!
Two fathoms deep it is at high water.
And it wouldn't be me, so, that killed you, but God himself, for if he  wanted you alive, sure he'd hold back the tide for you like Moses and the Red Sea!’
Farquhar staggered to his feet to attack, but Lachlan held him back.
He put a supporting arm round Farquhar's shoulders and grinned at the men rowing only hard enough to hold the ship steady.
‘Do you expect God to hold back the tide for us to float here all day, then, or do we turn in to Duart?’
And knowing he'd gone a bit too far, and glad enough, now his fright and anger were fading, to have faced down Lachlan's temper and Farquhar's knife unharmed, Duncan Rua was satisfied to grin back, and turn aside to work the ship.
In July young Catriona was wed again, and she took her child to her new home with her.
To everyone's relief, including his mother's though she never said so, Marion's year-old Alan was taken off by his fostermother to be reared at her father's home in Killundine.
In the suddenly-peaceful bower, Elizabeth looked the old cradles over carefully.
‘They're too small,’ she stated firmly at supper that evening.
‘One will do fine for his dallta, Lachlan, but I'll have a new one made for your heir.
A fine big one, of oak, with a carved band on it to say ‘Dominus mecum, dominus sum’.’
‘Eh?’
Lachlan spat out some gristle, and wiped his beard on his sleeve.
Elizabeth sighed gustily at his table manners — or lack of them.
‘If the Lord is with me, I am the lord,’ Hector translated.
‘I'd not wish to argue, Elizabeth Roisin, and we ourselves know that the Macleans sit on the left hand of God Himself, but Abbot Kenneth could be objecting that a claim to actually be the Lord sounds a touch excessive.’
‘And what does he know about babies?
Or about the Macleans, either?’
‘Or about the Campbells, then?’ her husband sneered.
‘Is the Maclean motto not good enough for you, that you must needs be inventing one?’
Elizabeth frowned.
Then she saw Lachlan flush, Hector's mouth twitch and eyes all down the tables exchange glances.
‘What is it?
I don't just recall —,
‘Virtue Mine Honour.’
Bridhe's voice was dry.
Marion, sitting where both Elizabeth and Lachlan could see her well, bit her tongue not to laugh.
‘Ah.’
Elizabeth sat back against her cushions.
‘You are right, husband.
That is what I should have chosen from the start ‘Virtue Mine Honour’.
Of course!
How suitable!
I thank you for setting me right, my dear.’
Eachuinn Odhar started to laugh.
He wasn't often out of his bed now, and David Beaton had said privately to Bridhe that it was only determination to see the baby born that was keeping the old man alive.
But now, propped in his high-backed chair, he cackled with a malicious glee.
‘Virtue Mine Honour’, eh?
It suits you, Lachlan!
Heh, heh!’
He stopped, coughing harshly, but as he sipped at the medicine Master Beaton held to his lips he was still grinning.
Angrily Lachlan turned on Hector.
‘Well, master scholar!
Hector Odhar, they're calling you now, I'm told, for that you can scarcely be called swift, nor my father brown, with his wisps of hair like dandruff!
Sing to us now, some of your Latin, maybe, and give us the benefit of your great learning!’
To keep the fragile peace Hector agreed.
Ranald fetched his harp, and he sang a story of a great selkie, one of the seal people, who loved a land maiden but warned her that if she took their son away from him, the baby would kill him when he grew up; but in fear that her child would become a wild selkie himself she stole the baby and reared him inland as a normal man.
His selkie blood called him back to the sea, though, and he became a sailor.
And one day he came across a huge seal and killed it, never knowing that it was his own father in his seal form.
As the clan clapped Hector's fine performance, Lachlan cast glowering looks at both Elizabeth and Marion Aluinn.
One had already borne him a son; one would do so soon.
But neither of these brats would kill him!
On a hot August night, Elizabeth gave birth to her baby.
It was an easy birth, for a first time.
As Hector had judged, she was the right shape for it.
Bridhe lifted the baby, slipped a magic coral and rowan-berry necklace over his head and walked sun-wise round the bed three times for good fortune, before taking the child down to the hall to  present him to his father, to Eachuinn Odhar and the clansmen assembled.
‘It is a boy child, whole and healthy, Duart!’ she announced proudly.
The old man, propped in his chair for the first time in over a month, laid a trembling hand on the babe's head.
He turned his eyes to Donald Crubach.
‘Declare for me,’ he whispered, ‘this is Eachuinn Mac Lachlan Mac Eachuinn Maclean.
I accept him as heir of his father after me to Clan Gillian.’
As the bard repeated the welcome to the cheering crowd, Lachlan, Hector and all the rest drank to the health of young Eachuinn Og.
They gave him his first meal, of bread for the body and purifying salt for the immortal soul, and cheered as his tiny red face puckered at the taste and he yelled lustily.
The beacon was lit, and answering bonfires spread the happy news throughout the Maclean lands.
There would be feasting for many nights.
Bridhe smiled down at the baby as she panted up the stairs again.
‘Come, then, my hero, come and we'll settle you with your milk-mother.’
Eachuinn Odhar closed his watery eyes to shut out the din, smiling dimly.
‘I've seen him, I can rest…
Damn Lachlan…’
Elizabeth lay in her bed, tired and sore and feeling astonishingly energetic, smiling up at Marion who was brushing out her hair.
‘I am mother of the heir…’
She started mentally composing a letter to her brother.
Marion smiled sweetly down at her, glanced across at Alan's old cradle, and thought, ‘Now it comes, my lady, eh?
Well, we'll see…’
Three days later Abbot Kenneth himself christened the baby.
At the feast that night, Eachuinn Odhar lay back in his chair and shocked them all.
‘Father Abbot, it's not worth your while going back to Iona now.
For in a day or two days you'd just be returning the weary road for the funeral mass.’
They all glanced at each other in dismay.
The Maclean was laughing at them.
‘Don't look so mournful!
I've had a good long life — well, a long life, eh, Father Kenneth?— and I'm not right done yet.
I'm going to see to it that my sending-off is as I want it.
There's not many Maclean chiefs have had the chance!’
Within an hour his bed was moved down to the hall, so that everything was under his own eye.
He had them set up his bier at the end of the hall, draped in black velvet, and its handles tasselled in black and gold.
The black velvet canopy hung above it had to be renewed.
‘Hell mend all moths!’
His great oak coffin that had been ready for him for years was set up like a cupboard at the head of the bier, fresh lined with red and gold damask, its silver handles polished bright.
‘You'll use my wolfskin coverlet for mortcloth.
I killed the wolves myself in my young days.
Bridhe, put a black fringe on it for me.’
His armour was polished.
‘Sharpen that claymore, you idiot!
I'll not have any man say I was ever afraid of a sharp edge in my life!’
The Maclean coat of arms was repainted on the funeral banners and his shield.
His best red velvet saddlecloth was re-embroidered with gold thread.
‘Aye, it'll be a grand show!’
‘David Beaton!
Have you oils and spices for my embalming?
You'll need plenty, this time of year, or I'll stink out the hall.
Ranald, tell Ruari to bring up sixty pounds of wax for black candles, and for the cerecloth.
And he's not to leave a bee-sting in it to prick me!’
The Maclean tomb at Kilpatrick was cleared of leaves and rubbish.
His father's body that had lain in the great lead-lined stone coffin there for forty years was reverently removed and buried below the flagstones inside the chapel, which was hung with black, and the old man was told that all was ready for him.
‘Huh!
I should hope so!
What else does the priest get paid for?’
He called up Mairi Ban and her friends from the clachan, to rehearse the coronach, the song of praise and mourning that would follow his coffin.
‘Louder, wives!
Sing out!
It's not you had an arrow in your throats!’
‘Seumas Ban!
How much black cloth have you?
Dhia, that'll never drape the mourners and the flags, let alone the hall and the kirk.
Get another five — no, six hundred ells.
Not silk, though — I'll have no skimping, but there's no need to be outrageous.’
His shroud of silver brocade, one of the pair that had been his wife's first task after their wedding, was aired.
‘Fine work Margaret aye did.
I'll see her soon.
And Lachlan's mother too.
God help me between them, eh?’
Bridhe and Seamus Ban consulted him about the amount of  drink that would be needed, and were told to double it.
‘My lykewake's to last ten days, mind, and if there's not a good fight or two, I'll be back to haunt you!’
There was a constant stream of visitors.
‘Come to pay your last respects?
Can I take a message to your late wife, eh?’
David Beaton, shaking his head, said that the interest was keeping him alive, and his mind was clear.
Lachlan Cattanach's was not.
His father was dying, and he himself on the very point of becoming chief of Clan Gillian.
He had two fine sons.
When he was Maclean of Duart, no-one could keep Marion from him any longer.
He had every reason to be happy.
And yet…
Somehow, in those last three days, the loathing he'd developed for his father faded.
The old man, facing his death with such courage and dry humour, deserved respect.
Or even love, maybe.
At the last, Marion and Elizabeth brought their babies for the old man to bless.
Abbot Kenneth exchanged a wry glance with Father Patrick at Eachuinn Odhar's words.
‘I give you my blessing both, bairns.
And what good it may bring you God alone knows!’
To the young women kneeling by his bedside he spoke seriously and kindly.
‘Elizabeth Roisin, Marion Aluinn.
I have the same word for each of you.
When I'm gone, just mind you, in your scheming, that neither of you, nor Lachlan, is a fool.
God keep you in mind of your souls as well as your bodies.’
As they rose and stepped back, they both were surprised to find their eyes pricking.
‘Hector.’
The painful tears seeped slowly from Hector's bandage, and his grandfather reached out a trembling hand to wipe them away.
‘No weeping, so!
Now take care of that wee lassie Luch.
It's in my mind she's of greater importance than she seems.
God preserve you, my dear, dear lad.’
‘God save you, grandfather,’ Hector choked.
‘Maybe, man, but he's left it a bit late, eh?’
The old man beckoned Lachlan last.
He was very weak, but the spark was still in him.
‘Lachlan.
What the devil can I say to you I've not said before?’
The big man snorted with sudden laughter.
‘Your blessing, father?’
‘Oh, aye, you can have that and welcome, for what it's worth.
I've no doubt you'll need it sore, with two women in your house.
No, I'll offer you no advice, for you'd rather be damned than heed it.’
He drew a deep, gasping sigh.
‘Man, do you know what I'm thinking?
There's a grand bit ham I can see on the tables down there.
I could be doing fine with a wee taste of it.’
Abbot Kenneth's praying hesitated for a second.
He stopped altogether as Lachlan solemnly shook his head.
‘No, no, father, we can't be cutting into that ham.
That's for the lykewake.’
Father and son exchanged looks, in better temper with each other than they'd been for years.
Together they started to laugh, the deep chuckle and the dry whispery cackle rolling past the monks, who returned with a start to their praying; past Bridhe, Elizabeth, Marion, Hector and his young attendants, the women, clan officers, nephews, cousins, clansmen great and common, clustered weeping at the death-bed of the man who had been chief for the whole life-time of most of them.
And then only the chuckle was left.