

Introduction
The Mystique of the Railway Station
THERE is perhaps no more potent or dramatic symbol of the Industrial Revolution than the railways.
Although the precise nature of the economic change the railways wrought is still debated, their impact cannot be gainsaid.
They epitomized technological advance — a new method of transporting people and goods speedily and in bulk, of unifying nations and, in the words of the celebrated epigrammatist Sydney Smith, ‘abolishing time, distance and delay’.
The Victorians equated the railways with progress and civilization.
Their coming was hymned in art and literature on a scale of imagination and power which the steam train's unromantic supplanter, the motor car, wholly failed to inspire.
The mood of enthusiasm and pride which the railways inspired is nowhere better summed up than in Ned Farmer's poem ‘King Steam’:
Hurrah for the Rail! for the stout iron rail,
A boon to both country and town,
From the very first day that the permanent way
And the far-famed fish-point was laid down.
'TIS destined, you'll find, to befriend all mankind,
To strew blessings all over the world;
Man's science, they say, gave it birth one fine day
And the flag of King Steam was unfurled.
Great were the claims made by contemporary enthusiasts like E. Foxwell and T. C. Farrer:
Many, if not most, of the distinctive phenomena that constitute ‘the nineteenth century’ are directly due to railway speed; that is, we can scarcely imagine the possibility of their development in the absence of railways.
These phenomena included ‘the unexampled diffusion of wealth’; ‘uniformity of prices’; ‘an ‘independence’ of manners’; ‘the ‘realistic’tendency in art and behaviour’; ‘the unprecedented growth of population’; ‘the astounding cheapness of most necessaries’; ‘the universal and sometimes frenzied spirit of competition’; the ending of feudalism and the introduction of freedom.
Nor was this all:
There are bigger things left.
Who can help being struck by the tolerance of our age…
The incessant shuttle of railway speed, the myriad daily encounters of all sorts and conditions of men owing to this cheap expedition, the resulting flux and murkiness in place of definite conviction, the unambitious content as long as one can find some modus vivendi amongst such heterogeneous diversity — this peculiar characteristic of the time (its weakness and its strength) is the special outcome of express trains.
From this restless diffusion of men arises a growing complexity of social problems; no more of the simple parish under despotic government.
Now all our various programmes interact — we are no longer autocrats on our own instrument, but have to observe orchestral behaviour…
Then there is hope in the air, a new optimism, fed chiefly by perpetual motion…
This healthy tone has been bred not only by the daily influence of the railways, but by the annual practice of ‘going to the seaside’ or making a tour, a practice undreamt of before railways, and now endemic…
So that standing on the platforms of our great inland stations, we watch a salutary stir in the ebb and flow of restless men; we see men under treatment by Motion, and know there is a chance for them.
Over every railway station the flag of Hope waves bright, while day after day the befriending express moves in and out on its errand of health.
What the sea does once a year to freshen individual lives our railways are doing every day for the national life, in a way less picturesque but none the less effective.
For all the fact that some of these claims need to be modified in the light of historical research, there can be no doubting that the nineteenth century was pre-eminently ‘The Railway Age’.
The railways were, as Charles Dickens noted with some distaste, ubiquitous:
There were railway patterns in its drapers' shops, and railway journals in the windows of its newsmen.
There were railway hotels, coffee-houses, lodging-houses, boarding-houses; railway plans, maps, views, wrappers, bottles, sandwich-boxes and timetables; railway hackney-coach and cabstands; railway omnibuses, railway streets and buildings, railway hangers-on and parasites, and flatterers out of all calculation.
There was even railway time observed in clocks, as if the sun itself had given in.
The central focus of all this railway activity was, however, the railway station.
Here it was that Foxwell and Farrer's ‘flag of Hope’ metaphorically waved.
Here was where people met and mingled, where books and newspapers were delivered, where goods and foodstuffs arrived.
Here was the gateway to the seaside, to the country, to the wider world.
Much has been written on railway routes and rolling stock.
But the railway station has only tardily gained recognition for its contribution both to the railway system in particular and to culture and society in general.
In every major city, the tracks terminated in a station.
There arose great, echoing halls of glass and iron, colonnaded, canopied, buttressed, and turreted, living temples to the worship of King Steam.
Théophile Gautier said of them: ‘These cathedrals of the new humanity are the meeting points of nations, the centre where all converges, the nucleus of the huge stars whose iron rays stretch out to the ends of the earth.’
It is a view that was fully justified in a wide-ranging exhibition ‘Le Temps des Gares’, originally conceived and executed by Jean Dethier at the Pompidou Centre in Paris in 1978 and subsequently presented throughout Europe in such places as Milan, Brussels, Berlin, and Madrid.
It ran at the Science Museum in London from May to September 1981 under the title ‘All Stations’.
The exhibition catalogue, illustrating and analysing its rich array of paintings and photographs, models and mock-ups, artefacts and ephemera, made a major contribution to understanding the multi-faceted role of the railway station both in our lives and in our dreams.
This study seeks to build on the foundations thus laid and to take the assessment of the importance of the railway station a step further.
At its most basic level, the railway station was the nineteenth century's distinctive contribution to architectural forms.
It combined within itself in eloquent reflection of the age which produced it both a daring and innovative modernity and a heroic and comforting traditionalism.
The modernity came in the technological skill which went into the production of the train-sheds, the great single- and double-span roofs, for which unsung engineers solved complex structural problems of weight and distribution with breath-taking brilliance and boldly utilized the new materials, iron and glass, to construct the naves and transepts of the cathedral stations.
The frontages were the work of the architects and they worked not in new styles but in revival styles — Gothic, classical, Renaissance, baroque — to comfort and reassure those concerned about the newness of it all.
For though it is hard for us to credit it now, many people believed that if you travelled faster than — say — 30 miles an hour, you might actually burst and be scattered across the railway lines.
But revivalism in architecture did not mean lack of imagination or inventiveness — quite the reverse: it meant a prodigal outpouring of both.
The end-products of this explosion are — or were until recently — all around us.
Everyone knows the fantastical splendours of that fairy-tale citadel called St Pancras and the lost magnificence of the Euston Arch, but beyond them in the rest of Britain stood other wonders: the medieval Gothic abbey that was Richmond Station, the handsome Jacobean mansion that was Stamford East, the elegant French Renaissance château of Southport Lord Street, the trim Alpine hunting-lodge that was Kendal, the airy Edwardian summer-house that was Wemyss Bay.
Their very names were grand and allusive — Carlisle Citadel, Hull Paragon, Bristol Templemeads, Lancaster Green Ayre, Cheltenham Lansdowne.
Abroad, too, imagination took wing.
In New York the Baths of Caracalla served as the model for Pennsylvania Station and Alexandre Marcel's designs for Bucharest Central evoked the architectural flights of fancy of Piranesi.
In Paris, first the Gare de l'Est and later the Gare d'Orsay became the standard station-forms for their respective generations, models of perfection which others strove to emulate.
Nineteenth-century forms and styles held sway until the 1920s when they were replaced by their horrendous antithesis — Functionalism.
Under this dispensation, stations became bare, square boxes, with — in the words of Sir Edward Elgar —‘no soul, no romance, no imagination’.
They were, in short, fitting products of the era of plastic, concrete, and neon — flat, boring, sterile, and styleless.
It is perhaps appropriate that in an age which can design its high-speed trains to resemble aeroplanes and its low-speed trains to resemble buses, its stations should equally have no identifiable association with the railways.
The symbol of the new age is the new Euston, an all-purpose combination of airport lounge and open-plan public lavatory.
It tells us a good deal about the relative values of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries that where the Victorians modelled their stations on cathedrals and palaces, Modern Man models his on shopping centres and office blocks.
As railway systems all over the world have contracted, so the great stations have been threatened and in many places destroyed.
In Britain some 4,000 stations have gone out of use since the 1960s, and many of them have vanished altogether — swept away with a callous disregard for our architectural heritage that takes the breath away.
British Rail themselves, the guardians of this heritage, gave a blockbusting philistine lead by demolishing the Euston Arch, an act somewhat akin to tearing down Salisbury Cathedral or Windsor Castle.
But the Americans followed suit by levelling Pennsylvania Station, New York.
The men guilty of these outrages did not even have the excuse of their European counterparts, who could sometimes claim that wartime bombing had flattened the great stations which they were replacing.
In all of Britain's great cities, majestic terminals went out of use and lay for years rotting like gigantic beached whales in the noonday sun — Manchester Central, Liverpool Exchange, Birmingham Snow Hill, Glasgow St Enoch's.
Country and suburban stations have been closed wholesale and even those still surviving are often covered in graffiti, wrecked and vandalized beyond recognition.
There is clearly now an urgent need for a Historic Stations Trust to remove those treasures that remain beyond the reach of the hammers of the destroyers, both official and unofficial, so that at least part of this precious heritage may be handed down to future generations.
The station is an endangered species and conservation is of the essence.
The Third World, particularly Thailand and Malaya, has set a notable example in the restoration and preservation of stations.
Many are the new uses to which old stations are being put here and abroad — museums, theatres, markets, restaurants, sporting halls, cultural centres.
Some of our more charming wayside stations have been sold off as private houses.
All chintz curtains and birdcages in the windows, many of them are the homes of old railwaymen who sit by the fire, dreaming of Gresley Pacifics and Stanier Jubilees.
And yet — and yet — for all this earnest and worthy work of conservation, the life has gone irrevocably out of these stations.
Without the ebb and flow of passengers, the arrival and departure of trains, they have in a very real sense ceased to be.
For steam was the breath which animated them, and that breath has been stifled.
Now they are being embalmed — dutifully and reverentially, as befits faithful but defunct servitors of mankind.
The closing of a station intangibly but significantly diminishes the spiritual life of a country and its people, for it brings down the curtain with devastating finality on a stage which has seen a thousand dramas, comic and tragic, played out and has mirrored the changing moods of the nation, has etched itself into the working lives of some, the emotional lives of others.
Robert Lynd summed this up well when he reported his feelings on listening to a radio broadcast of the arrival of the last mail train at Dublin's Broadstone Station before its closure in 1936:
How tenderly everybody spoke of it during the broadcast!
How haunted with memories of happiness it seemed!
Old servants of the railway company came into the signal-box from which the broadcast was given and spoke of the closing of the station as if for them it was the end of a world.
Never again would the Galway mail arrive there in its midnight glory.
Never again would a signalman give the signal that all was clear.
A banquet-hall deserted — Broadstone Station would henceforth be only that to thousands for whom it had for long been associated with happiness — the happiness of the day's work, the happiness of companionship, the happiness of simply being alive on a fine day.
There was a note of exile in the voices of the old railway servants who came to the microphone to say goodbye to the station…
Ruskin would surely have been surprised if he had been told that a time would come when railway stations, like lakes and mountains, would become a part of the imaginative life of men, and when the sounding express engine no less than the sounding cataract would rouse in them a noble delight.
He would have been still more surprised if he had been told that the closing of an old railway station would one day move men to sadness no less than the demolition of a Gothic church or the violation of a landscape.
Yet how natural it is!
Life is brief, and the removal of a long-tolerated equally with a long-loved landmark alters and injures the world in which we have been happier than we have deserved to be.
It is worth considering that in part at least the malaise of modern society is the result of ill-considered and reckless policies of demolition and redevelopment.
The fate of stations can be taken as symptomatic of this trend.
It is a commonplace to talk of the young being alienated.
Why are they?
One reason could be because all around them are utterly characterless, uniform, boring, and unmemorable buildings — nothing for them to stand and stare at, to wonder at and dream of — as there was in the heyday of the great stations.
Concrete underpasses and plastic shopping precincts are not the stuff that dreams are made of.
For older people, the familiar landmarks of their lives have been bulldozed, leaving them bewildered and uncertain.
The big city station from which they saw off their loved ones to war, from where they left for their honeymoons and holidays, where they kept their romantic trysts under the station clock, has been obliterated or at the very least altered out of all recognition.
People may still have their memories but their certainties have been undermined.
As Sir John Betjeman said: ‘Railway stations are most important in giving places an identity.’
Like the town hall, the central library, the cathedral, the station is one of the nodal points of the community, a vital element in its public consciousness.
This was not just true of towns and cities.
It was true too in the country.
The country station was a crucial factor in the lives of the inhabitants of rural areas.
As David St John Thomas wrote in his evocative memoir of the British country station: ‘In most areas for at least two full generations all important comings and goings were by train.’
Hilaire Belloc, writing of his local station in Sussex in 1908, spoke for all the users of rural stations:
What is more English than the country railway station?
I defy the eighteenth century to produce anything more English, more full of home and rest, and the nature of the country than my junction.
Twenty-seven trains a day stop at it or start from it; it serves even the expresses.
Smith's monopoly has a bookstall there; you can get cheap Kipling and Harmsworth to any extent and yet it is a theme for English idylls.
The one-eyed porter whom I have known from childhood; the station-master who ranges us all in ranks, beginning with the Duke and ending with a sad, frayed and literary man; the little chaise in which the two old ladies from Barlton drive up to get their paper of an evening, the servant from the inn, the newsboy whose mother keeps a sweetshop — they are all my friends.
The station was one of the hubs of village life — a centre of news, gossip, and advice, the home of bookstall and telegraph office.
Its disappearance has been followed in many cases by that of the village shop, the village post office, even the village pub — the slow, inexorable process of rural decay.
It is a decay that became inevitable when the infamous Beeching Plan substituted the crass motif of economic viability for that of communal need, and ripped out the steel vertebrae of the nation, leaving whole areas more isolated than they had been at any time since the eighteenth century.
The country railways, of course, never made a profit; they could not by their very nature.
But they provided a vital social service and their closure was a disastrous token of things to come.
What was it about the station that was so fascinating?
The station was truly a gateway through which people passed in endless profusion on a variety of missions — a place of motion and emotion, arrival and departure, joy and sorrow, parting and reunion.
There are countless individual stories encapsulated in the photographs of migrant workers arriving at Continental stations or commuters pouring into the London termini, of the Jews being herded on to trains headed for the death-camps, or of armies departing for half a dozen different wars — the brave, cheerful, youthful faces of a nation's young men heading off for the rendezvous with destiny.
James Scott in his Railway Romance and Other Essays observed: ‘It is mainly the human interest to be found in and about a railway station which is the secret of its fascination.’
Scott summed up with fine rhetorical finality the maelstrom of conflicting emotions and experiences a station represents:
What of the passengers and their friends!
Who may fathom, much less portray, the thoughts and emotions surging within their minds and hearts?
The grief and pain of separation, the hopes, the fears, the loving care, the prayers, the joys, the trust!
How ill-concealed by some in affected gaiety of mood; how patent in others who do not attempt to conceal!
Here are soldiers and sailors, with troops of acquaintances to see them off.
There are some boys and girls going away to school, their fathers and mothers filling up the moments of waiting with many injunctions in order to shut out their anxieties which their children must not see.
At another place a wife is bidding good-bye to a husband whom duty calls hence.
Elsewhere an only son and brother is setting out into the great world to win a name and place.
In the corner of another carriage there sits, his face screened by a magazine, some lonely soul who has no one to bid him adieu at this end of his journey or welcome him at the other.
At another compartment a happy wedding party is assembled, and amid merriment and showers of confetti the ‘happy pair’ are getting a good send-off.
These and a hundred other scenes one may witness at the departure of an important train such as this.
There may be tears, or mirth, or calm demeanour, but in all the life of feeling runs high…
A railway station speaks of epochs of decision in life, a parting of the ways, cross-roads in conduct.
Shall we embark upon this adventure; shall we definitely declare our hand; shall we make a break in habit; or a departure from principle?
Are we fleeing from Nineveh and duty, or going where Love and Right beckon us?
As we wait at the station are we still counting the cost, and weighing consequences in the balance?
Are we making a sacrifice in going away?
Have we left a clean record behind?
When the train has borne us away and we settle into our corner, have we feelings of remorse or satisfaction?
Where will the journey's end be?’
There are those who have made a close study of various aspects of platform life.
Bishop Eric Treacy was a connoisseur of station farewells:
What an interesting study of farewells a railway station affords.
There are those who scorn any demonstration of affection in public.
As the train leaves, with an unnatural casualness they will separate with never so much as a pressure of the hand; others there are who, oblivious of the world around them, stand gazing into each other 's eyes, spending their last few moments clasped in each other 's arms — matching a succession of last kisses — to separate with a look of bewildered agony on their faces.
Then there is that numerous class of people for whom ‘seeing people off’ is a bit of an outing, not one minute of which is to be lost.
So they stand cheerfully by the carriage window revealing in loud voices the personal secrets of the wretched traveller, who winces as he realizes that he has to travel two hundred miles with a carriage full of strangers who know his family history, how prone he is to chills if he wears a damp vest, what he has to do when he arrives at his destination.
The platform was also a happy hunting-ground for observers of social nuance.
Henry James, confessing in 1905 to a passion for London railway stations, gave as his reason:
The exhibition of variety of type is in general one of the bribes by which London induces you to condone her abominations and the railway-platform is a kind of compendium of that variety.
I think that nowhere so much as in London do people wear — to the eye of observation — definite signs of the sort of people they may be.
If you like above all things to know the sort, you hail his feet with joy; you recognize that if the English are immensely distinct from other people they are also socially — and that brings with it in England, a train of moral and intellectual consequences — extremely distinct from each other.
A typical example of such observation can be seen in Alfred W. Arthurton's account of the day's work at Paddington Station in 1904:
Life as seen from the platform at Paddington is most varied and one cannot help thinking that an official who spends most of his time there must gain a vast knowledge of human nature…
On the arrival or departure of the King and Queen crowds of loyal subjects — mostly ladies — besiege the barriers which have to be erected on the platform, whilst the entrance to the station and the railings overlooking the Royal waiting room are thick with those who would catch a glimpse of Royalty…
A fine ‘Henley week’ considerably increases the summer receipts of the Great Western Railway.
This is the time for a foreigner to see English youth and beauty at its best…
Another great event from the Paddington point of view is ‘Ascot week’.
Again the departure slope is packed with hansoms waiting to discharge their fair occupants, and again the ladies' dresses are a sight not to be missed…
At another time the platforms are full of youngsters on the way to ‘Lords’ for the Eton and Harrow match.
Before the train stops every door is opened and all try to get out at once, with the result that not a few alight on their faces.
Every boy charters a hansom and the spectacle of a mite of ten or twelve years, with stick and blue ribbon bow complete, gravely trying to fold his arms on top of the hansom doors above which scarcely more than his top hat is visible is an amusing one…
A scene of quite different character is the departure of 600 or 700 of Dr. Barnardo's boys and girls to their new homes in Canada.
These have no near friends or relatives to part from, and the future is bright for each; but all the same, a lump comes in one's throat as the train steams out of the station amid cheering and the strains of ‘Auld Lang Syne’.
Every Thursday during the summer ‘specials’ are run conveying thousands of children to and from the country.
The ‘Fresh Air Fund’ brings joy to many a childish heart by affording a stay in what seems like another world for a whole week.
Van loads of youngsters, each child properly labelled with name and destination, are brought to the station and dispatched to various places on the Great Western system…
Today, a crowd of Polish Jews, exiled from their native land, pass through Paddington on their way to America.
Pending the departure of the Birkenhead train they bestow themselves in a waiting room set apart, or roam the platforms.
Whole families are there with all their worldly possessions…
Another day a gang of convicts, chained together and bearing the mark of the broad arrow, clank along the platform en route for Portland, Dartmoor or Warwick…
And so it goes on.
The scene is continually changing, and from dawn to dark an endless procession of men and women pass before us, intent on business or pleasure.
The station as a point of departure literally and metaphorically took on a particular intensity for the post-First World War generation of young British literati.
Private foreign travel had been restricted by the war.
But after the war, there was a great literary diaspora — to Italy, the South of France, California, the Far East.
It was a flight from the chill of the trenches, shortages moral and material, rain, cold, and influenza, the twin banes of puritanism and philistinism, to the sun, to liberation sexual, social, and artistic.
W. H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood, D. H. Lawrence and Graham Greene, Norman Douglas and Evelyn Waugh, Robert Graves, Harold Acton, Osbert Sitwell, and Lawrence Durrell, all packed their bags and decamped gratefully and sometimes for good.
It was the last great age of travel — by ship and by train — before the joys and mysteries and individualism of travel were overtaken by the bland, pre-packaged age of tourism when daily long-distance flights, with their second-rate movies, plastic food, and attendant jet lag, replaced for ever the slow boat to China and the stopping train to Samarkand.
It was the last age when the railway station was an essential ingredient of every traveller's itinerary: point of departure, point of arrival, point of contact en route with everyday life as it teemed and flowed outside the protective cocoon of the train.
The Second World War put an end to this age as surely as the First World War began it.
Thereafter tourism replaced travel, the masses were unleashed upon the Continent, package-tour operators and entrepreneurs got to work to ensure that everywhere from Zagreb to Zanzibar looked, felt, and smelt exactly the same, and the aeroplane turned Atlantic crossings and transworld flights into the merest commuting, as mechanical and regular and unremarkable as catching the 6.10 from Waterloo to Surbiton.
But the point of departure was more than merely physical.
It involved a metaphysical change, as T. S. Eliot observed in ‘The Dry Salvages’:
When the train starts, and the passengers are settled,
To fruit, periodicals and business letters
(And those who saw them off have left the platform)
Their faces relax from grief into relief,
To the sleeping rhythm of a hundred hours,
Fare forward, travellers! not escaping from the past
Into different lives, or into any future;
You are not the same people who left that station
Or who will arrive at any terminus,
While the narrowing rails slide together behind you.
Sometimes this departure is final.
There is a fearful symmetry on occasion in the association of the station and death.
Count Leo Tolstoy, whose tragic heroine Anna Karenina threw herself under a train, himself died in 1910 at the remote Russian country station of Astapovo.
Emile Verhaeren, the Belgian poet who had vividly chronicled the impact of the railways on the countryside, was killed in an accident at Rouen Station in 1916.
Bishop Eric Treacy, ‘The Railway Bishop’, died while photographing trains at Appleby Station on the Settle–Carlisle line in 1978.
Indeed the railways began with a notable death.
William Huskisson, President of the Board of Trade, was run down and killed at Parkside on the inaugural run of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1830.
It was an event, akin to the sinking of the Titanic , that rocked society at a moment of supreme self-congratulation and brought home to a people intoxicated with science and progress the existence of an admonitory Deity.
A tablet erected to his memory announced sonorously that Huskisson,
singled out by the Decree of an Inscrutable Providence from the midst of the Distinguished Multitude that Surrounded him, in the full pride of his Talents and the Perfection of his Usefulness, met with the Accident that Occasioned his Death; which deprived England of an Illustrious Statesman and Liverpool of its Most Honoured Representative; which changed a moment of the Noblest Exultation and Triumph that Science and Genius had ever achieved into one of Desolation and Mourning, and striking Terror into the Hearts of Assembled Thousands brought home into every Bosom the Forgotten Truth that ‘In the Midst of Life we are in Death’.
The association of station departures with death and transfiguration (cf. the Stations of the Cross?) is but one aspect of a wider concern with identifying the particular mystique of the station.
It is a problem which has occupied the minds of those whom Canon Roger Lloyd has dubbed ‘station saunterers’(‘the railway lover counts no time wasted which he spends sauntering on a good station’).
Many of them have come to the conclusion that the role and atmosphere of the station large and small is essentially ecclesiastical.
G. K. Chesterton, a self-confessed station saunterer, celebrated the station as a temple of tradition, a comforting source of continuity in a world increasingly dedicated to change:
The only way of catching a train I have ever discovered is to miss the train before.
Do this, and you will find in a railway station much of the quietude and consolation of a cathedral.
It has many of the characteristics of a great ecclesiastical building; it has vast arches, void spaces, coloured lights, and above all, it has recurrence of ritual.
It is dedicated to the celebration of water and fire, the two prime elements of all human ceremonial.
Lastly, a station resembles the old religions rather than the new religions in this point, that people go to it.
In connection with this it should also be remembered that all popular places, all sites actually used by the people, tend to retain the best routine of antiquity very much more than any localities or machines used by any privileged class.
Things are not altered so quickly or coarsely by common people as they are by fashionable people…
If you wish to find the past preserved, follow the million feet of the crowd.
At the worst the uneducated only wear down old things by sheer walking.
But the educated kick them down out of sheer culture.
I feel this profoundly as I wander about the empty railway station, where I have no business of any kind.
I have extracted a vast number of chocolates from automatic machines; I have obtained cigarettes, toffee, scent, and other things that I dislike by the same machinery; I have weighed myself with sublime results; and this sense not only of the healthiness of popular things, but of their essential antiquity and permanence is still in possession of my mind.
A similar ecclesiastical peace was the principal quality that Karel Čapek detected in Czech country stations:
There are little stations threaded on the lines like beads on a rosary; they stand in the solitude like places of pilgrimage, far from the profane noises of the world; they are the real chapels dedicated to the silent ceremony of Waiting.
They are led to as a rule by a country lane with a straggling row of trees; the longer it is the more profound and lasting is the silence which embraces the pilgrim who comes to the station to wait…
We who are waiting shuffle from one foot to the other and cough under our breath like worshippers in a chapel; we are dressed in clean clothes and depressed in a Sunday sort of way…
‘Mummy!’ says the piping voice of a little girl.
‘Be quiet’ her mother reproves her in a whisper.
‘Mummy, when will the train come?’
Be quiet, little girl, we have to wait for the train to come.
If you aren't as good as if you were in church, the train won't come, and we shan't go away in it to the ends of the earth.
In this context, then, it is entirely appropriate for Canon Roger Lloyd to speak of the quietude of Marylebone Station in London:
It is essentially peaceful and when some rather fussy penitent told his father confessor that he could find nowhere in London where he could meditate in quiet and peace, he was astonished to hear the caustic answer: ‘Have you tried Marylebone, my son?’
It is possible to extend the metaphor almost ad infinitum .
For if the station is seen as cathedral or chapel, it can also be seen to possess in its heyday a Bible every bit as imposing and sometimes even as impenetrable as the Authorized Version (Bradshaw ), incense (steam), and liturgical chanting (‘The train now standing at platform 3 is…’,
‘Close the doors and stand clear’, ‘All change’).
In some countries nature imitates art and makes this fancy reality.
In Tsarist Russia, icons were often placed in railway-station waiting-rooms and in Greece there were shrines at stations where the traveller could light candles to protect him on his journey.
The ceiling of the Great Hall at the old Euston Station was deliberately modelled on that of the church of St Peter extra muros in Rome.
Somehow sensing this connection, clerics have been drawn as if by a magnet to the rails.
Bishop Eric Treacy of Wakefield, who had an engine named after him, was a tireless photographer of and writer about railways.
Similarly prolific and passionate in their dedication were Canon Roger Lloyd, author of, among other works,The Fascination of Railways , Canon Reginald Fellows, researcher into the history of Bradshaw , Canon Victor Whitechurch, creator of the fictional railway detective Thorpe Hazell, and Revd Wilbert Awdrey, author of the much-loved children's books about Thomas the Tank Engine and his friends.
Archbishop William Temple when headmaster of Repton had a complete mental recall of Bradshaw and would set as an imposition for an errant boy the best way of travelling from Great Yarmouth to Exeter or Penrith to Ipswich without touching London, complete with changes and times.
He would then correct it from memory.
It was therefore entirely fitting that, in the celebrated Ealing comedy about the last age of steam,The Titfield Thunderbolt should be driven by the local vicar and fired by a visiting bishop.
Not sauntering but fanatically rooted to their hallowed places at the end of the ‘Up’ main platform in most big stations are to be found the train-spotters, living proof of George Orwell's observation that the English are a nation of collectors, in this case of train numbers.
They stand, men and boys of all ages, come rain, come shine, oblivious of the seasons, clad in the regulation uniform of their breed — the anorak — with Thermos flask of coffee, spam sandwiches, bulging notebooks, and a well-thumbed Ian Allan Guide, the Bible of their cult.
Incomprehensibly, there seem to be as many spotters now in the days of dull diesels and anonymous electrics as there were when we were train-spotters in the last years of steam and the trains bore names like Bihar and Orissa ,Baroda ,Indore ,Drake ,Camperdown , and Barfleur , names redolent of history and tradition, summoning up fragrant images of far-off places and the martial rattle of distant centuries.
As far as we can tell, no work has yet been done on the psychology of the train-spotter.
But a number of possible motivations suggest themselves.
The sexual connotation of trains is well known, particularly trains entering tunnels.
Is this obsessive watching of trains sliding in and out of stations to be construed, in the child, as a substitute for sex and, in the adult, as a desire to prolong childhood indefinitely and avoid coming to terms with mature sexuality?
This gives us the concept of the train-spotter as voyeur, permanent observer rather than regular participant.
But perhaps a more likely interpretation is to be found in the aspect of the hobby known as ‘copping’, the keeping of lists of trains seen.
Is this a desire to provide order and system in a disordered universe, to give life an encompassable finite purpose?
That would account for its appeal to males of all ages, and equally explain the absence of females, whose finite universe has traditionally been provided by the home, housework, and the shopping.
A third possibility is the acquisition of knowledge for its own sake in a complex modern society which values experts and regularly validates a person's standing by assessing his expertise.
A boy who can demonstrate a wide range of train-spotting knowledge has cachet with his fellows, a cachet that as adolescence burgeons may well be transferred from engine numbers to the macho teenage lore of pop groups, cars, types of beer, and seduction techniques.
But these are murky areas into which the unwary amateur ventures at his peril.
Perhaps we should draw a veil over further speculation and simply describe train-spotting as one of those lovable British eccentricities, like garden gnomes, toy soldiers, strong tea, and talking about the weather.
Whatever the religious, psychological, or sexual significance of the station, more powerful and directly ideological forces may be at work, using the station to convey a political message.
At the very least, a station often mirrors the national ethos.
One cannot but be struck by the Spanishness of Toledo Station or the Dutchness of Amsterdam or the clean, bold, heroic lines of Helsinki Central, with its guardian giants so redolent of the spirit of Norse saga.
On another level, the station, with its timetables, tickets, uniformed staff, and ubiquitous clocks, is an inherent supporter and encourager of discipline and order.
The often-heard statement that Hitler and Mussolini made the trains run on time can be seen — in this context — as a profoundly political one.
The word ‘station’, which originally meant simply a stopping-place, has acquired over the years a more disciplinary, structural, and organizational connotation.
It is no coincidence that the most common applications of the word after railway station are police station and military station.
It is also not inappropriate that the word has come to be applied to a person's position in society, with the clear implication that ‘getting above your station’ is somehow wrong and dangerous.
All this conduces powerfully to the maintenance of the status quo.
Stations have functioned as election platforms on the whistle-stop tours of American presidents, as venues for revolutionary meetings in, for instance, Russia, and as targets for terrorist bombs, such as at Bologna.
In wartime, stations have been since the days of the American Civil War an essential element in the transportation of men and materials and consequently a military target of the first importance.
Most self-consciously of all, stations have been used to glorify the regime, either through the prominence accorded to photographs of leaders like Mao or Lenin in the central stations of Peking and Leningrad or the installation of national and party banners and symbols as in the stations of Nazi Germany.
The names bestowed on stations equally convey a message.
In the nineteenth century Queen-Empress worship was attested in the creation of stations called Victoria in London, Manchester, Sheffield, Nottingham, Norwich, Swansea, and Bombay.
Nationalist aspirations can be seen reflected in the renaming of the Dublin terminals after Irish revolutionary heroes (Connolly, Pearse, Heuston).
Great military victories are recalled in London's Waterloo Station and in Paris's Gare d'Austerlitz.
The very architectural styles themselves may be proclaiming a message.
The stately Victoria Terminus, Bombay, ‘The St Pancras of the Orient’, embodies the imperishable spirit of the British Raj.
At Metz, in German-occupied Alsace-Lorraine, a station was built which with its German Romanesque frontage, Teutonic warrior statues, and stained-glass images of Charlemagne deliberately aimed to stress the current political status of the province.
Milan Station, designed in what one critic called ‘a megalomaniac delirium’, remains a monument to the ambitious and grandiose aspirations of Italian Fascism.
Emile Zola declared that ‘our artists must find the poetry of stations as their fathers found that of forests and rivers’ and the station has been securely enshrined in every aspect of art and culture.
The reality of it, the sights and sounds, the mystique and drama of the station have been filtered through the imagination of the artist.
Painters have responded enthusiastically, from the meticulous realism of Frith's panoramic Paddington to the delicate impressionism of Monet's Gare Saint-Lazare, from the distorted heat-haze imagery of Dali's Perpignan Station to the lonely, austere beauty of Vlaminck's station in the snow.
Poets have apostrophized stations great and small, from London Liverpool Street to Adlestrop.
In fiction, the station has been a source of solace and joy to E. Nesbit's railway children, and the scene of suicide for Tolstoy's Anna Karenina.
It has been the starting-point for many a vintage Sherlock Holmes adventure —‘London Bridge Station, cabby, and don't spare the horses’.
The great Continental stations, Paris, Stuttgart, Vienna, Budapest, Bucharest, Constantinople, have been the beginning and ending and en route stopping-places in the wealth of literature inspired by that acme of railway luxury, the Orient Express, the train on which James Bond once shot a man for ordering red wine with his fish.
But it is the cinema which has blended all these different forms together to create potent and resonant imagery, a visual and aural imagery of powerful locomotives, billowing smoke, clattering rails, and melancholy train whistles, allied to the ideal dramatic potential of a mixed group of passengers thrown together by circumstance for the duration of the journey.
Image after image of the station in films crowds into the memory.
But it is perhaps David Lean's film of Noël Coward's Brief Encounter which lingers most forcefully in the mind.
In this film it was at Carnforth Station in Lancashire, amid the bustle of comings and goings and the steadily hardening rock-cakes of the buffet, that the entwined lives of that most English and most gentle pair of lovers Trevor Howard and Celia Johnson reached crisis point.
On a perhaps less exalted level, the station has passed into folklore.
For it was while changing trains at Reading Station that T. E. Lawrence lost the original manuscript of The Seven Pillars of Wisdom .
It was while waiting for a train on Uxbridge Station that the sight of a poster for the Tower Furnishing Company inspired W. S. Gilbert to write The Yeomen of the Guard .
Noël Coward was inspired to write the song ‘London Pride’ while standing on the platform of a London station on the morning after a particularly bad blitz and seeing Londoners going about their business ‘gay and determined and wholly admirable’.
The prolific popular novelist Nat Gould claimed to choose the names of his villains from the stations listed in Bradshaw , thus giving birth to such memorable characters as Newton Heath and Miles Platting.
The station has given its name to an anxiety state, defined by Cyril Connolly as angoisse des gares :
‘A particularly violent form of Angst.
Bad when we meet someone at the station, but unbearable when we are seeing them off; not present when we are departing ourselves, but unbearable when arriving in London, if only from a day in Brighton.’
The station has even provided a Liverpudlian euphemism for coitus interruptus —‘to get off at Edge Hill’— Edge Hill being the last station before Liverpool Lime Street.
Since the First World War the railways in the developed world have been in decline, their role usurped by motor transport and in particular the car.
But the car has inspired no great architecture and no great art.
It has conferred few benefits.
It has given its owners a greater degree of mobility than they hitherto possessed but the social and environmental cost has been considerable.
The centres of our old cities have been ripped apart to make way for it.
The countryside has been buried under layers of concrete to facilitate its movement in ever greater numbers.
Six thousand people a year are slaughtered on British roads alone, an exercise in socially sanctioned mass murder which causes comparatively little comment.
The motor car is socially divisive in that while 50 per cent of the population of Britain have access to a car, the remaining 50 per cent do not and they are always the underprivileged sections of the community: the old, the young, the poor.
The difference between car and train can be summed up quite simply.
The motor car is private transport, available only to its owner and his immediate circle.
The train is public transport, available to the community at large.
One measure of a civilized and compassionate society is the extent of its provision of public transport.
Violence, materialism, and the self-centred pursuit of success at any cost are often the hallmarks of the car-dominated society, as classically exemplified by the United States, in much of which country there is virtually no public transport and the car reigns supreme, consuming lives and environment with equal ruthlessness.
It would be foolish to pretend that ‘The Railway Age’ was perfect.
It had many faults.
But it was an age which saw the slow, sure, and steady progress of social improvement and it was an age of hope, of optimistic belief in the future, unashamed aspiration for better days and better conditions in the world.
The great stations stand, if they do still stand, as towering monuments to that belief, public meeting-places where faith in the perfectibility of man by his own ingenuity and the blessing of a divine providence was daily affirmed.
In this respect, the oft-quoted cathedral metaphor is not inapt.
Stations were cathedrals of the new technology.
They were also places of hope, faith, and inextinguishable humanity, embodiments of that spirit that Charles MacKay captured so well in his poem ‘Railways 1846’:
Lay down your rails, ye nations, near and far —
Yoke your full trains to Steam's triumphant car;
Link town to town; unite in iron bands
The long-estranged and oft-embattled lands…
Blessings on science and her handmaid Steam!
They make Utopia only half a dream;
And show the fervent, of capacious souls,
Who watch the ball of progress as it rolls,
That all as yet completed or begun,
Is but the dawning that precedes the sun.
The Station in Architecture (1)
Britain and Europe
THE railway station more than any other building epitomizes the spirit of the nineteenth century, in its mating of technology and architecture, industry and art, in its conscious appeal to the splendours of the past and its confident striving towards the vistas of the future.
It was the nineteenth century's most distinctive contribution to building types and that century was to see the creation of the majority of the most memorable and pleasing railway stations.
Many of the earliest railway stations were not purpose-built.
Initially railway practices, arrangements, even rolling stock, were modelled on those of the old stage-coaches they were superseding.
In the north-east of England, where railways began, old coaching inns, in for instance Shildon, Sedgefield, and South Shields, doubled as railway stations.
The terminal of the Stockton and Darlington Railway at North Road, Darlington, was until 1842 a converted goods warehouse.
Middlesbrough's first station was initially a dilapidated coach-shed and the Close Station at Newcastle upon Tyne was part of a disused riverside mansion.
An assortment of sheds, huts, and barns, invariably scruffy, draughty, and uncomfortable, was the story elsewhere.
The two earliest purpose-built stations were the termini of the world's first passenger service, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.
Both Manchester Liverpool Road and Liverpool Crown Street stations, opened in 1830, were essentially two-storey classical-style town houses, probably the work of the same architect, whose identity remains undiscovered.
They followed a linear plan, oriented to the departure platform, and access to the railway line was controlled by the building, which contained the company's offices and waiting accommodation for the passengers.
In form and style they set the pattern for the first generation of purpose-built station buildings.
The basic elements of the station were already clear and have never changed.
These are platforms for the trains, a reception and waiting area for goods and passengers, and the necessary offices for the issue of tickets and the dispensing of information, the accommodation of staff, and the relief of various human needs and functions.
Overall the station fell into two main parts: the train-shed, which was the functional area and presented the major design and engineering challenge, and the frontage, which was the public face of the railway and gave scope for the architect's imagination.
The result was at its best the perfect fusion of continuity and change.
As Building News declared in 1875: ‘Railway termini and hotels are to the nineteenth century what monasteries and cathedrals were to the thirteenth century.
They are truly the only representative buildings we possess.’
cathedrals of the Middle Ages, stations became one of the wonders of the age.
‘When Euston was first built’, reported a Victorian commentator in 1896, ‘it was regarded not as a railway station but as a spectacle.
Visitors used to flock to it in omnibuses and examine it with the careful scrutiny of sightseers.’
This is not surprising, for the nineteenth century was an age which loved spectacle, in its paintings, in its theatre, and in its buildings.
It was also an age of empire — not just in the concrete, narrowly political sense.
It was imaginatively true also in commerce and industry, in religious and intellectual life, and in the arts.
Art invariably embodies the spirit of an age and the spirit of the nineteenth century was one of exuberance, grandeur, self-confidence, and self-esteem.
For European nations, everything was happening on a grand scale: industrialization, urbanization, colonization.
The world was Europe's oyster.
Public buildings came increasingly to reflect the size and spectacle of it all.
They were the expansive visions, translated into wood, brick, stone, iron, and glass.
For, as William Bodham Donne noted: ‘To touch our emotions, we need not the imaginatively true, but the physically real.
The visions which our ancestors saw with the mind's eye, must be embodied for us in palpable form…all must be made palpable to sight, no less than to feeling.’
The rise and rise of the railways, with the progressive increase in the volume of passengers and goods carried, led to modifications in the basic ground-plan of stations, particularly terminals.
The earliest form was the one-sided station, in which arrival and departure took place on the same side.
The first Manchester and Liverpool Stations and the earliest stations at St Petersburg (1837), Potsdam (1838), Vienna and Amsterdam (1839) adopted this form.
But in Britain the last great one-sided station was Newcastle Central (1850), after which the form disappeared.
In Germany it continued for much longer.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, however, twin-sided stations, where arrival and departure took place on opposite sides, were the norm.
The most important examples of this type were London Euston (1839), Liverpool Lime Street (1849), Paris Gare Montparnasse (1852), Paris Gare d'Austerlitz (1862), London King's Cross (1852), London Paddington (1855), Vienna North (1856), Vienna West (1860), and Copenhagen Central (1864).
But twin-sided stations became a problem, with the increasing volume of traffic necessitating extra intermediate platform and presenting difficulties of access.
This was resolved by the head-type, where arrival and departure was through a head-building at the end of the tracks.
This came to dominate in the last years of the century.
The French designed the model head station, the Gare de l'Est (1852), long regarded as the finest station in the world.
The two-sided station continued to be built throughout the 1870s, particularly in Italy, and Central Europe, though many of them had pseudo-heads, blocks built across the end to link the wings where the main entrances were.
Nevertheless its greater flexibility ensured the eventual triumph of the head-type and many railway companies killed two birds with one stone by building a hotel to serve as station frontage.
Where the British station developed with characteristically pragmatic, forthright, and sometimes undisciplined adventurism, the French were as ever busy drawing up rules, theories, definitions, and philosophies of station-building.
It was academic theory that was to define the two great periods of French station-building which produced in the Gare de l'Est and the Gare d'Orsay terminals which came to be regarded as definitive types.
Auguste Perdonnet published in 1856 an influential four-volume analysis of station theory and design, the first of a number of significant French studies.
The great train-shed, one of the glories of the nineteenth century, lasted just as long as the century itself.
It was the triumphant and majestic application of the techniques perfected by Joseph Paxton for the Crystal Palace (1851), an arching rib-cage of iron to support a skin-covering of glass, admitting light but excluding the elements.
It was a brilliant and classically simple construction, which created a formal beauty of line and curve, and facilitated constantly changing patterns of light, shade, and steam.
It was a tribute to that engineering genius which made Britain the foremost industrial power in the world and which made engineers chiefs in the pantheon of heroes of the new industrial age, celebrated in works like Samuel Smiles's Lives of the Engineers .
Sir John Dobson's Newcastle Central, begun in 1846, was the first major station to apply the form, after which rival companies in their unending struggle for supremacy and prestige strove to achieve ever larger roof-spans.
A single span of 211 ft. was achieved at the London and North-Western Railway's Grand Central Station, Birmingham (later renamed New Street) in 1854.
The Great Western Railway's Paddington (1854) attained 238 ft.
St Pancras train-shed, described in 1868 as ‘the greatest in the world’, was 700 ft. long, 100 ft. high, and 240 ft. wide.
But the companies strove on, ringing the changes in design, from pointed to rounded to curved to semicircular to double, seeking ever larger spans: Hanover (1879), 282 ft.; Frankfurt am Main (1888), 549 ft.; Leipzig (1915), 964 ft.
In some stations the train-shed became the central feature, an eye-catching shape dwarfing an insignificant frontage: thus, for instance Manchester Central (1880), 210 ft., and Liverpool Central (1874), 169 ft.
Despite John Ruskin's strictures (‘Such works as…the iron roofs and pillars of our railway stations…are not architecture at all’), it is now generally admitted that not only are they architecture but they are also works of art.
Eloquent testimony of this is to be found in John Gay's magnificent photographs of London terminals, depicting, for instance, the forest of columns, arches, and metallic tracery supporting the roof of Liverpool Street Station and the perfect form and line of Brunel's ‘all interior, all roofed-in’ Paddington, achievements that could leave only the most die-hard curmudgeon unmoved.
Stylistically the railway station was the epitome of the aesthetic doctrine of picturesque eclecticism.
This doctrine strove above all else for visual effect.
Revelling in colour and contrast, drama and dissonance, boldness and individualism, it was the architectural legacy of Romanticism.
Romanticism liberated the imagination, exalted the emotions, gloried in mystery and fantasy, dreams and visions.
It was the appropriate mode for an age of spectacle and empire.
The railway station became a focus for an outpouring of this feeling.
It can thus be seen to stand as the architectural counterpart to the other key artistic expressions of the age, the panoramic canvases of John Martin, Edward John Poynter, and Lawrence Alma-Tadema, toweringly romantic and imaginative recreations of the temples, palaces, baths, and amphitheatres of the ancient world, and the novels of Walter Scott, Harrison Ainsworth, and Bulwer-Lytton which evoked a monumental and teeming past of medieval castles, Tudor mansions, and unbridled Gothic imagination.
The railway station, in its incarnation as latter-day cathedral, castle, and caravanserai, was yet one more gigantic stage on which drama could daily unfold, casts of thousands could cavort, and modern technology could display its marvels and miracles.
Carroll Meeks, the doyen of station architecture historians, discerns four distinct periods in the era of picturesque eclecticism — the emulation of one style (1830–50), the synthesis of many (1850s), the take-off to creativity (1860–90), and finally megalomania (1890–1914).
Initially, as might be expected, the classical form prevailed — the station as Greek or Roman temple — with Amsterdam Willemspoort (1843), Newcastle Central (1850), and Huddersfield (1850) notable examples.
But perhaps the most memorable example of the classical mode in station architecture was Euston's Doric Arch, designed by Philip Hardwick (1850).
As Christian Barman wrote in 1950:
The railway builders were moved by the spirit of the conqueror and nowhere is this spirit more clearly visible than in the portico of Euston.
Moving southwards for the attack on London we can see that they understood the greatness of their mission.
And so when finally they had invaded the greatest city in the world, they built the portico at Euston to proclaim as a memorial their victory to posterity.
For this portico, though designed in the manner for porches attached to buildings, is by virtue of its starkly isolated position a genuine military arc de triomphe.
Its demolition in 1962, still the most wanton act of vandalic savagery in what has become a century of architectural barbarism, signalled conclusively the end of the age of giants and the arrival of the age of pygmies.
The big city stations of the nineteenth century reflected to the full the Victorians' unashamed belief in monumentality.
In the case of the railway companies, it was a belief derived from a number of sources.
In the first instance it stemmed from an understandable utilization of familiar forms to furnish a reassuring and acceptable face for the new means of locomotion and thus allay the fears of travellers for whom speed was a new and potentially alarming phenomenon.
It was the beneficent by-product of competition between companies, each trying to outdo its rivals in visible splendour and architectural might.
It stemmed too from the desire of an arriviste industry to gain respectability and prestige, from the adoption of the idea of the station as civic adornment, a public building worthy to rank with the town hall, the assize court, and the public library.
No expense was spared to produce a station worthy to stand beside the other civic buildings.
A reported £690,000 was spent on Dresden Station (1898), £1,300,000 on Cologne (1894), and £1,700,000 on Frankfurt (1888).
Even quite small companies parted with large sums to ensure that at the end of the line the fare-paying public would be greeted by an imposing terminal.
Both the Maryport and Carlisle Railway Company and the notoriously impecunious West Lancashire Railway contrived to build handsome Tudor-Gothic mansions at Maryport and Southport (Central) respectively.
The feelings that the companies set out to instil with such buildings — admiration, respect, and confidence — are perfectly mirrored in the comment of Dionysius Lardner in Railway Economy (1850):
It is impossible to regard the vast buildings and their dependencies which constitute a chief terminal station of a great line of railway without feelings of inexpressible astonishment at the magnitude of the capital and the boldness of the enterprise which are manifested in the operations of which they are the stage.
Nothing in the history of the past affords any parallel to such a spectacle.
The classical phase of station-building was overtaken in Britain by the Italian villa style, which became so popular, particularly for country stations, by 1844 that the Illustrated London News could say ‘the style has been called Italian; it might be designated more properly an English railway style’.
At its grandest it produced the Italian palazzo : Chester General (1848) or Dublin Amiens Street (1844).
Gordon Biddle, author of the definitive study of Victorian stations in England and Wales, has observed:
There is no question that well designed Italianate lent itself admirably to that display of powerful dignity which the railways were currently trying to achieve.
Full advantage was taken of sloping ground, or…a broad forecourt, to increase the effect.
Nowhere was this better achieved than at Shoreditch in 1840, where Sancton Wood built the Eastern Counties Railway terminus on arches above street level.
At the end of the spacious triple-arched trainshed a heavily corniced three-storey frontage block was built at the head of twin flights of balustraded stairs rising to the entrance on the first floor.
In front, a broad cab-drive, also balustraded, swept round in a wide semi-circle setting off the entrance to perfection.
The arch motif, classically seen at Euston, is the symbol of the triumph of the railways, the arrival, consolidation, and dominance of the new mode of transport.
It takes the form not just of arched entrances, as at Brussels Midi (1869), Zurich North-East (1873), and Budapest East (1881), but also of arched lunette windows which define the building they pierce, as in the Paris stations Gare de l'Est (1852), Gare Montparnasse (1852), and Gare du Nord (1864), and at London King's Cross (1852).
The arch was to remain one of the important station motifs but it was to be matched and surpassed by the tower.
The tower, like the spire, a symbol of aspiration, the striving for greater achievement, supersedes the complacency of the arch, to epitomize an era of expansion, competition, and further advance.
It also had a functional role.
The dominant type of station in the early period tended to be long and low, and ‘picturesque theory’ condemned such buildings as monotonous.
The application of towers dramatically broke up the monotony, as in Francis Thompson's Chester General and P. C. Hardwick's Royal Great Western Hotel, Paddington.
Monotony was a cardinal sin for Victorian architects, just as it is the predominant defining characteristic of modern architecture.
During the 1860s came the take-off to creativity.
Meeks writes:
Stations…embodied the triumph of the picturesque eclectic aesthetic in complex massing, bolder asymmetry, pointed vaults and towers.
Eclecticism had escaped from the control of the revivalists into its more creative synthetic phase.
Verticality was in unchallenged supremacy in England and America.
On the Continent, station architects tended to be more restrained than their English-speaking colleagues, more prone to arches than towers, but they were not unaffected by the new aesthetic and clung to it longer.
The finest product of this take-off period was St Pancras Station, whose frontage was provided by the Midland Grand Hotel.
St Pancras was the undisputed King, or more properly Queen-Empress, of stations.
‘St George for England, St Pancras for Scotland’ went the joke, unconsciously bestowing on the station a symbolic national status — something Sir Thomas Beecham also did when he declared Elgar's First Symphony ‘the St Pancras among the symphonies’.
Both jokes contain, as jokes frequently do, an essential truth, seeing St Pancras as the symbol of an empire at its height and of an age of aspiration and achievement.
Sir George Gilbert Scott, a passionate exponent of the Gothic style, had been forced against his will and to his lasting fury to provide an Italianate design for the Foreign Office at the insistence of the Prime Minister, Lord Palmerston.
Commissioned by the Midland Railway Company to design the St Pancras Station Hotel, he poured all his fervour, invention, and imagination into his designs.
Completed in 1876, the hotel was extolled in its day — one commentator called it ‘the most perfect in every possible respect in the world’— and came to be vilified in the twentieth century as a monument to Victorian bad taste.
Now it is once again receiving its due meed of praise.
Alan A. Jackson, in his careful, thorough study of London termini, expressed the new revised standpoint:
With its castellated fringes, scores of dormer windows (each with finial), its myriad pointed-arch windows below the cornice, the multitude of chimneys on its steeply-pitched roofs, and its every corner marked by spirelet or pinnacle, the Midland Grand Hotel was one of the finest and largest examples of high Victorian secular Gothic.
From the elaborate porte cochère at the West end, the 565 foot frontage curved back and round to parallel the Euston Road, terminating in a 270 foot spire-capped clock tower which was a worthy rival of that of Barry and Pugin at  Westminister …
Over the elevations, Edward Gripper's patent bricks were varied with dressings in several different kinds of stone, and red and grey Peterhead granite.
Frontage and skyline together offered a treasury of delights and surprises.’
St Pancras typifies on the grandest scale the tendency for big city stations to be fronted by hotels.
As Donald J. Olsen has written: ‘With the possible exception of Canada, Britain has seen a closer relationship between railways and hotels than any other country.’
This association was far from being universal.
In Spain, for instance, no railway station had a hotel attached and passengers often had a long distance to travel from stations to reach their ultimate destination.
The first British railway company to provide hotel accommodation was the London and Birmingham at Euston in 1838–9.
The arch was already built, so the hotel was constructed in two separate buildings, the Victoria Hotel and the Euston Hotel, each side of the entrance.
Basically an unremarkable set of Regency terrace houses, it was notable only for having 350 windows.
Initially the two wings were linked by a tunnel, but in 1880 they were joined by a six-storey addition.
The railway company always intended to lease the Euston as a first-class hotel but tried at first to run the Victoria itself.
This was eventually leased too.
In 1843 the Corsican hotelier Zenon Vantini leased them, achieving such success that he went on to establish the first railway refreshment room at Wolverton.
At the other end of the London and Birmingham line, part of the Birmingham terminal, Curzon Street Station, was converted into the Queen's Hotel in 1839.
The station hotels at Euston and Curzon Street were exceptions in the 1830s but by the 1840s hotel accommodation had become an essential part of the planning of new railway stations.
Among the first was the Midland Hotel at Derby Trijunct Station.
Begun in 1840, it was designed for the North Midland Railway by the station's architect Francis Thompson.
Built of fine red brick, it was modelled on a country house, set in its own grounds and boasting an ornamental fountain in the forecourt.
The initial necessity for building railway stations on the out-skirts of towns caused other companies to adopt the country-house model, with the idea that passengers would spend the night there before beginning their journey or after arriving.
It is precisely this sort of arrangement —‘rooms had been taken there because they were to start by an early train on that line in the morning’— that leads to a fraught dinner party for Clara Amedroz and the two rivals for her hand at the Great Northern Hotel, King's Cross, in Anthony Trollope's The Belton Estate (1865).
From the 1850s, with stations moving to inner-city sites, station hotels assumed palatial aspects and the railway companies set the standard for others to follow.
Lewis Cubitt's Great Northern Hotel at King's Cross (1854) was a modest Regency crescent.
But P. C. Hardwick's Great Western Royal Hotel, which opened in the same year to provide the frontage to Paddington Station, was perhaps the earliest major building in Britain to show marked French Renaissance influence.
Its external grandeur was matched by an enviable internal efficiency, facilitated by the most up-to-date equipment, including fireproof staircases, electric clocks, and an elaborate system of bells.
It is interesting to observe how frequently the French style prevails not just in the building of hotels but in the whole ‘architecture of pleasure’ in Britain.
It is as if somehow the puritanical, work-obsessed British associated the idea of ‘pleasure’ with the saucy, sinful Continent.
The High Victorian hotels shared the exuberance of the stations proper.
The full monumental style with towers, chimneys, spires, and mansard roofs was represented by the South-Eastern Railway's terminal hotels at Charing Cross (1864) and Cannon Street (1866), both designed by E. M. Barry, and Alfred Waterhouse's magnificent Lime Street Chambers, Liverpool (1867).
Gilbert Scott's Midland Grand Hotel, St Pancras (1876), enjoyed the distinction of being the most expensive of all railway hotels, charging 14 shillings a night for a room, dinner, breakfast, and attendance in 1879.
The passing of the Limited Liability Act in 1863 made the 1860s a boom period in hotel building and there was a considerable amount of resort station-hotel building.
Notable examples included the gloriously Gothic Duke of Cornwall Hotel next to Plymouth Station (1863) and the yellow-brick Italianate Zetland Hotel (1862) at Saltburn-by-Sea.
Built next to the station, with direct access from it and with rooms at economical prices, it was a deliberate attempt by the Stockton and Darlington Railway Company to facilitate the development of the resort.
From the 1860s the companies increasingly used standardized designs for their country stations, partly for economy and partly to promote a corporate image after a series of company amalgamations which had produced the great conglomerates which were to dominate the railway scene until the 1923 grouping.
But many of these stations were pleasingly executed.
The London, Brighton and South Coast Railway built a series of sedate two-storey Italianate villas along the Sussex coast.
The Great Western Railway built a series of French Renaissance style miniature châteaux with two or three flat-topped pavilion roofs decorated with intricate iron trellis-work.
The Furness Railway favoured Swiss-chalet type stone and timber buildings.
On the Settle and Carlisle line, the Midland Railway opted for single-storey buildings, with twin-gabled Pavilions, linked by a central section that housed a recessed waiting area.
A not dissimilar design was used by the Highland Railway in Scotland.
In many cases the use of local materials imparted to country stations a distinctive regional flavour.
Jack Simmons recalled them:
a tile-hung front at Oakley Station, west of Basingstoke; knapped flint at Trowse, by Norwich; Midland brick on the Syston and Peterborough line, at Brooksby, Oakham, Manton…pretty Broseley tiles to enliven the waiting-room at Shrub Hill station in Worcester; the diaper of blue bricks (a local speciality) on red in the North Staffordshire's Elizabethan stations; fierce and unrelieved Accrington brick at Bolton, and elsewhere up and down Lancashire.
While big city stations in Britain were adopting French Renaissance or Gothic styles, Germany was creating its own distinctive form, which combined the ground plan of the French station with the form of a Romanesque cathedral.
Early examples were Munich (1849) and Karlsruhe (1842).
Berlin rebuilt many of its stations in this style, notably the Stettiner Bahnhof (1876) and Anhalter Bahnhof (1880).
The former, with its three curved arches under a curved roof, flanked by twin towers, was truly the idealized epitome of the station as medieval cathedral.
A second group of stations opted for a free version of cinquecento baroque — Berlin Potsdamer Bahnhof (1872), Mannheim (1876), Budapest East (1876), Zurich (1871), and Brunswick (1848).
The Italians during the same period, aiming for a distinctive national style, succeeded in producing at Turin, Trieste, Naples, Milan, and Rome a series of unremarkable and uninteresting stations.
The 1890s saw the triumph of megalomania as size took over and passengers and tracks increased in number.
The station for the new age was Victor Laloux's Gare d'Orsay in Paris, whose opening was timed for the 1900 Paris Exposition.
It was reached by two miles of track through a tunnel along the banks of the Seine from the Gare d'Austerlitz.
It utilized electric trains and there was no smoke.
In consequence there was no train-shed.
Vestibule, waiting-rooms, and concourse were all in one and topped by a graceful vault with ample skylights.
Enormous archways provided the entrances and the total bulk was increased by a hotel.
The Gare d'Orsay like the Gare de l'Est before it was regarded as the model station and strongly influenced others, notably Hamburg (1906), Copenhagen Central (1911), and the two New York stations, Pennsylvania and Grand Central.
Some, however, have found the so-called ‘Beaux-Arts’ style, for all its academic rigour and perfection of proportion to be too correct, bloodless, and buttoned-up when set against the free-flowing eclecticism of some other contemporary stations.
The absence of a train-shed from the Gare d'Orsay was symptomatic of the change about to overtake station-building.
The era of the great train-shed more or less ended with the Great War.
Its final phase was dominated by German stations.
The new Frankfurt am Main station, completed in 1888, was planned to replace and combine the functions of three existing Frankfurt stations on a single site on the city outskirts.
It had a triple train-shed, designed symbolically to perpetuate the identities of the three regions formerly served by the three redundant terminals.
The single head-house at the end symbolized the new unity of the German State.
More ominously its size and capacity also took into consideration future military needs.
Its style inspired a new family of glass-roofed stations, notably Cologne (1894), Basle (1904), and Hamburg (1906).
But Hamburg was the last of the great glass train-sheds.
For in 1904 Lincoln Bush patented the Bush shed and installed the first at the Hoboken station of the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad in 1906.
These sheds were low, single spans of reinforced concrete, covering two lines of track and half a platform on each side.
They were cheap to install, economical to maintain, and by 1914 twelve stations had them.
The Bush shed was in turn supplanted by an even more abbreviated form, the butterfly shed, which covered only the platforms.
It was the decisive end of an imagination whose bounds had been set wider and wider, the doom of the crystal palaces of the rails, the ferrovitreous stables of the champing iron horses.
As earthbound concrete replaced shimmering glass, so crude functionalism was to supplant soaring aspiration.
It was not to be long before the same truncation of aspiration, the same deadening of the imagination affected frontages too.
There was, however, a late flowering of the picturesque in Europe, an orchidaceous fin de siècle efflorescence.
In central Europe this showed the influence of Art Nouveau and a generation of stations appeared with soft curves, voluptuous domes, rounded arches flanked by pylons, surmounted by statues, urns, and spheres, and decorated with filigree intricacy.
These were the high-class European courtesans among stations, glittering, sensual, elegant, veritable Mata Haris and Lola Monteses among terminals, the architectural equivalents of Zola's Nana, Manet's Olympe, and Dumas fils 's Camille, complete with fans, pendants, and feather boas rendered in stone.
They were also regularly penetrated day and night by a variety of trains of different lengths and sizes.
George Frentzen's Bucharest Central (1895) and Cologne (1894) and C. F. Müller's Dresden (1898) stood out in this group.
But this ‘naughty nineties’ flavour reached even the stolid and respectable Low Countries.
Louis de la Censerie's Antwerp Central (1899) was a courtesan made good, like one of those Edwardian showgirls who married into the aristocracy.
The curving shapes are there but she is in her Sunday best, positively dripping in spires, swags, pilasters, finials, and coats of arms, the better to proclaim her respectability and superiority.
But then the Low Countries were prone to the occasional architectural brainstorm, such as the remarkable Saint-Pierre Station, Ghent (1912).
It is an Oriental mirage, a full-blown castellated and minareted North African Bey's palace.
Surmounted by a slender clock-tower, which summoned the Belgian bourgeoisie to rendezvous with the trains as surely as any muezzin summoning the faithful to prayer, it looks for all the world as if it has been transported by some mischievous jinn on a magic carpet.
But it can perhaps be seen as an architectural expression of that scented fin de siècle fascination with the Near East that produced in this period such works as Massenet's opera Thaïs and Strauss's Salome and the luxuriant novels of Pierre Loti and Pierre Louys.
However, many of the new stations began to feature a strongly marked nationalism as the assertive spirits of rival nations jostled with each other and advanced their claims for continental dominance with increasing stridency.
This bugles-and-banners stridency, drowning out the elegant salon music of pre-war Europe's Indian summer, culminated inexorably in the Great War and the subsequent rise of Fascist dictatorships.
The volkist spirit, matrix of the future Nazism, is detectable in the heavily Teutonic exteriors of Karlsruhe (1913), Oldenburg (1915), and Stuttgart (begun in 1911, completed in 1928).
All of them look to have been constructed from set designs for Fritz Lang's cinematic version of the Nibelungenlied , one of the favourite films of the Führer: rough-hewn temples and folk-moot halls embodying an exaltation of the primitive Teutonic spirit.
But nationalist styles were springing up everywhere.
In Scotland, stations like Aboyne and Dundee Caledonian Station were built in the distinctive Scottish baronial style.
But in recognition of Scotland's turbulent history, the Norse barn style was adopted for the far northern stations of Thurso and Wick.
In Spain, the Madrid, Saragossa and Alicante Railway created a series of handsome two-storey palacio stations, topped by prominent decorated clocks (Carthagena, Murcia).
They achieved a masterpiece in the Moorish style in the Plaza de Armas Station, Seville (1901), an element of the Iberian past also alluded to in the Moorish elements on the grand Romantic façade of Lisbon's Rossio Station.
Copenhagen Central (1911) was strongly nationalist.
A long, low, red terracotta building, it featured steep-pitched roof and clock-crowned central tower, rising above a graceful colonnaded entrance and flanked by smaller turrets.
It had all the rugged grandeur of the sea-girt castle of a medieval Danish warrior-king.
In Belgium, Bruges Station (1889) was designed in Flemish Gothic style, half castle and half cathedral.
Solid, castellated, and colonnaded for much of its length, it suddenly takes off into a free-flowing fantasy of spires and spirelets, as if two different architects' designs had got mixed up on the drawing-board.
In Holland, P. J. H. Cuypers's handsome Amsterdam Central (1889) set a fashion for Dutch Renaissance.
Elsewhere, other architects built in similar style stations at The Hague (1893), Groningen and Nijmegen (1894), and the magnificent castle-station at's Hertogenbosch (1896).
In Tsarist Russia, two different traditions stood side by side, as befitted a country straddling two continents.
There was a fondness for the strict classical style, as seen in Moscow Kiev Station, affirming a desire to be recognized as a fully-fledged European power.
But in the design of Moscow's Riga and Yaroslavl Stations, Russia looked to the other strand of her heritage — the East, producing veritable Oriental fantasies.
These stations embodied heady dreams from the steppes of Central Asia, the palaces of Tartar Khans, rich, ornate, barbaric, a fitting arena for Polovtsian dances and processions of the sirdars.
The best known of this nationalist group, finished in 1914 but not put into use until after the war, is Eliel Saarinen's Helsinki.
Hailed as a modern masterpiece, it drew on the basic elements of nineteenth-century picturesque — towers, pavilions, arches, and vaults — but gave them a distinct Scandinavian feel and line, the spirit of the sagas, as embodied in the gigantic statues at the entrance.
Perhaps the most overweening statement of nationalism in station architecture, however, is Milan Station, begun in 1920 and opened in 1930.
With its 700-feet-long façade and 600-feet-long porte cochère , it is the last word in grandiose monumentalism.
Encrusted with statues, pillars, and reliefs, it looks like a huge wedding cake in stone.
Inside, the booking hall was 210 ft. long, 110 ft. wide, and 140 ft. high, with glass roof, stained-glass windows, and multicoloured marble walls.
Candelabra flanked the staircases leading to the main concourse, which was 700 ft. long and 72 ft. wide, decorated in rose Baveno granite and polished Travertina.
The whole thing had the feel of a palace of some mad potentate, a train-obsessed latter-day equivalent of Ludwig of Bavaria, perhaps.
The Great War more or less put an end to the era of the great station and with it the period of the pre-eminence of the railways.
The system had reached its greatest extent in route mileage and the grand stations had all been built.
What station-building remained was increasingly to reflect the functional, geometrical approach, stressing cubes and cylinders and glorying in reinforced concrete.
There was more to it than just a change of style.
The Great War had witnessed the death of a world and a world order.
The age of palaces and cathedrals, of ancient dynasties and stratified aristocracies, of emperors and imperial proconsuls, of gaudy uniforms and chivalric orders, the world of the Habsburgs, the Hohenzollerns, the Romanovs, and the Elphbergs had crumbled.
In England revolution had been avoided by the widening of the magic circle to admit the bourgeoisie.
Public schools created a ruling élite, brewers entered the peerage, and the middle classes travelled by train.
They clothed themselves in the respectability of ancient forms, just like the railways.
In the ruins of the world of age-old aristocratic dominance and comfortable bourgeois certainty, a new world stirred.
The age of the common man dawned.
A new style was devised for the new age.
It emerged as flat, functional, unadorned, lacking in scale or grandeur, and glorying in the new materials — concrete, plastic, and steel.
There were new sources of inspiration.
Where the palace, the temple, and the cathedral had inspired their Victorian predecessors, British station-builders of the inter-war years chose more ‘democratic’ models — the cinema (Surbiton), the bank (Exmouth), and, with unintended irony, the garage (West Monkseaton).
They in their turn were to give way after tunenlightenedhe Second World War to the models of the bus-shelter, the airport, and the office-block, the ultimate in bankruptcy of imagination.
The railway industry had a propaganda purpose in the streamlining of outlines and in the new doctrine of modernism in these years.
Streamlining implied speed and, in increasingly acute competition with road transport, the railways' commitment to superior speed needed to be stressed constantly.
The use of new materials and new geometric shapes, shorn of ‘redundant’ decoration, implied a lean, fit, up-to-date industry, rather than one revelling in a pre-war Victorian complacency.
There was a self-conscious rejection of the Victorians' lavish ornamentalism and revivalist eclecticism.
But it took the form of an insufferable élitist arrogance, a blanket rejection of ‘Victorian taste’, largely because it was bourgeois, emotional, and — most reprehensible of all — popular, even with the masses.
Roger Fry, archetype of the new breed of self-appointed high priests of modernism, gave voice to his philosophy in a celebrated essay, published in 1937.
Firstly, the masses are dismissed out of hand:
We must face the fact that the average man has two qualities…
He has first of all a touching proclivity to awe-struck admiration of whatever is presented to him as noble by a constituted authority; and, secondly, a complete absence of any immediate reaction to a work of art until his judgement has thus been hypnotized by the voice of authority…
I am speaking…of a populace whose emotional life has been drugged by the sugared poison of pseudo-art.
Next, the things ordinary people like are dismissed as vulgar.
Fry deliberately wrote the next part of his essay in a railway refreshment room (‘One must remember that public places of this kind merely reflect the average citizen's soul, as expressed in his home’).
Oozing with contempt, he proceeds to list the room's decoration: the stained-glass windows, patterned lace curtains, Greco-Roman wall mouldings, imitation eighteenth-century satin brocade wallpaper, potted plants, neatly arranged tables.
This painful catalogue makes up only a small part of the inventory of the ‘art’ of the restaurant…
I say their contemplation can give no-one pleasure; they are there because their absence would be resented by the average man who regards a large amount of futile display as in some way inseparable from the conditions of that well-to-do life to which he belongs or aspires to belong.
If everything were merely clean and serviceable he would proclaim the place bare and uncomfortable.
Poor average man, cast into outer darkness because he likes what he likes and has the temerity to prefer a little diverting decoration to soulless functionalism.
Fry, perhaps consciously, was echoing the views of the foremost artistic panjandrum of a previous age.
He wrote in 1849:
Another of the strange and evil tendencies of the present day is to the decoration of the railroad station.
Now, if there be any place in the world in which people are deprived of that portion of temper and discretion which are necessary to the contemplation of beauty, it is there.
It is the very temple of discomfort, and the only charity that the builder can extend to us is to show us, plainly as may be, how soonest to escape from it.
The whole system of railroad travelling is addressed to people, who, being in a hurry, are therefore, for the time being, miserable.
No one would travel in that manner who could help it — who had time to go leisurely over hills and between hedges, instead of through tunnels and between banks; at least those who would, have no sense of beauty so acute that we need to consult it at the station.
The railroad is in all its relations a matter of earnest business, to be got through as soon as possible.
It transmutes a man from a traveller into a living parcel.
For the time he has parted with the nobler characteristics of his humanity for the sake of a planetary power of locomotion.
Do not ask him to admire anything.
You might as well ask the wind.
Carry him safely, dismiss him soon; he will thank you for nothing else.
All attempts to please him in any other way are mere mockery, and insults to the things by which you endeavour to do so.
There never was more flagrant nor impertinent folly than the smallest portion of ornament in anything concerned with railroads or near them.
Keep them out of the way, take them through the ugliest country you can find, confess them the miserable things they are, and spend nothing on them but for safety and speed…
Better bury gold in the embankments, than put it in ornaments on the stations.
The words are, of course, those of John Ruskin, self-confessed enemy of railways and all their works.
Modern architects were to take a savage and unimaginable revenge on the average man for his rejection of their ‘we know best’ anti-humanist ethic.
For by the 1950s and 1960s, with the connivance of money-grubbing speculators and complacent politicians, their theories had become architectural orthodoxy.
As a result monstrous tower blocks, not fit for human souls, were erected to replace the neat streets of individual terraced houses, vast impersonal motorways supplanted the agreeably irregular network of real roads, and as part of the dehumanization process, the Great railway stations, the local cinemas, and the corner shops, the familiar landmarks of a lifetime, were swept away.
The result was a desolation of the environment and the spirit; identikit Gulag estates, ravaged and abandoned inner cities, stifling individuality, deadening the imagination and provoking in the young an instinctive if unarticulated rage against their surroundings.
The inevitable course of this new aesthetic can be charted in the railway station.
There were in France some memorable new stations: a group like Noyon (1929) and Deauville (1930) in a sturdy Norman provincial style with half-timbering, heavy roof-beams, a steep ridge-and-furrow roof and dormer windows; Rouen's Gare de l'Ouest (1928) with an elegant arched frontage, an elaborate clock-tower, and twin statues supporting the central pediment, presenting a stylized refinement of fin de siècle forms; the Gare des Bénédictins, Limoges (1923), with its dome, rounded rowers, and half-naked statuary, looking back defiantly to the ornate voluptuousness of the vanished pre-war courtesans.
But le Havre and Cherbourg opted for a simple and austere classicism, with the new vogue for geometrical emphasis to the fore.
The future lay with Amstel and Muiderpoort in Holland (1939), two stations which created a great stir for their up-to-date functionalism of form and line.
The progressive de-stationization of the terminal can be seen in all the eagerly hailed landmarks of twentieth-century station-building: Florence (1936), Finland Tampere (1933), and pre-eminently the Stazioni Termini in Rome, completed in 1951 and proclaimed by Meeks ‘the finest modern station to date’ and by Pevsner ‘the best European station of the last half century’.
With its glass and metal screen, protected by floating cantilevered roof, its cold, clinical corridors and public rooms, it is Metropolis or Alphaville, the lifeless, emotionless city of the future.
‘C'est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la gare.’
But there have been worse experiences since then, the ultimate loss of identity in the faceless, featureless blocks that have risen to replace individualized and characterful termini: Rotterdam Central (1957), Munich (1963), Leningrad Finland Station (1960), London Euston (1968), Paris Gare Montparnasse (1969), Berne Central (1974), Warsaw Central (1975), and Milton Keynes (1983).
Since the Second World War it has all been downhill.
One only has to compare the uniformity of contemporary stations with the richness, profusion, and variety in British nineteenth-century stations: the classical temple of Huddersfield, the Byzantine basilica of Blackfriars, the robust Jacobean manor-house of Stoke-on-Trent, the scholarly Jacobean collegiate buildings of Shrewsbury and Carlisle, the ‘Russian dacha’ of Petworth, the ‘baroque orangery’of Newmarket, the airy French pavilion of Slough, the medieval Gothic abbey of Battle, the Queen Anne town house of Market Harborough and Birkenhead Woodside, so much like the great hall of a medieval house that one expects rushes on the floor, minstrels in the gallery, and foaming tankards of old ale.
Since the unforgivable primal sin was to be boring, the Victorians gave us intricate wrought-iron work, sculpted columns, mullioned windows, stained glass, mosaic floors, tiled maps, delicate portes cochères , exquisite stone tracery, clock-towers, crenellations, campaniles, wood-panelled booking halls, friezes, glass canopies, triumphal arches, balustrades, gables, chimneys, turrets, spires, drinking-fountains, ornate platform seats, coats of arms, baronial fireplaces, even majestic gentlemen's conveniences in monumental marble or bold ironwork, a constant and unending source of delight in a craftsmanship at its most complex, painstaking, and delicate.
To protect and preserve this unimaginably rich architectural and design heritage is a matter of the utmost urgency.
But the devastation already wrought in it is heartrending to contemplate.
In Britain alone, Glasgow St Enoch's was torn down in European Architectural Heritage Year (1975); Birmingham Snow Hill was allowed to rot for years and finally demolished on safety grounds, epitomizing a technique in all too frequent use — deliberate and wanton neglect given as a justification for removal.
As Marcus Binney and David Pearce put it: ‘since its establishment in 1947 British Rail has acquired for itself an all too deserved reputation as the biggest corporate vandal and iconoclast Britain has seen since the Tudor dissolution of the monasteries’.
But even before 1947 there were straws in the wind.
Christian Barman, who had written of Britain's country stations ‘No country in the world has a collection of minor stations that can begin to compare with ours for sheer quality’, prepared for the Great Western Railway just after the war a detailed prospectus for the modernization and transformation of the company's image, operations, and buildings after the lifting of wartime restrictions.
He was able with cheerful equanimity to contemplate the removal of Paddington Station:
That many will miss the old Paddington of Brunel and Wyatt and Paxton with its aisles and transepts, and its slim wrought iron arabesques, is…certain.
London will be the poorer for its passing; yet London requires that it must go.
Happily, Paddington still stands but a number of other great London stations are under threat and the list of great British stations to have bitten the dust is already too long.
There have been some notable conservation conversions, with the Gare d'Orsay in Paris, for instance, becoming an exhibition hall.
But for every triumph there are a thousand tragedies.
The Railway Companies' Report on the modernization of station amenities, published in 1944, listed the requirements of the well-designed station:
(i) The highest possible operating convenience and efficiency;(ii) Easy and direct means of access and egress for passengers and vehicles;(iii) The standardization of construction and equipment as far as the site and circumstances permit;(iv) Its immediate recognition as a railway station within the limits of harmony with its surrounding.
Whatever else the planners may have done, they have disastrously lost sight of the last of these objectives.
The Station in Architecture (2)
The Americas
United States of America
No railway system in the world experienced such a spectacular growth, achieved such a startling apogee in the first two decades of this century, followed by such a dramatic decline as that of the United States.
Railways somehow symbolized the fact that Americans never did anything by halves, and this was more than borne out by the architecture of American railway stations.
Starting from the simplest and most chaste of forms, rooted in a combination of pioneering vernacular and colonial buildings, the American station swiftly moved on to a riot of revivalist and hybrid styles in a complex process of architectural grafting which mirrored the increasingly diverse origins of its immigrant population.
Attempts to simplify this, particularly in the vogue for a massive Romanesque style in the 1880s, foundered on the sheer scope of station-building continent-wide, and the range of experimentation which arose from the repeated station renewal of railway companies whose exaggerated energy and corporate conceit were to endanger their own survival.
The station represented as much as any other architectural form the megalomania of American capitalism in the first two decades of this century.
The dramatic growth of the late nineteenth century, slowed by the depression of the middle years of the 1890s, but renewed between 1900 and 1910, was expected to continue.
The railway companies built stations to accommodate passengers who never materialized, to flatter a vanity which was shortly to meet its fall in the face of both economic recession and the rise of alternative modes of transportation.
When self-regard is so shatteringly undermined, the symbols of a former shaky greatness become almost an affront.
So American railway companies turned on the stations which had impaired their financial health and destroyed many of them in an excess of architectural vandalism.
The nineteenth-century railway history of the United States was dominated by a number of themes which were dramatically reflected in the railway stations.
The first was the battles of various railroad companies to enter cities.
Each town and city suffered a proliferation of unconnected lines, each with their termini in different quarters.
The second was the problem of bridging major rivers, which left the railways almost literally suspended on their banks with temporary terminal stations leading to steamer river crossings.
The third was the inevitable period of amalgamation when thrusting American capitalism was to embark on the creation of the railway cartels which were to lead some to cry ‘monopoly’ by the turn of the century.
A vogue for urban planning developed in the early years of this century, and many American cities were the subjects of Civic Plans.
In this period, the multiple stations of the various companies were demolished in many cities, and were re-placed by large ‘Union’ stations.
Whereas the railways in the past had been an integral part of the cityscape, running down main streets, leaving in their wake a succession of railroad crossings on the classic American street grid plan, by the turn of the century they were already disappearing behind fences, into cuttings, or underground, a process which was to be speeded up in the years leading to the First World War.
New types of station were called for.
If in the East the country's development had sometimes run ahead of the railways, as in the great boom decade of the 1850s, in the West the railways were the country's development.
The railway there brought towns into being, and led to the laying out of and rapid escalation in value of town lots.
In securing huge government land grants as an inducement to build, the railways became the prime engine of migration, transporting the migrants, acting as land agents, supplying their machinery, building materials, and seed, and later shipping (a word which developed land-bound connotations) their produce.
By the last two or three decades of the nineteenth century the railway stations of the Eastern states were analogous to those of the imperial metropoles in Europe, while those of the West seemed like colonial stations.
The difference was, of course, that they shared the same land mass, and were directly connected to each other by transcontinental tracks.
But the western railway dreams encompassed much more than the settling of immigrants or the taming of native peoples (throughout the world railways were credited with this ‘pacificatory’ role).
They were about ‘closing the map’, creating a great continental empire which the Russians were to seek to emulate in the 1880s and 1890s.
And both the American westward and the Russian eastward expansion had, of course, the same destination: the Orient.
Americans and Russians sought to outflank the great European shipping routes.
European manufacturers could reach the Orient faster by swift crossings of the Atlantic and the Pacific connected by the American transcontinental lines.
And eventually they could be replaced by American products.
For Russia the prize was to command railway routes connecting, it was hoped, Calais to Calcutta or Amsterdam to the Amur.
But if Russian effort was to be mainly inspired by government and executed by the military, the American was to be quintessentially capitalist.
By the end of the century American railways were largely in the hands of ten large companies (although there remained several hundred small ones) commanded by railway versions of merchant princes.
Only in the United States and in Britain was there no element of state control by the First World War.
American stations had an almost indeterminate start.
Trains often ran down main streets and early stations were sometimes no more than street corners.
When this was the case, a small ticket booth might be provided or a ticket office might be established in a shop some distance from the track itself.
Old houses were converted, simple single-room frame shacks were built, or inns and hotels were reused as stations.
As late as 1866 a hotel at Martinsburg, West Virginia, was turned into a station.
In Washington, DC, the first station, of 1835, was no more than a converted house.
In the West, early stations, as at Lariat, Colorado, were sometimes old railway ‘cars’ removed from the tracks or deposited in a siding.
In this early period American railway capital and building energies went mainly into track and engineering, and it took some time for the station to catch up with the grandiose schemes of the companies.
The first genuine American station, Mount Clare in Baltimore (1830), was a small octagonal street-corner building not unlike a tollhouse.
It was no more than a ticket booth.
In the 1830s and 1840s American railway architects turned principally to Greek revivalist and other classical styles.
At Lowell, Massachusetts (1835), a small Doric temple carried the track through a colonnade, made up of one of the four bays of the building.
Elsewhere, colonial Georgian and early ‘Federal’ forms provided the inspiration.
These elements were incorporated in Richard Upjohn's designs for the Boston and Lowell terminus in Boston (1835) and for Norton, Massachusetts, while a style reminiscent of the Nonconformist chapel in England appeared at Boston Haymarket or New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Many early stations were simply large barn-like structures, a form which was to be used for several decades.
These barns could adopt a variety of stylistic detail: there were open-sided ‘temple barns’ at Relay, Maryland (1850s), and Springfield, Massachusetts (1870s); barns with classical detail like Syracuse (1838); or with Gothic detail, as at Columbus, Ohio (1862), and Meadville, Pennsylvania (1865).
American railway architects in this period seem to have been fascinated by the notion of the integration of the station offices with the train-shed, for many of the stations which emerged from the grander developments of the 1850s and 1860s consisted of side buildings with the trains running into the interior through grand portals.
Such was the arrangement at Troy, New York, Chicago Great Central, or Cincinnati, all of the 1850s.
At Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, dating from the same period, the trains ran through wide twin portals of a double-sided station with a great clock-tower rising between the tracks.
When the sheds acquired entirely separate buildings, architects and engineers turned to the ‘railroad style’, an Italianate villa form with square squat towers.
Calvert Station, Baltimore (1848), pioneered this style, and it was adopted in Charleston, South Carolina (1850), Washington, DC (1851), Wheeling, West Virginia (1853), Gettysburg, Pennsylvania (1858), and many other places.
The Italianate villa in Washington, DC, which developed many Lincoln associations, was neat, warm, and human in scale, not at all the station of a great capital.
But the Italianate was a relatively ‘pure’ form.
As early as 1848–9 a new and distinctive type of station had appeared.
At New Haven, Connecticut, the platforms lay below street level and the buildings were constructed across a cutting.
The building, designed by Henry Austin, was remarkable.
It combined Italian, Moorish, and, in its central pagoda, Chinese elements.
Here was a picturesque exuberance which constituted a dramatic break from earlier styles.
And it was in complex hybrid forms that the American station was to develop, particularly after the Civil War.
From that time the influences were to be more European than English or colonial.
A whole range of styles was to be recycled into a sort of architectural digest of Italianate Gothic, Romanesque, ‘Queen Anne’, and Venetian.
In this era of creative or picturesque eclecticism, the upward element became increasingly emphasized and the squat towers of the Italianate villa became soaring pinnacles, creating dramatic urban landmarks, pin-pointing the positions of the stations to all quarters of rapidly growing American cities and towns.
These clock-towers, so powerfully counterpointing the essentially horizontal nature of the railroad, often reached staggering heights.
But in 1869, the year of the completion of the first American transcontinental railway, the greatest examples of the picturesque still lay in the future.
Meeks has suggested that in that year the United States still did not possess truly great stations to match the European models.
This was to be remedied by Commodore Vanderbilt, the greatest merchant prince of the American railroad companies, president of the New York Central, whose family had started on its route to fortune with a steamboat line.
By the late 1860s Vanderbilt required a station in New York which would be, in effect, his grand palace.
He turned not to the developing rage for eclecticism, but to the French Renaissance style of the Second Empire.
His station was an imitation of the Louvre, backed by the first truly great single-span train-shed built in the United States.
French Renaissance and Italian Renaissance styles were taken up by other railway architects — notably at the Michigan, Southern, and Rock Island station at Chicago (1871, and reconstructed after the Great Fire of Chicago in 1872), New Haven (1870s), Chicago Union (1881), and later at Salt Lake City, Utah (1909)— but nothing could halt the headlong growth of the complications of the picturesque.
In the 1880s another attempt at simplification was made, when the architect H. H. Richardson and his followers turned to a heavy neo-Romanesque style.
Both small-town stations and large city stations proved amenable to this treatment, and it had some influence in Canada, but still the picturesque could not be stopped in its tracks.
The power of the style lay indeed in its capacity to incorporate so many other forms.
The Romanesque was taken over in the last two decades of the nineteenth century, when American railway-station building reached its apogee in masterpieces of creative eclecticism.
These stations were multi-faceted structures with complex interrelations of roof lines, varied and dramatic handling of windows, gables, and towers, together with richly ornamented detail.
Boston Park Station (1870–4), Washington Baltimore and Potomac (1873–7), and Worcester, Massachusetts (1875–7), were early masterpieces of the eclectic style.
Detroit Michigan Central (1882–3), Chicago Dearborn (1883–5), Philadelphia Chestnut Street (1886–8), Louisville Union (1882–91), and, supremely, St Louis, Missouri (1891–5), all reflected the powerful incorporation of the Romanesque into the larger stations.
At St Louis the vast Union station of 1891–4 consisted of a variegated range of picturesque buildings with steep pitched roofs and ‘Norman revivalist’ detail in gables, entrances, and corner elements.
The whole was surmounted by a magnificent clock-tower and backed by a massive train-shed of five spans.
It made up one of the most satisfying compositions of all American stations.
These were perhaps the finest expressions of American station-building.
But Americans had already moved on to another massive and distinctively North American style, the station as office block.
Maximum use of valuable real estate here became the crucial factor in station-building.
With these stations, extravagance was expressed in scale rather than in exuberance of architecture, although many of them continued to be richly detailed.
Philadelphia Broad Street (1892–3), which replaced a station only ten years old, was a block of solid strength picked out with Gothic detail, while the ten-storey Philadelphia Reading of 1891–3 was Italianate with strong central classical elements.
At the new Chicago Grand Central of 1898–90, a striking office-block exterior was attached to a massive square corner tower.
At Pittsburgh, Daniel Burnham, later to be more famous for his Beaux-Arts work, designed an office-block station which was erected between 1898 and 1901.
A magnificent rotunda as carriage concourse projected from the front of the building, and in 1903 a great single-span train-shed, the last to be built in the United States, was added behind.
With the leap to exterior grandeur from the 1870s went a new concentration on the magnificence of the interior arrangements of stations.
The highly competitive conditions of American railroad building ensured that every company was determined to display its power, success, and prestige to its patrons.
This coincided with their belief that the ordinary person wished to travel from and arrive at great palaces which, with their concourses, restaurants, shops, information centres, medical facilities, theatres, and (later) cinemas constituted virtually civic centres or forums, an impression heightened by the fact that they were often also used for political speeches.
For all these reasons, American stations were ‘over-built’, provided with an external scale and an internal grandeur in the lavishness of their facilities and ornamentation which far exceeded strictly functional requirements.
American stations possessed by now the great train-sheds and large cross-platforms or ‘midways’ which could compete with their European rivals.
In the ‘head-building’ vast chambers were built which often outmatched anything to be seen in Europe.
The change can best be appreciated by comparing Meadville, Pennsylvania, depot of the Atlantic and Great Western (1862), with the interiors of the great stations of the 1880s and 1890s.
At Meadville an immense barn-like structure contained long, almost monastic, rooms with exposed rafters.
At Indianapolis, the neo-Romanesque station of 1888 contained a vast barrel-vaulted concourse with galleries, rose windows at each end, and elaborate tile-work.
Vaulted concourses, matching the form of the train-sheds, became the order of the day, and architects were so enthralled with the power of the vault that they extended its proportions in relation to the side walls.
This was done at St Louis where the reduced wall height was pierced by low round-arched portals leading to the various facilities and to the trains.
In the ‘rotunda’ of Chicago Central of 1892–3 the main ribs of the vault were carried down to the floor.
In each, a cavernous, but not intimidating, effect was achieved.
At St Louis every round-arched opening was made an excuse for a riot of sculptural detail spreading out into a great fan.
Female figures with arms outstretched were a recurrent motif.
The water fountain became an altar, standing on marble pillars and graced by its own fan design.
The ticket office was surmounted by a great mural bearing all the symbols of engineering success, a multi-arched bridge, river steamers, and, of course, the steam engine arriving from the left and dominating all.
At Baltimore, Maryland, the Romanesque revivalist style was used to produce an interior divided by arches borne on solid columns giving the appearance of a succession of law courts.
In these years the American station came of age.
The final stages of creative eclecticism and the power of the office-block station marked the end of the elaborate experimentation with revivalist styles.
Meeks saw the picturesque progression as a rise and fall, from mobile eclecticism in the 1870s to static massy Romanesque, from squat elegant Italianate through soaring Gothic to the squat and stolid approach to the vast stations of the late century.
But such a critical cycle does not really work.
The final Romanesque phase produced a handling of masses that constituted one of several peaks of station design.
Not all buildings with Romanesque detail were squat, as the magnificent St Louis demonstrated.
Indeed the soaring clock-tower was an enduring feature through several decades of station-building.
It reached staggering heights at Boston Park Square (1872–4), Worcester, Massachusetts (1875–6), Indianapolis Union (1886–9), and supremely at Waterbury, Connecticut (1909), perhaps the last example, where the campanile duplicated the height of the station building some two and a half times.
By the beginning of this century, however, the towers had gone as far as they could go.
American architects turned to new forms of expressing grandeur.
Many American architectural critics have seen the Beaux-Arts style which developed from the turn of the century as representing a new invigoration in American station styles.
There is no doubt at all that this is true in engineering, urban planning, and circulation terms.
The Beaux-Arts stations represented the apogee of station design, but scarcely of taste.
It is difficult to accept the praises of some American critics for the overblown gigantism of the Beaux-Arts, particularly as none of them has followed Ruskin's injunction to see architecture as mirroring the life of a society in all its facets.
The new classical and baroque forms are often said to have arisen from the conscious departure in taste represented in the buildings of the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893.
In celebrating the fourth centenary of the voyage of Columbus, the United States was marking, as exhibitions often do, a new phase in its national development.
It stood, in fact, on the edge of great-power status.
By the turn of the century, the United States of America had become an imperial power and her pre-eminence among Western countries was already confidently predicted.
It is true that baroque had long been adopted as the style for state capitols in the United States, but the Beaux-Arts style in all its overblown pomposity was to reflect this new sense of greatness.
It was a classic imperial response in every sense, and it is not surprising that it was to feed into Fascist Italian and German canons of architectural taste.
While the Beaux-Arts reflected both this new national conceit and the megalomania of American railroad companies, it also offered American architects a new means to self-assertion through the railway station.
The greatest of the picturesque stations had dominated their cities.
The great office blocks of the 1890s had taken over that role, and the office-block stations had made some attempt to match them.
By the early years of the twentieth century, however, stations could not compete with the upward thrust of American urban architecture.
The station could make its statement by spreading, by achieving its grandeur through the vast length of Beaux-Arts façades, the enormous circulation areas within them, and the new approach to land use which the new stations offered.
The temporary terminal for the Chicago World Fair of 1893 pointed the way.
Here arch, colonnade, dome, and column were flaunted in a triumphalist manner, with the vault of the great concourse projecting dramatically above the roof line as was to be common in all Beaux-Arts stations.
This station was not to survive, but its influence was to be extensively felt.
The first manifestation of the influence of Chicago was to be the portal and colonnade style of classical station, as exemplified at Boston North (1893) and at Columbus Ohio (1897).
Here the notion of the railway station as city gate was given direct architectural form as at London's Euston half a century earlier.
In 1898 Boston South Station was reconstructed in a classical style, with entrance and clock on a curved corner, which was to influence station-building in Australia, notably in Adelaide and Melbourne.
These were different, and in many ways more congenial, responses to the new classicism, but the Beaux-Arts was soon to reign supreme and supplant totally the nineteenth-century eclectic styles.
In some places stations built a mere ten or twenty years earlier were swept away to make space for these vast new edifices.
These stations represented two important urban developments.
Several old stations were now often amalgamated into one great Union station.
Building-land in cities was at a premium.
Railway lines were being raised on viaducts or sunk into cuttings and tunnels, and the railway station became the surface reminder of the engineering works below.
The new stations became part of the civic plans for great American cities which inaugurated a new vogue for city planning.
The famous firm of Burnham and Co. became closely involved with the combination of urban planning and station design, notably in Washington, DC, and Chicago.
In the stations themselves greater attention was now given to the problems of circulation, the control, movement, and organization of great numbers of people.
In most cases, the numbers were projected and not actual; the stations were born of myth for mythic passenger growth.
Obsessed with these circulation problems, architects looked for guidance to the ancient world.
In modern times churches and theatres were the only buildings which were designed to cope with crowds, and they offered no real clues to the scale of the problem now facing station architects.
But in Rome huge numbers had been controlled at the Colosseum with its multiple entrances and large ambulatories at each level.
At the greatest of the Roman baths, like those of Caracalla, a large central concourse led out to the various facilities.
A combination of these principles of assembly and dispersal now appeared in railway stations.
In 1906 Chattanooga acquired a vast brick classical station containing a huge domed central waiting-room, with service wings lit by floor-to-ceiling arched windows extending on each side.
The façade was decorated with ornamental brickwork and terracotta details.
In the following year the Beaux-Arts style emerged at its most majestic in Washington, DC, containing some of the most powerful, overpowering indeed, spaces of any station, and set off in a great park-like setting.
The arches, columns, and huge statuary of the exterior prepared the traveller or sightseer for the vast vaulted concourse and waiting-room within.
The interior spaces were divided by peristyles bearing classical statuary, while other statues stood in the round-arched window spaces.
All of this was matched by the immensity of the great train concourse behind, 860 ft. long, which provided access through gates to the tracks.
This station was consciously designed to match the pretensions of a baroque imperial capital.
Its accommodation was considerably greater than would ever be needed in normal times, but its nationalistic opulence was intended to come into its own every four years, at the inauguration of successive presidents.
Washington had come a long way from the converted house of 1835, the charmingly simple Italianate villa of 1851, or even the pleasingly revivalist Baltimore and Potomac of 1873–7.
The two most famous stations of this era are the twin Beaux-Arts stations of New York, the Pennsylvania and the Grand Central built respectively between 1906 and 1910 and 1903 and 1913.
The former contained a remarkable combination of nineteenth-century engineering with the immense columns and stonework of the ‘thermal’ style.
The outer concourse in glass and iron had its architectural roots in the exhibition halls of the nineteenth century.
The inner waiting-room recreated the central space of the baths of Caracalla with grand staircases on all four sides, rising through colonnades at each end under immense arches framed by Corinthian columns.
All of this was contained within long classical façades, with corner pavilions setting off all four sides.
At Grand Central, New York, the Vanderbilt search for opulence had even outrun the French Empire style of the first Grand Central with its great conventional train-shed behind.
The tracks of the New York Central railroad occupied some of the finest land in New York.
By sinking them, the Company made available at least a dozen blocks lying between Second and Fifth Avenues.
The great train-shed was rendered redundant, with some seventy acres of tracks and yards now provided below street level.
Forty-fifth to Fifty-sixth Streets, formerly dead ends at railway yards, became thoroughfares.
Yet the temptation to build upwards for the station itself was resisted.
A classical palace was created lying athwart Park and Fourth Avenues, surrounded by a raised roadway offering access to the wheeled traffic which would soon pitch the railways into dramatic decline.
Grand Central was in effect two stations, as the contemporary cutaway illustrations were concerned to show, stations with more complex multiple levels below ground than there were above it.
The tracks for suburban trains lay below those of the express system, while the suburban concourse and waiting-room in turn lay below the vast apartments in the ‘thermal’ style for long-distance passengers.
Baggage and passengers were separated, and the suburban and express passengers had no need to coincide with each other.
It was estimated that no fewer than 30,000 people could congregate at Grand Central without serious crowding.
A maximum of 70,000 outward-bound passengers could be carried in an hour.
The tunnels, track arrangements, and loop lines were regarded as among the greatest engineering marvels of the age, and more engineers flocked to see them than any other contemporary achievement, even including the Panama Canal.
They were, of course, all dependent on one vital technological development, the shift from steam to electricity.
All trains approaching New York were to have their steam engines exchanged for electric (in the case of the Pennsylvania at a station called Manhattan Transfer), and the vast echoing smoky recesses of the train-shed were dispensed with.
Many contemporaries hailed this development with delight.
A writer in the Town Planning Review trumpeted that train-sheds were now obsolete: ‘modern terminals in great cities must be below street level hereafter’.
In 1899, when the New York, New Haven, and Hartford Company had built their magnificent new station at Providence, Rhode Island, they had planned it without a train-shed.
The city objected, and after a long controversy one was duly built.
But the last shed was that at Pittsburgh of 1903.
When John A. Droege came to write his classic work on the American station in 1916, he regarded train-sheds as beyond the pale:
The day of the great awkward arched train shed is long since gone.
There was a time when in railroad terminal architecture it was considered as the most necessary adjunct (or evil).
It will long remain a problem to the average person that these sheds had such wide popularity and that so little use was made of the cheaper, cleaner, or, in fact, better umbrella sheds.
In view of the widespread use of the old style train sheds it is pleasing to our vanity to be reminded how expensive they were to build and how costly to maintain.
And what is more, the sheds are dark and dirty, the coldest places in town on cold days, the stuffiest on hot.
With those sentences Droege dismissed decades of dazzling structural and engineering achievements.
At a much later date, the Grand Central idea appeared in Britain at Birmingham New Street and London Euston, but without any of the magnificence of the ‘thermal’ building above.
Catching the train had been turned into a furtive, subterranean act, appropriate perhaps to the new status of the railways as a minority and persecuted transport interest.
But the Beaux-Arts was a relatively short-lived fad, and not even its excesses could drive other styles out.
Michigan Central Station, Detroit (1913), took the office-block idea a stage further.
An arched and columned vestibule block marked out the building as a station, but behind rose a fifteen-storey office block.
At Cleveland, an immense skyscraper station, with a central tower and clock fifty-two storeys high, consciously designed as a city gate and as the centre of a great transportation network, was built between 1923 and 1930.
Classical ideas were explored further at Chicago Union (1924–5) and Philadelphia Thirtieth Street (1927–34) where the style took on a flashy grandiosity akin to the Fascist classical of contemporary Europe.
Carl Condit described this as ‘coldly classical monumentalism’.
There were, however, two remarkable late flowerings of the American station.
One was revivalist, the Spanish style, and the other was strikingly modern and original, the Art Deco.
The Spanish style, favoured by the Santa Fe and other railroads in the Southern States, can be divided into two streams, the baroque and the mission.
The mission style, with its cool Spanish arches, bell-towers, and church-like interior, had strong antecedents in American station architecture.
In 1893 the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe opened an extraordinary Byzantine/Moorish station in Los Angeles, called La Grande.
The effect was heightened by the pavilions which straddled the track behind the main building.
By the end of the century the Santa Fe and the Southern Pacific had built Spanish-style stations throughout the South, as at San Angelo, Texas; Riverside, Santa Barbara, Capistrano, and Burlingame, California.
At many of these the mission atmosphere was emphasized by cloisters, gardens, and bell-towers complete with bells.
At Atlanta, Georgia, where the old station had played such a key role in the Civil War, three companies, the Southern, Seaboard, and Atlanta and West Point, opened a large Spanish baroque Union station in 1905.
Another baroque station appeared at Mobile, Alabama, in 1907.
One of the most striking of all the mission stations was opened by the Santa Fe at Albuquerque, New Mexico, in 1910.
It was a vast complex of buildings, a mission in the fullest sense with several towers surmounted by triple crowns.
The buildings derived their interest from these towers and from the complex interrelationship of the elements.
In architectural detail they were austere, with surfaces rendered in adobe and roofed in tiles.
The style was given a powerful fillip by the expositions held at San Francisco and San Diego in 1915 to celebrate the opening of the Panama Canal.
As a result, a new interest in the Latin American world led to the Spanish style finding favour until the 1930s.
San Diego, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and San Antonio, Texas, all acquired stations in the style, and opulent baroque versions were built at West Palm Beach (1924–5) and Orlando, Florida (1926).
At San Diego (1914–15) the cool, dark, chaste interior was lightened by tile-work to a height of eight or nine feet.
The church effect was heightened by the Santa Fe's cross symbol and by one or two paintings placed high on the walls.
The exterior had a magnificent ‘west end’— two fine baroque towers bearing murals illustrative of the early history of California flanking a wide arch protecting stained-glass windows within.
The Los Angeles version (1934–9) was much lighter in effect, with full-length windows.
There the interior was almost indistinguishable from a church: the nave was the waiting-room complete with seats arranged like pews, memorials on the walls, chandeliers suspended from exposed rafters; the chancel was the booking office, with an information kiosk in the crossing; the apses were the entrance lobby and the route to the tracks.
The Southern Pacific depot at San Francisco (1915) combined both baroque and mission elements, while at Boise, Idaho (1924–5), the mission style achieved its most simplified and exalted form.
There the station was perfectly proportioned and almost impossible to identify as a station rather than as a church, both externally and internally.
Art Deco ideas were explored at Omaha Union (1929–30) and, supremely, at Cincinnati Union (1929–33).
At the latter the process of incorporating a number of older stations into one arrived late.
Since a variety of different routes into the city had to be accommodated and since the planners envisaged a station of massive proportions a central city site proved impossible.
It was also to be a station for the motor-car age, situated on ample land with large car-parks.
A large number of architects and designers were involved, but none the less the result was stunning.
The front consisted of the largest of all station arched façades with tall windows separated by ribs, the whole giving the impression of an enormous speaker of a contemporary radio set.
Inside, the semicircular concourse was decorated with remarkable mosaics by Winold Reiss, illustrative of the industries, arts, and people of Cincinnati.
Lights and counters followed graceful Art Deco curves and doors in banded woods were surmounted by representations of the exterior of the building.
Beyond this great semicircular space was a massive train concourse above the tracks, again decorated by mosaics.
The station was consciously designed to be a civic centre with a wide range of rooms including a theatre.
Carl Condit's description of the colour schemes and materials used in this sumptuous station cannot be bettered:
Nothing on the exterior, however, prepared one for the stunning exhibition of color, texture, and mural art in the interior, features that constituted a major step in an architectural revolution that was most fully developed in the Century of Progress Exposition in Chicago (1933–74).
Only color photographs, of which too few survive, can do justice to this vivid yet harmonious palette, but a simple catalogue of materials and their distribution may suggest something of its richness.
The domed ceiling of the rotunda concourse and certain wall areas were finished in yellow and orange plaster with a trim of Red Verona, Tennessee Fleuri, and Virginia Black marbles, and the lower wall areas over the service facilities were covered with highly colored mosaic murals by the German-born artist Winold Reiss and executed by the Ravenna Mosaic Company.
The side-walls of the train concourse were devoted almost entirely to Reiss's murals…and the end wall was covered with a world map and clock dials showing the hour differences in various time zones.
Elsewhere on the walls there was a trim of Red Verona and various domestic gray and black marbles; the low vault of the ceiling was again done in orange and yellow plaster, and the floor was finished in red and tan terrazzo.
Wood veneer finishes with aluminum trim characterised the lounges and offices: zebra wood, holly, and walnut in the men's lounge were arranged in abstract designs derived from railroad locomotives, cars, and signals; panels of zebra and madrone wood covered the women's lounge; and gum, harewood, and holly were used in the offices along with cork flooring.
In the restaurant the walls were finished in zebra, birch, red and black marbles, and the floors in terrazzo; in the theater walls of Tennessee Fleuri, black and white marbles stood in subdued contrast to a mulberry carpet; the interior of the ticket offices were finished in Hauteville marble and terrazzo, and the private dining room entirely in Rockwood tile.
Monumental Art Deco and this riot of materials and colours led nowhere, however.
American station design had found a truly contemporary style which proved to be well suited to station scale.
But it was a swan-song.
The station opened in 1933, designed for continuing growth in passenger traffic.
In the event, that traffic was already spiralling in steep decline and the corresponding losses were to rise dramatically.
Cincinnati Union perfectly represented the exaggerated hope of the 1920s and the devastating failure of the 1930s.
It also bore alarming signs of the transportation future.
Its recognition of the significance of the motor car and its removal to the edge of the main city area was ominous.
This was the railway station as airport.
Abdication was at hand.
Inevitably, most space in this exploration of the American railway station has been devoted to the large city variety.
But station architecture was perhaps expressed in its most vigorous and diversified forms in the countless thousands of small country and medium-sized town stations coast to coast.
Some commentators have seen these as representing the true genius of American station architecture.
They too were invariably overbuilt, offering by the end of the century a source of small-town and parochial pride.
The early country stations had been supplied with small lookout towers rising above the roof of the building to enable railway employees to watch for approaching trains over the horizon.
When this utilitarian function was no longer needed, the lookouts became cupolas, lanterns, clock-towers.
Spires, corner towers, belfries, even unusually shaped domes soon adorned all but the smaller frame stations.
Elaborate wood and iron work, overhanging eaves,portes cochères , and all sorts of architectural ornamentation all conveyed a sense of the romance of travel, identified the station as landmark, and offered the various companies the opportunity to distinguish themselves by particular ‘house’ characteristics.
On the other hand, internal fitments, like booking counters, benches, and stoves, were usually solid and practical rather than elegant.
Many of these stations pursued a consistent internal design pattern.
The ground plan normally consisted of three main rooms, the baggage room and the waiting-room at each end, with the office between, usually with a bay window projecting on to the platform to afford the station agent a view up and down the tracks.
Sometimes the agent and his family lived above the station, so that offices and home together formed a rather grander two-storey building.
In some the telegraph operator was given an elevated office in the tower.
A few were the products of early pre-fabrication techniques, as at Ladson, South Carolina, and many, like American houses, were mobile, capable of being reused in different locations.
The country stations also enjoyed a great range of styles, but they escaped the process of repeated renewal which overwhelmed so many large city and town stations in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Many of the country stations did not enjoy the pedigree of great architects to sire them.
They were often designed by engineers, but what they lacked in architectural distinction, they gained in homely practicality and in the opportunities they afforded to local carpenters to display their skills in beautifully carved barge boarding and valances.
Even the tiniest of flag stations (where passengers stopped the train by raising a flag or changing a signal) could bear the marks of the expertise of some unsung local craftsman.
Appropriately, such stations generally derived their inspiration from vernacular pioneering house styles, in the ‘Swiss chalet’, the ‘cottage orné’, the ‘stick style’, the ‘shingle lodge’, or, particularly in the West, the frame store or the log cabin.
The medium-sized town stations sometimes reflected the styles in vogue for their grander counterparts.
Richardson's Romanesque style appeared at a succession of smaller stations in Massachusetts in the 1880s, at Ashburndale (1881), Framingham (1883), Wellesley (1884), and North Easton (1886).
These heavy round-arched stations were to be influential in Ontario, Canada, in the same period, and the Romanesque, rarely among station styles, proved amenable to both small- and large-scale treatment.
Cool classical porticoes appeared at Dover, Delaware, and Lexington, Kentucky, early this century and a scaled-down Beaux-Arts style was used at Worcester, Massachusetts, Tacoma, Washington (1910), Montclair, New Jersey (1913), and Broad Street, Richmond, Virginia (1917–19).
But the Beaux-Arts was essentially an overblown grandiose manner, ill suited to the smaller station.
Stations frequently expressed the social tone of the areas they served.
Glen Ridge, New Jersey, was supplied with an elegant shingle lodge in 1887 to serve its affluent commuters, while Tuxedo Park, a wealthy New York community, was graced by a pagoda-like structure with steep-pitched roofs and much fine woodwork.
Pelham Manor, New York, another wealthy suburban community, had an opulent stone structure with a powerfully squat square tower for ticket lobby and waiting-room.
Both Palm Springs, California, and West Palm Beach, Florida, boasted magnificent Spanish stations, built respectively at the beginning of the century and the 1920s.
Resort stations and hotels were combined at Cumberland (1871–2) and Relay, Maryland (1870s), and at Susquehanna (1865) and Altoona, Pennsylvania.
Many of these stood at junctions where passengers might be expected to stop over before continuing their journey's.
Much more exotic architecture was often used for resort stations.
It was as though the railway companies wished to put their excursionists in the mood, remind them of the rather light-hearted, somewhat extravagant outing they were engaged upon, quite different from everyday commuting and business travel.
At Bethlehem, New Hampshire, the highest village east of the Rockies, the Boston and Maine created a delightful, half-timbered chalet-style building with a great deal of space for the horse-drawn coaches and carriages which conveyed excursionists from the station.
Even more elaborately decorated wooden buildings with long agreeable verandas were built by the Southern Pacific at Shasta Springs, California.
The Pennsylvania Central built a holiday pavilion with a high cupola at Cape May, New Jersey, while half-timbering, so often associated with holiday architecture, was the dominant feature of the Southern's Asheville resort in North Carolina.
At Ardsley-on-Hudson, New York, a half-timbered, creeper-clad station was connected to a matching hotel by a rustic bridge.
The complex also boasted a dock on the Hudson River.
But the most astonishing of all these excursion stations was the one provided by the Delaware and Hudson at Lake George, New York, in 1882.
It was a multi-storey orientalist, almost pagoda-like confection, sporting elaborately carved verandas, valances, and outside staircases with rustic covered ways leading off from it.
It was demolished in 1911 and replaced by a much more utilitarian building.
The extravagant resort spirit was already waning.
No other building type secured such a variety of examples.
Many were minor masterpieces, from the picturesque cottage and Queen Anne gable porch of the Union Pacific station at Park City, Utah (1886), to the beautiful pavilions with their elegant flights of steps at Haverstraw, New York, and Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania; from the Norman revivalist Duluth, Minnesota (1892), with its steep-pitched roofs and twin conical towers, to the perfect proportions and beautifully handled materials of Point of Rocks, Maryland.
The American railroad companies boasted their own King Ludwigs and some of their creations succeeded in being both fantastical and architecturally exciting.
But their spirit had entirely vanished by the Second World War.
New large city stations were built at Toledo (1950) and New Orleans (1954), but in a totally undistinguished style.
Otherwise bus shelters were provided when small stations were knocked or burned down.
Just such a brave new station was the romantically named ‘Route 128’ at Boston.
By the time that the Educational Facilities Laboratories and the National Endowment for the Arts were producing their two excellent booklets on the reuse of railroad stations in 1974 and 1975, only one per cent of all inter-city travel was by train.
The United States which had been supremely the country of the railway at the beginning of the twentieth century had just as dramatically and wholeheartedly become the country of the motor car, the Greyhound bus, and the aeroplane.
The thrusting diversity of American capitalist railway operations, which had been its great strength in the nineteenth century, had become its greatest weakness in the twentieth, and not even Amtrak could entirely arrest that decline.
Canada 
Canadian station-building styles can be divided up into a number of periods.
The early primitive phase of frame shacks and converted buildings was followed by the appearance of rather grander stations in the post-confederation years of the 1870s and 1880s.
In these decades the Intercolonial railway was built to connect the eastern provinces, the Grand Trunk and several other railway companies penetrated the country districts of Ontario as well as connecting Canadian cities to each other and to the United States, while Canadian Pacific stretched its metals westwards to Vancouver.
As the Canadian railway companies experimented for a distinctive national style, it is perhaps not surprising that they turned to French models, although the styles they adopted were often filtered through the United States.
Once the Canadian fears of American invasion had passed, Canadians were happier to accept American influences in their station-building.
This ensured that Canadian stations always differed in appearance from the ‘Dominion’ styles adopted in Australia, New Zealand, and even South Africa.
The French Second Empire style found some favour in the 1880s, as did Richardson's neo-Romanesque.
The Canadian Pacific developed a French Renaissance château style combined with touches of Scottish baronial, which was both distinctive and neatly combined the main cultural heritages of Canada.
But from the early years of the twentieth century to the 1930s classical styles reigned supreme for all larger city stations.
So far as smaller country and town stations were concerned, there was a wave of rebuilding of Grand Trunk stations in the 1880s and 1890s, but the boom years in station-building (though not in profits) were those from the late 1890s to the early 1920s.
In this period the ‘colonization road’, the Canadian Northern, stretched its system east and west from its first line in Manitoba.
From 1903, in another effort to break the CPR's monopoly, the Grand Trunk Pacific was chartered by the Canadian government to build another coast-to-coast line.
Second and third crossings of the Rockies were effected by the Canadian Northern (to Vancouver) and the Grand Trunk Pacific (to Prince Rupert), while the government-owned Transcontinental set about linking Grand Trunk metals to the east coast.
A whole succession of prairie branches was built to develop settlement and to tap the furthest reaches of the grain-growing areas.
On the prairie transcontinental and branch lines, stations were required every five to ten miles for the convenience of farmers bringing their grain to the station elevators in horse-drawn vehicles.
By the First World War both the Canadian Northern and the GTP, shackled with loss-making mountain railroads, were in deep financial difficulties.
In 1918 the Canadian Northern collapsed; in 1920 the GTP followed, bringing down its parent Grand Trunk in 1923.
The nationalized Canadian National Railways was constructed out of the wreckage of these lines, and continued the completion of lines and the building of stations.
The boom period ensured that every prairie city had two and sometimes three stations, some of them very short-lived indeed.
When the Canadian National was formed it inherited no fewer than a thousand stations west of Lake Superior.
It is not surprising that one railway executive of the period described this time as one of ‘calamitous overbuilding’ in Canadian railways.
As the many Ontario lines stretched out in the 1870s and 1880s, dozens of new stations were built.
Companies like the Grand Trunk, the Hamilton and North Western, the Toronto, Hamilton, and Buffalo, the Ontario, Huron, and Simcoe, the Toronto, Grey, and Bruce, and the Credit Valley penetrated the furthest corners of the province.
Many villages were provided with flag-stop stations — as at Dagmar, Forks of the Credit, Gilford, Crombies, and Hillsburg — just tiny waiting-rooms, with, occasionally, projecting awnings.
Elsewhere the stations consisted of the usual combination of waiting-room, baggage room, office, and telegraph-operator's room.
In the late 1870s and 1880s a whole succession of attractive stations with complex roof-lines and towers with conical caps were built at towns like Craigleith (1872), Streetsville (1879), Smithville, Grimsby (1882), Whitby, and Don (1899), among many others.
Smaller one-storey buildings, often containing attractive wood-work in the gables, were built at Port Hope (1857), St Mary's Junction (1863), Aurora (1900), Kincardine (1903), Maple (1905), and Inglewood (1910).
The range of dates indicates the durability of this style.
By the 1890s neo-Romanesque had arrived from the United States, and its heavy style with round arches appeared at Brantford (1895), Kitchener (1897), Galt and Brampton.
Some of the larger stations aspired to considerable distinction, and Canadian railway architects seem to have favoured rounded features as a dominant element in their stations.
At Brantford rounded ends were combined with a square tower.
At Petrolia a most attractive station had round waiting-rooms, two end conical towers, and a central square one.
At Guelph as late as 1911 a Romanesque effect was combined with an Italianate tower, while at Goderich extensive offices were incorporated in a large round tower.
In a remarkable labour of love Charles Bohi categorized all the Canadian National stations west of Lake Superior and visited all the surviving ones in the early 1970s.
Many of the early stations on these lines were portable buildings or baggage cars, but soon both the Canadian Northern and the Grand Trunk Pacific developed standard designs in categories ranging from one to three or four.
Despite this standardization the country small-town stations achieved a remarkable diversity, with many individually designed stations for division points and other more important centres.
The stations all followed the standard plan with a freight and/or baggage room at one end, the waiting-room at the other, the agent's office with its bay window in the middle, and accommodation for the agent and his family, usually consisting of a kitchen and living-room, downstairs at the back of the station with up to four bedrooms upstairs.
The smaller third- or fourth-class stations had only one-roomed living quarters for, presumably, a younger bachelor agent, in a single-storey structure.
The larger second-class stations would also have a separate ladies' waiting-room.
The stations were all distinguished by complex roof-lines.
Often three different types of roof — pyramid, hip, and gable — were included together with a wide variety of dormers in the upper storey.
Most of them had shingled awnings borne on prominent brackets projecting over their simple wooden platforms.
On the prairies these stations, with their high steep-pitched roofs and their larger adjacent grain elevators, could be seen from many miles away.
With their telegraph and cable facilities, their express freight and post office services, these stations were the Most important buildings in their communities.
Indeed they often constituted the source of their communities when new villages were laid out by the railway companies beside them.
In the Rockies the stations were not expected to secure so much local traffic.
There they were more important in train handling and as sectional Points.
Their accommodation was modified accordingly.
It was only from the 1880s that the larger Canadian cities sprouted stations that would match their rapidly growing civic pride.
Both of the great Montreal CPR stations, Windsor (1888) and Place Viger, were designed by the same architect, Bruce Price, in the heavy Richardsonian Romanesque manner.
A CPR guidebook of 1897 expressed the company's pride in its Windsor Station:
…
Itself one of the sights of the city, which ranks among the most attractive places on the Continent.
This is an imposing structure, somewhat resembling in its frontage on two streets the keep of a Norman castle.
It is a rare combination of elegance, comfort, and architectural beauty.
No expense was spared to ensure its thorough adaptation to the purpose in view, and it is undoubtedly one of the handsomest buildings in the city, and a fitting illustration of the enterprise of the road.
Upstairs are the head offices of the Company, where the business of the great artery of travel is arranged, and below are minor offices, the grand general waiting room, with its noble arches and massive polished granite columns; the ladies' waiting room, an illustration of how modern skill can blend luxury and comfort; and last, but not least, the dining-room, the antipodes of those railway dining rooms whose peculiarities afford so many opportunities to the comic journalists of America.
The Grand Trunk's Bonaventure Station in Montreal was built in French Second Empire style with a palatial waiting-room to match.
At Quebec the first CPR station was a simple two-storey affair with crow-stepped gables.
But the CPR made its distinctive contribution to Canadian station architecture with its French château style, used for both hotels and stations, and its wooden chalets with Scottish baronial touches.
An example of the latter was Banff in Alberta, and of the former the great gateway to the Orient which the CPR built in Vancouver.
When the first CPR train reached Vancouver on 23 May 1888, the depot on the waterfront was no larger than a wooden shed.
This was soon replaced by a large structure in the CPR château/baronial style, with conical towers and steep-pitched roofs.
It blocked off the end of Granville Street, Vancouver's main thoroughfare, and was consciously designed to present the city both as the great terminus of the transcontinental railway and as a great Oriental gateway.
But the life of this station was to be short.
In the twentieth century, regrettably, Canada abandoned its distinctive combination of French and Scottish elements which so perfectly reflected its cultural heritage.
A bastard classical took over and became the dominant form for several decades.
This transition is perfectly represented at Thunder Bay on Lake Superior, the great grain trans-shipment centre from the prairies.
At Thunder Bay North (then Port Arthur) the Canadian Northern built a distinctive station with pyramidal roofs and battlemented turrets, adorned with its symbolic wheatsheaf motif, in 1905.
In Thunder Bay South (formerly Fort William) the CPR built a classical station in 1911.
The Canadian Northern continued to build its distinctive style, bearing enlarged features of its smaller stations, at Edmonton and later at Saskatoon (1911).
But transcontinental status always brought a classical rush to the head of railroad companies.
When the Canadian Northern reached Vancouver in 1915, it reclaimed land at False Creek, one of the many land reclamation schemes which facilitated the building of railway stations as far apart as Bombay and Auckland — and built a massive classical station.
The restless CPR, which repeatedly rebuilt the mighty Hotel Vancouver, had already built another, classical station on the Vancouver waterfront.
By this time Regina Union (1911), Brandon (1911), and Winnipeg (both CPR and the Union station of the Canadian Northern and the GTP (1911)) were all built in the style.
Winnipeg, with its great round ticket lobby, was extolled in Droege's work on the railway station.
Suitably updated to twenties and thirties Georgian the style remained dominant in the inter-war years.
It was used for new stations at Edmonton (1928) and Saskatoon (1930s).
A fine Greek revivalist station, not unlike that at Monkwearmouth in Northumbria, was built in Hamilton, Ontario, in 1930.
Sculptures of rail and shipping transportation were inserted above the doors.
Even in this period, however, the odd example of eclecticism survived.
At Toronto North, a station open only from 1916 to 1930, an Italian Renaissance building was combined with a high clock-tower.
The only Canadian station to vie with the greatest American examples was the remarkable Toronto Union station built between 1915 and 1930 with what one writer called a ‘blessed sense of civic excess ‘.
It was opened in 1927, but was not fully completed until 1930.
The old Union station had been in a rambling neo-Romanesque style, but the new one was to match the grandest of the American Beaux-Arts school, and in some ways surpass them.
The firm of Ross and Macdonald had recently been associated with the building of the Beaux-Arts station in Ottawa.
In Toronto an immense frontage 752 ft. long had a central colonnaded entrance-way which led into a great concourse with a slightly curving coffered ceiling.
As at Grand Central, New York, care was taken to separate passengers and baggage, as well as incoming and outgoing passengers.
The station was conceived in the grandest imperial manner, but although there was much interesting architectural detail, the statuary which was supposed to adorn the entrance and other parts of the exterior was never sculpted as the colder economic winds of the late 1920s began to blow.
The same economic difficulties held up the last great station-building project in Canada.
In the 1920s Canadian National Railways planned a new station to replace the old Bonaventure.
It was to be on a new site and act as a combined station for suburban and express services.
It was started in 1930, but work was stopped by the Depression.
It was begun again in 1939 and opened in July 1943.
The building was almost unrelievedly functional, although some mural decorations were incorporated into the corners of the concourse and some simple ornamentation appeared above the lifts.
The concourse was large, but uninspiring, particularly as the floor area was broken up by stairways down to the tracks.
The site made use of the Mount Royal tunnel and of the considerable falling away of the land, so that although the platforms were below the station building, none the less they were above ground.
They left the station to the south on a viaduct.
Baggage and goods were handled on a sub-track level, and one of the advantages of the new arrangements was that no fewer than fifteen street level-crossings were eliminated.
Montreal was catching up with developments which had taken place at many American stations earlier in the century.
The Railway Gazette reported that it had become an attraction to sightseers, rather like the early days at the first Euston and at the inauguration of the great European and American stations.
Montreal Central eventually served the CPR express lines as well as the CNR, but, compared with Toronto or Cincinnati Union, there was something half-hearted about it, despite the trumpetings with which it was received during the war.
Confidence soon ebbed from Canadian railways.
The Vancouver stations were run down — and two were demolished — once Vancouver had ceased to be the main portal to the Orient with the ending of the passenger shipping services.
In Edmonton the classical station was demolished and replaced by a tower block in 1966.
Saskatoon's station was closed in 1969, and replaced by a new one-storeyed, flat-roofed, functional station at the edge of the city.
At Ottawa, following a government report, the Gréber Commission, which concluded that stations and railway lines were unsightly in Canadian cities, the Beaux-Arts station, so superbly situated at the base of Parliament Hill, was abandoned and a new station like an airport was built on the edge of the city.
The monumental folly of such ideas, produced by planners who have capitulated to the strangulation of the motor car and destroyed city communities from Liverpool to Hong Kong, was to dawn too late.
In throwing away the advantages of the nineteenth-century central city site in the nation's capital there could be no surer sign that Canadians were allowing Mammon and the attendant philistines to destroy the heritage that had largely made the country.
In Quebec city the same process was set in train, but later reversed.
The contrast with the renewed vigour and conservationist sense of Australasian railways in the same period is striking, and says much for the respective cultural health of the Dominions.
Latin America and the Caribbean 
Nowhere in the world did the railway station represent so powerfully the combination of an intrusive technical power together with the search for national identity as in Latin America.
Spanish and Portuguese rule had been overthrown before the arrival of the railway, and the building of Latin American lines was to become the classic expression of the informal imperialism of Britain and the United States which penetrated the region from the mid-nineteenth century.
The railway none the less became the symbol of progress without which national aspirations had no hope of achievement.
In Uruguay the first journal was called Ferrocarril (‘Railway’), although its content had little or nothing to do with railways.
Informal imperialism produced a complex network of companies and lines.
A multiplicity of stations would appear in each Latin American capital of importance, some of them among the grandest anywhere.
And great engineering heights would be scaled in the whole succession of Andean railways.
There were only modest and tentative beginnings to all of this in the 1850s and 1860s.
But during the next few decades, nitrates and minerals in the Andes, wheat and beef in Argentina, and coffee in Brazil were to draw the railways outwards.
In the main cities, the early primitive stations were replaced by grandiloquent specimens in the last years of the nineteenth century and in the decade before the First World War.
This extraordinary burst of architectural activity has been largely ignored.
Even the superb ‘All Stations’ exhibition contained no examples of Latin American stations, nor were any illustrated in the accompanying, and otherwise excellent, book of the same name.
But travellers in Latin America in the early twentieth century found there stations which led them into rhapsodies of praise.
Nowhere was this more true than in Argentina.
W. H. Koebel wrote in Argentina Past and Present (1914) that ‘In no other branch of Argentine industry is the British capitalist so deeply interested as in that of the railways’.
This deep interest was amply reflected in the fact that no fewer than a dozen Argentine railway companies were British-owned.
There were, in addition, three French companies, and the Argentine State railways which controlled a number of local lines.
Such diversity of ownership was matched by the architectural catholicism of station styles.
There was in some cases an extraordinary Englishness about Argentine railways.
Station platforms, overbridges, signalling, motive power were all on British lines or British-made, and some country stations even had half-timbered buildings.
In Buenos Aires, however, the great terminal stations of these systems were built in baroque and Renaissance styles.
It was a city remarkably endowed with terminal stations.
At Retiro, facing on to the Plaza Britannica, there were no fewer than three great head-type stations.
In ascending order of grandeur these were the termini of the Buenos Aires and Pacific, the Córdoba Central Railway, and the Central Argentine Railway.
The station of the latter, completed in 1915, was described by the Times Book of Argentina as ‘the finest of its kind south of the Equator and in point of convenience and completeness challenges comparison with any in the world’.
Its dimensions and the details of its decoration indicate that this was no empty boast.
booking-hall, 200 ft. long and 60 ft. wide, led into an even vaster grand hall, 480 ft. long and 82 ft. wide, challenging comparison with the great halls of New York or Toronto.
Both booking and grand halls were decorated in Royal Doulton faience to a height of 7 ft.; each had mosaic floors and balconies ran round the walls at a height of 30 ft.
The vaulted dome of the booking-hall stood at a height of 65 ft. from the floor and the outer dome above reached a height of 108 ft.
Refreshment and dining halls and train-shed matched these lavish dimensions.
Statistics can be tedious, but these demonstrate dramatically the great power and splendour of Argentine railways.
Retiro Station offered Paul Theroux a comfortable sense of home-coming after a long rail journey through the continent.
It was English-made
with a high curved roof supported by girders forged in a Liverpool ironworks, and marble pillars and floors, ornately carved canopies, shafts of sunlight emphasising its height, and indeed, everything of a cathedral but altars and pews…. it was a relief to me, after such a long trip, to arrive at this station…
I needed to be reassured that I had reached a hospitable culture…
These three stations, which from the air offer one of the railway sights of the world, all stood in an area which was closely identified with the British community, significantly close to the docks.
That community eventually built on the Plaza Britannica a magnificent clock-tower to complement the stations.
It was burned down on the second anniversary of the Falklands War.
For some visitors, the Buenos Aires Great Southern Railway was the greatest of them all.
Its station, an imposing structure in the French Second Empire manner with steep mansard roofs, four towers, and an elongated central dome, stood on the Plaza Constitución.
Powerful cornices emphasized the horizontality of its façade, and its silhouette was punctuated by large chimneys.
The central arched entrance was surmounted by a massive sculptured group.
The station was described by Koebel as the Waterloo of the southern hemisphere, handling more passengers than all the other Buenos Aires terminals together.
He went on:
There is something very impressive about the Plaza Constitución, the terminus of the Great Southern Railway.
Seen from without, the stately building that fronts the open square is sufficiently imposing; viewed from within, the place more than fulfils the promise of its exterior.
There is a spaciousness here and a strictly ordered bustle that bespeaks the railway of importance, very sure of itself, its methods, and its officials.
The waiting rooms, the ticket office, the refreshment rooms, and the book-stalls all breathe the same atmosphere.
In the world of railway companies there are undoubtedly terriers and greyhounds, whose conduct is reflected in their attitude and trains…
The Great Southern is a greyhound.
So great was the growth of passenger traffic in the 1920s that an already vast station was remodelled and enlarged in 1927.
There were several more terminals in Buenos Aires, including those of the Buenos Aires Central Railway at Chacarita and the Buenos Aires Western at Once.
Together with the freight stations they took up a considerable area of the city.
After the depression of the late nineteenth century Argentina was very much a country on the move in the first three decades of the twentieth.
This was well illustrated by station-building and civic pride outside the capital.
La Plata, the administrative centre of Buenos Aires province, had undergone economic vicissitudes at the end of the century, but with the upturn in its fortunes in the next few years it acquired a station of striking originality, an overall shed flanked by a staggeringly ornate pentagonal building covered in statuary and surmounted by a dome.
The doorway bore ‘La Plata’ carved above it, and had all the appearance of a city gate.
Another La Plata station, quite different, four-square and concrete, belonged to the provincial government's metre-gauge railway.
At Rosario the role of the station in civic pride was confirmed in 1925 when the foundation stone for a new station was laid to commemorate the bicentennial of the founding of the city.
At Concordia a fine classical station with twin towers marked the headquarters of the Argentine Northern Railway in the Entre Rios province.
From the beautiful brick structure at Alemania, with its overhanging eves and balconied flat roofs, to the classical façade of the station offices at Tucumán, from the neat brick and stone structure of Puerto Madryn in Welsh Patagonia, with its fine balusters, corner urns, and ironwork, to the white square mass and canopies of Concepción de Uruguay, Argentinian stations explored a remarkable range of styles and materials.
Across the River Plate in Uruguay, the great Central Station in Montevideo, built in 1897 and designed by a Uruguayan architect, Luis Andreoni, virtually marked the coming-of-age of the country.
It was the grandest building in Montevideo when it was built, and adopted a style which seems to have been particularly congenial to Latin American nationalism, Second Empire.
The complex variegated arcading of its façade was adorned with statues, including those of James Watt and George Stephenson, the whole surmounted by steep mansard roofs and a squat tower with projecting rounded windows.
Behind was a magnificent overall train-shed.
Throughout Uruguay every station was equipped with a sign announcing the distance from Montevideo station, symbolizing a radiating nationalism well matched by the manner in which all lines led to the capital.
Yet Uruguayan stations achieved a diversity almost as great as that as Argentina, from the tin shack at Pan de Azúcar to the heavy, unrelieved, square strength of Paysandú, from the elegant classical Salto to the delightful single-platform country station at Paso de los Toros.
The station at Asunción in Paraguay was one of the most remarkable in Latin America.
The tracks were designed to enter the train-shed at a shallow angle to the street and an impressive building with a grand tower was inserted in the triangle formed between the lines and the road.
The train-shed arched over the adjacent pavement and a long colonnade carried pedestrians along the side of the station as though rather hoping that they would become passengers.
Although the overall effect was classical, the end towers of the shed dominating the street corner had distinctly Gothic elements.
It made brilliant use of a difficult site and united station and thoroughfare in a most satisfying way.
A remarkably complex railway system was created in Brazil, with federal, state, and private (largely British) railways.
The southern state, São Paulo, was developed by the coffee boom of the late nineteenth century.
The railways coped with very difficult terrain there, but none the less enough capital was left, apparently, for some lavish stations.
In São Paulo, the Estação da Luz (‘Station of Light’) was built in an overblown Italianate Renaissance style.
In red brick and white stone, it had a façade of great length matched by a high tower which reached up to the light which its name celebrated.
It was built as a side station with twin towers flanking the train-shed.
Inside, the entrance hall was designed like a grand salon of a Renaissance palace, highly decorated, with Corinthian pilasters rising to a series of cornices surrounding a painted ceiling.
The São Paulo railway adopted a range of styles.
The station at Santos bore more relation, on a smaller scale, to Montevideo Central, while that at Paranapiacaba was more like an English country station, all wide canopies, with fretted valances on a large island platform surmounted by a fine clock-tower.
At Recife, the capital of Pernambuco province in north-eastern Brazil, the British-owned Great Western of Brazil built an imposing station, grand enough for any capital.
Twin towers, each capped by sculptures of four mighty condors, flanked a great semicircular ribbed window.
Stepped-down wings extended on each side and the whole was finished off with an elegant domed lantern.
The square outside was adorned, a neat British touch, with a bandstand.
Only the Brazilian Viação Ferrea do Rio Grande do Sur seemed to adopt a house style, much more Lusitanian in feel, in white stucco with red tiles and large moulded windows.
At Rio the old station was replaced by a modern skyscraper which doubles as a clock-tower, but at Belo Horizonte, a provincial capital in central Brazil, a massive station survives from 1922.
Its clock-tower, supported on the station's porte cochère , and dome were decorated with large female figures on each corner and above the clock itself.
Balustraded verandas surmounted each level, and a succession of towers projected from the mass of the building.
This was Latin American nationalist classical at its most overblown.
On the other side of the Andes, stations were built in a much more modest style.
There, passenger traffic was light, and was generally regarded as a nuisance.
The enormous cost of engineering the lines ensured that little money was left for the stations.
Nevertheless, stations reflected the same combination of foreign capital and nationalist pride.
In Chile, British railway capital provided Valparaiso with a classical station, while Santiago's Alameida Station was built on the broad Avenida Bernardo O'Higgins, linking the railway to independence heroes in a manner common throughout Latin America.
Chilean stations usually had overall roofs in the British manner.
At Las Cuevas, on the frontier with Argentina, the cavernous station stands in a vaulted tunnel for protection.
The original station in the open was destroyed by an avalanche with the loss of thirty-five lives in 1964.
Lima in Peru at one stage boasted four stations, Monservate, La Palma, Los Desamperados, and Viterbo.
Monservate was demolished after an outbreak of bubonic plague, an unusual fate for a station.
The original Los Desamperados (‘the abandoned ones’) was burnt down earlier this century and was replaced by an earthquake-proof Italianate structure clad in cream-coloured stucco.
Its name is a curious comment since it is situated beside the back garden of the Presidential palace, and boasts only one train a day.
Most of the Andean stations have an abandoned air and see few trains, although those in the capital cities derive a certain faded grandeur from the fact that their buildings often incorporate the headquarters of the railway companies.
Cuzco station, the junction for the Santa Ana railways, used by large numbers of tourists to reach the great Incan site of Machu Picchu, was a modest two-storey tin-roofed structure with one platform until the pressure of visitors led to its expansion in recent years.
Other principal stations in the Peruvian Andes, like Oroya and Huancayo, are equally modest, although Fawcett described Huancayo as ‘the prettiest station U have seen anywhere.’
On the southern Peruvian railway
The North American stamp is upon it all, giving the line a flavour completely different to that of the Chilean systems…
Nowhere on the Southern — not even in Arequipa — is there a train shed.
Stations are naked, open to the Andean skies, sometimes divorced from any visible settlement to justify their existence.
The North American flavour was emphasized by the fact that the simple station buildings contained ‘the traditional bay window on the low platform, housing the station-agent — operator's office with the usual table in the bay complete with telegraph instruments, sounders, telephones, and so on’.
The station at La Paz, Bolivia, presents a sense of square, muscular, classical power, emphasized by its strong tower, but boasts only one platform behind.
In Ecuador, both Quito and Riobamba adopted a modest, charming Spanish style in cream stucco and red tiles, no bigger than large houses.
But Bogotá in Colombia was provided with one of the grandest of Andean stations in 1917.
Its full-length widows give the appearance, appropriately enough, of a power house, and the quantity of glass gives it a modern, almost Bauhaus feel.
Yet the central portion was built with a rusticated lower storey and the entrance canopy supported Corinthian Pillars with a sculpture of a mighty condor on the entablature.
Elsewhere in Colombia, the stations are like Spanish houses, some of them in wild colour schemes, like the bilious green and pink of Zipaquiva.
A multiplicity of railway companies in Venezuela ensured that Caracas had four stations by 1905, but Percy Martin found them dirty, shabby, and comfortless.
Like those of Caracas, the stations of Mexico have generally had a bad press.
By the turn of the century Mexican railways were divided into a group which were American-owned, largely connecting Mexico to the United States, and two (the early Mexican Railway started in 1857 and the Mexican Southern of 1889) which were British.
Several of these were swept up into the state National Railways of Mexico in the early years of this century.
There were at this time few, if any, pretentious stations.
The Central Railway's Buenavista terminus in Mexico City did not fulfil the splendid prospect its name implied.
It consisted only of a simple two-storey stone block with an overall shed behind covering two platforms.
At Puebla, the Inter-Oceanic Station of the National lines was a solid stone range with a squat central tower.
But when Mexican stations moved from the era of foreign capital to the period of nationalist fervour, they took on a new self-conscious national grandeur, complete with the acres of frescos which Aldous Huxley noted on his visit to Mexico.
Theroux described Potosi station as
a mausoleum of stupefied travellers, which bore on its upper walls frescoes by Fernando Leal.
It was very much a Mexican style of interior decoration for public buildings, the preference for mob scenes and battle pieces instead of wall-paper.
In this one, a frenzied crowd seemed to be dismantling two locomotives made of rubber.
Pandemonium under a thundery sky; muskets, arrows, pickaxes, and symbolic lightning bolts; probably Benito Juarez leading a charge
The railway stations of the Caribbean, however, deserve close attention.
Both Cuba and Jamaica had extensive railway systems, dating from the earliest years of railway construction.
In Cuba, where the first line was opened as early as 1837, there were two main systems, British-owned in the west and American-owned in the east, by the end of the century.
At the time of the First World War, the United Railways of Havana built a magnificent central terminal.
It was in the Spanish Renaissance style, built in American terracotta, and with its waiting-room, concourse, café, and bar finished in Italian marble and Spanish tiles.
This was American imperial building on a grand scale.
Twin towers bore the arms of the railway companies emblazoned upon them.
At San Juan in Puerto Rico, an opulent Spanish-style station was built in 1913.
It may well have influenced the Spanish style in the United States and reflected the role of American imperialism in assimilating a Spanish cultural heritage.
No such pomposity was to be found in the British Caribbean islands.
Jamaica, where the first railway of 1845 was the first in the British colonial empire, was provided with a diverse group of wonderfully eccentric stations.
Many were of wood and featured fine carving, canopies, beautiful lamps, and central towers.
At Montego Bay there was an overall shed backed by a long building with an elaborate tower.
Montpelier was stone-built with a wooden tower projecting from the top.
There, identical buildings stood on each side of the track.
But the most beautiful Jamaican station was at Cambridge.
The main building had a high pointed roof with a cupola on top.
A fine tower with stepped windows stood at one end.
Seldom did weather-boarding reach such architectural heights as this, and seldom did one short platform have such a fine building attached.
Railways were also built on Antigua, Barbados, Haiti, and Trinidad, but stations were always rudimentary on these islands.
Only in Port of Spain, Trinidad, was there a station of any pretension.
This was rebuilt in 1924, with a long, plain, classical two-storey building, three canopied platforms, and an overbridge in the British manner.
P. Ransome-Wallis remarked that one platform would have sufficed for the traffic, and indeed it was not long before Trinidad's railways, together with those of all the smaller West Indian islands, were shut down.
The stations of South America and the Caribbean are mainly the products of the great building-boom era between 1890 and the 1920s.
They were built in a vital period of political turmoil, growing republican nationalism, and American and British imperialism, formal and informal.
Their styles — apart from those of the British West Indies — are generally variations on Renaissance themes, Italianate, Spanish, Second Empire, reflecting national aspirations and the pomposity of civic and national pride of many regimes.
British and American capital and technical expertise were dominant almost everywhere, yet seemed anxious to flatter their hosts.
But the stations do demonstrate that architectural influences flowed north and south through the Americas, bending styles derived from Europe to new ends.
THE STATION IN ARCHITECTURE (3)
ASIA, AUSTRALASIA, AND AFRICA
It was the appearance of the railway station in the non-European world which staked its claim to be not only the distinctive architectural form of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but also the first which was genuinely world-wide.
A case might be made for the Christian church, but there were many more stations than churches, and the railway penetrated cultures which were resistant to Christianity.
The great era of station-building in Asia, Australasia, and Africa was between the 1860s and the 1920s, with the boom years from 1890 to 1914.
In India, though the first stations appeared in the 1850s, the finest examples came later and the building of lines to the deepest recesses of the subcontinent went on until 1914.
Elsewhere in Asia, stations were to emerge as the prime symbols of European power only at the end of the century.
The remarkable Ceylonese railway network was built largely as a response to the insatiable demands of tea-planting from the 1880s.
Although Central Asia was to fall to Russian arms — and soon after to the railway station — in the 1870s, it was not until the turn of the century that Siberia and the Far East bowed to the onward march of the station, here rigidly classified into a whole range of categories of importance.
Similarly, railways and their stations swiftly followed the late appearance of imperial rule in upper Burma, Malaya, and Indo-China.
If in Japan the railway symbolized the country's rapid response to Western power and influence, Chinese resistance to the West was characterized by an often violent antipathy to railways.
Elsewhere, railways in the last years of the century became an inseparable feature of the ambitions of a self-confident age.
The spanning of the United States in 1869 and of Canada in 1885 led to similar grand designs being formulated for Australia.
In the 1870s the French conceived extravagant plans which included no less than the conquest of the Sahara, an impractical design never brought to fruition.
The even grander Cape to Cairo dream came nearer to realization, but only when victorious British arms took the railway to Khartoum in 1899, and the copper of Northern Rhodesia (Zambia) and the Belgian Congo (Zaire) lured it north from the Zambezi in the early years of this century.
If the railways and their stations in Latin America were the classic instance of informal imperialism, economic imperialism without political control, the continental visions of Russia, Australia, and the British and French in Africa were emblematic of the formal control of the world by the European empires.
But grand designs did not necessarily produce great architecture.
Indeed some of the grandest designs were based on the weakest economic need.
So much capital went into the engineering and the track that little was left for the stations.
The French built surprisingly modest stations in North Africa.
Very few of the stations on what was built of the Cape to Cairo railway were anything more than small wayside halts.
Just as the great majority of stations in the United States and Canada, particularly in the earlier period, were no more than frame sheds, so thousands of stations in Africa and Asia were very simple buildings indeed.
In Australia the absence of population in the great central deserts ensured that the stations were built more for the benefit of the trains than for the nonexistent passengers and goods.
On the other hand, on the Trans-Caspian and Trans-Siberian lines the scale of the enterprise was such that the stations became in effect complete communities dominating their localities as part of the process of conquering those vast outer regions of the Russian Empire.
The British built grandly in many places in India, partly to celebrate their own power, but also because the scale of the population, the high degree of urbanization, and the economic potential of the railways demanded it.
On smaller-scale railways, in Ceylon, South-East Asia, and West Africa, the richness and diversity of railway architecture was truly striking.
India 
Nothing symbolized Britain's power in India so completely as the railway station.
Stations were to the British what the motte and bailey and great stone keeps were to the Normans.
The difference lay in the fact that there were in India so many of them, exhibiting a hugely diverse range of styles.
With significant variations, the architectural progression matched the range of experimentation elsewhere.
Some of the early stations were cool classical pavilions.
But once the Mutiny had raised the temperature of the relationship between Briton and Indian the fortified station became the norm.
After experimentation with Romanesque revivalism, Gothic was introduced with a distinctly Indian flavour.
India had its own period of gigantism, symbolized by Calcutta's Howrah, but when the rest of the world reverted to the classical forms, the British in India set about rediscovering and reinterpreting Indian architectural styles.
Some of the early stations were very primitive affairs.
Even in a presidency capital like Bombay, it took some time for the station to catch up with the developing pretension of the city.
On the first line out of Bombay, Byculla station was used primarily by Europeans, Bori Bunder by Indians, and both were modest wooden structures.
Even when the Prince of Wales visited Bombay in 1875, there was still no adequate station there.
He left from a mean wooden structure at Parel, near Government House.
The British had reserved their first great station gestures for the interior of the subcontinent.
When the first 120 miles of the East India Railway were opened from Calcutta to Raniganj in 1855, the ceremony took place at Burdwan station, a long classical structure 66 miles from Calcutta.
The railway seemed to be continuing the classical tradition of the East India Company capital itself.
In the aftermath of the Mutiny, however, the eighteenth-century imperial style was dropped, even as the East India Company was wound up.
The symmetry of the classical had symbolized order, regularity, the homogeneity of legal codification, and Macaulay's English education for Indians.
The Mutiny of 1857 had disrupted all these, and the British now experimented in social, governmental, and economic practice.
Yet 1857 had also demonstrated the full strategic importance of railways and their role in maintaining future order.
The railway station would now be seen as a significant strategic point to which Whites could withdraw to be rescued by train-borne troops and from which the forces could fan out into disaffected areas.
As a result, a number of fortified stations were built in this period of nervousness.
They had strong enclosing walls, round corner towers with firing slits from which defenders could command the outer walls.
There were few windows on the exterior, their roofs were supplied with long walkways protected by thick parapets, and high look-out towers flanked the entrance and main concourse.
The trains appeared to penetrate the buildings themselves, for shed and offices were conceived in a single mass, and the tracks could be closed off by gates.
An Illustrated London News illustration of 1864 shows the arrival of the Governor-General at the most famous of these stations, Lahore.
Huge crowds have gathered, elephants are drawn up, banners are borne aloft, and pennants and flags fly from the entrance and corner towers.
It is like a medieval chivalric scene, and the Governor-General emerges from the fortified station like a king or great lord across the drawbridge of his castle.
Here the station was setting the tone for a new British self-image, one more related to the power of medieval romance than classical imperial rule.
Later, Lahore was made to look more like a station.
The look-out towers were provided with clocks, and the fortified entrance was turned into a long porte cochère with projecting canopies.
When this happened it was clear that the defensive need was over.
Nevertheless, this notion of the station as strong point continued, and was partly the reason for many being built outside the communities they served.
The railway companies soon turned their attention to the presidency cities of Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta.
As the complex railway networks fanned out from these nodal points of British power the companies built there stations that would match the railway, civic, and administrative grandeur associated with them.
The scale of these stations was dictated not only by the numbers of passengers they had to handle and the imperial power they had to represent, but by the complexity of the Indian railway operation, and the range of facilities that had to be made available to the hierarchic and heterogeneous nature of the passenger traffic.
The station buildings had to incorporate a variety of waiting-rooms for the classes, races, and sexes, restaurants and toilets equally diverse, as well as resting-rooms and bathrooms for Europeans.
Madras was the earliest British settlement among these cities, and it was there that a grand station in Romanesque revivalist style was built in 1868.
The architect was instructed to keep ornamentation to a minimum, but the Victorian's notion of minimal detail would be considerable elaboration to any other age.
The round-arched arcading and windows were capped by variegated coloured voussoirs; there were four corner towers and an imposing central one; and towers and roof ridges were finished in fine iron work.
The whole produced a chaste, harmonious, and well-proportioned effect.
Within twenty years the immense complexity of British power had been perfectly represented in the greatest station ever built in India, the remarkable Victoria Terminus in Bombay.
The station was built on a site of particular significance in the history of Bombay.
It was said to be the site of the shrine of the goddess Mumba Devi or Maha Amba who gave her name to Bombay.
The Portuguese had built a public gallows adjacent to the shrine's tank, which itself survived until 1805.
Now the British built a steam cathedral on a piece of land which had become a sort of palimpsest of indigenous and alien power.
The Great Indian Peninsula Railway, replacing a modest station on the same site, scotched all adverse resonances the place might have possessed by arranging the opening of its new station on Queen Victoria's Jubilee day in 1887.
To this day the building has a remarkable power in a modern city of concrete skyscrapers and oppressive traffic.
In 1887 its commanding presence must have seemed the very epitome of British rule.
It was designed by F. W. Stevens in what is often described as the Gothic Saracenic style.
It cost £300,000 to build, a vast sum for the time, and Murray's Handbook for Travellers in India, Burma, and Ceylon , with typical travel-guide hyperbole, described it as the finest railway station in India or any country.
It is an extraordinary hybrid, combining domes with spires, fretted and decorated round-headed arches with lancet and rose windows all in a warm red colour.
Middle English, Venetian, Romanesque, and Orientalist features jostle with each other in an architectural epic of commercial and religious power.
Marbles and granites were imported and the building was embellished with appropriate statuary and ornamentation.
The apex of the dome was surmounted by a colossal figure, over 16 ft. high, representing ‘Progress’.
Sculptural panels illustrating ‘Engineering’, ‘Agriculture’, ‘Commerce’, ‘Science’, and ‘Trade’ were set into the gables, and cameo busts of the directors of the company were placed in the main façade.
If Lahore symbolized military power, Victoria Terminus represented a scientific and commercial dominance which could suck in and re-process a whole range of other cultures.
To this day, it signifies almost better than any other building the Victorians' love of spectacle and sentiment and their confidence that a new world order could be created out of a massive syncretism.
No other Bombay station could match it, and none tried.
The Bombay, Baroda, and Central India Railway built a grand headquarters building across the road from their station at Churchgate, but the station was left to fend for itself.
It had been built in 1876 and consisted of a whole succession of low-roofed, dormer-windowed, gabled buildings.
Colaba, built in 1893, was no more than a pleasant, small, English country town station, with Gothic windows, a tight upstanding porte cochère , and a single tower.
In Calcutta the railway companies seem almost to have been overawed by the classical splendour of the Viceroy s palace and the great secretariat buildings dating from the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The stations were to be vast in size but unexciting in form.
The first Sealdah station of 1862 derived its prime grandeur from its engineering works: a six-mile embankment had to be built to bring the railway into the centre of Calcutta.
The station itself was built with massive stolidity as though to distance itself from the Georgian grace of the great imperial buildings near by.
This is well illustrated by the photographs of its construction preserved in the India Office Library in London.
The foundations were in places 45 ft. deep, incorporating great water tanks, and its walls were 10 ft. thick.
It was described as Italianate, but it bore little relationship to the contemporary light Italianate villas of the United States and of English country houses.
It was later replaced by another station which was said to have features modelled on the Palace of Nineveh.
Its 200-foot-long waiting-room was surmounted by an arched gallery and a magnificently arcaded clerestory.
Across the Hooghly, at Howrah, the East India Railway, often described as the premier railway company of India, built another massive terminus, which was opened in 1906.
In 1855, when the first railway line was opened from Howrah, there had only been a collection of huts and sheds on the site.
Now the architect, Halsey Ricardo, had designed a station in redbrick gigantism, providing a dramatic contrast with the syncretic graces of Bombay's Victoria Terminus.
Jan Morris described it as a combination of Tibetan monastic and English penal, with both Moorish and Romanesque detail.
But what it lost in architectural refinement, it made up in staggering scale.
No fewer than eight towers dominated the façade, six of them capped by shallow-hipped roofs, two of them flat, open, and balustraded, bearing flag-poles, and all arranged in a numbing symmetry.
There were several lesser towers, the corner ones with domes.
Open balustraded verandas intruded at every level, the frontage being stepped back to incorporate them.
Two large portes cochères offered ingress to a station which was immediately dubbed the largest in India, perhaps even in all Asia.
Only the equally massive Central Station in Tokyo could compare with it.
Outside the presidency cities, the stations can be divided into those of the large provincial cities, those of smaller towns, and those of the princely states.
The stations of the presidency cities were all head stations, termini befitting their status as ports and capitals, but those of the provincial cities were generally through stations with side buildings.
It was the need to provide so many public areas which produced the enormously long frontages of these stations, the buildings often as long as the platforms themselves.
Such was the case at Rawalpindi, a massive stone structure with six powerful crenellated towers, at Mooltan, where a lighter effect was produced by beautiful arcading, stone lattice-work, long balustrades on three levels, all surmounted by chatrio , and at Khargpur, where the central block was surmounted by a tower.
At Ahmednagar the massive effect was relieved by a complex division of the building into different projecting, outwards and upwards, separate blocks, whereas at Ambala, Allahabad, and Jullunder the whole was brought together into one single undulating block.
Throughout India there were countless hundreds of smaller stations where simple functionalism reflected a predominantly ‘native’ passenger business.
A covered platform to keep off the worst excesses of the monsoon rain, a ticket office, and a large, bare waiting-room or shed with a stand-pipe outside were all that were provided.
By contrast, those places which could be expected to have a predominantly European clientele, particularly at the hill stations, a sort of English country style was adopted to create the right atmosphere for a cool refreshing visit to the hills.
Such was the case at Simla, Darjeeling, Solan, Coonoor, and Ootacamund.
They were small-scale, comfortable, appropriate to their surroundings.
At the other end of the spectrum were the pilgrim stations, expected to be used only by Indians, and in vast numbers.
They were given immensely long platforms, like their military counterparts, some of the longest in the world, and huge circulation areas to cope with the great press of travellers at significant pilgrimage periods.
Through the British, the Indian princes acquired armorial bearings, a strict order of precedence, salutes, and much other paraphernalia of an invented tradition.
They also acquired the railways and many of them became as proud of their state systems as of the other perquisites of the British connection.
Their distinctive stations often tried to adopt local styles.
Many in Rajputana, at Jaipur, Jodhpur, Ajmer, Udaipur, incorporated Rajput motifs or were built to match local buildings like forts.
The Deccan developed a distinctively four-square stone-built style.
Both Secunderabad and Hyderabad presented long arcaded fronts to the platform, back by powerful rectangular blocks containing offices.
That at Hyderabad with its wide cornices and balustraded roof detail was somewhat less austere than its more utilitarian neighbour at Secunderabad.
Throughout the state of Hyderabad, the smaller stations followed the same pattern in miniature: stone-built, with strongly accented quoins, and heavy arcading often relieved by tubs of flowers and shrubs, and fine iron corner brackets and lamps.
At Junagadh in Gujarat a beautiful country-style station with deep pitched roofs and elaborate wood carving sheltered behind the hugely impressive Reay Gate with its massive clock-tower.
Town gate and station were here brought together.
The station it Gwalior, a neo-Mughal construction with chatrio at every corner, consisted in effect of a series of pavilions connected by verandas in a light and elegant stone.
So fascinated was the Maharaja Scindia of Gwalior with railways that his table was adorned with a silver centrepiece, in effect a classical station adorned with statuary and urns, from which there emerged a silver model of a train which circulated liqueurs and cigars.
The tradition of the ‘Orientalist’ station never died in India throughout the British period.
Mughal-style stations had been built in the Lucknow — Agra area, often, as at Nawab, single platform stations with an overall roof framed by minarets — and with a side pavilion capped by domed open towers.
Madras Egmore, completed in 1908, was also in a ‘Mughal’ style, curiously out of place in South India.
It was a wildly ornate station in brick trimmed with granite and sandstone.
Several towers were capped by domes in the shape the Mughals had brought with them from Persia and Central Asia.
There were also chatrio and intricate stone carving, particularly in the fantastic stone brackets, the drip stones, and rich friezes.
A great range of waiting-rooms, offices, restaurants, baggage rooms, and a post office were supplied within.
This tradition was continued in the 1920s with the new stations built at Lucknow in 1926 and Kanpur (Cawnpore) in 1928.
The long façades of these redbrick buildings were adorned with Mughal arches; the interiors were provided with airy loggias and wide verandas, from which sprang a whole succession of open towers adorned with lattice-work and capped by domes of varying sizes.
This was a splendid late flowering of the ‘Orientalist’ style, and was to the British in India what the Spanish mission-station style was to the United States.
Elsewhere, however, other styles were taking over.
In Bombay the new stations were built in international concrete style.
In 1928 a new Churchgate was designed, mainly to cope with suburban traffic.
Its totally undistinguished architecture was largely and mercifully obscured by shop-fronts.
The old Colaba station was closed in 1930 when the massive Bombay Central was opened.
Its façade was dominated by a 65 ft. concrete arch, with a vast concourse beyond flanked by offices and retiring rooms.
Its functionalism was at least tempered by a grand conception of space.
At the same time the great Victoria Terminus was extended by the addition of another station behind to cope with increased long-distance traffic.
In the same period the new capital of India at New Delhi was being designed by Sir Herbert Baker and Sir Edwin Lutyens.
Their original conception involved a great railway station in one of the most important sites in the capital.
The Queen's Way, which ran at right angles to the King's Way, was to have a massive terminal station at its head, dominating Connaught Circus and second in importance only to the Viceroy's palace on the Raisina Acropolis at the head of King's Way.
The station was never built.
The New Delhi station which did appear, somewhat further away, was a functional monstrosity in concrete and steel.
Delhi, in fact, despite its status as the Mughal capital and its vital importance as a great railway junction, had never had a distinguished station.
Delhi Junction had a long, curving, double-arcaded front, in redbrick Eurasian Gothic, with small crenellated towers, the only hint of decoration being supplied by blinds on all the windows.
On the other hand, the Railway Magazine reported that its internal arrangements were extremely convenient.
The only railway building in New Delhi to emerge in the Baker-Lutyens style was in fact the Northern Railway headquarters, Baroda House.
Many of the old imperial stations have now been replaced.
The long, low colonial station at Surat was demolished in favour of a modern office-block style station.
New stations have been built since independence at Jodhpur, Siliguri, and Baroda, among many others.
A station featured as an important part of the design of Le Corbusier for the New Punjabi capital at Chandigarh, but there the station with its ramps, car-parks, and adjacent bus station was mainly designed to benefit the internal combustion engine.
None of the new stations conveyed the confident self-assurance or whimsy of their distinguished predecessors.
Independent India has been unable to express any distinctive national culture through its new stations.
Like Indian airports, which some of them resemble, they are merely poor relations of the international style.
Ironically, it was the imperial British who were able to create syncretic styles which became distinctively Indian.
Ceylon, Singapore, and Hong Kong 
The British created in Ceylon (Sri Lanka) one of the finest island and mountain networks in the world.
The first sections of the Colombo to Kandy railway were opened in 1865, and from that time there was continuous railway-building on the island until the 1920s.
Lines extended north and east along the coast, and branch lines were built in the interior to all the main plantation areas, for the cultivation of tea, after coffee had failed, developed dramatically between the 1880s and 1920s.
In 1910 a line which was described as being ‘of imperial importance’ was started to link Ceylon to India.
The South India Railway was to be built as far as Ramaswaram and then connected to Ceylon by embankments and bridges.
It was the fact that this was essentially a planters' system which ensured that the stations were built of a standard and elegance which a plantocracy could use with comfort.
The photographic archive of the Crown Agents in London contains a magnificent record of these stations in their pristine condition.
Many of them were built in a simple, elegant, almost standard form.
There was usually a two-storey building, with a cool loggia, surmounted by a veranda at first-floor level, reached by an open staircase.
Fine lamps, English rural-style fencing, and lattice-work round the veranda and stairs created a pleasingly English colonial form.
Flowers and creepers became almost part of the architecture.
In places the platform loggia was formed of a row of Doric columns, as at Negombo.
A few were thatched, but most had iron or tile roofs.
Henry Cave's Guide to the island's railways described the station at Ohiya as being like somewhere in Cornwall, and at the hill stations of Nauwara-Eliya and Nanuoya there were distinct efforts to reproduce English country stations.
They were built as country cottages with platform canopies on one side,portes cochères on the other, all surrounded by flowers.
Handsome stations were built on the line eastwards from Colombo towards Galle because it was along that coast that lawyers and civil servants had their bungalows.
At Mount Lavinia, a nineteenth-century Governor, Sir Edward Barnes, had built a marine villa.
The expenditure was subsequently repudiated by the Colonial Office and the villa was turned into a fine hotel with a station alongside.
The original station in Colombo had twin towers which housed the first and second-class booking offices at their bases.
The platforms had canopies supported by beautiful ironwork, but overall the station fitted no conventional style.
There were several stations in Colombo and for many years the principal mode of transport within the city was the train.
In 1911 Fort Station was developed as the principal Colombo station.
The old terminus was converted into a goods station, a common fate for superannuated passenger stations throughout the world, and Fort was provided with platform canopies and flowers to enhance its attractive position beside the lake in the centre of the city.
Further east, another colonial island was provided with a railway in 1903.
The first Singapore station, Cluny Road, was a long brick building on stilts to protect it from flooding.
It had a long colonial veranda and a high cupola, while the terminus of the railway, Tank Road Station at the docks, had a tower which made it an aid to ships navigating the harbour.
On the other side of the island the terminus was at Woodlands Station, an English country station to match its name, long, low, with overhanging eaves, barge-boarding, and fine lamps.
In 1923 Singapore was connected to the state of Johore in Malaya by a causeway and Singapore station, instead of being merely an entrance to a small island system, became a portal to Malaya and ultimately Thailand.
Indeed, there had even been plans to connect this area of South-East Asia by railway to India and China.
The new Singapore station was built to match these Pretensions.
Within a plain exterior there was a large booking hall with long slender windows rising to an arched roof and decorated with Italian mosaics depicting aspects of Malayan life.
In the late nineteenth century a succession of small lines had been built to connect the Malayan tin mines to the coast.
It was not until 1909 that the spinal railway of Malaya was completed, connecting the rubber plantations to the capital, Kuala Lumpur, north to Ipoh and Penang, and later (after 1931) up the pan-handle to Thailand.
The local stations on this system ranged from the simple wooden building at Batu Gajah or Tampin to the large, airy, open-sided barn style at Teluk Anson.
Many of them seemed like tiny oases hemmed in by the alien rubber which overran the entire peninsula.
Kuala Lumpur acquired at the beginning of the century one of the most spectacular stations in Asia, where building and train-shed were conceived as one architectural whole and the trains entered what seemed like a cross between an extravagant Oriental palace and a mosque.
An equally elaborate railway headquarters was built across the road, and together they owed more to the Mughal style in India than to any local architectural forms.
At Ipoh, the capital of the state of Perak, an early station was replaced by a stuccoed structure, quite different from that of Kuala Lumpur, with prominent quoins, powerful arches, and three levels of verandas, surmounted by balustrading and a dome.
A clock-towered station in white stucco was built at Penang, the earliest British possession in Malaya, though the trains left from Prai on the mainland.
The traveller from Malaya arrived at Bangkok in an elegant, cream-stuccoed station with a single wide arch and small towers on both sides.
Smaller stations, however, like that at the fashionable resort of Hua Hin, adopted a local multi-roofed pagoda style.
If Singapore acquired pretensions as the gateway to a continent in the 1920s and 1930s, Hong Kong had secured similar status earlier in the century.
There a 22 mile railway completed in 1911 connected Kowloon to the Canton province and the railway system of China.
The first Kowloon station stood opposite the Hong Kong Star Ferries terminal.
It was built in an Italianate style with no concessions to the East at all, in red brick with stone columns.
The fine clock-tower, together with the famous Peninsula Hotel near by, dominated the Kowloon waterfront, and acted as a powerful Western gateway to China.
There the Western merchants and officials of the Chinese treaty ports could entrain for their destinations in China.
The station in Kowloon was demolished in the 1970s and replaced by a soulless concrete and glass structure on reclaimed land at Hung Hom, opened in 1973.
The new station is inconvenient to pedestrians, being a considerable walk from the ferries' landing stage.
It is enslaved to the motor car, surrounded by great road ramps, and dominated by an unpleasant multi-storey car-park.
Now it repels rather than beckons, and Hong Kong has destroyed another of the fine colonial buildings of the territory.
Russia 
The spreading tentacles of Russian railways into Asia marked the last great imperial push of the Tsarist empire.
It sent alarm bells ringing throughout the East, and brought Russia into renewed conflict with China, Britain, and ultimately — more seriously — Japan.
The speed and extravagance (despite all the cheese-parings of the Emperor Alexander III) of Russian railway-building were remarkable.
These were State enterprises, engineered by the military, and using convict and forced labour.
Revolt between the Aral and Caspian seas occasioned the building of the Trans-Caspian in the 1880s, but the young George Nathaniel Curzon saw in it a much more sinister imperial plan.
Perhaps, he thought, they hoped to link it up to a Euphrates Valley railway, which would make Baghdad a Russian southern capital.
Otherwise, by securing railway concessions in Persia, the Russians could reach the Gulf and at one and the same time create their longed-for warm-water port and turn the western flank of the British in India.
Again they might contemplate connecting their Central Asian line to Herat and Kandahar and on to Quetta, thereby creating a through route from Calais to Calcutta.
Curzon had little need to spell out to his contemporaries the commercial and strategic dangers of such a scheme.
Already preparing himself for the first of his political glittering prizes, the viceroyalty of India, he visited the Trans-Caspian in 1888 and published a book on it in 1889.
None of the schemes Curzon feared was to be accomplished.
But the Russians had their own grand plan which made even the North American transcontinental schemes and the Cape to Cairo dream pale into insignificance.
That was, of course, the Trans-Siberian railway.
Moscow to Nakhodka, St Petersburg to Vladivostok — however one measured it, that scheme would be wellnigh 6,000 miles long, compared with a mere 3,420 for New York to Los Angeles or 3,500 miles for the never-completed Cape to Cairo.
The Cossacks had crossed Siberia in the seventeenth century.
It had later become a place of exile and migration.
In the second half of the nineteenth century the population of Siberia had doubled, but although some short railways had been built to connect river navigations — as in Canada — conditions of transport remained exceptionally primitive.
The forerunners of the railway stations of the Trans-Siberian were the ètapes , the stockaded rest stations with barrack-like rooms, and the post-houses which had been built across Siberia earlier in the century.
The railway had advanced across the Urals by 1874.
Perm to Ekaterinburg was completed in 1878 and Ekaterinburg to Tyumen in 1885.
Proposals for a Trans-Siberian had been made since the 1850s, but it was famine and political disorder in the East at the beginning of the last decade of the century which finally prompted the building of the line.
The Tsarevich Nicholas, the future Nicholas II, on a visit to the Far East, cut the first sod and laid the foundation stone of the rail-way station at Vladivostok on 19 May 1891.
He returned to European Russia overland, leaving a trail of triumphal arches in the towns of Siberia, and in a sense rounding off the old route before the appearance of the railway.
The vast project was pushed forward faster than the spanning of the United States or Canada.
Khabarovsk was reached from the direction of the eastern terminus by 1894.
The Western Siberia started in 1892 and was opened in 1895.
The Central Siberian from Ob to Irkutsk was built between 1893 and 1898.
Ice-breaking ferries were launched on Lake Baikal in 1900, the year in which the Trans-Baikal railway to Sretensk was completed.
The line round Lake Baikal was finished after the outbreak of the Russo-Japanese war in 1904.
The Chinese Eastern railway was completed in 1904, and the Amur railway was developed between 1908 and the First World War.
All of this construction took place, of course, in the face of the most severe weather conditions imaginable.
Track could be laid only during the brief summer months.
Railway stations and associated building works were constructed during the winter.
On such mighty systems as these the stations were clearly to be places of great importance.
Their significance was enhanced by the fact that they were often far from the towns whose names they bore.
The railways had to be driven by the fastest and most convenient route.
Towns had often to be sited in defensive, strategic positions not readily accessible to the railway.
The railway stations created new settlements, some of which indeed were ultimately to be more important than the traditional towns they were supposed to serve.
In 1888 Curzon found station-building activity going on across the Trans-Caspian route.
He noted the classification of these stations, the great variety of styles used, and their relative paucity over vast desert distances compared with European standards — only sixty in a thousand miles — and their distance from the towns and cities they were to serve.
At Bukhara the station was ten miles from the old city.
Samarkand station, 150 miles from Bukhara with only two stations between, was three miles from the city itself.
Many of the stations as Curzon found them were no more than rude shanties, a few planks half-buried in the sands of Central Asia.
But the Russians were well aware of the grandeur of their exploit —‘mounting the stream of ages into Central Asia’, as Curzon called it, taking the ‘fire horse’ into the very heart of old cultures.
At Samarkand, masons were active building a grand terminus (which was to remain so only until the railway was carried through to Tashkent in 1898).
Each of the great oases of Central Asia was eventually to be graced with powerfully squat four-square stone-built stations, perfectly symbolizing the implacable toughness of Russian power.
The stations on the Trans-Siberian were classified according to size and amenity into five categories.
It was originally decreed that great economies had to be exercised in the provision of stations, which were to be mainly of wood.
But all stations of any importance, even category III and IV, soon possessed elaborate churches, hospitals, schools, workshops, engine sheds, living quarters for railway staff, and even theatres.
Some had barracks and medical centres for migrants.
This was the railway station as town.
Merchants and storekeepers flocked to them, building at first only shanties for warehouses and stores, and the nearby towns which they were supposed to serve were seriously damaged.
The actual station buildings at the centre of these new railway communities became administrative centres of some importance and this was reflected in their architecture.
Fine stone structures, confident in their detail with powerful round arches, were built at Petropavlosk, Zlatoust, and Kurgan (all category III) and at Omsk (II).
At Tayga (III)— the junction for Tomsk — Ob, Achinsk, and Olginskaya (III) there were long, low, wooden stations with twin gables fronting on to the platform.
Even a simpler station, like that at Vyazemskaya (III), was adorned with high chimneys, dormer windows, and a flag-pole on its front gable.
Class III stations could in fact exhibit a great diversity of style and size, while many a class IV, like that at Shumikha, could seem little different in scale.
But the class V's showed their lowly status: they were very small and could look lost in their vast and bleak surroundings.
At Vladivostok, the station which rose on Nicholas's foundation stone was a baleful prison-like building with two blocks linked by a single-storey entrance range.
The plain, towerless strength of all the stations seemed to be a conscious representation of a powerful and economical practicality.
There was nothing of the picturesque or civic excess in these stations.
It was left to the adjacent churches to provide elaboration and the upward thrust of towers, domes, and crosses.
Tayga, Tatarskaya, Isil-Kul, and over one hundred other stations boasted such churches, built from the Alexander III fund and by other donors.
Only occasionally was a churchless station built with its own elaboration.
At Oyash, 50 miles north-east of Novosibirsk, a small wooden station with a distinctly Orientalist feel to its carved wooden decoration was dominated by a water tower, similarly decorated, which provided the upward thrust so common in Western stations in the nineteenth century and so lacking on the Trans-Siberian.
Many of the old stations were subsequently swept away.
Irkutsk acquired a massive station, with two central towers capped by domes and larger corner blocks with connecting wings.
Tayga's wooden station was replaced by a much grander structure adorned with elaborate lamps.
The American Harmon Tupper found two stations coexisting at Mariinsk in the 1960s.
The old wooden structure, in the same style as the original Ob, Achinsk, or Olginskaya, remained in use, but a new stone building with a central booking hall and two wings was completed, ready to take over.
On a journey across the Trans-Siberian in 1977, Eric Newby found many of the old stations still surviving.
Near Sverdlovsk (formerly Ekaterinburg) he saw an extravagantly castellated little wooden station in the woods.
But everywhere he found a paranoia about photography.
Generally, he was not allowed to photograph any of the original wooden stations on the grounds that they were too old, presumably an affront to Soviet progressivism and modernity.
At Omsk he was not permitted to photograph the station because its front had been removed.
In the Far East, on the route to Nakhodka (Vladivostok is forbidden to visitors), he saw many old-fashioned wooden stations still in use, painted green or blue, each with huge iron stoves in its waiting-room.
The Far East 
Nowhere were railway systems begun with such reluctance as in the Far East.
And nowhere else did stations suffer such massive mortality.
In China there were only 300 miles of railway in 1900, although the figure reached 5,200 miles by 1910.
In Japan the first railway line between Yokohama and Tokyo (18 miles) was opened in 1872, and within thirty Years there were 3,000 miles of track.
The newly restored Japanese Emperor opened the line, and thereby scotched the bitter religious opposition that had been aroused against the building of railways.
But whereas Chinese railways became a prey to concession seekers, railway builders, and engineers from Britain, France, Belgium, Germany, Russia, Japan, and the United States, even Portugal, Austria, and Italy, the Japanese tried to keep railway-building, after an initial concessionary period, firmly in their own hands.
The first Chinese station was destroyed in 1876.
Another wave of station destruction occurred in the Boxer Rising of 1900.
Japanese invasions and wars put paid to hundreds of Chinese stations in the 1930s and 1940s.
Others were destroyed in the Cultural Revolution.
In Japan, station mortality was caused principally by a combination of earthquakes, the ravages of American bombing in the Second World War, and terminal modernism.
In China it took many years for the railway to broach the capital.
The railway was brought into the vicinity of Peking only gradually.
At one stage the station, not far from the foreign legations, was connected to them by a tram line.
But at last, in a gesture symbolic of Western encroachment itself, the railway burst through the city wall of Peking, bridged the great moat, and advanced upon the ancient capital itself.
In Japan the new imperial capital of Tokyo became the principal railway centre from the start.
Station architecture reflected the intrusiveness of the new Western technology.
At the Chinese treaty ports, the stations used by the inhabitants of the foreign settlements were comfortingly Western.
One postcard from Shanghai to Scotland, illustrating the railway station and posted before the First World War, bears the message ‘is not the station like that at Fort Matilda?’
The latter was a stop on the line between Greenock and Gourock in Renfrewshire.
Few truly large stations were built in China until modern times, when the Russians assisted in the building of a vast new station in Peking.
Despite all the ravages and destruction wrought on Chinese stations, some still bear a curiously 1930s air.
At the border station between Hong Kong and Kuangtung province, Shumchün, the first-class waiting-room still contained in 1980 large 1930s armchairs with antimacassars.
In 1898 there were already several termini in Tokyo.
The impression given to one railway traveller in that year contrasts dramatically with that of modern Japan.
D. T. Timins thought that Japan and railways constituted a curious incongruity:
What should that placid little people know of the rattle and rush of an express train, typical as it is of the nerve-wasting haste with which we Westerners live our lives?
Those shining metals are as the veritable trail of the serpent; they follow inevitably in the wake of civilisations, and give rise to crowded and smoky manufacturing towns, while spreading abroad an unrestful desire for travel with all its concomitant worries and brain wear.
Moreover, the destruction of all peaceful village life comes in their train…
I cannot resist saying that when Japan finally exchanges her peaceful simplicity, her admiration for, and artistic appreciation of, Nature's beauties, and her contented national life, for the storm stress, and hurry of that feverish existence known to the West, she will have given up the substance for the shadow.
Japan's flight from her Eden was to be astonishingly swift.
And it was reflected in the growing size of her railway stations.
The first Yokohama station consisted of two elegant Georgian houses for the offices with a broad entrance canopy and a waiting-room, lit by a fan-shaped window of stained glass, between.
A multiplicity of small early termini was replaced in 1914 by Tokyo Central, a station so vast as to vie with Howrah in Calcutta, though other mainline termini, Ueno and Shinjuku, survived.
Tokyo Central was designed by Japanese architects assisted by an Englishman, William Barton.
It was built in the French style, in brick, with three towers, a mansard roof, and a grand porticoed gateway.
This was the Far East's contribution to gigantism, reflecting the national expansiveness of Japan's imperial phase.
Timins found Japanese trains to be leisurely.
The Tokyo to Kobe train travelled at an average of 12 m.p.h., because
It makes fifty stops en route, some of them of considerable duration, and, as has been shown, much time must be wasted at stations.
As the Japanese are at present constituted, accidents to life and limb would most certainly occur if trains made but a brief halt to entrain passengers.
For Paul Theroux seven decades later one of the great mysteries of Japanese train travel was the manner in which Japanese passengers could safely disembark and entrain at stations where trains stopped merely for seconds.
Timins's ‘placid little people’ had indeed found the ‘feverish existence’he had predicted.
Nowhere had a traditional culture's response to the Western world been so completely reflected in the life of its railways and stations.
Today, few old stations survive.
Their architecture has faded into unremarkable modernism, devoted to speed, rush, and disciplined circulation.
The railway stations have, like so much of the rest of Japanese life, been subordinated to her economic miracle.
Australasia 
The railway stations of Australia and New Zealand exhibit a remarkable muscularity of style.
This reflected the nature of the environment, the local pride of the individual Australian colonies, and the awareness of the railway builders and architects that they were building for a grander, though then unrealized, future.
Australia and New Zealand illustrate too how rarely British Gothic styles were exported, even to her white dominions.
The dominant styles were the cottage and the colonial bungalow for country stations and a variety of appealing Italianate and Renaissance forms for the stations of cities and towns.
As in the United States, the large city stations underwent a constant process of renewal, culminating in massive rebuilding in the classical manner between the wars.
Early railway lines in Australia connected coastal points to pioneer settlements inland.
This was the pattern of first railways in many parts of the world and it was to produce in Australia great complexities of gauge, rolling stock, and working systems.
Six colonies developed their own proud practices.
It was not until the 1880s that intercolonial connections were made, and the stations which connected them became important not only as points of break of gauge, and therefore of journey for passengers, but also as customs centres.
In 1901 West Australia was enticed into the new Commonwealth with the promise of a transcontinental line, just as British Columbia had been persuaded to join the Canadian Confederation with railway promises.
The line from Port Augusta on the South Australian system to Kalgoorlie in Western Australia was begun in 1912 and completed in 1917.
As late as 1937 there were no fewer than six breaks of gauge between Sydney and Perth.
Three gauges met at Port Pirie.
More visionary railway schemes were got up in the inter-war years.
A line to connect Port Augusta to Darwin and thence by sea to India and the rest of Asia was begun in the 1920s but got no further than Alice Springs, reached in 1929.
It was not until 1966 that the transcontinental standard-gauge line was completed, thereby connecting Sydney to Perth without break of gauge for the first time.
It has been suggested by Australian authors that, because of all the gauge problems, Australians have always had an inferiority complex about their railways.
But a great deal of energy has gone into the extension of the standard-gauge lines and the building of new stations in the modern period.
It is certainly a brash energy rather than an inferiority complex which is conveyed by Australian stations.
They did, however, have very simple beginnings.
The first Sydney station, as seen in a print of 1855, was a one-platformed wooden barn.
By 1871 a photograph shows it little changed.
The first Melbourne station, at Spencer Street, was a somewhat larger three-span shed with a side building.
On New South Wales lines simple verandaed stations with short wooden platforms like that at Burwood were the norm.
But very soon much grander stations were being produced.
When the railway reached Paramatta, its terminus was a fine one-storey classical building with a prominent entrance vestibule.
Solid country stations of the 1880s, like Penrith and Picton, had a four-square strength which was to characterize all Australian station-building.
At Goulbourn a large brick structure with stone quoins and cornices and a central tower and dome had been built in the 1870s, and structure with powerful round-headed arches and long arcading on two storeys was more reminiscent of Indian stations than of those of Europe or North America.
Interior sumptuousness arrived with this station too.
The walls of the concourse were finished in New South Wales marble; the ticket office was constructed entirely in Tasmanian blackwood; and a feature of the booking hall was an elaborate gallery in stone and brick.
The station was reconstructed in a much grander and more familiar Renaissance manner, complete with clock-tower, at the time of the opening of the Sydney Harbour Bridge in 1932.
It now became an important through commuter station as well as a main-line terminus.
If the stations of the Australian capitals did not reach the true gigantism of the last great wave of American stations or of Howrah and Tokyo, they came close to it.
The central station at Melbourne, Flinders Street, built in Edwardian times, was reconstructed as a massive classical range with a corner entrance crowned by a dome.
Above the doorway was a succession of clocks which indicated the next departures to the principal destinations.
At the other end of the long façade was a huge clock-tower, and no fewer than six lesser domes finished the corner and entrance elements of the station.
Its form was dictated by the tightness of the site between Flinders Street and the river, which necessitated stringing out the narrow building along the full length of platforms which ran parallel to the river behind.
Flinders Street was the commuter station for Melbourne, main-line expresses leaving from the less imposing Spencer Street.
It demonstrated the rapidly growing importance of commuters in the Australian cities at this time.
In 1928 Adelaide acquired an even grander classical station, a massive four-square structure with Ionic corner pavilions and a central rusticated porte cochère with a powerful portico above.
It was a head-building which replaced the earlier station of 1902–3.
Its classical central waiting-room had a touch of the first Euston about it, eighty years removed, and South Australian railways were so proud of it that they promptly published a booklet providing statistics of its dimensions, quantities of building materials used, and so on.
It was designed, after a competition, by Garlick and Jackman of Adelaide.
Australia makes an interesting case of station-building.
There was a robust strength about all Australian stations which seemed to reflect the character of the early colonies, their ambitions, and the part they would play in a successful Commonwealth in the twentieth century.
Picturesque eclecticism never found a place there, and a classical tradition emerged which set Australia apart from Canada, India, South Africa, and even to a certain extent neighbouring New Zealand.
Australian railways took up and developed the Italianate style which had been so influential in Britain and the United States earlier in the century, and by the time the principal Australian stations were built, classical was in style once more.
Just as the classical and baroque triumphed in the design of state capitols and ultimately fed back into railway stations, so did Australia cling to forms which had never entirely been superseded as the official architectural language of imperialism.
Few countries have shown such a remarkable sense of responsibility to their station buildings as New Zealand.
From their small and humble beginnings in tiny weather-board stations to the great climaxes of the massive Auckland and Wellington stations of the 1930s, New Zealand Railways have consistently adopted thoughtful and sensitive approaches, When railway confidence was beginning to wane elsewhere in the world in the 1930s, New Zealand not only built two of the greatest stations in the southern hemisphere, but under the Labour Government of 1936–49 continued to invest in railway's.
While there has been contraction more recently, New Zealand Railways, almost uniquely, use the magnificence of some of their stations as a public relations and marketing feature.
New Zealand stations also demonstrate the manner in which, through repeated renewal, station buildings mirror the development of the country.
The earliest stations were no more than collections of weatherboard huts, similar to a contemporary group of stores.
The next phase of the growth of the New Zealand station was to imitate English country practice.
At Invercargill a station with an overall roof and side building was provided.
Long platform canopies supported by decorated iron and with wooden valances soon appeared.
Later, when Invercargill was extended it adopted a classical form.
Soon, however, a much more distinctively New Zealand style emerged.
From 1877 trunk lines were begun on both North and South Islands to cement the short, separate, coast-to-interior railways which had developed up to that date.
The trunk lines called for stations of all sizes from small lean-to flag stations to large city termini.
At Christchurch the original station was no more than a collection of sheds, but in 1877 it was replaced by a long Gothic structure — a rare example in the southern hemisphere — which looked like a succession of chapels at right angles to the platforms with a connecting range running between them.
Later, a remarkable wood and glass conservatory was added to the front.
In 1884 New Zealand was lucky enough to acquire a railway architect and engineer who had been trained in Scotland.
This was George Alexander Troup (later knighted).
He swiftly established himself as a dominant influence in New Zealand station architecture and produced many remarkable buildings.
At Foxton, Petone, and New Plymouth he created a new and striking wooden style with multiple gables, light verandas, and canopies, often capped by a squat tower with cupola and finial.
It was a type that would appear throughout the New Zealand system.
At Bluff he designed a charming two-storey half-timbered building with a wide cantilevered canopy.
His finishing touch was usually Marseilles tile roofing and ridging.
These stations, in providing a large space for parcels, traffic clerks, telegraph offices, and sometimes a post office, reflected the particular needs of rural and small-town communities in New Zealand at that time.
Troup produced his masterpiece in Dunedin in 1907.
It replaced three older small stations which had been built there in the 1860s and 1870s.
The new station, which was the chief pride of New Zealand railways for a number of years, was in a Flemish Renaissance style.
It was constructed in basalt, faced in a white stone, and with polished Aberdeen granite pillars supporting the arched colonnade at the front of the building.
A 120 ft. clock-tower with three ornate clock faces dominated one side of the building.
The interior of the main foyer boasted mosaics, Royal Doulton surrounds to the ticket offices, and stained-glass windows.
At one stage the station was under threat, but it has now been lovingly restored and New Zealand Railways very sensibly issue a tourist booklet to celebrate it.
Its façade and finest decorative features appeared in the New Zealand film Pictures .
Dunedin was to be overshadowed, but not surpassed in elegance, by the vast new stations at Auckland and Wellington completed in the 1930s.
They were built in what has sometimes been called classical bankers' style, more akin to London's Waterloo or Boston South than the Beaux-Arts style.
Auckland's first wooden station had been replaced in 1885 by a two-storey classical building with a squat tower.
This was replaced in turn by the immense station built on reclaimed land in the late 1920s and opened in 1930.
There was a great deal of space on the new site, but the station was less conveniently situated to the city than the old one had been.
Wellington station, which was opened in 1937, was even grander, with a massive Doric frontage.
It too had space for gardens and car-parks, and both had vast concourses.
Wellington also contained the headquarters of New Zealand Railways, and its massive, confident air surmounted by rows of flag-poles represented an extraordinary reaffirmation of support for railways in New Zealand.
New Zealand continued to build stations after the Second World War.
At Christchurch, proposals to replace the Gothic station of 1877 had been made at the time of the First World War and again in the 1930s, but it was not demolished until the 1950s, when it was replaced by a modern station more successful than most.
It retained many of the traditional features of stations, including a clock-tower more than 100 ft. high, and large circulation areas adorned with tiles with Maori motifs, and frescos depicting New Zealand scenes.
This inaugurated a new wave of station-building.
At a time when new stations elsewhere meant bus shelters, fine new stations which retained at least some of the spirit of the old were provided at Taita, Palmerston North, and Rotorua, among others.
Nevertheless, small rural stations have been closing throughout New Zealand, often to the accompaniment of vigorous opposition from New Zealand farmers.
Despite their rearguard action, however, freight handling has been concentrated at larger stations, destroying the role of the small station in the community.
Africa 
In 1870 there were still only short stretches of line in North and South Africa, the only railway of any significance being that between Alexandria and Suez, opened in 1852 and superseded by the Canal in 1869.
Diamonds at Kimberley and gold on the Witwatersrand transformed the situation in Southern Africa, and great railway schemes became an inseparable part of the partition of Africa by the European powers in the 1880s and 1890s.
By the turn of the century Johannesburg was connected to the coast by no fewer than four lines.
The main route north from Kimberley was connected to Bulawayo by 1897 and to Salisbury five years later, thus connecting the Southern African lines to the Indian Ocean at Beira.
In 1904 the line was across the Zambezi and crossing Northern Rhodesia (Zambia) for the copper deposits of the Congo.
By that time, the French had already built an extensive network in North Africa, the Uganda Railway was under construction, the Germans had begun their railways in both Tanganyika and South West Africa, and the British had driven their railway through the Sudan as part of their reconquest of the upper Nile.
French grandiose schemes for the crossing of the Sahara came to nothing, but several lines from the coast to the interior of West Africa were built by the British and the French.
These were completed in the inter-war years, by which time the Lobito Bay railway in Angola and the Central African railway from Mozambique to Nyasaland were in operation.
When the British naval officer Captain (later Admiral) Colomb passed through Alexandria to Suez on his way to take up a new command in the anti-slavery squadron in 1868, he wrote of the rudimentary nature of stations in Egypt.
In Alexandria he found that the railway meandered down to the beach and passengers had to find their way on to the trains without any benefit of station buildings.
But by that time a grand station had already been built in the centre of Alexandria.
In 1858 the Illustrated London News provided an illustration of it, and described it as ‘the most substantially’ constructed edifice in that city, partaking more of a European or Anglican character than most civil structures in Alexandria’.
It was designed by Edwin C. Baines as a side building in a simple classical manner with trains entering an overall shed ventilated by open side arcading.
At Cairo Central there were long side and head buildings, with a fine corner tower embellished with Moorish arches.
The platforms were again covered by an overall shed in the European style.
Generally, African stations made no concessions to local architecture, but were self-consciously intrusive.
The four-volume work on the Cape to Cairo railway, published in the early 1920s, commented on the extraordinary Englishness of Sudanese stations.
Even the stationmasters' uniforms reminded the traveller of Waterloo or Victoria except that the fez replaced the cap.
Stations like those at Atbara, Port Sudan, and El Obeid did indeed have the look of an English country or Scottish Highland station, with the building on an island platform, adorned with travel posters and fine lamps.
At Khartoum North there were two platforms in an overall shed affording some protection from a fierce sun.
South of the Sahara, it was only in South Africa that stations were built on a European scale, and only there that stations were replaced by new and larger versions.
The first simple station at Cape Town, appropriate to the short lines of the mid-Victorian colony, were soon found to be inadequate when that city became, in effect, the gateway to a subcontinent.
A fine Italianate palazzo was built in Edwardian times, and by then, as in so many other places, it was in fact two stations that were required, one suburban and one for the main line.
This was in turn replaced by a modern station in the 1960s.
The early Durban station was superseded at the turn of the century by a large, decorated brick structure with a clock-tower in the civic Renaissance manner, with a fine overall train-shed behind.
Pretoria and Bloemfontein acquired large, dour, stone structures which somehow reflected the religion and ethos of the Boer republics which they served.
Pretoria acquired a new station, suitable for a capital city and designed by Sir Herbert Baker, after the Union of 1910.
The first station in Johannesburg, called ‘Park’ because it was situated beside the cricket ground and public park, consisted of an island platform with long elegant buildings, sporting beautifully carved woodwork.
This station was purchased from an Amsterdam exhibition and survives as part of a railway training college in the Transvaal.
It too was replaced by a larger stone station, part of which still stands beside the modern structure which succeeded it.
The new station, consisting of the by then classic steel, concrete, and glass concourse with facilities around its outer flanks and with steps and ramps leading down to the platforms below, gave a new twist to the separation of passengers and baggage regarded as an ideal at so many American stations.
Johannesburg station was designed specifically to separate the races as the full-blown policies of apartheid were developed by the Nationalist government in the 1950s and 1960s.
It remains to this day one of the most potent monuments to racial segregation.
Elsewhere in South Africa, most stations consisted of plain, stolid, stone structures in keeping with the character of the territories.
The larger towns like Kimberley, Mafeking, and Pietermaritzburg provided the full range of facilities in long buildings backed by canopied platforms.
At many there were African platforms where tin sheds served as waiting-rooms.
On the northern line through Bechuanaland and on to Rhodesia the stations were built in a graceful simple colonial style, usually painted white with columned verandas on the track side.
On all of the lines in the interior of Africa the number of trains handled per day was very few, single tracking was the rule, and passenger facilities were slight.
The arrival of a train would be a significant event, galvanizing a whole community into action perhaps only once or twice a day.
Generally the passengers camped and sat out in the open air.
The white passengers would avail themselves of the services of a hotel, in a colonial verandaed style not unlike that of the station itself, just beside the tracks.
In consequence no elaborate station architecture was needed.
The only large stations in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) were in Bulawayo and Salisbury.
The Bulawayo station was remodelled in 1913 and the building, a long two-storey range, had outer and inner canopies supported on fine ironwork.
In Salisbury the station remained an elongated single-platformed structure throughout its history, with all the passenger and office facilities provided in a building almost as long as the platform itself.
Trains from Bulawayo used one end of this platform and trains from Umtali the other.
The first station was burnt down in 1917 and the new station was reopened in 1925.
Despite the great romance and drama of the building of the East African ‘Uganda’ railway, none of the stations was particularly grand.
Only at Nairobi, where the station created the city, was there a handsome building with a deep, shady, wooden valance along the platform side and a fine tapering clock-tower in the middle.
Mombasa, the gateway to East Africa, had an entirely unpretentious station.
Later, a large modern station with extensive facilities and a clock-tower was opened at Nakuru, an important junction in eastern Kenya, in the early 1960s on the very eve of decolonization.
The British produced a remarkable variety of stations in West Africa, all faithfully recorded in the photographic collection of the Crown Agents who were closely involved in their building.
On the Lagos Government Railway, simple white two-storeyed stations with an upper veranda supported on the columns of the lower, set well back from the tracks, were standard.
The style was reminiscent of that of Ceylon, where the Crown Agents had also had a hand in station-building.
At Iddo Island a long wooden building with a central gable and flanking verandas dominated the station complex, while on the northern extension the stations were all squat rectangular stone structures with a round-arched loggia on all four sides and with the name of the station sculpted on an entablature rising from the middle.
This was the style, not unlike that of the state of Hyderabad in India, at Jebba, Zaria, and Abo, while other towns had quite different multi-gabled wooden structures with long verandas.
None of them made any concessions to the local Muslim culture.
At all of these stations separate third-class waiting-rooms were supplied further down the tracks.
The manner in which the architecture of these stations reflected colonial racial hierarchies is beautifully illustrated by a Crown Agents photograph showing the proclamation of the First World War at Port Harcourt station in eastern Nigeria.
The Europeans all stand on the station veranda, while an African crowd stands outside the station beside the tracks.
Variants of the colonial verandaed station, again reminiscent of those in Ceylon, appeared in the Gold Coast, Sierra Leone, and the British Central Africa railway to Nyasaland.
Despite the consistent influence of the Crown Agents' technical assistance in all these colonies, a remarkable diversity still prevailed.
The German African stations were noticeably grander than their British counterparts.
It was as though the newer imperial power had to assert itself more bombastically through its station architecture.
At Kigoma in Tanganyika a multi-storeyed station was constructed just before the First World War.
It dominated an otherwise primitive town.
At Windhoek in South West Africa a large, white, stuccoed structure was given imposing Dutch gables.
Both there and at Keetmanshoep the Germans built headquarters stations which could take on a new strategic role in time of war.
The French by contrast seldom built grand stations in north Africa.
A few were similar to small stations in southern France, reflecting the control of North African railways by French companies like the Paris-Lyon-Marseille.
Rather later, some concessions were made to local architectural styles.
At Oran in Algeria the station was built like a mosque, with a minaret for a clock-tower.
In French West Africa a few stations, like the fine one at Bobo-Diolassu in Senegal, were built in a recognizably local style.
The railway lines in Portuguese territory were built almost entirely with British capital.
At first their station buildings were primitive affairs, no more than clearings in the bush with tin huts.
Early travellers to Mozambique described the station at Beira as no more than a muddy, fever-infested street corner.
Before the First World War, however, Lourenço Marques had a large baroque station with a central dome.
Lourenço Marques was a gateway to both South and Central Africa, and Beira and Lobito Bay were the prime portals of the routes into British Central Africa and the Congo, much used by European settlers and tourists.
The Portuguese Empire, which was constantly under threat, had to present a self-confident face to its European neighbours.
Large new stations designed to do just that were built in these three cities after the Second World War.
The railway stations of Asia, Australasia, and Africa reveal to the full the range of styles, many of them of great elegance, which could be encompassed in station architecture world-wide.
It is not difficult to find among them ample illustrations of Ruskin's dictum that architecture reflects the life of the society around it.
The station had to take account of both the realities and the aspirations of imperial power, the prestige of conquerors and the pride of colonizers, together with class and racial distinctions and economic necessities.
Russians in Central Asia, imperialists in India, South-East Asia, and Africa, colonizers in Australasia, and the commercial intruders in China and Japan all expressed themselves with striking forcefulness through this one architectural type.