

SINGLE
This is a picture which I took of him myself.
He was so beautiful in those days — listen to me,those days , talking like it was all ancient history.
It's just that at the time it all seemed so beautiful and important, it was like some kind of historical event.
History on legs , we used to say; a significant pair of legs, an important stomach, legendary…a classic of the genre.
Historic .
Well it was true, all of it.
I know that though I've shown you the photograph you still want me to describe him to you, this Boy of ours.
What was he like , you say, and what you want to say is what was he really like then?
Tell me something that no one else knows about him.
Tell me something that will prove all of this .
I understand; I mean, you want to know that someone isn't just making the whole thing up when they talk about a man being that special to them.
But what can I tell you?
That ‘I knew the moment I saw him’?(people do say that about their men, more often than you'd think).
I could tell you that he had white skin, black eyes, and black hair, but you can see that from the photograph.
I could tell you that the eyes were so beautiful they could actually make you feel giddy when he suddenly looked up from the floor and straight at you.
That the white skin bruised easily (you could write your name on his back with your fingers, they said).
And that the hair was black all over his body, a shiny, animal black, even on his back, at the base of his spine.
But then I don't suppose that would be enough for you, and after all this is Boy's story mostly, he is after all in a proper sense my hero, and you have to have this Boy clearly in your mind before we can proceed.
The best I can say is that Boy looked something like, or had something like the feel of, Paul Newman when he's playing the character christened Chance Wayne in that Tennessee Williams film.
There's a moment when he looks away from the camera and down at the floor and softly says, ‘Nobody's young any more …
’ Boy often made me think of that particular moment — it was the way he looked down.
Except of course that Boy was young, really young.
He was nineteen when he came to us.
When you see that film you want to say,God, he was perfect , and it was the same with Boy.
And you wanted to hit him sometimes and ask him if he knew what he was doing.
He was so young some nights, I mean he looked so young and so quiet, and I was scared for him you see, so scared that he'd get it wrong, that he'd waste himself.
Sometimes when I was drunk and I'd see him standing there looking all quiet and black and white and gorgeous, waiting for someone to take him home, I'd get all teary and want to go up and slap him and shout in his face:How can you possibly understand what it means!
You're nineteen.
So he was young; but his body wasn't smooth and gold,pure hard gold , which is what the woman says about the body that you see in that scene of the film.
Boy's was white, and furred with close dark hair from the root of his cock to the perfect black, flat fan on his chest, and at the base of his spine like I said.
It was not golden; but it was precious.
It was a perfect body.
A perfected body, not  an adolescent one, which was odd, because the rest of Boy was unfinished, and that's what this whole thing is about.
And Boy was as handsome as Chance Wayne, and he smiled as easily.
He could smile to order or smile for real, with real pleasure, and it came out just the same, it came out so beautiful that you were sure not to notice the difference.
He moved as easily; and like Chance Wayne at the height of his beauty you, or I, would just, well, would just have died for him, stopped in our tracks for him, stopped the car for him, fallen silent if we saw him cross the street or across a crowded bar.
Like Chance Wayne when you watch that scene in the film, he made you just want to wake up with him in the room, wake up with him in the bed beside you.
You wanted to wake up with him right there in the room and to turn to him and quote the next line of the film right back at him, to whisper it to him,make me almost believe that we are a pair of young lovers without any shame , and I don't mean that in some tragedy queen way, but in order to say of Boy that truly I do think that it is a beauty like his that makes it all worth while, and I do feel that if we are fighting for anything, and if I was asked in a questionnaire what it was I was fighting for (and believe me I do feel like I am fighting, more and more I think that), then I would answer, beauty.
Beauty or whatever you call it that makes you feel that you have no shame any more, none left at all.
One thing Boy never said, the line of Newman's he would never have used, was don't call me Boy .
He loved to be called Boy.
He smiled whenever the name was used.
He loved it that we had christened him and he knew that he was special to us.
And if you still can't quite see him, and this is not your ideal Boy at all, then I'm sorry.
Perhaps you think that Boy does not sound too beautiful to you, by which you mean he does not sound your type.
Well I have to say  that much of the impact of this story depends upon your being able to see and think of Boy as beautiful, admirable and even adorable in the true senses of those difficult and dangerous but nonetheless precious and necessary words; I suggest therefore that you amend my descriptions of Boy and his lover — but I anticipate myself, that was not to be for several weeks yet; that ‘Great Romance of Our Times’, as it became known amongst us, had not yet begun, its theme tune had not yet been composed on Gary's piano, its scenario was not yet subject of our daily gossip and speculation, we were not yet auditioning for a place in the credits — The Friend, The Admirer, Blonde Man in Bar, Second Guest at Dinner Party.
But do go back, and amend my description of Boy so that he is, is some way, if you see what I mean, your type.
Make him fit the bill; imagine for him the attributes that you require.
I don't mean that you have to imagine him as your lover or prospective lover; this story does not require such strict identification, and I don't see that any story does.
After all, just look round any bar and you'll see that everybody there, myself included (you too if it's your kind of bar), has in their time been both The Boy and The Older Man, both Banker and Domestic, Ingenue and Other Woman, booted Prince and stirrup-holding Groom — but I don't mean either that you should have complete license to make him look just how you wish; I don't want to think of anyone hearing this story and grinning and thinking of Boy as some permanently, conveniently smiling blue-eyed blonde, because he was not that in any way and that is not what he meant to us.
For instance, don't make him shorter than you are, so that his eyes must always be looking up at you whenever you think of him.
You might surprise yourself one night by wanting to feel his arm around your shoulder.
You might want that to happen one night.
And I would ask you, whatever changes you make, please keep him strong, as strong as he was.
When I think about it I'm not sure it makes any important difference how you imagine he looks, I mean who am I to say whether this Boy you are seeing has blonde hair or dark; but I am sure that it does matter what he means to you.
Keep him strong, keep him young, and, whatever his colouring, keep him gorgeous.
I apologise if this description of Boy sounds to you like some fantasy and not a real person, a real young man; and worse still, if this looks like a photograph from that kind of magazine which you wouldn't even buy, let alone be seen reading in public, on public transport for instance .
But the truth is, if you had ever seen this young man, naked or clothed (and I have see him both, and halfway in between), then you would admit to the accuracy of what I've said.
There are such men in this city, and even to see them, never mind to touch them or have them kiss you, or see them just before dawn, or to have them as one of your dear friends, is one of the great pleasures of our life, and it is commoner than most people think.
In the part of town where I live I see strangers who I would call truly beautiful at least once a day.
Boy was truly beautiful, when he came to us.
I can see him now standing there in the door.
I have this postcard depicting an allegorical figure of Strength.
He is naked like a statue, with one knee bent and the other leg straight.
He has strong, agile and indeed superb hands; in the palm of his raised, right hand he holds out to you a miniature city, complete with dome, bridges and towers, the freedom of which he is offering you and which he has promised to protect.
Now place around the head of this statue angels; place in his left hand a sword; and light in his realistically enamelled eyes a welcome and a promise such as I had never, never in all my years seen.
On this figure  depends the rest of our story; it is on those white shoulders that all our hopes rest.
He is the most beautiful of us all.
It is at his feet that we throw ourselves like the bound figures which form the pedestal of this statue (one captive looks upward with adoring eyes).
It is him who will attend our funerals; it is him who will be strong when we are not.
Actually, I am not sure that I was there on that night of his arrival, and I don't claim to remember all the details or to have been as impressed by his appearance, framed in the doorway, as some people I drink with do; I think they just want to talk about their witnessing his first appearance that way — as if he was an angel or something extraordinary — because of what went on to happen later.
But I don't say that doesn't make sense.
I'm sure you have men you think of in that way too, people you see from a distance and you think they are angels, or at least heroes.
I think that's a proper feeling.
But anyway, one day he found himself walking in our street, which was different to how it is now, because not only was The Bar there, which as you know is gone now, but also there were different kinds of people living in that part of town then.
If someone was looking for The Bar in those days — because there was no name written up or sign for it, no lights at all, and not even a number on the door, Madame liked to keep it that way even when she didn't have to any more — I mean when she opened up we may all have been in a sort of hiding, and not many people knew about The Bar and our life there, but it wasn't that way later, and now you know we can have lights and advertising and you see boys queueing up outside every night, very public, and I like to see that — but in those days, in those days if somebody arranged to meet you for a date there, and it was their first time and they weren't sure how to find us, you'd joke with them, and you'd say well first there is a wedding, and then  there's a death, and there's the news, and then there's us; meaning, first there's the shop with the flowers, the real ones, and next door to that is the undertaker's with the fake flowers in the window, china, all dusty; and then the newsagent's and magazine shop, and then right next door to that is The Bar.
You can't miss it.
THE FIRST WEEK
This is how he came to us.
Boy was walking down the street.
Our street, though he didn't know that yet.
And his head was spinning from walking so far; he walked everywhere, and though he stopped to eat every day when he was on one of these journeys of his he did not I expect eat especially properly.
He was worn out.
Worn out with his own personal brand of window shopping; all that staring and never buying anything, all those shop windows, all those men to stare at and not dare follow, as if there was indeed a sheet of plate glass between him and them.
And worn out with all that thinking, thinking all day with no one to talk to, and thinking because there was no one to talk to.
No one whose advice he could ask.
Some days he would follow a man, a man he'd just seen in the street, for minutes or for hours, thinking he would go up to him and ask him if he knew the way.
I can remember doing that in my own time.
Thinking that maybe this man was the right man, that maybe it was him I should ask him for directions, him who would take me home or wherever it was I was trying to get to.
Boy was like that, he was hoping that somebody would take him to the place where  everybody else was.
Or at least tell him how to get there, or give him the money to get in when he did get there, or at least lend him a map with a cross marked on it, or give him an address.
But he never did ask any man for directions; he walked and he walked.
In fact when Boy first came to us he was at the point of exhaustion.
This is partly I suppose what made us seem like a destination to him; he was in that simple sense ready to arrive, ready to get somewhere and rest there for the night.
When he arrived it was at a very particular time of day.
The actual day's business of shopping was over; for everybody else in the city it looked to Boy like it was time to go home, spent up and carrying bags full of things.
The public world was closing down and everybody was going home; it was five o'clock.
But for the kind of shopping that Boy was doing there was no five o'clock, there was no closing time.
To reach us, as I have said, Boy had to walk past three shops with windows.
The first two were closed already, but Boy looked in the windows anyway; when he was out journeying the whole point was to stop and look at everything.
The florist was closed, and they'd put the fresh stock away, so that when Boy looked in through the first window the flowers he saw were of silk; all artificial, but so good that they were better and fresher than the real thing, and certainly more expensive.
Carefully arranged sprays and spires of sweet pea and mignonette, tiger lilies and lily of the valley, all in silk, wedding flowers with lots of ribbon in white and pink and pale blue, confetti colours.
Next door Boy saw, laid out on the floor of a darkened and otherwise empty shop, a selection of flowers for graves.
There were small clumps of purple china roses in the continental style, heavy and sharp enough to be used as weapons; wreaths of laurel, and hellebore flowers in white plastic with glittered stamens.
Each arrangement  had a blank label or card prominently attached to it.
In the next window Boy saw a wall of magazines and papers (in eighteen different languages, including Turkish and black English), as carefully arranged as any display of flowers.
This shop was still open, but Boy stayed outside, looking at the window display.
In the top right-hand corner of the window was a single magazine whose cover displayed a naked man instead of a naked woman or a smiling mother.
Boy stood outside the window and imagined the things he might see inside this magazine, should he ever take it down off the high shelf and open it, perhaps in the privacy of his room or perhaps right there on the street at five o'clock.
He imagined small, cheaply staged pictures of sexual tortures involving ropes and wires — the kind of things which Boy had not yet done.
He imagined a full-page, black and white photo of two barechested men (their chests shaved), photographed in daylight, walking down the street, gazing squarely at the camera, holding hands, one of them holding an alsatian straining at a leather leash.
He also imagined men photographed in colour, sprawled alone or holding each other, doing extraordinary things but in ordinary rooms, living rooms; doing things on sofas, on sheepskin rugs, stretched across a coffee table.
He imagined the personal messages which appear in the back pages (usually on cheaper paper, and often coloured a dull pale yellow or pink) of such magazines, and he imagined writing replies to these messages, imagined exactly what he would say, even imagined meeting some of these men.
And then (as he stood and stared through the window at the magazine) Boy imagined sleeping with these men, actually sleeping, sharing a bed with them for the night.
And then Boy could imagine having a cup of coffee with them in the morning, but he couldn't imagine anything else after that.
And now Boy was truly tired, end of the day tired, dog tired.
He wished that the geography of the city was different.
Often at this time of day, when he felt the day's journey should be ending or reaching a destination, but knowing that it was not, knowing that what he was looking for probably happened after everybody else had gone home, he wished that he could end his days walking at the edge of a sea or a lake so big that you couldn't see its other shore.
He wanted very much to walk out onto a pier — those constructions built so that people who have come to the sea to get away from their place of work can, for a moment, almost leave their working life behind, can go to the very edge of their week's holiday and then dream of going further.
Constructions built so that people who cannot afford to leave or sail away can feel that they are almost leaving.
Boy would have been happiest to stand on the end of a pier from which big ships, real proper ocean ships, embarked; but he would have settled for just an ordinary pier, a small one — so long as it was big enough for him to walk away from the city, into the wind, turn his back on everything and stand there looking west at an empty sea, or a far horizon, and think about America, or somewhere.
And next door to the window full of magazines was not a window, but a black door.
Over the doorway was a small plaque.
It said,In this house (and the ceramic of the plaque had broken and the name was missing)stayed on his first visit to the city, and it was here that he wrote the opening pages of his greatest work .
There was no name painted up over the door.
We just left it blank most of the time, because The Bar was always changing its name.
It's had about ten or twelve names since I've been going there, though some of them were  just for one night, just for a party or celebration, and even then the name was never written up anywhere, you just had to know that tonight it was The Lily Pond, or The Jewel Box, The Gigolo, The Hustler, The Place (no, I think that was somewhere else), Grave Charges (I loved that one)— or The You Know You Like It, I remember that year especially.
Just now we didn't have any name for it at all, and it was just The Bar, like it always was, the bar.
There were three bells by the side of the door, and these did have names written by them.
It was as if these were the names of tenants or people who lived upstairs, but in fact no one lived upstairs except Madame.
The bells didn't work and I don't know who put the names there, they've just always been there.
The first bell was labelled San Francisco ; the second El Dorado ; and the third Timbuctoo .
Underneath the third bell someone had also written, using a biro on the paint of the wall, ETIOPHIA .
Also there was a cluster of messages on small adhesive labels, like the ones Boy had seen stuck in phone boxes near the railway station, and he bent down to look and read all of these.
They said: ‘Big, strong man gives sense of direction in life’; ‘Boy seeks Angel of Death’; ‘Blonde boy seeks older man with Fast Car for mutually satisfactory crash .’
One of these labels or messages was dated, and it said, ‘Thursday afternoon August 12th, Kevin Come back Darling .’
This doorway also had a display of flowers arranged behind glass.
On the wall to the right of the door was a small illuminated case with the label ‘Appearing this week ’, and below that a selection of coloured photographs was pinned to a board covered in cheap red plush.
The pictures however didn't seem to be of artistes of any kind; they were just of anonymous, handsome young men, the sort of photographs that Boy had seen in barber's windows showing the kinds of haircut you could get.
The colours were a bit faded and it looked like no one had  rearranged or replaced the pictures in the case for some time.
The door was shut, locked in fact.
Boy could see the scuff marks around the doorhandle where other men (Boy knew it couldn't be people , he just knew it was men ) had opened and closed it.
On the black paint of the door was chalked a message:eleven o'clock .
The street was empty.
Boy had an erection.
He promised himself that he would come back later no matter how tired he was.
I can see that people must have thought we were being very mysterious then, that we were a bit of a mystery, that The Bar was a very strange place; but it never seemed that way to us.
To us, it was as normal as home.
And because it was so normal to us, it is very strange now trying to describe it to you.
Giving an account of it like this makes me feel as though you're asking me to account for it, explain it for you.
Explain our lives there — as if they needed explaining, and the whole point was that when you walked in the door of the Bar you knew you didn't have to explain anything to anyone who was there, not anyone.
Our lives there were promiscuous, I can say that for a start.
And though that was where I felt most private often, it was a very private place you see, even at its busiest, and it was busy, I mean it wasn't small and quiet, I don't want you to think that, it was very public.
A very public kind of life.
‘Promiscuous, public and semi-professional ’, it said in one of Madame's books about the lives of the great courtesans, and I think that's about it.
Some of us were great courtesans very definitely, certainly Stella sitting on her stool at the bar, you'd think she was in pearls the way she sat there.
But even the less dedicated of us,public and semi-professional , I think you could say that of us all  really.
And I will say that myself I was very promiscuous sexually, I will say that because I think a lot of people want to leave that out of the story, well not me thank you very much.
But, very strange it must have seemed, certainly the first time you walked in.
For instance you had to know the names, the cast list.
On a good night you'd have Ron Ackroyd; Terry and Bobby (and Bobby's Mother); Sandy and Eddie; Big Janet (she was always in); That Awful Hugh Hapsley; Teddy, Tiny, Leaf, Minty, Winter; Madge, also known as The Troll; Miss Public House; and, of course, Mr Mortimer.
Stella I've mentioned; Stella I was her full title, she would be sitting at the bar, and then later, Stella II would be sitting there beside her.
I shan't be telling you all about these men, but it does give you some idea, the way we were, the chorus, the bit players in this romance which is what I really want to tell you about.
And there was the way of talking, as well.
Nobody talked like that all the time, of course, but you have to imagine what sort of an evening it was when all these things were said, what was really being talked about when we talked like that:
Stella (to Noel, who looked like an air steward, but wasn't): ‘Will you do us a favour?
Come over 'ere and sit on my face and go to sleep.’
Stella again: ‘Good evening, Sean.
Remember what I told you; the first lesson's free.’
Sandy and Eddie at two in the morning, surveying the evening's crowd and explaining who was who to a newcomer: ‘You see that one in the white vest, that's his affair in the denim.
They've been together for fourteen years, they met at school.
And you tell me, how fabulous is that.’
Sandy, at three in the morning, watching Boy: ‘If I was built like that I wouldn't wait until three o'clock to take my shirt off.’
(pause with music )
‘In fact I don't think I'd even wear a shirt.’
(longer pause )
Eddie, lighting a cigarette; ‘I wouldn't even buy shirts.’
Greta — Greta was a cook.
She used to show you a collection of photographs which she kept in her wallet as if they were family photographs, but in fact these pictures were all pictures of men's cocks, she used to make them stop on the way home at the photobooth in the entrance to the station, she'd make them stand on the stool with their trousers down, she never got caught — Greta, on seeing me leave with an especially handsome man: ‘I hope you're on the pill.’
Miss Public House: ‘I can't stand any more trouble.’
Now this was a line from a film, and he was always using it.
He'd be talking to some man all evening, they'd be getting on very well indeed as far as we could all see, but then Miss P would still be there alone when the lights went on, and the man would have gone.
And he was never especially unhappy about it, and I rather admired that really.
I think Miss P had a real point; you do have to know when you just can't stand any more trouble, not tonight anyway.
When I very deliberately try and remember it like this I know I end up remembering it and describing it being like a bar scene in a musical, where everyone that the camera pans past is a very definite character, and they're all so eager when the camera is on them, clapping and laughing and tapping their feet to the music  so convincingly.
Well that was how we were; playing our scene for all it was worth.
people criticise this style and say it's all a lie, they take one quick look in through the door and they say that we are all acting madly to conceal some great sadness from ourselves.
All I can say is, I think they must never have spent a night in The Bar if they think that, or never a good night.
I want to say to them, when they talk like that,well, where do you go in the evenings ?
Playing like we played wasn't lying at all, it was nothing to do with lying.
What did you expect us to do?
Sit around and be depressed?
Madame always had a little stage set up there at the end, and I remember thinking at the time, well, seven nights in a week and seven different acts, it's one way of dealing with the situation.
One night there was a little backdrop of a painted garden, and in front of it two new boys were doing a strip routine to the original ‘Let's Stay Together’; but then they got carried away and ended up just leaning against the wall together, leaning up against the painted flowerbeds and the little painted bridge, just kissing and making love right there, for at least forty minutes, nobody minded.
It was lovely just watching them you see.
And the next night the backdrop was ‘A Night in Spain’, and there was Stella II, it was his very first night, all done up in black and gold lace with an underskirt of violent red, a red Elizabeth the First wig for some reason and a real red rose, it was sensational, and it was his first night too, Stella II doing ‘Te Amo’ till the tears ran down his face.
And there was the original Stella up on her stool not being able to believe what she was seeing, going mental, screaming,That's my sister, it's my long lost fucking sister .
And all that in one week, it must have been one of Madame's special amateur talent weeks I suppose.
As a background to all this, The Bar was basically black inside.
Black was always fashionable with us.
Whether it  was being referred to that week as The Tea Room, The Oasis or The Hole (I liked that one too), it was always basically night inside, A Good Night Out; not black as jeweller's velvet exactly, except on a good night, but always when you stepped in off the street it was truly night inside, a night dark enough to dream in and on which to meet strangers, whatever the variations on where and when this particular night had fallen.
(One time we did scrape the black paint off the windows at the back and we served tea and pastries in the afternoon and had no music, but that wasn't a great success with us.
We would rather have gone somewhere else if that was what we wanted; it wasn't quite right somehow and so we painted the windows up again.)
Against the black walls there were of course changes in fashion, changes of music, changes in drink; for instance for a couple of years you could get little liqueur glasses of violently alcoholic black coffee with pyramids of whipped cream on top after one of the barstaff had come back from an affair with a real sailor (or so he said anyway) in some German port, Germany somewhere.
And sometimes Madame would just decide that we all needed a change and there'd be paint ordered and people would come in during the day and work for a couple of days and the whole place would be done out for a party or a festival.
And suddenly we'd all be in Amsterdam or Paris or something like somebody's idea of America for the evening, or else it would still be our own dear city, but from very definitely another era, all striped Regency wallpaper and framed Angus McBean photographs of Vivien Leigh; or another time there'd be nothing but opera on the sound system for a whole week, there'd be complaints of course but Madame would say,I'm just trying to give you boys an education , and Gary at least would be very happy.
But then it would go back to the usual music, the old pictures would go up again and it would be back to the black paintwork.
Basically  you see The Bar was always the same.
It could be relied on.
And whatever else the decor was or the show was that night, whatever city we were all supposed to be in, one thing that was always the same and that Madame never got rid of was the ceiling.
The design of the ceiling at The Bar was very wonderful.
She'd had it inlaid with a hundred, several hundred small white fairy-lights, and it gave the effect of a real fantastic night sky, especially on a good night.
I always loved that.
The bulbs weren't just scattered, but were arranged in the correct patterns — so that if you looked up you could see (if you knew which star was which), up there amongst all the dragons, bulls and poisonous scuttlers of the Heavens, right in the centre you could see the constellation which I always thought of as being our special one, a solitary man walking with his faithful dog, the high summer constellation of Orion, the Hunter, stretched and striding above us.
But I never knew what all the other stars meant, just that one constellation.
I didn't know the full map.
Gary would sometimes see me staring up at them, and he'd say,you know, it's no good trying to read the stars up there…the only real stars here tonight are those two making out on the dance floor.
Well I for one am shocked , Gary would always say.
On certain nights, when things got very late and very heavy, Madame would go to bed and leave us to it there under the stars.
And of course the door was shut then, and there'd be just seven or eight of us left on the dance floor.
There would always have been a few men who had been dancing barechested all the evening, dancing with the fierce attention of the tango, or the apache ; these were the ones who stayed on late.
And now they would be dancing, as we said,dancing right down , with the elegance and economy of movement that only exhaustion brings, the careful and expert moves that only come at that  particular time in the morning.
The music by now would sound so fractured and sophisticated that only they, the real dedicated dancers, could still hear its rhythm.
They were evidently hearing something different from the rest of us now, for we would watch them slow-dance to the fastest beat, and then, on the next record, see them execute perfect and elaborate improvised arabesques, all fast footwork and impassioned arms, in the gaps of a slow blues.
And sometimes, towards dawn, the music would be at full blast and there would be hardly any movement at all, nothing left except maybe just one couple kissing — and yet that looked like dancing too.
There was something about it that was scandalous.
Two men kissing to music under the stars…or Little David, the barman, would bring out his famous white gauze and feather fans and send them gliding across his sweating chest and face (you don't see this any more these days)— as if the secret thoughts that were normally hidden behind that odd smile in his eyes had escaped and taken flight; as if , I used to think, it was magic, as if some oddly attractive boy had unbuttoned his flies for you and brought out not a fat red cock but a blinking, blinded, delicate, fluttering magician's dove, releasing it into the roof of the dark theatre to fly crazily over your astonished head…and above all this was that ceiling of shining stars.
And on a good night the stars would seem to brighten; if you looked up it was like a clear winter's night in the city, one of those nights when you find yourself on a dark street, one without streetlamps, and for once you can see that the stars have different colours; they are like still fireworks.
This moment is very private and is rarely if ever seen by outsiders, not even glimpsed through a window.
And then the lights all came on, and it would be like the hardest-to-bear dawn ever.
What else can I tell you about our nights there?
Yes, you could have sex there, in the toilets, but only according to certain rules.
I should say, really, that you could live just how you wanted there, according to certain rules.
But the point was, they were our own rules.
And so it was into all of this that Boy made his entrance.
At the moment of Boy's arrival, at the very moment that he was standing there framed in our doorway, hesitating (which makes such a good entrance, though Boy wasn't doing it deliberately), at that same time on that same first evening there was a terrible attack on one of the men from The Bar.
It's odd that I should remember that now, because I didn't connect the two incidents at the time.
I heard about the first one pretty soon, the next night in fact, because everyone I knew was talking about the arrival of the new beauty.
The second I didn't hear about for four days and even then not from a friend but from the free paper which used to be given away in the bars once a week those days.
The details were all there; they'd used a knife, and they brought it down on his face four times.
ft was strange then, all these things were happening, and the thing was, sometimes you didn't hear about them until much later, even if it was someone you were used to seeing all the time.
THE FIRST MONTH
‘That Boy's a bit exclusive today, isn't he?’ that was what we used to say, the joke being that actually Boy was there nearly every day right from the start; and every day that he was there, he went home with someone.
In fact, Boy quickly became quite a regular at The Bar.
He didn't waste any time.
And every time he came in Mr Mortimer would say, ‘Oh, so you've turned up again, Boy.’
This was another one of his quotations.
Back in 1961 it had been, briefly, a very famous line, and a very tragic line too.
It came from a scene set in a bar not unlike ours, and was said just after everyone in the bar had turned pale at the sight of a particular young man, a regular, entering the bar after a week's absence; the thing was, they were all wondering how they were going to break the news to him that there'd been a terrible suicide, they were all wondering who was going to be the one to take this boy to one side and tell him what had happened to his friend, and why.
And now, you see, the thing was that we could see Boy walking into our bar, pausing in the doorway, and we could just say the line and laugh.
That laugh was our sweet revenge on those bitter times.
And you could say that Boy's life in The Bar and in fact  his mere presence there began somehow to be for us our revenge on that poor boy in that terrible, bitter, unhappy scene in that famous film.
I know, I know, 1 hear you say, this precious Boy of yours surely has no imagination if he is content with the first place he finds and the very first crowd of men that he runs across.
But I know, and you should know, that imagination is not what counts at this stage of a young man's career; what he needs is application, study, repetition, diligent imitation and sincere admiration of his peers.
You have got just to find some place and stay there and get stuck in.
Boy knew this without being told.
Or perhaps he felt he had no choice, perhaps he didn't know about the other places in the city which he could have gone to; anyway he became a real regular, and soon he was there most nights, in fact every night, six nights a week, The Bar being open every day of the week except Monday, usually from the afternoon and always until three a.m. (at least officially).
Every day except Monday which was, as we said, our day of rest.
People talk about how much of a shock, a wonderful shock, it is the first time you realise that there are places like ours that you can go, but for Boy I had the feeling that coming to The Bar didn't feel like that much of a change in his routine.
He was used to walking all over the city, as if searching, as if dedicated to the act of searching, every single day; and now he came to The Bar every single night, and did his searching there.
Of course now he didn't have to walk quite so far to do his searching; but a similar kind of dedication was still required of him, for The Bar contained in a way the streets of the whole city, there were men there from all the different parts of it.
What Boy had to do now was not walk down those streets, but stand still and choose  amongst their inhabitants, choose the right one to follow, the right one to lead him in the next stage of his journey or wandering through the city.
And journey he did; from The Bar Boy would be taken home and driven at night down all those same streets down and round which he had once walked by daylight.
He already knew most of the city's different districts and its short cuts, its sudden changes of place and people; it was just that now he would see the shop windows shining at night instead of by day, see them gliding past from a car or taxi window as he was driven home for the night.
Every night Boy would wear the same thing, a white t shirt; and every night he would throw that t shirt down on a different bedroom floor.
His special trick was to look at the floor a lot.
That way people could stare at him as much as they wanted to and as much as he wanted them to; then at the crucial moment he would lift his face and turn those famous eyes on his chosen suitor for the evening.
People thought he was doing this deliberately, because people never really believe that the beautiful lack confidence; looking back, I think that to start with Boy must have been frightened almost all of the time.
He was always silent; always waiting to be asked, and never asking.
Of course being nervous he often drank a little too much, so that when he finally looked up at the end of the night it would be with something like desperation, a fear that no one was going to ask him to leave with them; but the way he looked at you also meant that you knew he would never say no, if you did ask.
This made him easier to take home for the night; people who would normally never have approached such a beauty felt that they could.
Boy went home with someone every single night, he'd go home with anyone really.
And he always learnt something.
Lesson by lesson, Boy learnt how to behave in the company of men.
He learnt how to talk in the car on the way home, even when he didn't want to; he learnt how to take a shower in somebody else's bathroom without embarrassing himself.
He learnt that he could make love and come both in haste and with impressive slowness, for five minutes or for three hours, without asking either for more or for less time from his partner but fitting in with their timing.
He learnt how to make love in complete silence or to talk all night if that was what the other man wanted.
In one of these early lessons he was very lucky in his teacher; Miss Public House took him home on one of his first nights — she who usually never could be bothered — and in one exhausting night Miss P taught him everything he knew about how to make love without getting hurt or hurting anybody (remember that in those days we were still getting used to the idea and still elaborating our repertoires of what you could and couldn't do, which was very hard for us, for me anyway, since we had spent so long trying to forget the very word couldn't ).
And Miss P told him that if ever any man tried to mess him about or to make him do things he didn't want to do then he should come right back to The Bar and tell us, and we'd sort the man out for him.
When Miss P said this to him Boy realised that he couldn't actually imagine a man proposing something that he wouldn't want to do, or wouldn't at least want to try just once, but he understood what he was being told and he learnt that lesson well, thank God.
I am sure he had no idea how lucky he was.
He learnt all the signs and conventions, very quickly, not only because he made himself student to so many tutors, but because he watched so carefully everything that each one did, with that strange, silent, exhausting attention of his.
Boy never refused an invitation.
He went home with a couple who had been together for twelve years, not because he wanted to know what it would be like to be made love to by two men at once, but rather to see how these particular two men lived as a couple; specifically, what they did together in the morning before going to work.
He got himself invited to a large formal dinner party at which one man served the wine and another served all the food, and was tired and irritable, like a wife; Boy observed all of this very closely.
He went home with a single man whose mantelpiece was crowded with framed family photos — partners, holidays, weddings, babies, graduations, christenings; the man (who was gorgeous) told Boy that he worked in a photo processing lab, and that none of the photos were of his own family or lovers, but were all stolen.
He went home with a man who made love to him very violently on the living room floor, wanting to fuck Boy face down on the floor, and straight away, without any kissing; the floor was covered with scraps of glittering sequined fabrics.
This was Madge, who made costumes for the rest of us to wear at the party nights.
Boy was not surprised at the kind of sex they had, because he had already learnt never to assume that people made love in the same way as they talked.
He went home on the Saturday night of his third week with someone who invited him to stay for Sunday lunch.
The lunch was to be a Christmas dinner, even though it was the middle of May.
The living room ceiling was hung with bunting, the kitchen smelt of roast turkey, the house was full of people who all knew each other intimately, the videos had been ordered and the sideboard was laden with drink and in fact everyone behaved just like it was a real family Christmas, except that Boy had sex with two other men in the bathroom, and they didn't even bother to lock the door because they knew that no one else there  would mind, knew that they didn't have to hide what they were doing from the rest of the party.
He went home with a man who had wallpapered his living room with seven hundred copies of the cover of a Sunday colour magazine showing a white-skinned 22-year-old Glaswegian photographed wearing the second, whiter skin of a gymnast's leotard; his hands and wrists were also powdered dead white.
In the middle of the sex this man whispered in Boy's ear,you're just like him, you know, you're just like him you are .
Although they were all very different (Boy spent a lot of time noticing the differences in their physiques, techniques, cars and living rooms), they were also all the same in one respect.
Boy only ever went home with older men, men older than himself, men who had stories and careers and sometimes even families and children of their own.
I'm always giving myself away , that was how he thought of it.
Sometimes he thought that he needed to feel like a woman, a younger woman or at least The Other Woman; certainly he needed to feel like The Young Man.
He especially liked to be taken to the home of a couple, to sleep securely between them if they'd let him, and then in the morning to ask them questions about their house, about the furniture which they'd chosen together.
He was still amazed and fascinated by the fact of two men being together at all; he was almost overwhelmed by the idea of two men actually living together.
He never ever thought that he might live in one of these houses; he always cast himself as the honoured young guest.
Only once in this period did he sleep with someone of his age, and on this occasion he chose someone who looked almost exactly like himself.
On that night he watched himself in the mirror all night, and for the very first time he was the one who asked for things and  who made things happen in the order that he wanted them to.
He made his partner change roles and positions constantly, every few minutes, until they hardly knew which body was which, which was giving and which was taking.
That night, because he could see himself, Boy thought about himself all night long.
In all of this Boy was trying very hard, so very hard that it was touching to watch.
We all talked about him, of course; his name was now ‘The New Boy’, so how was The New Boy ? we'd say.
Sometimes we would even just refer to him as ‘The New’.
Whenever he was shown a new sexual technique, he would use it the very next night on his new partner.
Whenever a man smiled at him he smiled right back.
If someone touched him from behind on a crowded Saturday night he would push himself back onto the anonymous hand, just like a cat would, without turning round to see who it was.
And when he began to have the confidence to talk to us, he would have long discussions with people about films which he had never actually seen, but which he could pretend to have seen, since he made a point of reading all the reviews of the new films and musicals when he found out that that was what people liked to talk about on first meetings.
You could say that he was doing all of this so that he'd end up behaving like one of us.
He even began to sing along quietly when Gary played.
He wanted so much to be one of us, you see.
(Boy would never, of course, have used the word us at this time.
And there's lots of men won't use the word us , still.)
And of course sometimes during this apprenticeship Boy knew that what he really wanted was not to be taught to be one of us, not to be taught how to be a man at all, but to be reassured that he might somehow remain a boy forever.
When he realised that arriving at The Bar meant he was still only just at the start of his  wanderings or journey, he ached some nights to be told that he need go no farther than this.
One night (this was in the second week after he had arrived, and about nine or ten weeks before The Romance really began) the man who had driven him away from the Bar had done so in a big, warm, expensive, deep-seated car.
He had played classical music on the stereo, which Boy had assured him he liked, and it was true; Boy had never heard music like this before and he thought it was wonderful, a sound as big, and as warm, and as expensive as the car; a sound as exciting as the sensation of being driven through the night by a stranger.
It was a starry night that night, and by leaning against the cold window Boy could see the stars, not the stars of The Bar ceiling now, but the real ones.
The man said:
‘I live a long way out of town.’
and Boy said, as he always said: ‘That's alright.’
Soon they were driving almost through countryside, there were no street lamps any more; and Boy suddenly found himself saying,stop the car .
The man pulled the car into the long, wet grass by the roadside.
He turned the lights and the music off, and because there was no other traffic on the almost-country road at three in the morning, there was complete silence.
Boy wound down the window so that he could see the stars better, and then he made the man kiss him, right there.
Then they drove on, freezing, because Boy kept his window down so that he could see the stars.
He tipped his seat back and zipped his jacket right up and he asked for the music to go on again, and he lay there in the dark with the music on, feeling warm in the middle of the freezing night, and he could feel himself smiling.
I want to be like this , he thought.
I want to be like that…
I want to be this, I want to be that.
I want to be rich and handsome.
I want to be a rich young man, if wealth is what it takes to buy this feeling; a young lord leaving the city after a night of riot…
I want to be nineteen for ever.
I want never to arrive.
I want the dawn never to come.
I want the stars never to fade.
I want to have this man drive me in his car all night long, for us never to arrive anywhere…but if we should then let the gates swing silently open, let there be a long gravel drive, let it be like when the young master comes home from school.
Let the man lift me from the car still asleep and wrapped in a tartan blanket, let him lift me and carry me up the stairs to my bed, let him gently say, ‘we're here’…let him lay me down to sleep.
Let him kiss me when I'm half asleep, kiss me once, and then again, and again, as if half wanting to wake me.
Let him take his chauffeur's cap off very slowly and say softly to me, ‘oh sir, I don't never want to work for anyone else, never’; let him kneel by the side of the great bed, in the moonlight, and let him lean over to kiss me gently on the lips and to run his leather-gloved hand tenderly across my cheek, across my lips, through my hair, saying all the time, ‘oh sir, I'm here sir, I'm right here, I'm right here by the bed; was you calling me sir, did you call me ?’
It was nearly four in the morning by now, and Boy was ready to sleep; not exhausted, but content, knowing that the night was perfect just the way it was.
And in fact they never made it to the man's house in the country that night, because Boy made him stop the car twice more.
The first time, he asked the man to make love to him right there in the car, not to take him home yet but to do it to him there in the car.
They did it, very slowly and tenderly, and then drove on again; and then Boy made him stop the second time, in a layby with the first lorry headlights going past, and the man took Boy's cock in his mouth again, and masturbated Boy again so that he came a second time, and then they drove again.
And by then it was nearly  dawn, and this time, the fourth time, the man stopped the car without Boy saying anything.
He just stopped the car on the top of a small hill, for they were right out in the country now.
And they sat in the car with the windows down in the freezing dawn and they watched the distant city lights going out under the dawn at five in the morning, they sat there for a full half hour, looking, and thinking how beautiful the city looked at this time and at this distance…
All the shame, the desertions, the exposures of their life there,(this is what the man was thinking of as he sat silent by Boy's side),all the slow hours and cruel thoughts and disappointments of the night.
And this half hour of sweet silence was the greatest pleasure that night, it was its crowning moment (Boy thought,this is as good as coming together ), the precious moment from which Boy was to go home exhausted and almost jaded with pleasure, the moment to which all the overtures of the night had led.
When it was fully light the man said:
‘It's no good, I have to go to work soon.
Can I just drop you off?’
And so he drove Boy back to where he lived.
They got there at half past six in the morning.
The man stopped the car for the fifth and last time, and there, right outside where Boy lived, they kissed, passionately, scandalously, because by now people were up and there was traffic passing, the first buses and freight lorries on the Commercial Road; people could have seen them.
They said goodbye to each other and promised not to ignore each other the next time they met.
And when Boy got home to his bed he was too tired to sleep or to speak.
He loved this end-of-the-night sensation of hardly being able to think, just feel.
He slowly took off his clothes and the smell of the night with them, and stood there naked in the morning light by his bedroom window, and he smiled.
Smiled to himself and just for himself.
Boy  thought that this had been in some ways the perfect night, the best that he had ever had since he'd arrived at The Bar.
You see sometimes Boy, like all of us, sometimes Boy just wanted to be taken care of without having done anything to deserve it.
The way that sons always are, they way they always expect to be taken care of.
The bed that Boy climbed into that morning, knowing that he wouldn't sleep, but wanting just to lie there a while, was on the twentieth floor of a council block right close by the river on the east side of the city.
When he'd first arrived he had lived in a succession of bedsitting rooms on the west side, for which he had been charged extortionate rents by landlords who he never met; the third night after coming to The Bar for the first time he had slept with someone who knew of someone who had a spare room at a much more reasonable price, and Boy had moved in.
The rent on this new place, like the rent on all the places he'd lived in since he arrived in the city, was paid for by the Social Security.
And apart from that rent Boy hardly had any money.
That was why he had walked everywhere on his early journeys; and now it was the main reason why he was so happy to eat the food which men prepared for him either before or after they had sex, to sit at their dining room tables.
He himself lived off fruit with sugar, yoghurt, cereals, eggs, instant coffee, and he often ate toast three times a day.
So you see he was very happy, very flattered to be bought drinks in The Bar, and this life with hardly any money at all was why listening to other people's classical music on their expensive sound systems was a real and true idea of luxury to him.
Because it was on the twentieth floor, the flat had an amazing daytime view of the great and glittering river; by night, it was the great towers of the financial district to the west that glittered.
Boy would sometimes sit staring at this view with a guide to the city open on his lap.
He'd use it to identify and locate all the landmarks which he had stared up at during his exhausting explorations, now seen from a very different perspective; he knew the names of all the streets where the distant, anonymous towers of the banks and finance companies were sited, having worn himself out many times by walking along them, fascinated by the scenes glimpsed behind their mirrored, darkened or tinted glass windows and walls.
Now he'd sit and stare at those same walls made transparent by all the lights left on at night.
From his local library he got photocopies of the maps of his district for 1811, 1843 and 1871; he'd sit there and try to work out how the changes in the maps related to the view at night; where the darkness of rookeries, courts and tenements had been replaced with the darkness of lampless parks and public gardens.
He worked out where The Bar was on his maps, and then checked this perspective against the actual view — from where he saw the city it looked like The Bar was right in the middle of it, not hidden away at all like it was on the map.
He also got a copy of the underground railway map, and tried to trace that invisible geography over what he could actually see; he would even try and trace the map of the flight paths of aeroplanes over the city, deciding which direction indicated which distant country.
Boy thought he would like to see the city under heavy snow; then it would look like a real map, all in black and white, the river a thick black ribbon, or, if frozen as he knew it had once been, a clean white ribbon, the only space in the city without streets, names, lights or indeed owners.
The man who actually had the lease or paid the rent anyway on this flat was a man who worked sorting for the Post Office.
Boy was his lodger I suppose.
Boy as I said lived during the days on sugar, yoghurts, instant coffee and toast; then every evening the man would cook up a big casserole, one big casserole filled with fish and lots of potatoes, tinned sweetcorn, something like that, and they would eat that together in the kitchen every night at seven o'clock, before the man went off to work — he worked nights you see.
The other time that they used to sit down together was for a cup of tea or coffee at six in the morning, which was when the man got home, and often as not that was when Boy got home too.
They'd sit in the kitchen with a pot of tea just after dawn, their very different labours finishing just as the rest of the city was going to work.
Boy used to think,I suppose we both work nights, really, it's no wonder we're as tired as each other, we've been up working all night.
Then the man would go to bed for the day, and Boy would stay up, dozing but mostly watching the television.
The fact that he lived with someone who slept by day, and the fact that his own life, centred around The Bar, was more or less nocturnal, made it seem quite normal to Boy to always consider the life of the city around him from the perspective of the night.
He never felt that he quite belonged to the life of the daylight hours.
This man Boy lived with went swimming every other day, kept the greying hair on his body clipped shod with an electric razor, made a long phone call to a lover in another city every weekend, and kept a photograph of this lover visible in every room of the flat, even the bathroom, so that he was never out of his sight.
Of course Boy had seen inside a lot of different men's houses, but this was the first man's life he had ever watched at such close quarters, the first time he had ever seen a man taking care of himself, the first time he had ever seen another man living day after day after day.
During the days, while the man slept, Boy would sleep a little himself, in a chair, in preparation for his nights at  The Bar; but mostly he would stare out of the window at the city, or stare at the television.
This sounds like an idle life I know, but these long hours of staring were no more idle than Boy's long journeys around the city on foot had been aimless.
Boy looked through the glass of the living room window, or at the glass of the television screen, with the same fierce attention that he had stared through the shop windows.
If you had asked him, I suppose that he would not have been able to give a very convincing answer as to why he was walking, or looking, or watching in such an apparently random and obsessive fashion.
He might have been tempted to say,it's sort of a job by which he meant,it's something that I have to do .
The one thing he would never have said was I'm looking for someone .
None of the television which Boy watched for so many hours made sense in a conventional way, because he watched television as if it was one continuous programme.
He watched a disgraced politician's confession on a Wednesday; on the Thursday a party broadcast made no reference to his disgrace, but was followed on the news that night by edited highlights of his arrest.
In the middle of this, Boy switched to a documentary made by a group of prostitutes which showed married men sitting nervously on the edges of beds in hotel rooms, sitting on neatly flowered bedspreads and having difficulty (they were embarrassed by the female camera crew) saying exactly what it was that they wanted to do for their thirty pounds.
One man just sat there in silence, looking at the camera, grinning and folding and refolding his six fivers.
Then Boy cut to a black and white film in which a good man comes back from the war in uniform and finds his wife hostessing a party in black satin with orchids, and he throws out her gin-drinking friends, and she says to them, laughing but then not laughing at all,my husband would like to be alone with me.
He probably wants to hit me again.
And then Boy cut back to the man on the bed, who was  saying (actually it was a different man in a different room, Boy realised; the sofa and the quilted nylon counterpane were in a different colour in this room, though the man sitting there looked just like the last one), the man was saying I like your shoes, please take off your shoes ; and Boy cut backwards and forwards between this man and the politician beginning to lose his self-control and saying I would just ask people to forgive me really and to forgive my wife as well .
Boy watched all of this as if he was seeing fragments of one, continuous and baffling programme.
He would sit there all day doing this, sleeping sometimes in his chair but never tuning off, trying to make all these pieces of television fit together in some way.
Sometimes the effort overwhelmed him and he failed and gave up.
Watching the final scenes of Jean Harlow's last film, the ones shot after she had died, defeated him in this way.
In these scenes an unknown actress, impersonating Harlow's voice, speaks the lines with her back to the camera or with her face hidden by a wide-brimmed hat; at the sight of this, Boy simply got up and left the living room, left the end of the film unwatched and just sat in the kitchen with a pot of tea.
Why, he thought, had they been unable to abandon the film, to leave it without an ending, as a memorial to her death?
Why hadn't they just put a notice up on the screen half through the scene she was shooting when she died, saying this has to stop somewhere ?
Why did the story have to be finished in such a bizarre way — Boy was suddenly overwhelmed with the thought of things never being allowed to end.
The idea that one person was interchangeable with another suddenly appalled him.
But he did not admit defeat to the extent of turning the television off; he simply left it on and went into another room.
The man used to say to him sometimes, when he saw him sat in front of the screen:
’ I don't know how you can watch it like that.
How can you concentrate?’ and Boy would say:
‘I can't, that's the reason; I can't concentrate.
That's a good reason to practise, isn't it?’
Sometimes, over their early morning cup of tea, Boy would tell the man about what he had watched, in the way that people often like to describe the highlights of their working day once they get back home to their partner.
One morning he said (the man didn't talk much during these early morning cups of tea, he was too tired, but he was happy to listen):
‘I watched a whole film through earlier, it was really good.
There was this scene right at the end where the woman lights a cigarette after she's left the gas on the cooker on and everything goes up in an explosion; and then in the very next advert there was a car driving through a field, and the whole field went up in a sheet of flame.
And now every time I see an advert, or just anything, I expect things to explode.’
The man didn't usually comment, but this time, after a pause, pouring himself another cup, he said:
‘Oh I've seen that one.
We saw it together.
She's just got him out of prison after making all that money and going through all that shit for him, he finally comes home, and all he wants to do is watch the match on the telly.
and all she can think of to say is (and here he mimicked a heavy filmstar accent which actually was nothing like the actress in the film at all, because the woman in the film is an ordinary, decent, hardworking woman), ‘Oh dahlink, I 'ave missed you so much,’ and then the first thing she does after waiting for him to come home for seven fucking years is to leave the fucking gas on while she's making his coffee, and then of course she's so tense that she just can't wait for a fag, she lights up, there you go; bang.
Silly cunt.
It's not my idea of a happy ending.
D'you want more tea?
I think I might go out today after I've had my bath.’
And Boy thought, oh,I see, he's thinking about his lover.
He's thinking about how if his lover comes to live here, then that's not how the story will end.
That's not what he thinks would or should happen, the day his lover finally arrives.
The day his lover finally comes home from that other city.
Boy thought about this reaction to the film all day, but in the end he found it unsatisfactory, both as a form of interpretation and as a form of enjoyment.
What worried him was that the man was somehow rejecting the film, announcing that he didn't think life was really like that.
Just to see what it would feel like, Boy tried hard to copy this attitude during the film he watched the next afternoon.
He tried hard not to admire or approve of the heroine, tried to imagine that life was not like that really.
He argued with her silently, pointing out that by any normal standards she was doing all the wrong things and was allowing her story to end badly or wrongly.
When her father was being stern with her, and she hid her face from the camera in the pillow on the morning before her wedding, he thought of all the arguments that he would have used to persuade her to get up and face the situation.
When, in well-cut white satin and glycerine tears, she sobbed,Oh but Daddy I do love him, I do love him , he still tried to reason with her; but then when he saw her hitching up the satin and running across the lawn, throwing off the veil, scattering the astonished wedding guests as she ran, and when he saw her jumping into a truck, not caring that she was getting petrol stains all over her broderie anglaise , jumping into a truck and not with the man they all expected her to love, but with the one she really loves, and then driving off with him in a cheap pickup truck to a motel in Wisconsin, shouting out,Goodbye Father, Goodbye Father ! as she goes; well when he saw her doing that then Boy could not bring himself  to disapprove.
He said to himself,but I do think life's like that .
And that night of course in The Bar we were all saying,oh god when she jumps into the truck, how fabulous was that, it just makes you want to cheer ; and Boy thought again,well that is how life is , that is how I feel, that is how I feel when I'm leaving the bar with my husband for the night, my husband-to-be, that's just what I think when I'm getting into his car, Goodbye Father, Goodbye.
(Of course, Boy would never have used that word,husband , that's my word.
But then, I'm old-fashioned, I mean, we used to talk like that all the time.
What word do you use then?)
The next day Boy thought about the film again, and while he still felt very approving of the woman in the film, Boy knew that the man he lived with would have disapproved very much of her whole attitude and the whole way her story had been told, would probably not even have stayed to watch the end of the film.
All Boy could think of to explain this was that the man was older than he was, and that he actually had a husband in a sort of way, and not just for one night or a few nights, and so that had to be why he felt differently about the films he watched.
Boy never thought that anything on the television was ever about anything except his own life.
Boy had dreams in which he spent all his money and most of his time shopping for and carrying home bulbs, seed packets, leafless vines and small, bare-branched trees.
In these dreams he would never use a basket for the shopping, but would cradle the roots and bulbs in his bare arms.
Back home, he dreamt, he filled the whole flat with buckets of earth, even filled soup dishes and the kettle and the wineglasses with soil, and spent hours watering them and moving them carefully around every day, carrying them from room to room so that they would  be struck in turn by whatever sunshine came in through the different windows at different times of the day, making sure they were kept warm.
He would be deeply moved and encouraged, in his dreams, even by the smallest and most ordinary bud; his nostrils got raw and caked with fine dirt as he knelt down and sniffed and sniffed to try and catch the first smell of green life.
His favourite word, the one that he heard again and again in these dreams, was spring.
Did Boy ever ask himself why he didn't dream about men, when he got home from The Bar — why he had instead these strange dreams of shoots, bulbs and roots; roots kept in the dark, waiting to flower, needing a gardener's attention?
After all, if you had asked him, Boy would probably have said for the first time in his life, yes, thank you I am very happy.
WEEK FIVE
Every night when he was in The Bar, Boy wore his black shoes.
He had bought them when he arrived in the city, and they were the only shoes he owned.
They were good value, because they were in a style that he could wear anywhere and they were strong enough for all his walking and kept his feet from being bruised on the city pavements, for when you walk as much and as far as Boy did at that time you can hurt your feet badly.
These shoes had stood him in good stead.
They had come in a good strong box, which Boy had kept.
The box was always somewhere on the floor by his bed, and was tied up with a bow, as if it was a precious parcel or a gift intended for a special person; the bow was tied from a length of scarlet nylon ribbon which Boy had seen in the dustbin outside a florist's, and had stolen, and taken home and ironed, having sensed at once that its splendid colour made it suitable for the tying up of this very special box.
In the box Boy kept a few books and a lot of letters; apart from his clothes these were about the only things he had in the flat that were his own.
The letters were  written on several different kinds and colours of paper, airmail paper, headed notepaper from hotels in several different cities.
Each was in an envelope; the envelopes all bore Boy's name, and the addresses of the twelve different places in which Boy had briefly lived since he had arrived in the city, before he had managed to get this place where he was resident now.
There were however no stamps on the envelopes and no postmarks.
Some of the letters were in ballpoint, some in a big fat lazy hand in heavy black ink, only twenty-six words on the page, some typed (some well-typed, some mis-typed); but despite these differences, each letter began with the same phrase:My Dear Boy .
The letters were all signed with different names, each in a different handwriting.
Some appeared to be from famous historical figures; the signatures on these were Oscar, John A, Edmund, Edward Morgan, James .
Others were signed with names of characters, either characters from films or works of fiction, or the kind of people that you meet in our kind of life in our kind of city, and they're so large, or so strong, or so infamous, that you say of them,she's a real character .
These letters were signed Carla, Bette, Yvonne, Rose-Marie ; one (on airmail paper and from an American city) was signed ‘Love from all the Family’, beneath which were four signatures:Mom, Dad, Eugenia and Auntie B .
There was a set of letters tied up in a bundle with a violet silk ribbon and all written in the same ridiculous and now-faded violet ink; they were scented with old makeup (each one bore at the bottom of its last page a lipstick kiss in Nuits de Paris ) and were on expensive and indeed pretentious notepaper as thin as an onion skin.
These were all signed Fanny .
They formed a sequence, dated from 1903 to 1927, detailing the changing fashions of that period —my dear , we never showed our legs like that.
Might have got more trade if we did I suppose.
The letters from 115–18 were missing.
These letters were full of details of makeup, hair and gossip; advice on how to make the best of oneself when just beginning one's career.
Some of the other letters in the box (the typed ones) were much less elegant, and seemed to have come from strangers; they contained advice of a different sort, instructions about where to get sex and how much to pay for it if necessary, often these were just plain filth like I'd like to do this to you and then I'd like to do that to you, be at the top of the park in your grey school trousers and I'll show you what a real man can do for you.
I'll make you listen to the sound of your own voice saying, ‘Yes, please, I want you to do it.’
I'll get you on your knees.
I'll get you so you won't even recognise your own body but after we've done it you'll be grateful to me that I made you do it and you'll enjoy it and you'll get better at it and one day you'll thank me for doing this to you .
In some of the envelopes in Boy's shoebox were photographs.
Some of these were old portraits that Boy had bought in a street market early on a Sunday morning, wing collars and moustaches printed in sepia; some were cut from pornographic magazines or bodybuilding magazines (in colour); some were cut from newspapers (these in black and white).
On the back or across the front of these photographs were signatures duplicated from the letters; John Addington Symonds, Baron Corvo, Robbie Ross,for Boy with kindest regards from Reggie Turner .
There had been no attempt to make these signatures credible; the words ‘for my Dear and especial Boy, with affectionate regards from Mr Arthur Bloxam’ appeared across a faded nineteenth-century portrait; but they also appeared scrawled lavishly across a portrait of an eighteen-year-old boxer torn from the sports pages of a recent newspaper.
A reproduction of the famous 1886 Sarony portrait of Oscar Wilde in New York had fuck  you anytime, Denny written across it.
A commercially-produced greetings card, with a colour photograph of a handsome and well-muscled man blindfolded and tied to a pillar, had clumsily printed across it:You made me love you .
The photograph that Boy looked at most often and which he sometimes even left out of the box and kept on the floor beside his bed as he slept was one that looked like a photograph of Boy himself.
It had the same dark hair, the same white skin and the same extraordinarily inviting eyes.
But the face was framed by the stiff collar and strange beribboned cap that the Foot Regiment of the Scots Guards wore in 1915.
The portrait had been taken against a painted canvas studio backdrop depicting a road winding across chalk hills beneath a summer sky; the stage property milestone against which the soldier had been posed, leaning, bore the inscription;to France .
Many such photos were taken in 1918 and kept by wives, girlfriends and lovers as mementoes of the men who went to Flanders.
I never did find out if this was in fact some relation of Boy's, his Grandfather perhaps, or whether the resemblance between the now-dead soldier and Boy was merely a coincidence.
If it was, I don't know why he kept it or what exactly it meant to him.
The box also contained letters which were hardly letters at all; small unsigned notes on pieces of paper torn from notebooks or the backs of envelopes.
These just said,darling, I'll see you tonight , or Darling, it's going to be alright, really it's going to be alright, everything is going to be alright, everything is going to be alright .
On the rare nights that he was not in The Bar Boy would lay out all these papers in a circle on the floor around his bed (he had this affectation of keeping his bed, a mattress on the floor, in the centre of his small but  almost empty room).
He laid them out like they were a pack of cards spread out around him for a game of patience.
He'd lie on his bed at three or four in the morning just looking at them with rapt concentration, not reading them, just laying them out, changing which one was next to which one, as if determining some sequence or some relationship between the writers.
He was making couples, choosing partners, arranging meetings in a café where they could all talk, all those men who never had had the chance to meet.
Sometimes he would lay out in a row the seven or eight letters from the seven or eight men who he would most like to meet and talk to when he got to heaven.
He knew of course that he never could meet them, but he wanted so badly to talk to them that he would get out their letters and pictures from his box of papers and talk quietly to them anyway.
Boy did not keep in this box the letters that arrived once a week at his flat, regularly, on a Tuesday morning, letters which also began ‘Dear Boy’ or ‘My Dear Boy’, but which were all signed ‘Father’.
Boy did not throw these letters away; he kept them all, and indeed read them not only on the day that they arrived but again and again during the week before the arrival of the next one, but he did not keep these letters in his box, and he did not reply to them either.
SIX, SEVEN AND EIGHT
The Bar was not just a place, but also a person; The Bar was Madame.
Madame was there every night, she was The Bar and she was also the reason why so many of us went there all the time.
Madame had not always been Madame.
I have seen photographs of her (looking it must be admitted not much younger than she did at the time in which this story is set), across which she has signed herself ‘Mademoiselle’, and sometimes ‘Miss’.
In the days when it was briefly fashionable to be seen around with black people she had also been known as ‘Missy’, and she'd had a black lover then.
And, since you asked, she once went for a policeman with her stilettoes as he tried to bundle a black man into a car outside a dance hall on the bottom of the Tottenham Court Road (derogatory remarks in that department were still more likely to earn a black eye than a black look in The Bar).
That was after the war; during the war itself she had been known as just M, wherever she went.
I think she must have seen a lot of things at that time which had made her the way she was, seen things in the blackout and in the underground stations.
You still hear about it; the women fighting like cats to stay together, the couples making love in the park and up against walls; the uniform boys in the  arms of the Soho queens, the Americans in Piccadilly.
And she'd come out of all that and she'd opened her bar, at a time when there were hardly any.
She had her reasons, is what I'm saying.
It was in memory of those days that she had given The Bar its first and now largely forgotten name,Babylon .
And then after that it was The Mandrake Studios (I know the man who's still got the nameplate, a brass nameplate it was, very discreet, like a private doctor's).
The very first film that ever had a room full of homosexuals and no one else, that was the name of the place where that scene took place, you see.
And that was the film with the scene of the boy coming into the bar that I said I thought of when I saw Boy coming in sometimes.
Once or twice I have heard her begin to tell the story of those days to some young man, but then halfway through a sentence she would go white with anger, knock back her gin and go silent.
Don't talk to me about what it was like in those days , she would say.
The truth is , she would say,I'm still looking forward to life beginning .
After all that, she'd been just ‘Madam’ for a while, which might have indicated that she was getting older or grander, except that she always looked just the same, never any older.
That Madam , Gary used to say,she's been forty for as long as we've known her .
And she clearly intended to stay that way.
And then at a certain point she felt, and we felt, that Madam wasn't quite enough; and so just now, anyway, she was known as Madame , and no one in The Bar ever addressed her as anything else.
Madame was our constant; against the fact that she never changed her style or her outfit (it was always the same dress, every night) you could measure the changes in all the other faces and bodies that you spent the night scrutinising — faces subtly altered by a recent bitterness  or passion, a body sagging under the pressure of losing a partner or made alert by the proximity of a new or potential one.
In the centre of all these changes, supervising them and sitting straightbacked above them on her high stool, was always Madame, the central figure in the composition of whatever new tableaux we rearranged ourself into.
Madame, with Madame's Waterford crystal tumbler always placed just at the same place on the bar; Madame, in position, on guard, ruling the night.
Do you know what that meant, and means, to have someone who was there every night like that?
Sometimes I wonder that she didn't collapse under the sheer weight of how much we needed her, of how unreasonably we all admired and needed her.
When she had opened The Bar, Madame had kept up the costume in which she'd worked when she was just an entertainer in other people's places — she'd worked in them all.
It was this outfit which made her age so hard to determine.
The dress (the dress, because as I said she wore it every night) was full length.
It left her back and her strong arms bare (she powdered her arms white) and it was close-fitting everywhere, showing off her large hips and her large breasts.
It was white, very classic, with lots of silver in the brocade and lots of sequins and real crystal beading.
The effect was very Palladium, very 1957, I used to think.
But I've seen pictures of Holiday in a beaded sheath just like that, taken well before the war, and publicity shots of some of those French singers or chanteuses coming down staircases in just the same sort of thing even earlier in the century.
Crystal beading, brilliants, feathers — or plumes, really — that was the look: Madame often wore feathers in one way or another, a marabou-trimmed cape, or a fan, a real osprey if she was feeling very upmarket.
One hundred and fifty years  of glamour sitting on a stool right before your very eyes, that's what she was.
And the face didn't date, either.
Madame's hair was dead black, scraped back like a dancer's in the daytime and at night done up in coils with big silver pins.
Every night she greased her face, whited everything out and redrew it just as she had always done; a heavy coat of pale powder, black mascara, black eyeliner, heavily pencilled black eyebrows, and then, finally, her famous scarlet lips, always perfect, always done in the same shade,Rouge Extrême .
It never changed.
Once I heard a very stupid queen say,How old are you, Madame ?(god that one must have been out of it).
Madame replied:I am old enough to know better .
Madame drank water all day, and gin all night, always in that same Waterford crystal tumbler.
I never once saw her drunk and think it may have been water in the evenings too, half the time.
She always had a cigarette in her right hand, and her right hand was covered in rings.
I must say again that it is very odd for me to have to describe all this for you.
I mean, everyone knew Madame.
Her dress, her rings and indeed her whole style were common knowledge.
The Bar was, as far as we were concerned, the only place to go.
So everybody went there, all the time.
And it's so odd, it's hard now when somebody says, ‘What was it like?’ or says, ‘What did she use to wear?’because of course we all saw her all the time and thought nothing of it, saw her at the very least once a week (missing service , it was called, if you went a week without visiting, and it was certain to be discussed amongst the congregation when you did finally show up), it's just very odd for me to think that you were never there and that this is all strange to you when to us it was just an ordinary life.
It was daily life.
You were never there, you never knew her, you never saw her, you know nothing of our lives  then, nothing, nothing, nothing, it's extraordinary to me that.
Anyway, since you ask, the rings were black and there were ten of them, all on her right hand.
They were mourning rings, real eighteenth century.
Little black cameos of urns and weeping women all mounted in real old gold.
She had names for them all, and would count them off sometimes like a rosary.
Sometimes it would be Bessie, Billie , names we'd all heard before and knew about; her favourite fistful, the one she would recite just before she got up on stage, was Mae, Marie, Maria, Anna Mae B, La Miss, Marian …
I forget the other four now.
Marian I know was Marian Anderson, the black singer, she sang on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial on Easter Sunday morning in 1939, it was freezing, they'd locked her out of the concert hall she had booked.
But even when they were famous names like those, Madame used to recite or whisper them like they were the names of lovers or at least the dear departed, girlfriends, people she had actually met.
On the other hand, the left, was the diamond.
This was very big and very real.
Madame believed in money.
The outfit may have been grand, but it never stopped her from working.
I've seen her behind the bar in that dress, many nights.
And she'd go on the demonstrations in it too, I've seen her at a rally in a park dragging that beaded hem through the mud.
She had put an old cardigan over the top, and she'd rolled up the sleeves and she was shaking that bucket.
When Madame shook the bucket you turned out your pockets even if it meant walking home.
I've seen her angry in that dress many times, but never as angry as when some man said to her,I don't see why we have to keep on giving money like this .
I've seen her in that dress with the whole of the bar top covered in loose change, laboriously counting the coins, bagging the  silver and copper coins separately.
We blunted our fingers counting coins in those days.
And I've seen her, done up and looking her very grandest, reach into a small-feathered evening bag, take out an antique cigarette case with an M in brilliants on it and offer a surprised young queen a condom.
Something for the weekend, sir , she said, stopping him just as he was about to leave with another young man — you see she'd noticed that they hadn't talked before going off together, they'd just started kissing and were going to drag each other home without discussing anything, and they were young, really young, eighteen.
Madame's was one of the very first places to have condoms for free.
I can't keep on fishing in this bag , she said, and then she had a holy water stoup put up by the door, and filled it with them, you just took some on the way out.
And of course I've seen her blazing in that dress of hers when she kicked off against someone.
Madame kicking off?
Well, for instance; one night Stella went crazy and assaulted a visitor who had called Stella II a skinny black bitch right in the middle of her rendition of ‘Te Amo’, and he meant it, right there in the middle of his number — well Madame not only showed her approval of the assault by conspicuously buying Stella drinks every night for the whole of the following week; as soon as she saw the fight starting she got off her stool, yanked out the plug on the sound system, hitched up that frock, got straight up on the stage while they were still on the floor (she knew Stella would sort him out) and she went into an unforgettable aria of abuse against this stranger which culminated in her eschewing all her usual magnificence of phrasing and just standing there shouting fuck off at him, screaming fuck off, if you don't like it you can fuck off, E, X, I, T, there it is, you came in through it and now you can fuck off out of it, fuck off out of it why don't you you stupid bastard (and by now of course someone  had dragged Stella off and we were all up on our chairs cheering while the disgraced stranger made his slow and humiliating exit through the parting crowd)why don't you just piss off and insult someone who doesn't have the balls to answer back because you've picked the wrong girls here darling, fuck off that's it, fucking fuck off, fucking fuck off right through my front door and don't you ever, don't you ever, don't you ever step on my fucking frock again .
God she was heaven when she went off like that.
No one goes off like that any more.
The whole bar was up on its feet to watch even before she had finished laying down the opening phrases; by the time she was into the full fury of the aria, with its demanding coloratura decorations, its elaborate breathing technique and its famous placing of the pauses, we were all applauding and whistling.
For the closing phrases, by which time she'd completely lost it and was just plain screaming, we all fell silent, because it was awesome; and then when she had finished the victim of her fury slowly exited right on cue in complete silence, complete silence except for Madame's heavy breathing and the sound of Gary playing recitative on the piano, for he had been playing along under her rage all the time, as if to support it, as if this really was music to our ears.
And then Madame stood there in her dress and took the applause and cheers just like she'd done ‘Casta Diva’ or something.
Once on holiday I saw a supposedly miraculous statue of the Madonna brought back to her resting place after making her annual tour of the capital city.
The Virgin wasn't in silver and beads, but gold, with real diamonds; and I say Madame, in her dress, was just as splendid.
At the end of a special evening, or rather at its high point, you would hear Gary playing a certain intro, and you'd hear the whole bar going quiet as people recognised it.
That quietness was typical of us; we had a very strong sense of etiquette you see.
This intro on the piano was in its way a very formal announcement, and people would hear it over or under whatever other music was on, and the bar staff would turn the tapes down and then off, without anyone having to say anything, they would just do it.
And everyone knew that now it was time for Madame's famous song.
Over the intro Gary would always give his little speech, very quietly — almost to himself.
We had after all all heard it before, it wasn't as if this number actually needed any introduction.
Ladies and gentlemen , he would say,Ladies and gentlemen, now it gives me very great pleasure to introduce the woman who is responsible for holding this whole show together; the woman who first understood all those years ago that there was crying need for a place where all you lovely people could gather of an evening, the one that we all know and love, and so…would you please welcome on stage, the very lovely, the very talented…once again…our very own …and sometimes he would fade out, and not even say her name, and he would pause, he would make us wait, he would suspend his elegant hands over the keys; and then, in that silence, he would play the first notes of the actual song itself.
And to the sound of those notes, to the sound of the first simple phrase of that famous melody, Madame would lift the hem of her beaded silver and white dress and she would place her silver-shoed loot on the first of the six steps to the stage.
Word would have gone out that she was going to do it again tonight.
People would even bring flowers, but she never accepted a single bouquet, not one.
She said,keep them for my grave.
Because of the way she did it, they said of Madame, ‘That woman knows what she's singing about,’ and this expression became a common one.
If someone was making a confession about an unfaithful lover, and was  on the edge of tears, people would often say,listen, darling , this woman knows what she is singing about.
She couldn't actually sing I suppose, but when she sang, she meant every word.
She would as often as not weep during the song, and these were not glycerine tears, and they were not, except in the later years, produced to order.
Her performances were legendary, and I am at a loss to describe them now.
You'd be better off spending time seeking out the great women of your own day, young man; turn off that radio.
Or at least make sure you are listening to the right station.
Or talk to anyone who saw her on one of the nights when she was worth seeing, and ask them what it was like.
I can't do it properly.
Ask someone else to justify how much it meant to us.
How much it meant to us when she brought her Waterford tumbler up onto the stage with her, settled her feathers and her sequins and then looked calmly round until there was complete silence.
And then she would look to Gary for him to begin the piano again, and she would look us straight in the eye for as long as possible, and she would sing:
All of me ,
Why not take all of me ,
Can't you see —
and even this early in the song, I have often heard Madame falter and stop, and just open her arms towards us, palms outwards, in a simple refusal to sing, just letting Gary carry the phrase on the piano — and of course we all knew the words anyway and so could hear them even when she wasn't singing, sometimes you'd hear the whole crowd singing almost inaudibly along with her.
And indeed I can still remember that strange whispered singing, all those men singing, I can remember it, and I can remember every single one of those words even now, and I've often quoted them to myself when I've needed to.
I have walked down the street crying and said those words out loud:
All of me ,
Why not take all of me.
I've often wanted to say that to a man, go on,take all of me , why not?
And I've wanted to say that to someone who's just staring at me, just go up to them and say,all of me , the whole fucking thing, take it.
Why not?
There were six steps up to the tiny stage, Gary would be playing the intro, and with each of the steps Madame would say a woman's name, fingering one of the rings.
She would dedicate her song to them all.
Here again, she knew what she was talking about.
Madame's room above The Bar had a large glass-fronted bookcase, and also a high bookshelf running right round the red-lacquered ceiling, and they were both stacked with biographies and autobiographies of financially successful women; courtesans, couturiers, financiers, novelists, acrobats, madams, actresses, mistresses, singers and wives.
Madame had once heard one of her customers castigating another for spending all his money on a faithless younger lover:you're such a Camille , he said.
Madame interrupted with a seven-minute lecture summarising the economics of the real Marguerite Gautier's career, explaining exactly how and why she had made her way through the Paris of the 1840s with such skill and courage…
Madame could not help but admire any woman who had gained access to enough money, either early or late in her career, to be able to laugh and to leave people.
Her studies were  remarkable; as a young woman Madame had filled eighteen notebooks with summaries of these women's careers, reading them very literally as sources of practical advice, in much the same way as she had taught herself to understand stock management and how to do her own accounts.
Her favourite line was Bernhardt's, and this she copied into the front of each of the eighteen notebooks, at least the five of them that I still have;Oh well, I'll just buy the theatre .
She didn't just pin them up on her walls, these women, she studied them.
And she carried them all up on stage with her when she climbed those six steps to sing her song.
(Of course we understood none of this really, we just thought she was fabulous; when she left us, simply left us, taking only the jewels, we were terrified and had no idea of how to keep things going.
We had not watched closely enough; we had simply paid our money over the bar and hoped — without knowing it — that Madame would always be there to open the doors and close them behind us.
We thought that our evenings in The Bar could simply be bought.
Of course we tried to keep things going — after all, we knew, vaguely, how much we needed that place, needed our evenings there together, but after seven months of enthusiasm and mismanagement The Bar closed.
The place which now bears its name is in quite another part of town and is run by men who didn't even know Madame.
Men with more sense than we ever had.
I suppose that means that we are learning.)
Those were the nights, with Madame singing her song.
And Boy listening.
NINE
At Madame's right hand, on the stool next to her, hardly ever talking to her but always right there beside her, was the man that we all called O. I deliberately haven't told you about him yet.
You'll see.
O was only one of the many names that we had given him, but it was the one that had lasted.
His actual name, as it happens, was Hart (like the poet), Hart Price.
Because he sat most nights on his own and looking very much removed from the whole crowd, very dark-browed and quiet, we speculated endlessly on his story.
When he first appeared he was known briefly as The Broken, referring to his christian name, and to the way he looked so grave, even grief-stricken sometimes in an odd way.
And then, because we admired his beauty so much, someone would often say of him, as we were sizing up and judging the night's array of talent, one of us would quietly say, The Price Is Right.
But this didn't stick, and because his style was as I have said to always sit and wait, and never to make the first move, we began to call him The Older Man; and then this became just Older , and finally just O.
You never thought of O as someone who was with people or who went home with people, and he never seemed to be looking round for someone all the time, which is how most of us must have appeared.
However, O was no celibate; several of us had slept with him.
But his style was always to seem self-contained.
He may have left The Bar accompanied, but you never saw him following anyone, gazing after someone or persuading them to come home with him.
Asked exactly how O took people home, you'd have to say that O just summoned his men to him somehow.
They said that O had been an alcoholic.
Nowadays he just smoked all night (the same brand as Madame) and kept a glass of iced water constantly beside him — Little David would keep it fresh and cold without being asked.
I always thought that was extraordinary; a man like him sitting apparently alone all night with that one never-empty, unintoxicating, frosted glass, as if it was the sign of some great abstinence or purity.
It was all the more striking because O had such a body; he was magnificent.
Forty-five at least, with grey in his black hair, and magnificent.
He always wore a plain white shirt with the sleeves rolled back off his splendid forearms, and he had eyes dark enough to look truly black in the lighting of The Bar.
With those looks and that air about him I sometimes thought that he was a Prince really.
We all assumed that O was a man with a past.
If someone asked you,who is that man ? you said,oh, she was wounded in the war, you know .
A major part of the mystery was that as I have said O sat on Madame's right hand all night every night; and he never left without kissing her goodnight, formally, on the cheek.
If he was taking a man home he would keep him waiting while he did this.
Because of this ritual we wondered if Madame was privy to his secret, if she knew the story, if she sat by him because she knew that O's great self-possession and his quietness were in fact the signs of a pain which had to be kept hidden, a pain which stayed fresh and so had to be controlled every hour of the night.
Pursuing this theory, we attributed to him some great and unhappy love, and then surmised that he had only ever confessed it to Madame, perhaps in the days of his terrible drunkenness.
We placed in that magnificent chest a magnificently broken heart; we imagined that without Madame's support and proximity he would break down, order whisky all night, then howl out some great and vivid grief before collapsing on the floor of the Bar before our very eyes.
However this convenient explanation of his style bore no relation to what we did know about O's past life with other men.
For all his silence, he was passionate, not desolate; if there was a sadness or loss there, it was bigger or deeper or stranger than the loss of one person.
And if Madame stayed close to him, it can hardly have been because she thought he needed looking after.
Talking about him with the others, I did find out that several other people had had the same experience with him as me; that his lovemaking was done in silence, that he never said a word (in fact with me he hardly looked me in the eye either, just stared at his own hands as he moved them over my body, not stroking so much as seizing and kneading me, holding me down too); but then later in the night you would wake to hear him talking to himself, lying there fast asleep (O always asked the men he fucked to stay with him all night long, always), fast asleep and talking out loud in the night, talking in a fast, furious, hushed, hollow voice.
O's whole way of making love was strange; he worked on your body until you couldn't stand it, but it was impersonal somehow, as if he was digging inside you to find someone else, something else, something he'd lost or wanted but couldn't find words to ask you for.
(This was very strange for me and I found it hard to talk about.
We didn't use to talk about him like we did the others.)
When he got you home he would strip at once, taking everything off right there and laying his clothes down on the hall  floorway as if he had to be naked at once , methodically removing every item.
No, not every item; he kept on his locket.
A gold locket in which two small photographs lay face to face.
One photograph was of a very beautiful man.
As I lay on O's chest something moved me to snap the locket open, and I remember I asked,who is that ? thinking maybe this was the solution to the mystery, and he said, in the same voice that he talked with later in the night, a sleepwalker's voice, without taking his eyes off the ceiling he said,I don't know; I just found it in a magazine.
I think he is the most beautiful man I've ever see.
I'd give it all up, for him .
The other picture was of an unrecognisable small boy, holding a cat up to the camera, wearing shorts and standing in front of a privet hedge on the edge of a lawn.
And who's this one then ?
I said, and O said,that's me.
That's me before I was who I am now .
I can't remember if the picture of the man from the magazine looked anything like Boy.
One more story about O: he told me (it was as if he was trying to explain the oddity of his lovemaking to me, as if he was trying to account for or apologise for the way he'd treated me, or perhaps to reassure me concerning the effect he'd had on me, I don't know), in the morning he told me that there was one man, this had been just a couple of years previously, there was one man who had summoned him to his bedside to be counted amongst a farewell gathering of lovers, dear friends and great passions.
When O had arrived the dying man had ostentatiously sent all the others from the room, leaving just O and the flowers.
He had called O to the side of the bed, taken hold of his hand and then quietly said to him:please take your clothes off I wish very much to look at you one last time.
You were the most perfect, the most beautiful, the best I ever had.
And O said to me,the thing was.
I couldn't remember.
I didn't even know he still had my address, it all happened years before, we barely even had an affair.
We never talked.
I know we were drunk together, but we were never close, never intimate.
Never intimate; that was O.
And what I wanted to know was, why had O and Boy never been seen to look at each other?
After all, they were our two greatest beauties, surely they deserved each other.
TEN
Every night that Madame stepped up onto the stage in her dress, Boy would be watching her; he always stayed for that.
And of course O would be watching her too.
Madame had this way of pausing between every single word sometimes.
The phrasing got so slow and emphatic that you knew that she wanted you to listen to and weigh up every single word; but you couldn't tell if each word was freighted with anger, or bitterness, or joy; it just came out with great, quiet force, and you had to work out its tone for yourself.
This slowness gave Madame plenty of time to address phrases or just lines to individual people.
And now, often, it would be Boy.
Madame would see Boy there, she'd look at him and she'd give a whole line straight to him (Can't you see…
I'm no good without you ).
And then Mother would look from Boy to the other man who was also there every night and never took his eyes off her when she sang, O, and she'd sing the next lines to him,take these lips, take these arms…can't you see ?
When I saw this happening I began to watch more closely, and I saw that some nights even when she wasn't up on the stage Madame had her eye on these two and would often  look from one to the other and then back again.
She was of course famous for her powers of observation; she was better than any of us at using the mirrors which she had had installed everywhere to keep an eye on everything that was happening, or was about to happen and might need averting.
Even when she was talking to you or giving you your change, you could feel her smile going somewhere over your shoulder as she took in the whole room behind you.
She always knew exactly who was in and who was missing; and if you were missing, Madame probably knew why, and with whom.
All night long she made mental notes of all the transactions being made, the profits, the losses, meetings, separations, the wanting, having, getting, seeing, the excess, the moderation, the negotiations; all those men trying to work out what they wanted, what they could afford, what they needed.
God, thought Madame, when she added up the night's takings,one week I should write down who's having who as well as who's drinking what .
There would be two columns in the ledger: Tonight's Takings, and Tonight's Givings.
Sitting up straight-backed on her stool, she could flatter two men at once and still be watching a third in a mirror; she could keep tabs on the whole shifting choreography at once.
She could confess, absolve and advise two erring lovers in the same weekend without either of them knowing that the other had collaborated with her in engineering their reunion.
And now she seemed to be planning a new use for those skills as I watched her gaze, fixed on Boy, or shifting from O to Boy.
The way she looked at them was odd, because there was no story here as yet, no drama whose next development or twist of plot or big scene we were all awaiting; remember, they had not yet met or even looked at each other .
I don't think anyone but me was taking notes at this stage of the proceedings.
Of course Madame keeping an eye on O was nothing new.
She always had half an eye for him; sometimes I thought she watched him as a tamer does a tiger.
Madame had you see known him in his alcoholic days, when indeed such calm must often have been the prelude to him lurching into an argument, or falling heavily from his stool.
In those days Madame would never stop him from drinking, would never put her hand out over his glass like a good or responsible woman is supposed to in such scenes; Madame would give him the whole bottle, and say, quietly and sincerely,I hope you know what you're doing .
But now there was something new about the way she watched him.
If you had not known who O was you might have thought that Madame was planning a seduction, or wondering whether he was a suitable candidate for a job — her new barman or doorman.
And now it wasn't just him she was watching.
She was watching two men.
She was singing her chosen song.
She was matchmaking.
She was eyeing up a potential couple.
She was smiling and making money and catching people out of the corner of her eye.
That woman was thinking all of the time.
Do you know what I mean?
She had clearly decided, without ever speaking to him, that Boy (she concurred in the popular choice of name) was an asset to her establishment.
She knew nothing about him (none of us did), though of course she could see both how he looked and how we all looked at him.
And she knew that he had been to The Bar over thirty times in seven weeks now.
She did not know his real name, and did not ask either Madge or Mr Mortimer, both of whom had already taken him home, what it was.
Madame didn't need to know; she trusted profoundly in appearances.
Madame wondered how long it would be  before Boy got his hair cropped short so that he looked just like the others.
And on several nights Madame, looking from O to Boy and from Boy to O, noticed, as several of us had, their remarkable similarity of colouring.
Their bodies were very different, although Boy's showed promise, and could indeed have been a version of, a study for, O's magnificent musculature, twenty years earlier.
But their colouring was identical; white skin, black hair, eyes dark enough to look black beneath our artificial stars.
They made, as Madame was later to remark to Gary, a handsome couple.
I told Gary he should have said, ‘And they must make you so proud; everyone can see where they got their looks, Mother.’
I have said that when Boy first entered The Bar he was exhausted; exhausted, walked off his feet.
And there was still an extraordinary shadow of tiredness on his face, as if his eyes were ready to bruise with exhaustion, he often looked like that.
But under the tiredness he was forcing himself to stay awake, stay alert; his eyes were alive with hunger when he looked up into your face.
He was always looking for the beginning of something, and he had the energy of someone starting their career.
When I looked from his face to O's (my eyes often followed Madame's) I saw an older face, one I thought had been weathered by sex and by that indefinable sorrow of O's into a quiet, strong silence.
I suppose both of them were silent; but I thought that O looked as though something was almost over, as if he was ending somehow.
That's it.
Boy was beginning, for all his exhaustion; and O, for all his strength, was close to ending.
One ending and one beginning.
I think it's like that with a lot of couples.
I was there the night that Madame made the first move in what I now see was a careful campaign to prepare Boy for this romance or meeting.
She had sung her song that night.
There was an edge of anger in the song, as if she didn't see why we hadn't understood it yet.
Boy was listening of course.
She waited until he went to pass her to reach the door and leave at the end of the night.
Boy was a bit shamefaced, a bit embarrassed, because that night he was going home alone, having tried very hard but not succeeded.
Perhaps Madame had waited for just such a night.
She stopped him by resting a hand on his arm, and spoke to him — it was the first time.
‘I hate to see you going home empty handed,’ said Madame, and she gave him a package tied like a cake in neatly folded greaseproof paper.
‘Goodnight,’ she said
‘Goodnight,’— Boy was not sure if he was yet allowed to address her by her name, didn't know if he yet had that right.
The first thing in the package was her letter:
My Dear Boy,
I don't do this for everyone.
You will probably realise that these books are precious; they are also, some of them, worth a considerable amount of money.
If, in addition to the few notes which I have taken the liberty of enclosing, you feel that you need any advice, then please ask for it.
I would however prefer that you got as much advice as possible from the books first.
When you've finished these (you may want to read some of them twice), I'll give you more.
Also, all your drinks at The Bar will in future be free.
You are an asset to my establishment.
If you wish to discuss any of the above in private, please feel free to call me — after one, which is when I rise, and before four, which is when I begin work.
Yours, M.
This letter of Madame's isn't entirely accurate…
True, she went to bed late, and was often at her desk until four a.m., and so might have been expected to rise well after midday, and luxuriate over breakfast before beginning her day's work at one in the afternoon.
But in fact Madame was often back at her desk at ten a.m., having already spent an hour tending her body, her face and her hair.
Beneath the letter was a xeroxed newspaper article listing all the bars in the city.
Some of these simply had written across them, NO.
Boy assumed that it was up to him to find out if these bars were closed, were unfashionable, were dangerous or were simply too expensive for him to visit…
Beneath that was a leaflet with the number of the switchboard (837 7324) and then eight pamphlets dealing with sexual hygiene, four of them coming from America, ones which Madame had got hold of before anyone else.
Fuck knows Madame was a tower of strength at that time.
Madame, you see, never assumed either ignorance or experience.
Below the leaflets was a list.
This I have kept, with the letter, and I still have it:
1)
Accept all the advice you can get, courteously.
After all, they've been doing this longer than you have.
2)
REMEMBER, YOU HAVE LEFT HOME NOW.
3)
Never make love badly.
4)
Remember who you were this time last year.
5)
Protect your body.
6)
‘Money is everything, right?’
7)
The moment after he's come, just after, that's when you really see his face how it is.
Whip out your instamatic and take his picture and keep that in your wallet.
8)
Mother speaking of a great gown: ‘If you can't afford it, steal it; if you can't steal it, copy it; if you can't copy it, buy a postcard of it and dream about it; if you can't afford the postcard then get your fucking act together.’
9)
Mother says: If someone does something, it is probably because she wants to.
10)
Mother says: People only lose because they're not strong enough, not because they don't want to fight or aren't good at fighting.
(This, incidentally, was the first time that Boy had heard Madame refer to herself as Mother.)
The rest of the parcel was books.
The first book was a novel about nurses in the Second World War, a pair of lovers in a training hospital — Boy assumed that Madame had lived though this.
The second was a paperback, a romance set in Ancient Greece.
Although it was full of period details — greaves, chitons, how to anoint your lover with olive oil after wrestling — it was also clearly a thinly-disguised account of life in this country in the year of its publication, 1948.
The third was a lengthy and dully-written biography of a late nineteenth-century general.
Boy looked at the pictures of the moustached and uniformed characters with some relish; but he couldn't finish the text, and so missed the single paragraph that Mother had circled in black ink.
She wanted Boy to know that for all the book's nine hundred and forty-eight pages the author had  seen fit to devote only one ambiguous and insignificant paragraph to the fact that this great man had lived forty-one years of his public life accompanied everywhere by a handsome and dedicated working-class servant.
The fourth book featured a scene in which a man planned to write a letter to his Father and Mother telling them of his new-found happiness, but he never could bring himself to write the letter.
Boy remembered this scene.
The fifth was a biography of a famous writer, which Boy read twice with great fascination.
At the age of sixteen, this writer had slept with an older, married friend of her Father; she had arranged to meet him in a churchyard after dinner and they made love on a tombstone.
At seventeen she bore his daughter, but it died.
Eleven months later she bore his son.
Four months later she left the country and travelled constantly, following her lover wherever he wanted to go.
Four months later her sister committed suicide.
Two months later her lover's wife committed suicide, and two days after that she married him.
To please him, she travelled, learnt languages, read all the guide books to the cities he insisted they visit, became a sexual virtuoso, developed opinions on the classics and on contemporary literature, and learnt never to voice them at the dinner table unless asked.
She then wrote a best-selling novel, which is full of dead children and pointless travels; its subject is the education of an unskillable, stubborn, ignorant and horribly-deformed woman.
She was still only nineteen when this novel was published.
By the age of twenty-four she had published her second novel, given birth to and buried a second daughter, buried her first son, given birth to a second, and received a letter describing the death by drowning and the cremation of her husband.
The cremation in particular was described in great detail.
There was no proper funeral, as there had been no proper wedding  ceremony; they simply hauled the waterlogged body onto a bonfire of driftwood, and even though the sea wind at dawn had made the fire hot enough to break the stones of the beach, it was six hours before the body was gone, and then they had to wait a whole day before they could rake the ashes for his bones and send them to her.
She returned to England on the death of her Father; she did not attend the funeral (in a picturesque little English church), but did become his literary editor and published the first and most authoritative biography.
She wrote eighteen more novels, none of them distinguished or now read, enabling her to live alone in relative comfort for sixty years and to give her only son the best upper-class education that her country could provide at that time.
As I've said Boy read this narrative twice, but still he could not understand why Madame wished him to study it.
He did not know who he was supposed to be — the child-wife, the monstrous heroine, the burner of men's bodies, the woman of independent means, the beloved and expensive son?
The sixth book forced Boy to think again about this problem of not knowing who in a story to be.
It was as if Madame had deliberately placed this story underneath the story of the authoress's life.
It was completely fantastic, yet had a simple, conventional plot about love and marriage running through it; her story contained every deviation from the conventional storyline of marriage possible yet was, in every detail, true, and so in that sense not fantastic at all.
This sixth book was entitled Lady into Fox .
The lady in the story (as plainly told as it is titled) inexplicably turns, halfway through an ordinary afternoon, into a bright-eyed vixen; and the man in the story, equally inexplicably, Boy thought, remains faithful to her and loves her dearly even when she leaves him  in order to raise a family with another animal and he even, in the end, goes mad with love for her.
The fourth book had, as I said, impressed Boy with its famous scene of the unwritten letter, which he thought must relate in some way to his own collection of letters.
In the seventh book he found a letter which he in fact copied out and added to that collection.
He was delighted that it was already, even before he did this, addressed to him.
It began:
My Dear Boy, my greatest fear is not that I shall never again touch you, but that when I return I shall no longer be able to hear your voice.
The most casual obscenities, the most hackneyed endearments, coming to me from your rose-red lips, are worth more than the sagest advice of all the old men in the world.
I fear, my dear, that I going deaf…
Boy loved this letter not only because the man it had been sent to shared his new name, but because it was addressed by an older man to a lovelier, younger one.
Madame's letter, and her books, were put into Boy's shoebox to join his collection of letters and photographs.
In fact he couldn't get them all in, and he acquired a second box, a small tea chest he found, with metal corners.
When he'd stored his new acquisitions in it there was still lots of room left for more books and papers.
This excited Boy; he thought,I am acquiring a library .
I must have a future.
When Madame had given him her advice, she didn't interfere.
In fact they never discussed what she had given him; Boy sensed that this was a private matter, something to think about but not talk about.
She left him alone to get on with it and fuck around.
If only Boy had known, there was lots more where that came from; there was lots of advice which Madame might have given him, but didn't.
When she was in her room, when The Bar was closed, she had a recurring fantasy in which Boy's black hair was long enough to reach down to his waist.
She would imagine calling him up to her room every night before he went home to bed with a man, and taking her silver hairbrush from her desk and brushing his hair out like a daughter's, one hundred strokes every night.
Madame imagined that while she was doing this to Boy she would tell him everything she knew, she would talk to him quietly each night whilst brushing his hair before bedtime.
She would tell him where to place the pillow under your back, how to put on a condom for someone else, how to dry tears quickly, how not to be afraid, how to go down, how to let go of someone because it's not the end of the world.
How money is the most important thing.
What to take with you when he leaves you.
She wanted to rehearse all her wisdom out loud to someone so that she could find out if she still believed it herself.
ELEVEN
We knew that something was about to happen.
We knew that something was going on, because it was in this week that Madame changed her name.
She had in fact been referred to privately as ‘The Mother of Us All’ for some time.
But now she announced that she wished this title to be publicly used.
She made the announcement, of course, from the stage.
‘The recent change from Madam to Madame,’ she said, ‘though it has doubtless raised the tone and general tenor of proceedings in this low and benighted place, has not quite succeeded in erasing the traces of squalor and indeed sleaze which cling to that title in the popular or gutter imagination whenever it is applied to a hard-working woman.
We are, after all, no longer in the Dark Ages.
I am not, after all,’ she said, looking around her domain with a distinct smile, ‘running a house of ill repute, which is what I fear the present title of Madame seems to suggest, along with bead curtains, red velvet plush love seats, champagne buckets and other such fittings and accoutrements which are not our style at all these days.
I should hate anyone to think that I am,’ she said, looking around her at us all and smiling again, ‘that I am in the business of catering exclusively for prostitutes, tarts working girls, slags bitches, cunts, whores, studs, pimps, rent boys, butches, nellies, queens, masseurs, escorts, one-night stands, ex-models, ex-policemen, ex-Armed Forces, ex-boxers, security guards, tennis instructors, so-called businessmen, tourists and those poor unfortunates who simply come here to pass the time and meanwhile do some shopping; oh, no, let it never be said!
Bearing this in mind, the title of Madame will no longer do.
It is too redolent of rooms upstairs and days gone by.
I have decided that as from tonight I will be reborn under a different star,’ and here she gestured upwards to the constellation over her head, ‘I will be rechristened, I will come down those stairs tomorrow night fresh to the world and glistening with a new name; from now on, you will kindly refer to me, both to my sainted face and behind my back, as Mother.
Thank you, and Goodnight.’
And so from then on, when you left the Bar, it was ‘Goodnight, Mother’, ‘Goodnight, Mother’, from all the Boys.
THE LAST WEEK
In the final days before they met, Mother's face began to harden when she sat and watched Boy and O, as if she was trying to push them together by sheer force of will power.
Mother, she who had seen so much, wanted one last triumph; one final casting coup.
When she spent all night every night watching her clientele, her boys, it was for this; she was waiting for her chosen ones, the last of her protegés, her perfect couple, her two to see her through the dark times.
This time , she said under her breath,I want to see them fucking perfect .
She added another scene to her fantasy of brushing out Boy's long black hair.
Now she had both men in her room upstairs; she had them standing naked before her.
Taking in every inch of their bodies, she said, looking from one to the other, she said, in her famously well-timed drawl,That's just how I want you.
You two are so (pause) fucking (pause) perfect (drag on the cigarette).
This fantasy was so vivid to her that she would even rehearse this line out loud, looking at herself in her mirror as she smoked the last cigarette of the night, after she'd taken her face off, after all the noise was over and we'd all gone home.
Maybe she felt that if she couldn't do it now, she would never do it; maybe that was why her face hardened  as she watched them, still apart, and imagined them, together.
And indeed she left it to the very last possible moment; she almost missed her chance.
Let me describe how it was, exactly.
The fact is, as he later told Boy, O almost quit The Bar that week.
He almost gave up on us.
It was on the Thursday, the very night before he met Boy.
It didn't show, of course; he showed very little, was always still and dark-eyed and dark-browed.
The way he explained it to Boy, it was one of those moments of giving up, one of those moments when you throw away your still half-full packet of cigarettes as you walk home in the drizzle and you say out loud,well that is it, that is the last time.
Or like the time when you say, right out loud,that's it, I could have been at home sleeping .
All that we saw on that Thursday night was O going home on his own once more; though if we had watched closely we would have seen that he simply left his stool and did not say Goodnight, Mother .
And we would have seen how her eyes followed him to the door.
But we didn't see any of that; we didn't notice that, as O later put it, his eyes weren't just dark that night but almost blinded, blinded with grief.
He did not know why he suddenly felt this way; he was not angry with himself, or with us, and he was not crying.
It was just that suddenly he felt he could not look up, that he couldn't, as he put it, either stand it any longer, or stand any longer .
He left The Bar in a hurry, and with his eyes cast right down.
All he saw was the street under his feet; the escalator at the station suddenly yawning under him; the signs in yellow paint saying: ‘DANGER’.
I should say here that O was a grown man, a strong and handsome man.
These were not the bad nerves of  the lost or the young; O was well used to the life of the city at night.
It is just that some days, and at some times, often in the early hours of the morning, sometimes this is what it feels like; sometimes it gets me too.
It often gets me when I am in a high building or can look down over the city, or sometimes at a station when there is another journey to begin.
Sometimes the tears come for no reason (by which phrase we mean that someone is not crying for a particular reason, for something or someone in particular, but that they are crying for everything).
And when the tears come like that I think it is better to retreat, to go home, to go to sleep, to leave wherever you are and try to just sleep.
That was O's instinct on this occasion.
He was leaving, giving up, going home.
Even though it was only ten o'clock.
He did not look up until he was right down in the station; and it was a sound that made him look up.
For some reason there was almost no one else there.
The poster at the end of the tunnel was so large and so perfectly lit that it seemed to O, looking up at it suddenly, that the tunnel did not end in a wall, in fact did not end at all, but led to the green fields of France.
Green fields through which a road wound, not tiled like the tunnel floor but just as white (the deep white dust of chalk hills in August) so that the tunnel floor seemed to carry on and meander into this summer landscape.
Across the perfect sky hung, inexplicably, the words ‘Don't You Just Wish?’
There seemed to be some other words at the bottom of the landscape, but O could not make these out.
The sound that had made O look up came from a man who was sitting on the floor, leaning against the wall of the tunnel, looking not much like a beggar, but just someone worn out; perhaps he had collapsed there and  was resting.
But he was singing; people only do that either if they are drunk or if they are trying to collect some money, in which case they will sing and sing all day, having no other means of getting it.
So O decided that he looked like a beggar after all.
O also thought, because of the man's posture, and the huge overcoat in which he was wrapped, that he looked like a queen in a tragedy which O had seen, who in a terrible moment of despair had sat down, not on a throne or on the marble palace steps, but just right there on the floor.
She had gathered her robes around her, sunk to the ground and then had lifted her hand to her face (so painfully it looked as though her wrist was broken) with exactly the same gesture with which this man now covered his eyes.
O remembered that the line which had accompanied this action was O, intolerable .
O stopped to watch.
And he was sure that the man was begging now, for he was holding out his other hand with the palm upwards; except that then O thought that maybe the gesture had another meaning, maybe the man was extending his hand in the hope that some passer by might take it, grasp it firmly and pull him to his feet.
He was singing quietly and hoarsely; unintelligibly.
If he was begging, he seemed hardly to expect that anyone would give him money for making such a noise.
It was almost as if he had chosen this quiet tunnel in a relatively quiet station so that he could sing to himself undisturbed, carry on singing without having to admit to himself that this was a hopeless task, that he wasn't going to get anything.
O listened.
As he listened he could smell the man; and he could hear that the song was almost turning into a sob.
Sobbing and singing both come from the diaphragm.
He could see that the singer wasn't especially old or badly dressed under the coat.
O stared, he didn't know for how long, at him and his outstretched hand, wondering whether to gasp it, fill it with change, or knock it away; and then he looked up, because he heard his train coming and also because he felt the hot wind on his face.
When he looked up he saw two other people in the tunnel with him.
He looked up and he saw two people walking or appearing to walk away from him down the white road of the tunnel and out across the green hills.
He had not heard them pass him; he had been too intent on watching the singer.
The woman was in black stilettoes, walking slowly and evidently in pain — as if she had walked into the country in inappropriate shoes and was blistered and had a long way to go, as if this hot summer wind from the chalk hills was almost too much for her.
And in each hand she had two heavy plastic carrier bags of shopping; they cut into her hands and threatened to split.
They were evidently too heavy for her to carry.
She put two of the bags down for a rest, and used her free hand to push her dyed black hair back from her eyes.
Straggling behind her was a small child, about four or five, O couldn't see what sex the child was.
Without meaning to, O found himself staring at them too.
The Mother waited for the straggling child to catch up with her, and then she bent down, shouted something to it right up close against its face, and then hit it hard across the face with the back of her right hand.
The child sat down, more from surprise than the force of the blow; the woman picked up the shopping bags and walked on; she knew that she was in danger of missing the train now.
She was shouting come on, fucking come on .
The bags were of that thinner kind of plastic they use for the bags that they give away at the supermarket, the free ones; and now one of the bags in her right hand split and she just stood there helpless to stop them as three cans fell out and rolled across the concrete.
She was stuck there with the bags, she couldn't leave them to go and pick the  child up.
All she could do was raise her voice higher, the train was coming in now, and she screamed at the child, screamed at him Come on, Johnny, fucking come on .
The child didn't move, and just sat there looking at her as if astonished.
And the child didn't cry.
The woman stood there with the bags at her feet and said out loud, to no one, not to O, not to the child, not to the singer, just stood there and threw her head back and stood there, framed against the blue sky and green hills of France, with the train leaving now, she screamed out loud, over and over, oh fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck .
And at that moment the man who was singing turned his song into the sob it had always almost been; the stretched note was broken by the efforts of his strained, knotted stomach into a series of high, senseless yelps.
His begging hand was still outstretched but his other hand now fell from his face so that O could see his gasping mouth labouring with the hard, near-fainting breath of extreme grief.
O was horrified to see that the man was actually crying.
The woman had left the bags and O saw she was walking back to the child, he heard her heels, but O did not stay to see what she did to the child (and so he did not see her pick the child up in her arms and hold him tight); he turned quickly, and left the station as fast as he could.
Like the three kings in the story, O went home another way, feeling that in some way he had just been warned about something.
He got himself back to his flat and he turned the lights on in every room.
He stood in the middle of the living room and took off all his clothes, leaving them on the floor where they fell; then he inspected his naked body, front, back and sides, in the full-length mirror that he  had on his living room wall.
This was a variation on the routine he would put himself through every time after a man he had just slept with had left the flat; he would check his body for scratches, bruises and teethmarks.
On this night he did not then go straight to bed.
He walked into the brightly-lit kitchen, opened the fridge, took out a bottle of pure water and opened it.
He ran a glass under the kitchen tap, then returned to the living room and, looking at himself in the full-length mirror all the while, stood there naked, shaking violently as if with cold, and poured himself and drank three glasses of water without stopping.
Then he put the bottle and the wet glass down on the floor, walked into the bathroom and turned both the taps in the bath on full.
Then he walked into his bedroom and sat on the edge of his bed with his head bowed while the bath filled, breathing deeply.
While he waited for the bath to fill he went through the whole scene again in his head and congratulated himself for staying so calm.
He began to speak out loud over the sound of the copious running water; he congratulated himself for not crying in public, he congratulated himself for not getting hurt, for not letting himself be assaulted on the way home, for not letting anyone corner him or get him down on the floor or up against a wall but for keeping walking instead.
Then he went back to the bathroom and turned off the taps.
He waited until the surface of the water in the bath became quite still, like a pool, like a swimming pool before the very first swimmer enters it early in the morning, and then with one quick move climbed in and lay right under the water with his eyes closed.
The water had in fact run cold from both taps because O had not had the heating on that evening, but he did not notice.
He held his breath under the water; then climbed out again (leaving the bath full) and walked dripping back into his bedroom.
There he crawled naked and dripping and wet-haired into his bed and pulled the sheets and  the duvet tight around him.
He was not cold, because his body, despite the water, was burning and almost feverish.
He went quickly to sleep with the lights still all on, his body hot and rigid, curled up into a tight ball, and his eyes screwed up tight.
O did not talk in his sleep that night; all his dreams were silent films about shooting people.
He had his own gun and he killed four men and two women, shot people for looking at him, never mind saying anything, shot them like on television, with no blood, no noise and no justice.
The next day, which was the Friday, O didn't work and he didn't eat; he woke up late, stayed in bed until it was dark, got up at nine and dressed in his white shirt just like always and he went to The Bar looking for his heart's desire one very last time, and that was the night that he met Boy.
Of course I didn't know at the time that this was to have been O's last night in The Bar; and I knew that it wasn't Boy's first visit to The Bar, I mean he did not see O the very day he walked in, their eyes did not meet across the bar on that very first night.
But let me say here that that was just how it looked to me at the time; that there was a nice logic to it, that Boy's beginning matched O's ending, that Boy's first night was O's last, or it certainly would have been his last if Boy had not fallen into his arms.
They were not expecting anything is what I'm trying to say.
It was an insignificant moment, no one there would have thought that it was to be the first movement in such a great drama, not only for them but also for those watching.
And if it was so insignificant then why can I still see that first kiss even now?
Why am I still able to describe it?
Why  are they so special to me, these two, why do I remember that one kiss out of all the other romances I knew about there in that place on that particular Friday evening, why do I remember it, do I actually remember it all or just want to?
This is how it happened.
They didn't chat each other up, because Boy still didn't know what to say half the time, and O didn't want to say anything, not any more, he had said too much to too many men.
It was three or four a.m. and the music was very slow; and usually at that time Boy would have gone, or have found someone, or have been found by someone.
But on this night he was making one last move through the crowded bar, and at that exact moment O was making his way to the door.
And they passed.
And because the Bar was still crowded for some reason they were literally pushed together.
And the contact turned into an embrace without either of them looking at the other or talking, they just put their arms around each other.
And began to dance; the embrace turned into a dance.
There was no kissing yet, though Boy did at once lay his head on O's shoulder.
And then O placed his right hand in the small of Boy's back and put his left hand up behind Boy's head and he kissed him right there and then.
That was the start of it.
No one noticed, or seemed to notice.
There was after all nothing remarkable about seeing two men kiss in that way at that time of the night.
But I looked at Mother as they were kissing and she had seen all right.
She must have been watching because she smiled, or rather tried not to smile too obviously — she tried to conceal her pleasure in witnessing the beginning of her triumph by pressing her lips together, but the smile came out anyway.
And I was watching them, and I got an erection I remember.
I could just imagine how that felt.
I love it when they put  their hand right there and you can feel their fingers in your hair and pressing into the top of the back of your neck.
I've always liked men who kiss like that.
It's dead romantic.
I do not know if they talked or if they went to bed together on that first night.
For a long time they just held each other there under the stars.
And people say they noticed how tightly O was holding Boy, pulling him closer and closer to him, as if he was clutching at him; and how he smelt Boy too, taking in big draughts of the air around him, as if he was a man just escaped from drowning holding onto something and pulling the sweet night air down into his lungs in great grateful gulps.
They were almost the last to leave; as they were leaving they paused, of course, to say goodnight to Mother.
Some of us had stayed just to watch this happen.
All three spoke as though the moment were of no real consequence, but I know that for Mother and for O at least it must have been a strange and moving moment.
O said:
‘Goodnight, Mother,’ and then Boy said (for the very first time): ‘Goodnight, Mother.’
And then she said: ‘Goodnight Boys.
Don't do anything you wouldn't want your Mother to hear about.’
And just as they were about to leave, as if to make a grand exit of it, O kissed Boy again, very publicly.
It was as if he was making a declaration:I am taking this Boy home, this Boy of ours, and this is how I feel about him .
And it was as if Boy was now suddenly the drowning one, and O was the lifeguard; O slapped him twice around the face, pulled his head back by a handful  of hair and placed his mouth over Boy's before he had time to speak, and kissed him right there in the doorway of The Bar.
And when we saw that we all started talking about what might be about to happen between these two.
And at three or four a.m. that morning, as O and Boy kissed for the second time, the blade of a Stanley knife sliced for the second time across the cheek of a man (I don't remember his name, it wasn't anyone I knew) who was at that time on his own, not with anyone, just waiting, on his own, at a bus stop, waiting for a night bus which was due at any minute.
COUPLE
Neither dark nor dumb ceremonies, but…so set forth that every man may understand what they do mean, and to what use they do serve.
From ‘Of Ceremonies: Why some be abolished and some retained,’The Book of Common Prayer 
Sunday
Dear Boy
I'm just sitting down with a drink and the news before dinner.
I've had my bath, after a satisfying day in the garden, and so I thought this would be a good moment to put pen to paper.
I've been deadheading the roses; there is such a wonderful profusion of colours this year now that the new bushes have settled in, especially the big white one which I'm sure you remember.
I haven't cut the lawn for two days but tonight the garden smells of freshly mown grass nonetheless because next door have just done theirs.
Actually, Helen and Geoff are away (with the children, of course, it's Spain again this year I think), and Mr Davis's boy Kevin from the house on the corner is keeping an eye on things and doing the garden for them.
At this time of year of course it's all go, what with the beans and the tomatoes and the soft fruit coming on all at once.
There is so much ripe fruit that I just ask people to come in and help themselves, also I get to see everyone that way and hear all the news and of course the children love it.
That Kevin is certainly growing into a fine young man, he has been working with his shirt off in this weather and you can see he is going to be just as much an athlete as his father was.
My back is much better.
Everyone here sends their love as ever, and asks about you.
yours, ‘Father’
PS I enclose a photograph of the wedding, and also last week's christening.
It was so good to see everybody there.
Sunday
Dear Boy, It must be very difficult for you sometimes I expect not having anyone and having to do all the shopping and cooking for yourself I know that when I was working I certainly could not have managed on my own, coming home tired and then making dinner your own dinner and then going upstairs to do some more work, what sort of life is that, though I know all about that because of course I did do that for three years almost, and I know how much happier I was when I knew there was someone waiting for me and having the dinner ready and keeping the house clean and all those things, or perhaps you people don't think those things are important.
Anyway I wish you well and send my love to you as ever, ‘Father’.
MEETING
It was a full week before they reappeared in The Bar; we hadn't seen them for six nights and there had been much discussion.
Someone said that O had not been seen at his job in the video hire shop for the whole week either.
Of course when they did reappear the predictable line ‘And on the seventh day he rested’ was much used.
If Boy had been quiet before, now his quietness had become silence.
All he really wanted was to be next to O; and you could see that the whole time he was listening, watching.
Also for most of the time at this period in their affair Boy was either slightly drugged, or drunk, or exhausted; and he was in a permanent state of sexual tension, for either he had just come from O's bed or he was on his way to it.
He found it hard to think, never mind talk; all he could do was wait.
All he could feel was his body, trying to anticipate the next touch.
Boy was of course no virgin, but he had never spent a whole week with one man before.
He had never had someone say to him, at half past eleven in the morning,let's go back to bed now .
He had never been with a man who wanted to take him out at three in morning and stand him up against a wall in a dark street and jerk him off, not  because there was nowhere else to go, but for the pleasure of doing it like that; he had never done it again and again with one body.
In fact Boy had never done it more than three times with anybody.
We were not surprised to see Boy behaving like this; in the week of their absence, we had decided that their lovemaking would be extraordinary, legendary.
Since so many of us had made love to either O or to Boy we felt that by comparing notes we knew a great deal about how they behaved when making love, and so when we saw them reappear so obviously as lovers we were pleased to see that our predictions had been correct.
We had assumed that their affair would in some way be a violent one, because O was known to be violent, and because Boy made you feel strange when he gave himself away to you, a strangeness, and a feeling that you always wanted more, that often came out as violence.
And now here to prove our thesis was Boy, silent, stunned, clearly exhausted.
His eyes glittered.
He looked quite extraordinarily tired, ravaged by intimacy, shattered by sex, dazed with sex.
When a young man looks like that you think about the phrase Still waters run deep .
And also we had our own adaptation of the phrase ‘She's out to lunch’; in such extreme cases as Boy's, we would say,Darling, she's gone to the Opera .
‘And,’ added Gary on this occasion, ‘it looks like she's not coming back.’
As well as the silence we couldn't of course help noticing the bruises.
We were, let me tell you, impressed.
Boy was bruised badly around the mouth, and had red burn marks around both of his wrists.
Of course we weren't about to ask,what on earth has happened to you , since we knew it could only be O who had done this to him.
And we wouldn't even have thought of asking such a question.
It was a point of honour, in The Bar, to behave as if nothing, not anything, was extraordinary.
No sexual perversion, no possible error of taste in the choice  of erotic or romantic partner was considered odd.
To cry for no apparent reason was not considered odd.
Nothing anyone wore was odd.
The strangest of stories (And of course when I told her that, she just threw me out of the house, my own Mother…well, Goodnight Mother, I can tell you ) were treated as entirely credible.
So we said nothing, and noticed everything.
The bruises on his wrists showed like diamonds beneath Boy's cuff; he was wearing one of O's white shirts, with the sleeves rolled down.
When someone finally did ask, How are you two?
Boy smiled, and then winced slightly, because his lower lip was split, and then he took a sip of his beer and he smiled sweetly and said,In love .
What he actually wanted to say was,I'm struck dumb with love .
(He smiled, and thought,I'm just a dumb kid .)
But he realised that that wouldn't make sense, since a man cannot be struck dumb and then speak of that condition, so what he said, when we asked him how he was, what he said was, very slowly,In Love.
In Love with Another Man .
They spent that first night of their return to public life just standing close together in silence, like they were a couple of lovers; but they weren't, of course, not yet.
Six nights together does not entitle you to be lovers in that sense of the word.
Occasionally O would take hold of a handful of Boy's black hair, which was still long all over then.
We noticed that they touched each other all evening, shoulder to shoulder, knee to knee, nothing obvious, although I did see O raise Boy's hand to his lips once, and later I saw Boy rest his head on O's knees, just lay it there for a moment like a dog.
When I saw that I wanted to be him, or one of them, or both of them, but anyway I was just so happy to watch them together.
Like several of us in The Bar at that time, when I made love, or masturbated by myself, I often used to have fantasies about doing it with either O  or Boy.
Now that I'd seen them together like that I started to have fantasies of being invited to watch them together, or to take photographs of them.
My biggest fantasy I think was to be a sort of assistant, a nurse, holding Boy's hand while O worked on him.
Stroking his brow, holding down a thrashing arm, holding Boy's precious and sweating head in my two hands on the pillow and whispering to him, go on,push, push, breathe, push, breathe, that's it, push, push, push .
We were all waiting for Mother's reaction to their reappearance.
Mother, of course, was allowed to say anything to anyone.
She left it right to the end of the evening.
When they went to leave, having sat in silence all night, O paused to speak to Mother.
She said;
‘Goodnight, O,’ and then she turned suddenly to Boy and said to him, very pointedly:
’ And what on earth have you done to your eyes?’
This was a trick question, because of course no one does anything like that to themselves; both of Boy's eyes were as black and blue as if he was still wearing yesterday's makeup.
And also it was a trick question because Mother knew full well what had caused the bruises; she was just testing his nerve.
Boy paused before answering, and looked at himself in one of the mirrors.
I think Boy thought about everything he ever said.
Then he spoke to Mother, but didn't look at her; when he replied to her question he was looking at O, and O was looking at him.
‘It's alright,’ he said, ‘I don't think he'd ever do anything to hurt me.’
And then they left, hand in hand.
(In fact Boy hadn't been hit in the face by O. As I said, that white skin marked easily, and Boy's eyes were in  fact just bruised with fatigue, with six sleepless nights in a row.
Boy had spent half the hours of each night awake, listening to O talking in his sleep.
Boy didn't complain about being kept awake in this way.
Boy did not complain about anything ever.)
When they had left, when she had watched them leave together, Mother allowed herself a moment of exultation.
That night she was perched on her stool wearing her cape trimmed with marabou over the dress.
Occasionally when she was wearing this she had a trick of lifting it like wings, or ruffling it as if it was her real plumage, and she'd declare: ‘My dears, I am preparing for The Flight — into Egypt, to the islands, to the New World — who knows!’
And now she lifted the cape and she said, to no one in particular:
‘I am taking those two under my wing.’
If that woman had wings, they were splendid.
More splendid than her antique fan of ombré ostrich plumes or her green-black coq feather boa, more splendid even than the towering aigrette á la Pougy which she wore sometimes to go with the diamond.
They were the wings of Argos.
They were the wings of the riddling Sphinx, they were the wings of the Archangel Michael as he descends with his sword shaped like a flame; the wings of the angel who watches, a single tear on his left cheek, as Adam and Eve make their staggering way out of Paradise.
Or they were the wings of that sweet-faced Gabriel who appears in so many pictures, whose scarlet plumes brush the ceiling of the bedroom in which he has alighted; whose shadow fills the whole of the bedroom wall, whose robes cover half the bedroom carpet and whose single, beckoning finger silences the virgins of history, making them forget  the books which they have been surprised reading, and sends them sinking to their knees.
Gabriel's wings are as silent as those of the barn owl; he can fly right past the back of your head on a summer's night and you'll never know.
He comes to your chamber unbidden and unheard.
EXCHANGING NUMBERS
After six nights in a row with O, Boy spent the seventh night on his own; he went to his own place.
He slept immediately and deeply, and then got up at six a.m. to turn the television on and make the tea ready for when the man he lived with got in from work.
They had their tea, then Boy went back into the living room to watch the breakfast television, which was sport, and then the phone rang.
It was O, calling Boy up for the very first time.
The man took the call, in the kitchen.
He was surprised, since for all Boy's nights out, during which, as the man correctly assumed, Boy had sex with many different men, he never received visits, calls or letters from the men he had been sleeping with.
The man did not think that Boy ever gave his address or phone number to anyone.
He wondered sometimes if Boy even told people what his real name was.
And now here was someone on the phone saying,Is Boy there?
The man dried his hands and took the phone through to Boy, then walked back into the kitchen.
Then he heard Boy say ‘Yes,’ and then he heard the TV change; Boy had got up and turned it over to a boxing match, which was something Boy never usually watched.
Wanting very  much to hear (because he was sure that this was a lover calling, from the voice), the man used the boxing match as an excuse, and he came and stood in the kitchen doorway with a wet plate and the cloth in his hands, and looked at the television.
And on the screen was a blackhaired, whiteskinned, nineteen-year-old boxer.
His lip was split, and he was bleeding.
What had happened was that O had been at home, not sleeping, thinking about Boy at six in the morning, and he had called up and said, ‘Are you watching TV,’ to which Boy had replied, as the man had heard, ‘Yes,’and then O had told Boy to turn over to the boxing; he'd just said, ‘Get up and change to the third channel.
I'm watching it, and I want you to watch it too, it makes me think of you.’
Though it was so strange and so cryptic, Boy understood this call, because he began to understand now that there are different kinds of wanting someone.
He thought, there is wanting to go to bed with someone, which is really just an erection; and there is the kind of wanting which extends beyond the night into the day, the kind where you spend all day waiting, sometimes several days.
Sometimes you are waiting for a phonecall and sometimes for a touch.
You think about the person all the time,I think about you all the time , that's what you say.
And you begin to say things that don't make any sense to people who don't know what's going on between you, but you know that the other person, to whom what you've said is really addressed will know what you mean, even though he may not actually be there.
And also, as he watched the boxer on the television, Boy began to think that there are two kinds of sex: the kind of sex where you say do this ,do that , or you manoeuvre yourself into position for a particular kind of pleasure; and then there is the other kind of sex, where you want  not someone else's body that had done those things the night before or the afternoon before.
as if he was not responsible for his actions.
as if suddenly he might not be able to help himself and suddenly right there in the middle of The Bar he would say out loud:Fuck me.
Please fuck me , take this body of mine right down into the deep with you, pull me under the earth, drag me under the sea; pinion my arms, put your mouth over mine and pull me under these heavy waves I'm feeling, drown me.
When O put down the phone at the end of this first call, he did not know how to say goodbye to Boy; he did not know what name to use.
He would remember this later, this not knowing what to call him, Boy or Darling or whatever.
One night, later in their affair, O woke up in the middle of one of his long and noisy dreams and lay there for a long time looking at Boy's face as he slept.
And then, very deliberately, as if this was what he had decided, O said, very quietly, but very definitely, out loud,baby .
This time there was no knife, they just got him on the floor and it was just a fist which had come down on the man's face again and again.
And it happened just two streets away from The Bar.
He came into The Bar with blood everywhere.
He was trying not to cry, and he kept on saying,I'm shocked, I'm just a bit shocked that's all .
He wasn't as badly hurt as he looked, actually, but it was enough to make us all think at least twice.
People say to me that I must be keeping a list of all the attacks I hear about.
They say it's morbid, they say what are you trying to prove anyway.
They say why do you have to talk about that just now.
they say to me, how many of them do there have to be before you think you've got enough on your list.
They say when are you going to stop it, and I say, when am I going to stop it, when am I — it was the second night they were in the bar together after their week of absence I remember.
When the man had had his face washed (by stella) and been given a drink, and one of the barmen had called for a taxi, Mother got right up and got on the stage and told Gary she was ready for her song now.
She did her own intro.
And if ever I thought it, that was the time that I thought that Mother knew what she was singing about.
First she dedicated her song that night to the man who was bleeding (he was still in The Bar, the taxi hadn't come yet), and then to the men who had brought their fists down on his face just two streets from her Bar.
Then she went on and dedicated her song to all those men here tonight who are still hunting, all of those who are unhappy in love, all of those who are putting up with second best, all those who are not getting what they want.
Don't waste another night, she said;if there is somebody here you want then you go right up and tell him about it, you just tell him, because he may not be here tomorrow night .
If you want him to beat you, then you ask him; if you want him to stop beating you, then you tell him.
If you want him to take you home, go up right now and ask him, sure he will.
She then proceeded to recite a bitter list of all the failed marriages which we had in our midst or knew of.
She named the names of all the broken hearts.
She dedicated her song to all the boys who had really regretted doing it, all the men who have ever said, naming no names,it took ten years of my life , and now I can truly say that I never want to even talk to him again, never to see him.
And then, just when people were looking genuinely shocked by what she'd said — remember that this man, who we all knew, was still sitting there with the blood just washed off his face, as if to remind us that she wasn't joking — then she said,don't be scared Boys .
She said,don't waste any time, Boys, because you don't have any to waste .
She looked right at O and Boy when she said this and it was as if she was trying to scare them in particular, even as if she was trying to frighten them away from each other , as if she was saying, to them, and to all of us,this is what you have to go through, right?
She said,I want you to listen to this song very carefully tonight.
I want you to note that I am not singing just ‘Take my back, because it is my best feature’(in the mirror we  could see her beautiful strong back in the low cut of the dress, and of course we could see ourselves too).
I am not singing ‘Take my body’.
I am not singing ‘Take my head and my heart and all my bad habits but by the way I'm sorry that you have to put up with all that but they're just part of the package you see.’
I am not saying take me on my good days.
I am not saying take me like I look tonight and pretend that's all you've got to take, I am saying take me when there's blood on my face.
What I am saying most specifically is take all of me — and here of course Gary began the melody on the piano and we all smiled and then she sang, sang her song, and believe me we did all listen to the words that night, we knew that the man who had been attacked was there, and we knew that O and Boy were standing shoulder to shoulder in our midst, we saw them in the centre of the mirror, saw ourselves standing beside them and standing by them and give me a drink now because I had such hopes of a lover of my own on that evening and here I am.
Give me a drink.
You know I have always wanted to get married, not for always, but just for once in my life I wanted to live out my love for a man like they did.
I suppose you think I mean I want to walk down the aisle in white with my friends watching, but that's not it, that's not what this feeling is to do with.
Or not all of it, because of course I would love to do that.
But that's easy to laugh at.
What I want is to hold his hand in public.
And what I want then is to hold his hand in front of the television for several evenings a week, and if you don't understand that, if you don't know what that feeling is, if you don't know why it's like that then you know nothing, nothing, nothing.
I'm sorry.
I mean, Gary says you dream about marriage the same way you dream about someone coming down your throat; it's not something you're going to actually do, not these days, but that doesn't mean you don't dream about it.
It doesn't mean you can't actually almost feel what it would feel like.