

Foreword
During the past years great changes have taken place in dogs: their health, care, breeding and training.
Each individual aspect of dogdom has now become a complete science and discipline; indeed, as I pen this foreword, a working party comprising the leading authorities on all aspects of dogs are compiling a nationally recognizable qualification allied to the ‘City and Guilds’ degree.
This will enable those eager and able to sit the relevant examination and thus qualify.
Such qualifications will be recognized by the leading organizations within the world of dogs.
In my opinion, this dog book will have its place on such a curriculum.
I welcome this book on two major counts: first, because it succeeds in what should be the aim of every author, that is to educate and entertain, and secondly because it has been written by  a very knowledgeable person who genuinely cares for his dogs, has bred a consistent type for many years and has put as much into the ‘dog game’ as he has taken out.
One must appreciate that with the passing of time all things progress; what may have been of considerable interest to one generation may not be to the next.
This book will, however, stand the test of time.
In a few instances as might be expected, opinions differ on certain aspects.
I leave it to the readers to draw their own conclusions intelligently.
May I finally express a wish that readers of this book will enjoy the text, perhaps learn, but most importantly debate and discuss it.
Terry McHaffie M.B.E.
Chief Training Officer, Royal Air Force Police Dog School 
History of the Breed
The origin of the Rottweiler is obscured by the shadowy mists of history.
However, most historians of the breed agree that the original blood was of Roman origin.
The dog that accompanied the eleventh legion that was to conquer the area we now know as Rottweil in AD 74 would not be recognizable as the breed we know today.
To understand the Rottweiler lineage, it is necessary to go even further back in time.
Long before Christ, dogs were used in the amphitheatres of Rome for fighting large cats (there were usually three dogs pitted against one lion).
These dogs were known as Mollosus dogs.
Dogs of this type were also used in the Asiatic wars against rival armies.
So it can be understood that planned breeding is not a new idea.
There are accounts of dogs of Mastiff type being exported from Britain to Rome through an agent known as the Procurator Pugnacium (provider of dogs).
Only the best were good enough to grace the amphitheatres; a second class performance by man or beast was not tolerated and would probably lead to the inevitable ‘thumbs down’.
It is reasonable to assume, therefore, that there would be a residue of canine stock, who for one reason or another would be deemed unsuitable to die for the perverted pleasure of the gloating Roman nobility.
The dog which the eleventh legion would have taken with them would need some herding instinct, be fleet of foot and be powerful enough to guard the herd against wolf or bear.
Colour or general type was not important.
Driving the cattle that was to feed the troops through the Alps was a Herculean task and it would have been impossible without the dogs.
It is known that dogs of herding and hunting ability were already in north Switzerland and south Germany, an area once known as Helvetia.
Best known is the marsh dog of the Swiss Lake people, which was capable of speed and also had a strong powerful jaw.
Also, domestication of dogs and cattle had been undertaken some twelve hundred years ago in southern Europe by Azilian hunters who had used dogs to corner their prey.
They were the first known tamers of animals.
Assyrians going to the Hunt.
The dogs that came with the Romans probably mated with the indigenous population, helping to form many of the breeds we know today.
In fact, the indigenous population probably had more influence than most historians believe.
The Rottweiler is almost more of a Swiss-type dog than a German one.
By this I mean, in Switzerland the Rottweiler has many close cousins, including the Bernese Mountain Dog, Appenzeller and Entlebuch.
The Entlebuch is also docked and resembles the Rottweiler to such a degree that it is easy to believe in a common ancestry.
The Rottweiler originates from a town of the same name, Rottweil, known as Arae Flaviae by the Romans.
It was an important administration and social centre and had been populated at least two thousand years BC.
With the coming of the Romans, the town was developed and transformed.
The Orphic mosaic found in Rottweil probably enhanced the house of a wealthy Roman.
The Bath House, also discovered in the town, tells us how important a site this was.
Building continued and the town was upgraded to a fortified villa.
The most important buildings would have had red hand-made tiles on the roof and for this reason, the  region became known as Rottwil (red villa).
This name was changed over a period of time to the name we know today, Rottweil.
Between AD 250 and 260, the town was conquered by Suebi and Alemanni tribes who slaughtered the Roman habitation.
One can only guess what became of the dogs of the town, for they were usually trained to guard their master's property to the death.
Needless to say, some did survive and prosper.
Elika v Barrenstein BH.
AD.
Europajugendsieger 1986, owned by the author and his wife.
By the Middle Ages, the town had become fortified and a royal court of justice, with jurisdiction over a wide area.
It is the cattle dealers and butchers of the town who are of most interest to us, for it was they who took the dog of Rottweil and turned him to their use with great effect.
Long drives were undertaken from town to town, even country to country.
Over a period of time, the dog was moulded to his master's needs, calling on all the virtues of his ancestors: herding ability, speed, guarding ability, strength and power, but most of all intelligence.
Two types began to emerge: a large ponderous type, used in a draft capacity, for instance, for pulling the butchers' carts full of meat; secondly, a smaller, more agile type, used mainly for herding.
The latter is the type nearest to what we know today.
Although very large dogs can still be found, they do not excel in the show ring or in the trials arenas.
It was because of this close association with the butchers and cattle drovers, that the Rottweiler was to become known as the metzgerhunt , or butcher's dog.
One story is told of drovers who, at the end of a long drive, having sold their cattle, would go to the  beerkeller  to celebrate, but before they did, they would tie the money from the sale around the dog's neck, secure in the knowledge that no matter how drunk they became, their money would be safe until the morning!
These were good times for the intrepid forefathers of our breed.
However, it was not to last.
Two things caused a gradual decline in the number of Rottweilers.
Firstly, donkeys began to be used in the draft capacity, which was not too serious a blow, but the advent of the train almost doomed the breed to extinction.
Cattle were no longer taken on long drives, but were delivered by rail and cattle drives were then made illegal.
This was the most important feature of the breed's decline from grace, since it was bred solely for work.
When that work is taken away, the dog becomes a luxury and one which the simple people of that time could not afford.
At the turn of the century, things looked very bleak for the Rottweiler.
It is recorded that, at this time, only one bitch was resident in her home town.
In 1905, something happened; a silver lining on the cloud of doom.
The Rottweiler was recognized as a police dog, and though it came fourth behind three other breeds, it was a start, a start to a new career and one the breed took to with relish.
Once new people had become interested, other people followed and new uses were found for the breed.
Used as tracking dogs and guide dogs for the blind, the Rottweiler's versatility and willingness to please his master once again came to his rescue.
After the Second World War, the showing of dogs became more and more popular and the acquisition of a new breed to exploit, or make one's name with, was the order of the day.
In countries outside Germany, the discovery of a very old ‘new’ breed was therefore irresistible.
During the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, we have seen the exploitation of the breed lead to its streaking into the top ten of the most popular dogs in countries with active show circuits.
This popularity has not been all to the good, but having said that, the Rottweiler has now made friends who are concerned with his welfare.
It is hoped all will not be lost with this giant swing of the pendulum.
Fortunately, the breed had clear guidelines on which to develop  drawn up by the breed clubs in Germany.
The first club of this type was the International Rottweiler and Leonberger Club.
This was a short-lived club, but important if only for the fact that it drew up the first Breed Standard in 1901.
Very little information on this club is available, but apparently it was first started in 1899.
Incidentally, the first report of a Rottweiler being shown at an official dog show was at Heilbronn in 1882.
Blanka v Eppendorfer-Baum, SchH III Sieger in 1954.
Owned by M Bruns.
On 11 January 1907, the German Rottweiler Club was formed, DRK.
Albert Graf, one of the founders, is generally recognized as being the first breeder of the type we would know today.
As with many clubs, there were disagreements, one of which led to one of the members being dismissed.
This former member then led the formation of a new club known as the Southern German Rottweiler Club.
It was also very short-lived.
Former members therefore joined a third club, the International Rottweiler Club (IRK).
The Breed Standards of both clubs were very similar, the major difference being personal conflict, so it was a happy conclusion when, in 1921, both sides merged and formed the Allgemeiner Deutscher Rottweiler Klub (ADRK).
The rise of the ADRK was rapid, with all shades of Rottweiler interest coming under its umbrella.
With its motto ‘Rottweiler breeding is working dog breeding’, it has put together a unique package where no dog can become a show champion without first having working qualifications.
Working, therefore, comes first, although great strides forward have been made in conformation or beauty points, but at a very controlled level.
Head shape was the first improvement.
This was achieved by three potent sires.
Close attention was paid to their offspring.
Some well-known producers were Lord von der Teck, Arco Torfwerk and Hackel v Kohlerwald.
It was however in the late 1950s that a dog arrived who embodied everything that was thought to be correct, a living blueprint for further development.
He was Int.
Ch. and Triple Bundessieger, Harras v Sofienbusch, who was to become an American import, also gaining an American title.
It is his type that has been projected as a desirable up to the present time, although I feel that recently, Rottweilers in Germany have become slightly lighter in build and longer in the loin, a very workmanlike animal, designed for Schutzhund work.
Where this racey type and this small but workable type will lead, I do not know.
What we do know is that ADRK will keep a close eye on all matters concerning the breed.
Liesel v Hegnenbacher Landl, SchH I. AD.
Owned by Herr Wolfgang Gaa.
Falko v Gruntenblick, SchH III IPO 3 FH.
AD.
Owned by Herr Wolfgang Gaa.
The Rottweiler in Great Britain
The first registrations in the UK took place in 1936, when the late Mrs Thelma Gray of the Rozavel Kennels imported two bitches from Germany, Diana v Analienburg and Enne v Psalvgau.
Enne was imported in-whelp to the Welt Sieger (World Champion) Ido v Kohlerwald SchH.II.
Enne was described as an excellent bitch bodywise but her head was not her fortune.
She was sold to Mrs Paton and the litter was born in quarantine, but, as with so many litters in those days, distemper took a heavy toll.
All the puppies except one died.
This bitch was called Anna v Rozavel.
Anna was to become a very good working dog, qualifying CDex and winning good show placements including Best of Breed at Crufts in 1939.
When the war broke out, Anna was commissioned into the Army, where she did her service for her newly adopted country.
Obviously, at the end of her service, she was too old for breeding and stayed with her handler until she died at the age of sixteen.
Anna was a fine representative of the breed, possibly a little large in the ear, but excellent in head type, body and limbs.
Mrs Gray made further imports, including Arnolf v d Eichner Ruine and Asta v Norden, who were half-brother and -sister.
But the finest import Mrs Gray made was the German bitch Int.
Ch.
Vefa v Kohlerwald.
This bitch was also mated before she came into quarantine in this country, where she produced a large litter of ten.
Again, disaster struck because all ten puppies died.
In 1938, two other dogs were brought over, Arbo v Gaisburg, who was imported by Mrs Simmons, a keen obedience worker and show goer; and Benno v Kohlerwald by Miss Homan.
This dog was also taken into the Armed Forces, thus effectively ruining any chance of the breed making any progress in this country at that time.
The war years must have been really frustrating for the early Rottweiler enthusiasts.
Mrs Gray's home was in fact requisitioned by the Army.
She sent a few dogs to Ireland and, after the war, attempts to track them down only resulted in letters being sent back marked ‘gone away’.
The second attempt at getting Rottweilers off the ground in the UK was not until 1933.
Captain Frederick Roy-Smith was serving in Germany in the Royal Army Veterinary Corps and had seen Rottweilers who had impressed him greatly, especially with their working ability.
Captain Roy-Smith brought back a breeding pair: the dog was Ajax v  Suhrenkamp and the bitch, Berny v Weyher.
It is fortunate for the further success of the breed that the liaison between these two animals did not produce fruit, except on one occasion, since the bitch was in fact a long coat, and thus unable to be registered with the ADRK.
Berny was destroyed in 1936, after six attempted matings, which produced a total of four puppies, of which only one survived.
The Germans perhaps thought it was a huge joke to sell a long-coated bitch to someone who was to try to re-establish the breed in another country.
I find this attitude hard to understand but it still prevails today.
The mortality rate of puppies at that time was incredible.
It seemed that mortalities were the norm and survivals were very rare.
A second bitch was acquired by Captain Roy-Smith, Lotte v Osterburg, who was a much better breeding prospect and foundation for the breed in this country.
She was mated to Ajax and produced two litters, the first one, in 1938, contained five dogs, four of which apparently went to India and Pakistan, for reasons which seem to be obscure.
The only dog that remained in this country was Rintelna The  Bombadier , who was bought by Mary MacPhail.
He was to become the sire of the first British champion.
W.T. Ch.
Bruin of Mallion with daughters Lenlee Fern, Lenlee Delight and Lenlee Neeraum Brigitte.
Meanwhile, Mrs Joanne Chadwick of the Mallion Kennel was importing dogs from the Eulenspiegel Kennel in Germany.
This kennel was owned and run by the famed German breeder Frau Marion Bruns.
The first dogs to arrive on these shores from these kennels were a breeding pair: Rudi Eulenspiegel of Mallion and Quinta Eulenspiegel of Mallion.
It is my belief that the Mallion lines do not receive the credit they deserve.
Not only were they prolific breeding stock, but some very useful dogs were to appear from their matings.
Best known of these was Bruin of Mallion, who belonged to Mrs Maud Wait of the Lenlee Prefix.
Bruin was to become the first Rottweiler to gain the title ‘Champion’ in the Working Trials arena.
He gained the title of CDex/TDex.
Against better-known breeds, this was a tremendous achievement.
Eric of Mallion was the first champion to be born in this country, but not the first to gain this title because he did not actually become a champion until he was seven years old.
He was owned by Mrs Cook.
Abelard of Mallion was the first Rottweiler to be used by the Metropolitan Police and was handled by Inspector Roy Hunter.
The import of the Mallion lines could be considered the most beneficial thing that had happened so far in the breed.
It is interesting to note that the only two other Working Trials champions in the history of the  breed were the son and the grandson of Bruin, the former being Lenlee Gladiator, who qualified CDex, UDex, TDex and PDex; the latter being Jacinto's Bolero, who qualified CDex, UDex, TDex and WDex.
There is no doubt that if CCs had been on offer at the time, Bruin would probably have taken them all.
He was a dog before his time.
W.T. Ch.
Bruin of Mallion, owned by Mrs Maud Wait.
There was a flurry of imports to follow in the years to come.
All the work which had so far been done received very little recognition, because CCs were not on offer to the breed in this country.
It is worth pointing out that more work had been done by the pathfinders than many people realize.
So it is appropriate that the first champion to be whelped in this country was Ch.
Eric of Mallion, which forms a connection between those early pathfinders and the dogs we know better by virtue of their being crowned as champions.
Eric was in fact a repeat mating between Rudi Eulenspiegel of Mallion and Quinta Eulenspiegel of Mallion, the seventh repeat mating of this pair.
All the previous imports had been from Germany, but one of the most influential imports of the early 1960s was made by the Elsdens, who looked to Holland for their import.
The dog they imported was Ch.
Chesara Luther, a large impressive dog with plenty of bone and   substance, but perhaps, larger ears than we would like on our Rottweilers today.
However, it was to be the Elsden's second import which was to have the most effect on the breed.
Chesara Akilles who was bred in Sweden by R. Hamberg.
This dog was to be the foundation of the modern type of Rottweiler in the UK.
He was medium sized and dry, with excellent head, legs and general conformation and character.
He was to sire ten UK champions, a record only equalled by the Elsden's other great stud dog, Ch.
Chesara Dark Charles.
W.T.Ch.
Bruin of Mallion with daughters Lenlee Fern, Lenlee Delight and Lenlee Neeraum Brigitte.
Quinta Eulenspiegel of Mallion, owned by Mrs Chadwick.
Ch.
Chesara Akilles, owned by J. Elsden.
The next import of note was from Germany and this dog's name was Ch.
Gamegards Bulli v d Waldachquelle.
Imported by Joan Blackmore (née Woodgate) this dog excelled in head, which was clearly recognizable through his family line.
He was sired by the very famous Int.
Ch.
Bulli v Hungerbuhl, SchH.II.
His influence in the breed was like a fresh wind blowing through the genetic pool.
Although he died comparatively young, around five years old, he had sired some excellent dogs who were used extensively at stud.
The best known of these was Jane Bloom's Ch.
Janbicca The Superman, who won fourteen Challenge Certificates (a record at the time) and twice won Best of Breed at Crufts.
Superman was also to prove very influential at stud.
Bulli's other great son was Peter Gedge's Ch.
Prince Gelert of Bhaluk, who won twelve  
Ch.
Gamegards Bulli v d Waldachquelle, owned by Mr and Mrs Woodgate.
Challenge Certificates.
Gelert was an extremely handsome dog, but his influence at stud was less marked than Superman.
During the 1960s, around fifteen imports were made.
Not all these were imported to contribute to the breeding programme.
One dog who was specifically brought in as a potential show dog and latterly stud dog was Ch.
Castor of Intisari.
He was a royally bred dog, born in Denmark and imported by Mr and Mrs Radley.
He was sired by Int.
Ch.
Farro v h Brabantpark, Sch.II and his dam was Danish Ch.
Ursula PH AK.
Again, he was another medium-sized dog, well constructed, very much in the same mould as Bulli.
He had an excellent temperament and lived as a family pet.
The main difference between him and Bulli was in head: Bulli's head was cleaner with a more defined stop.
Of the two, Bulli's lines produced more winners and are more enduring.
Castor twice sired two champions in a litter, his most famous son being Ch.
Jagen Mr Blue.
Mr Blue, though a magnificent dog himself, never really proved himself as a stud, whereas Superman, one of six champions sired by Bulli, became a prolific sire.
Bulli was also the sire of Jentris Nicola Belle, who was behind so many of the best of the Poirot Kennel.
The Bulli Line
The next import to make a major impact on the British breeding scene was Ch.
Ausscot Hasso v Marchenwald, who was bred in Germany by Herr Gallas and imported by Gordon McNeill.
He was very much a German type of dog, with a very impressive head, a dog who excelled on the move.
He was very much loved by his owner Gordon (who was tragically to die quite young) but Hasso's blood was to produce some very good animals, not only in the UK but also in Australia, America and Canada.
Hasso was sired by Int.
Ch.
Elko v Kastanienbaum, SchH.I.
Hasso had mixed fortunes in the ring: the judges either liked him or totally ignored him.
However, he did win four CCs and six Reserve CCs and was to gain a Best of Breed placement at Crufts in 1980.
Hasso sired two champions in one litter, Ch.
Panevors Proud Kamille and her brother Ch.
Panevors Kinsman.
They were out of Gamegards Zenith of Panevor, who was one of Bulli's daughters.
However, Hasso's most famous offspring was Ch.
Gbos Gaytimes, who was born on 21 November 1976.
She won fourteen CCs and eight Reserve CCs for her owner Helen Wilson.
Her breeder was Gladys Ogilvy-Shepherd, who is the longest established of the Scottish breeders.
Another notable daughter of Hasso was Ch. and Canadian Ch.
Ausscot Cover Girl, who was actually bred by Gordon and was to repeat her father's success by taking Best of Breed at Crufts in 1981.
The next dog who must be mentioned is Ch.
Rudi Anton Bali, who was born on 8 December 1979 and bred by Mr and Mrs Radcliffe.
He was to become a breed record holder, with twenty-nine CCs to his credit, two Working Groups and a Best in Show, All Breeds Championship Show.
He was top male show dog All Breeds 1982.
 In spite of this phenomenal show record, I was never really inspired by this dog; in fact, I found him quite coarse and plain, being rough in coat and straight in stifle.
However, Rudi was a great show dog, whose movement defied his conformation.
It was, however, no surprise that this dog was never used to any extent by top breeders, which shows that sometimes there is very little connection between great show dogs and great producers.
This certainly did not apply to the next great dog of influence on the British show scene: Ch.
Pendley Goldfinch, who was born on 27 September 1980 and bred by Joanne Yates.
He won ten CCs and nine Reserve CCs Working Group and was Best of Breed at Crufts in 1984.
Although he was only to win a third of the tickets that Rudi had won, this dog was used extensively by successful breeders, which is the true test of a great dog.
As the saying goes, ‘handsome is as handsome does’.
Ch.
Pendley Goldfinch, owned by Mr and Mrs Killick.
The same can be said of the next dog of great influence: Ch.
Caprido Minstrel of Potters Pride, born 29 June 1981 and bred by Mrs Dorothy Skinner.
He won a junior warrant and was top dog in 1983.
Handled by his owner Mrs Slade, he won nine CCs and one Reserve CC.
This tally could possibly have been a lot more had it not been for his unreliable behaviour in the show ring.
He was to prove, however, a very successful stud, not only in the beauty conformation aspect, but also a phenomenal record in the absence of his dysplasia in his offspring.
One of his offspring, Jagen Dreaming Blue, was a key member of the Southern Obedience Team, a great achievement in itself, but when the team went on to win the team event at Crufts Dog Show, it was patently clear that the show dogs of today, given a chance, can still perform in the obedience arena at the highest level.
Dreaming Blue was owned and trained by Gloria Hill.
Champions Bred by UK Kennels
The Rottweiler in the United States of America
The first Rottweiler litter to be whelped in the USA was in 1930 by a German emigrant, Otto Denny, who was already an established breeder in his homeland.
The litter was registered with a German breed club, which often happened, even after recognition by the American Kennel Club (AKC).
The first Rottweiler to be registered was Stina v Felsenmeer.
She was later mated to Arras v Gerbermuhle, to produce the first litter to be recognized by the AKC.
Thus began the great love affair between the Rottweiler and the American people.
The puppies were registered under the Wellwood prefix by their breeder, August Knecht, who named them Ada, Alda, Alma and Asta.
The remaining two pups were not registered with the AKC, as they were not thought to be of high enough merit.
Two other breeders bred in the 1930s.
These litters were also registered with the German Rottweiler Club (ADRK).
How this was achieved is a mystery.
The strict breeding regulations which cover entry into the ADRK could not have been adhered to, because there was no way of checking the quality of the litter unless someone was appointed Bred Warden in the US, which is unlikely.
It is probable that acceptance was based on trust.
The AKC gave recognition in 1931, even without the help of a Breed Standard.
The 1930s were hard times, so I think they will be forgiven for this slight oversight.
Little progress was made for thirty years.
The breed was merely ticking over, a curiosity in the hands of a dedicated few.
Up until the beginning of the 1950s, only about a hundred Rottweilers were registered with the AKC.
After the Second World War, Rottweilers in the USA, as in Europe, started to make their mark in the obedience arena.
It seems that in any country, the Rottweiler is always recognized as a working dog first and a show dog as an after thought and then as only a show dog.
It is hoped that the pendulum will swing to balance equally between the two.
The first show champion in the USA was Zero, owned by Paul Jones in Idaho.
His litter sister Zola, owned by Mrs Pinkerton, was to be the first bitch show champion.
Mr Jones was to lead the Rottweiler to the attention of the people.
A great stalwart of the breed, he was a founder member of the first breed club in the USA and handled the first Rottweiler to win the working group, possibly the best way for a new breed to gain attention.
The first Rottweiler to win a best exhibit at an All Breeds Championship Show was Ch.
Kato v Donnaj, bred by Laura Coonly and owned by Jan Marshall.
This dog also had working qualifications CDex TD.
The USA has imported some really excellent dogs, so many in fact that it is hard to see why the constant influx of new blood is required.
The dog most people think of is the great Ch.
Dux v Hungerbuhl, Sch HI.
Although I was not fortunate enough ever to see him in the flesh, I suggest that his picture should be tattooed on the brain of every aspiring judge.
He was critiqued without fault by Heinz Eberz.
Working  only from photographs, I can only concur.
Great dogs do not always make great studs, but Dux sired thirty-six champions, a record for the breed to date in the USA.
Before Dux, was Int.
Ch.
Bundessieger Harras v Sofienbusch, another fantastic dog of the best possible type with a strong will and hard temperament.
He was used on only a few favoured bitches, but his influence is still undeniable, his potency incredible.
Ten matings in the USA produced forty-six puppies of which seventeen were to become champions.
It is unbelievable that Germany could let a dog of this quality go.
Sons of Harras were also imported to the USA and they also proved of great importance.
Best known was International Champion and Bundessieger and Worldsieger, Erno v Wellesweiler, an American champion.
Again, it is unbelievable to an ordinary Rottweiler fanatic like me that a dog of this quality could be bought.
If he were mine, I would rather sell my soul.
Then, from Holland came Ch.
Oscar v H. Brabantbark, who was to have an excellent show career in the USA.
Imported by Clara Hurley and Michael Grossman, when he was five years old and already a Dutch and Belgian champion, he gained his title taking a Best in Show  along the way.
Purchase of such outstanding dogs must be appreciated by the American Rottweiler enthusiast of today.
To find such dogs is an achievement, to actually purchase these legends of the breed takes experience and sometimes disappointment, not to mention a lot of money.
Am.
Ch.
Dux v Hungerbühl.
SchH I Rom.
Owned by Rodsdens Rottweilers.
From this excellent bedrock, America has bred some extremely good Rottweilers.
I personally find it strange that there is still a stampede to buy any dog that has won anything in Germany.
Perhaps in trying to emulate the great imports of the past, slightly less than great dogs are finding their way into the USA gene pool.
Herr Alpeter, addressing a meeting in England, was asked what happened to dogs who did not fulfil the required standard for breeding in Germany (a dog can win in the show ring and still be useless for breeding).
Herr Alpeter said that such dogs were sold to foreign countries — a sobering thought.
Great care must be exercised when buying in Germany as high prices gained in the sale of dogs are told and retold throughout the training clubs of Germany and as you can imagine, many German breeders want to get in on the act!
The saddest story I have heard is one of a blind German boy who had a Rottweiler as his special pet.
A friend of the family saw the dog and persuaded the family to enter the dog in the next show.
The dog duly won his class, the boy was overjoyed and went home very happy.
The next day, buyers appeared on their doorstep.
It was explained that the dog was the boy's pet.
Not deterred the offer price was raised and raised again, until the family could no longer turn down this fabulous offer.
The buyers went away with the dog, unaware of the aftermath of unhappiness left behind.
The boy was broken-hearted and inconsolable.
Buying should be done with dignity by people who care for the breed.
One must be sure the dog would contribute something to the USA gene pool for the improvement and betterment of the breed.
Buying just for financial gain should be despised.
All dog shows where championship points are awarded are held under the rules and regulations of the American Kennel Club, who are responsible for providing qualified judges, keeping records of points and a register of pure-bred dogs.
If a Rottweiler is eligible for registration with the AKC, he can compete at any licensed dog show, as long as he is at least six months old and does not have a disqualifying fault.
Spayed dogs are not shown.
All dogs should be properly trained before they enter the show ring; they should have attended handling classes and be well used to crowds and being handled on a lead.
Shows are either benched or unbenched.
At benched shows, dogs should remain  on their bench for most of the day, where the public are able to view them.
At unbenched shows, you may take your dog home when you have finished in the ring.
It is best to get some ring practice at the smaller classes and match meetings and iron out all problems ready for the big day when you go to a Championship Show.
What the Judge is Looking for
The judge's blueprint is the Breed Standard.
The Breed Standard describes what is considered to be a perfect specimen of the breed.
Also listed are definite faults, which we would hope to discourage and which are penalized heavily.
The judge will go over the dog using his hands and eyes to look for any faults in conformation, but most of all to ascertain the virtues of the animal.
He will then wish to see the dog in motion.
This gives a clear insight into many of the structural faults and also ascertains whether the dog is sound or lame.
American handlers are always smart and well turned out and show their dogs to their best advantage.
The basis of showmanship is to portray a dog with physical beauty and structural soundness.
A dog with intelligence and ring presence is a bonus.
Am Ch.
Rohirrim The Time Lord.
Show Classes:
Dogs competing for championship points are entered in one or more of the regular classes for their breed.
Schedule Classes are:
Puppy For dogs under one year old.
This class may be divided into 6–9 months and 9–12 months.
Novice For dogs not having won three firsts in Novice, or in other classes (except puppy) or any championship points.
Bred by Exhibitor For dogs who are not champions, and are owned wholly or partly by the breeder and shown by him or his family.
American Bred For all dogs (except champions) born in the USA, resulting from a mating which took place in the USA.
Open For any dog.
Winners Classes are:
Winners Dog Male winner of each class who has not been beaten in any other class, competes for Winners Dog.
He receives a purple ribbon and points proportionate to the number of males present.
Reserve Winners Dog The dog who came second in the Winners Dog's original class competes with the dogs remaining in the ring,(unless he has already been defeated by one of them), for Reserve Winners.
The Reserve Winner receives a purple and white ribbon and moves up to the Winners if the Winners Dog is for any reason disqualified.
Winners Bitch Exactly the same procedure is followed as for Winners Dog.
Reserve Winners Bitch Exactly the same procedure is followed as for Reserve Winners Dog.
Best of Breed The Winners Dog and the Winners Bitch compete with any champions entered for Best of Breed and winners of non-regular classes such as Veteran.
Best of Winners If the Winners Dog or Winners Bitch is awarded Best of Breed, it then becomes Best of Winners.
The Winners Dog and the Winners Bitch are judged together for Best of Winners.
In addition to the blue and white ribbon, the Best Winner may receive additional points if the opposite sex had an entry qualifying for higher points.
Best of Opposite Sex Following the selection of Best of Breed and Best of Winners, all the winners of the opposite sex to Best of Breed remain in the ring.
From this group, Best of Opposite Sex is chosen.
A red and white ribbon is awarded to the Best of Opposite Sex.
In the classes, four ribbons are usually awarded.
Blue for first, red for second, yellow for third and white for fourth.
Champions are not allowed to compete in the Open Classes as they do not need the points on offer.
To attain champion status, the dog or bitch must win a total of fifteen points under at least three different judges.
Also he must win a minimum of three points in each of two shows under different judges.
The American Rottweiler Club — Top Winners
The Rottweiler in Scandinavia
Norway
The first Rottweiler in Norway arrived in the year 1910, but it was not until 1919 that a bitch called Florrie, who had been originally imported from Sweden, was registered.
Her importer, E. Palmguist, then became a founder member of the Norwegian Rottweiler Club which was founded in 1933.
It is interesting to note that the Norwegian Rottweiler Club also founded the Norwegian Kennel Club.
It is unusual for Norwegian Rottweiler owners to have large kennels.
Rottweilers usually live as family pets or working dogs.
Norwegians are keen to train their dogs and Rottweilers are used for many purposes, from mountain rescue to drug detection.
Their working ability in Norway is rated very highly.
I have always found the Rottweilers in Norway to be of very stable disposition, and this is probably because the Rottweilers live as family pets, with a stable home life.
Norway, Sweden and Finland were, until recently, rabies free and show dogs from Scandinavia were entered in all three countries.
Unfortunately, rabies has now been detected in Finland.
Nor.
Ch.
Jagen Blue Star of Zarstø, owned by Mr and Mrs Andersen.
The Nordic Championship Show for Rottweilers is rotated between the three different countries.
On the first day of the show, working trial tests are held, reflecting the interest in this aspect of the breed.
On the second day, the Breed Show itself is held.
This show is the highlight of the year for Rottweiler enthusiasts and it was my privilege to be able to handle a UK import to win Best of Breed here in 1986.
On entering the ring, all dogs are checked and absentees noted.
The dogs stand in numerical order and the judge then looks at every exhibit and examines teeth and, in the case of dogs, testicles.
During his examination he makes notes on a pad.
The class is then excused and the entries return to the ring one at a time in numerical order to be judged individually.
The judge goes over the dog and then assesses him on the move, at the end of which the dog receives a written critique and a grading, which is symbolized by different coloured ribbons: red for first, blue for second and yellow for third.
Only the firsts are allowed to return to compete for class placements.
In other words, if you do not receive a first grading, that is as far as you go although you get a written critique, so that you at least know why you didn't make the placings.
The winner of the open classes usually receives a certificate, which is the equivalent to the Challenge Certificate in the UK.
Reserve Certificates are also available and more than one may be awarded.
Then there is a champion class and the winner of the champion class meets the winner of the Certificate and Reserve Certificate to compete for Best of Sex.
Then the dog and the bitch compete for Best of Breed.
Incidentally, a first grading would be awarded to a typical dog of good conformation, with only minor faults, a very good representative of the breed.
A second grading is a good representative of the breed with no serious faults.
A dog that gains a third prize is a dog that lacks quality and is not perfect in construction, but one that still cannot be called a poor specimen.
I have found Norwegian shows to be very relaxed and Norwegian people accept the decisions of the judge very well, which is to their credit, for with the grading system and every dog receiving a critique, everyone feels they have achieved something.
Norway has always looked to Sweden for breeding influence.
The first great influence from Sweden was the Fandangos Kennel.
It was, however, Norwegian Ch.
Ponto who sired the famous Int.
Ch.
Fandangos Fairboy.
Ponto not only influenced Norwegian and Swedish Rottweiler history, but also the UK's through his grandson Ch.
Chesara Akilles, who was to sire ten UK champions.
The Swedish influence has continued up to the present day, where  the Faunus Kennel has a great influence on the breeding stock in Norway.
One such kennel is the Zarstøs Kennel, owned by Mr and Mrs L. and E. Anderson, who have produced some top winners in the last few years, the most famous of which is Int.
and Norwegian Ch.
Korad Bellinas Zari, who was the top winning Rottweiler in Norway in 1984 and 1985.
Her daughter, International and Nordic Winner 1987, Ch.
Zarstø's Bunny, who was top winning Rottweiler in 1988–89.
She was sired by Swedish import Norwegian Ch.
Korad Bersgardens Ramus.
Of the males in Norway, one of the best of recent years that I have particularly liked was Norwegian Ch.
Chubby of Rottmann, although the latest star on the show scene seems to be international and Norwegian winner Mellomossens Marco Polo.
Other kennels of note in Norway are the Kimuras Kennels, owned by Mr and Mrs Lindstrome, the Dixi Gaarden Kennels and the Valheins Kennels.
All are making significant contributions to the breed at this time.
One of the latest imports into Norway is a German-bred dog called Kolja v Bakkes.
This dog was originally imported into the UK by me.
He is a V1 winner, the highest rated German dog ever to be imported   into the UK.
Having sired one litter in the UK, he was then sent on to Norway.
Since being in Norway, he has been used to stud not only by the Norwegians but also by the top Swedish kennel Faunus, which is owned and run by Gun Berquist.
It is too early to estimate the value of this dog at stud in Scandinavia, but the litter sired in the UK has produced winners at Championship Show level, not only in the UK but also in Australia and Norway itself, for one of his sons Jagen Blue Brutally Handsome, was exported to Norway to the kennel of Mr T Lindstrome prior to Kolja's arrival in Norway.
This dog has already won a CC and in-show awards.
His dam was the well-known Eika v Barrenstein BH AD EJS (1986).
One of Kolja's daughters, Zarsto's Fit For Fight has already won nine CCs at 16 months old.
Int.
and Nor.
Ch.
Zarstø's Bunny.
Int.
and Nor.
Ch.
Mellomossens Marco Polo.
Kolja v Bakkes, owned by Mr and Mrs Andersen.
Norwegian Rottweilers are soundly built, of good size and stable temperament, which probably explains why they are in such great demand not only as family companions but working dogs.
Many Norwegians participate in mountain rescue, which is usually carried out in deep snow.
Rottweilers seem to excel at this work.
It is a large country with a small population and so it is very easy to get lost.
Even on the main routes over the mountains, we have travelled many miles  through snow blizzards without seeing a single house on the horizon.
This is why Norwegians take this training so seriously.
Indeed, special clubs have been set up which concentrate entirely on mountain rescue.
Nor.
Ch.
Valheim's Ikaros.
It is this special blend of solid conformation, mental ability and participation by owners who exploit the best from their dogs that will keep the Rottweiler one of the most favoured dogs in Norway.
Sweden
The Swedish Rottweiler Club (AFR) was founded in 1968.
Today, it has a membership of over one thousand.
As with Norway, breeding restrictions are very tight.
Hips and elbows must have been X-rayed and have received excellent results, but further more, all dogs must participate in the Swedish mental test.
As in Germany, all results from these tests are published.
The first Rottweiler to be registered in Sweden was a bitch Syda v Karlstor, registered in 1914.
However, the first dog to be imported to have any major influence was Arbo Torfwerk.
He was imported into Sweden in 1921 and was litter brother to winner Arco Torfwerk.
This  blood-line was particularly helpful to the early breeders because the line was in-bred, his parents being brother and sister of excellent breeding and so consequently true to type.
Arbo's most famous son was dual Champion Aspnas Bjorn Skks.
Bjorn shone brightly in everything he was asked to do, not only at shows but also at trials.
He was a very accomplished tracking dog and gained recognition from the Swedish police for his achievements.
Faunus Cinderella.
The breed in Sweden was off to a tremendous start and from this position of strength, Swedish people have produced over the years some very good Rottweilers.
Imports were almost exclusively from Germany, but it is obvious that much thought had been put into their acquisitions, for the next dog to be imported was Ossman v Frankofurtia in 1930.
This dog's line went directly back to Arbo's more famous brother Arco Torfwerk.
Ossman was not shown but became a stud dog,— most useful as breeders in Sweden would continue line-breeding.
During the 1960s, Sweden’ s top stud dog was Ch.
Fandangos Fairboy.
Along with International, Nordic and Finnish Ch.
Fandangos Faruk, they have cast their influence right across Europe, America and Australia.
The most successful show dog of all time in the whole of  
The author with his Best of Breed and Best Opposite Sex at the 1990 Stockholm International Show.
Left: B.O.B.
Int and Nor.
Ch.
Faunus Bullit.
Right: B.O.S. Zarstøs Fit for Fight.
Scandinavia was Ch.
Bergsgardens King of Sweden who was owned by Rolf Soderlund.
Probably one of the best-known characters in Swedish Rottweiler history is Mrs Gerd Hyden, who is an international judge and breeds Rottweilers under the Saltsjoborg prefix.
Her kennel has won the Hamilton Award for the Swedish Kennel who produces top quality breeding.
This award has also been won by the Fandangos Kennel and Bergsgardens Kennel.
Other kennels of note in Swedish history are: Nordangens, Fandangos, Bergsgardens, Lyngsjons, Odels, Aviemores and Faunus.
The Faunus Kennel has dominated the Swedish scene over the last few years, one of their top winners being Faunus Bullit.
The breed in Sweden is strong and can compete with any country.
It has been built on a solid bedrock of good dogs and breeding control, with a strong emphasis on mentality.
Finland
The first police dogs to come to Finland were in 1908.
They were German Shepherds, Dobermanns and probably Rottweilers.
The first Rottweiler to be registered by the Kennel Club of Finland was a male and his name was Hammarbys Puck (KC Reg.
No. 6206).
He was bred in Stockholm and was owned by Capt. Gustafaspegren in Helsinki.
Puck was born on 3 January 1923.
The first prefix to be registered was Kiikkuniemi in 1933.
Many Rottweilers were imported prior to the Second World War but their influence on the breed today is negligible because, as in other countries, the war so seriously destroyed the breeding programme.
During the war, many working dogs helped with the defence effort.
The majority were German Shepherds but it is known that Rottweilers did contribute.
The first Rottweilers in Finland to gain their championship titles were H p Hn Belzebub and H p Hn Barry, both in 1948.
H p Hn Tomi was the third Rottweiler to achieve the title in Finland and was also the first bitch to do so, again in 1948.
Belzebub was owned by Mr Olavi Pasanen and his wife Maria, who in later years bred many well-known dogs under the Heidenmoor prefix.
This completes the three Nordic countries, where it is possible to make up an international champion.
To gain the title of Nordic Champion, it is necessary to be a champion in the country of origin and also to achieve at least one certificate in each of the other countries.
To gain the International Champion title, it is necessary to win the champion  ship in the country of origin and an international ticket in two of the other participating countries, one in your own country.
There must be one year and one day between the first and last, under two different judges, which is no mean achievement.
However, before the International Champion title is awarded, it is necessary for the Rottweiler to pass an obedience and tracking test.
Therefore, one can say that a Rottweiler who achieves international championship status in the Nordic countries has to be a Rottweiler of the very highest standard.
The Rottweiler in Holland
The first record of a Rottweiler being exhibited in Holland was in 1910.
This is not surprising as Holland and Germany are close neighbours.
In view of this, one would expect the breed to have firmly established itself long ago.
However, the outbreak of war caused an anti-Germanic feeling across Europe, especially in Holland, where this feeling prevented the further growth of this German breed.
The Dutch people love working dogs.
Although their favourite dog is possibly the Bouvier des Flandres, real interest began to grow in the Rottweiler in the 1960s.
Improvements of the breed have been no problem, for the Dutch have access to the best stud lines available in a German gene pool.
Some outstanding dogs have been produced in Holland, the Brabantpark and the Triomfator Kennels being the most famous.
The most outstanding dog to be produced in Holland is surely Mr G. Kuijpers Int.
Ch.
Duuck v d Nedermolen.
Duuck has been Club Champion in the Netherlands in 1982, 1983 and 1984.
In addition to this, he has crossed the border gaining not only a ZPT qualification,(see Appendix 1), but also SchH III.
In 1981, he won the title World Champion.
A truly magnificent dog both physically and mentally.
Dutch kennels often travel to Germany for the larger shows.
In 1987, Bulli Triomfator won the open class at the Bundessieger, gaining VI (see Appendix 1), while Dunja Triomfator won the open bitch class, both these animals are owned and bred by Miss Gruter, whose kennel is situated in Zunderdorp.
Both animals were the only Rottweilers in the open class to gain a V rating.
The bitch sieger class was also won by Miss Gruter with Hera v d Kathaarens Winstler, who is an NL and Lux Champion.
As can be seen, the Dutch do more than hold their own in the strong German classes, even at this level.
All dogs who are bred in Holland have to be X-rayed for hip  dysplasia and must have a normal or near normal rating.
They must also pass a character test which is organized by the Netherlands Rottweiler Club.
Incidentally, bitches may not be bred from more than once a year and strictly not when under the age of two years old and dogs of two years and under may not be used at stud.
It is also necessary for all breeding stock to have been graded at least‘very good’ by two different judges at official shows.
It would be nice to see this regulation enforced in all countries by the individual Rottweiler Clubs.
The Dutch, second to the Germans, probably have the strictest breeding regime in Europe.
The Breed Club takes an active role in all things, including inspection of litters to help with the resale of puppies from litters which are bred within the Club's jurisdiction.
The Rottweiler in Ireland
Ireland as a country is run by two governments.
Since Northern Ireland is part of the UK, all things pertaining to dogs come under the UK  Kennel Club's jurisdiction, while in the south, or Eire, dogs must be entered with the Irish Kennel Club.
Northern Ireland has two shows where CCs are on offer to Rottweilers, the Northern Ireland Rottweiler Club's Championship Show and the Belfast All Breeds Championship Show.
Exhibitors in the south however have twenty All Breed Championship Shows and one Club Show where green stars are on offer.
Green stars are allocated at these shows and are made up on a points basis.
Each breed has an index figure, which is equivalent to the number of dogs required to be actually exhibited (not just entered), to gain a five point green star.
For entries over 20 per cent above the index figure actually shown, another point will be added, up to a maximum of ten points.
Forty points are required for a champion and four of these green stars must be majors, which means they must have five points or more.
Apart from the Club shows north and south, the highlights of the year must be the Belfast Championship Show in the north and the St Patrick's Day Show in the south.
The St Patrick's Day Show is always  held in Dublin and all green stars awarded are usually guaranteed majors, which usually encourages a large entry.
Ch. and Irish Ch.
Jagen Blue Moonduster, owned by Watt and McCurley.
In the south, August is the busiest month of the entire year for the Irish show goers.
Six Championship Shows are held in three weeks.
The third week in August usually sees the start of what is known as the Munster Circuit, four Championship Shows in seven days.
Irish show goers look forward to the Munster Circuit.
There is a certain sense of camaraderie where people travel from show to show; aside from the serious work of showing dogs, it is also a great social event with many new friendships being forged in these few weeks.
The fact that it is possible to make up an Irish champion in one week draws not only a high proportion of exhibitors from the north, but also many exhibitors from the UK who travel by ferry and aeroplane to take part in what is known as The Circuit.
Only one Irish-owned dog has won a UK title, Ch.
Jagen Blue Chicago Bear, and only one Irish-owned bitch has won her UK title, Ch. and Irish Ch.
Jagen Blue Moonduster.
One dog who was already a UK champion was exported to Ireland: Ch. and Irish Ch.
Cuidado the Dandy.
Ch.
Jagen Blue Chicago Bear, owned by Mr and Mrs McCullum.
Ten times BIS All Breeds.
The Rottweiler in Australia
In 1958, Mr and Mrs Mummery decided they would try to import some stock of the very best blood-lines into Australia.
Mr Mummery at the time was a police dog trainer.
He had seen his first Rottweiler in the UK whilst visiting a police dog training centre and he was greatly impressed with his working ability.
He decided to import a dog named Balthasar of Mallion, whose sire was Rudi Eulenspiegel of Mallion and whose dam was Quinta Eulenspiegel of Mallion.
Unfortunately, tragedy struck and the dog was to die on board ship through heat exhaustion.
This was a tragic loss to Australia because the blood-lines would have been extremely useful.
In 1962, Capt. Roy-Smith arrived in Australia, bringing some dogs with him.
The bitch, Rintelna the Chatelaine, was to whelp the first litter born in Australia, having been mated prior to leaving the UK.
The bitch produced six puppies, but Capt. Roy-Smith destroyed all but one.
His explanation was that he could find no suitable homes for the other puppies.
The Mummerys therefore placed an order for a bitch from the next litter, which was born on 13 July 1963.
In the meantime, the Mummerys planned another import.
This was to be Pilgrimsway Loki.
This dog was then mated to Rintelna the Fatale, who had been a puppy purchased from Capt. Roy-Smith.
This litter, born on 5 December 1965, was to be the first born in Victoria and was registered under the Heatherglen prefix.
Australian Rottweiler history had begun.
Mr Mummery then imported a bitch called Lenlee Gail, who was by W T Ch.
Bruin of Mallion, out of Lenlee Neeruam Brigitte CDex UDex, a bitch of impeccable working lines.
Gail was mated several times to Loki, the offspring proving influential in the development of the breed in Australia.
The first Rottweiler to be imported from Germany came via the UK, owing to very strict quarantine regulations.
Her name was Catja v d Flugschneise.
In the time she spent in the UK, Catja was mated to Ch.
Castor of Intisari.
This litter was whelped in the UK and several puppies remained here, while four accompanied their mother to Australia.
The puppies that were to remain in the UK, although shown, achieved no obvious success, either in the show ring or as breeding prospects.
However, their litter mates in Australia were apparently used extensively.
Aust.
Ch.
Stromhall Torrey, owned by Stromhall Kennels.
Imports into Australia today are legion, coming not only from the UK and Germany but also from Finland, Italy and the USA.
I feel this is possibly not a good thing at this present time, when every spectrum of Rottweiler size, shape and type can still be found in the show ring: further expansions of the gene pool can only have a destructive effect.
It is possibly that the judging system in Australia, where almost all judges are all-rounders and are passed to judge at group level, has not helped the development of type in Australia.
Another very unhelpful element breedwise is the ease in which champions are made up.
In Australia, championships are gained on a point system and it is feasible, however unlikely, that a Rottweiler Champion could be made up without actually meeting a member of his own breed in competition.
Possibly more champions are made up in one year in Australia  than the total achieved in the UK since the breed's first introduction.
This cannot be a good thing.
The word ‘champion’ by definition, means ‘he who conquers all’; it should not mean ‘he who has driven the furthest’.
This mass grading of champions takes away the achievements gained by the dogs who are true champions.
Aust.
Ch.
Stromhall Liebschen, owned by Stromhall Kennels.
Having said all that, there have been some very nice dogs bred in Australia, not only achieving high show placements, but also major obedience awards.
One of the first such dogs was Mrs Hall's Stromhall Torrey CH CDex UDex TD.
Torrey was also a very good sire, producing many excellent offspring.
When considering showing dogs in Australia, it must be realized that the country has a total area of three million square miles and is divided into five mainland states and two territories, plus the island state of Tasmania.
At the moment, there are six Rottweiler clubs in Australia: the Rottweiler Club of Victoria, which is the oldest club; the Rottweiler Club of New South Wales; the Rottweiler Club of Queensland; the Rottweiler Club of Western Australia; the Rottweiler Club of South Australia and the Northern Territory Rottweiler Club.
All these clubs are extremely active and put on many events for their members.
Carting is very popular, as is agility, working trials and latterly Schutzhund trials.
There are many dogs in Australia now who hold Schutzhund titles, which have been gained in Australia under German judges.
General obedience is taught by most of the Rottweiler clubs to new handlers as a public service exercise and this early training sometimes inspires people to go on to do greater things.
The future of the breed in Australia looks to be in good hands, although some moves towards getting a clearer definition of type must be made.
This is a very difficult task in such a large country.
However, all the Rottweiler clubs do have a National Council to oversee all affairs dealing with Rottweilers.
I feel the greatest contribution the National Council could make to the Rottweiler in Australia is the stabilizing of type, but in the present climate, with a flood of imports from various destinations, this will be all the more difficult.
All people intending to breed from their dogs in Australia are strongly recommended to participate in the hip dysplasia scoring scheme.
At the time of X-ray, the dog's ear is tattooed and the X-ray is marked with that tattoo number so that there is always proof of the dog's soundness.
It is also possible to have your dog's bite and eyes certified by the veterinary surgeon while the dog is sedated.
The Victoria Rottweiler Club actually owns its own tattoo machine and members apply for a number from the secretary of the club.
This system  is streets ahead of the slap-happy way tests are carried out in the UK, where the whole system of hip  dysplasia testing is open to abuse.
Another service rendered by the Victorian Rottweiler Club is the ‘litter expected’ notice.
Members are able to fill in a form to notify the Club that a litter is due to be whelped.
On this form, the applicant signs a declaration that, to the best of his knowledge, the sire and dam do not suffer from hip dysplasia, entropion, undershot or overshot jaw, wrymouth, incomplete dentition, extreme shyness of or viciousness towards people, total absence of tan marking, yellow bird-of-prey eyes or eyes that are not the same colour, white markings.
The hip scores of both parents are then given and all this information is published in the Club magazine, not only to assist people in the purchase of quality puppies, but also for the general information and education of members.
Some of the best-known kennels in Australia are: Angepena, Anverdons, Auslese, Brabantsia, Beirnstut, Cardweil, Heatherglen, Kalatara, Kerusgal, Korobeit, Lamez, Metzkers, Morweiler, Murraval, Muzairib, Ormslee, Robstans, Rodonburg, Romawi, Rotset, Rottser, Rotvel, St Arkhund, Schaden, Stromhall, Tarawa, Tarquinian, Tayverka, Utz, Yarrawon, Zanbax.
For those I've missed, I apologize.
The majority of these kennels are in the Victoria area.
One of the reasons for this is that up until the early 1970s Victoria was the only state to stage classes for Rottweilers.
Up until that time entries would be relatively small, possibly less that ten at most shows.
As entries started to grow, several stars started to appear in the show ring.
Ch.
Uplands Lados had an extremely impressive track record: he won the challenge not only at the Melbourne Royal, but also at the Sydney Royal.
In the early 1980s, Ch.
Tarquinian Ambassador and his sister Ch.
Tarquinian Adante scooped over ninety CCs between them.
Other good winners are Tayvelka Noble Marcus and Ch.
Schaden Cheyenne and the bitch Ch.
Saarlund Quanabie Mist, who was a granddaughter of UK Ch.
Gamegards Bulli v d Waldachquelle.
As I mentioned before, Ch.
Stromhall Torrey CDex UD, TD, was a prolific winner winning Best in Show at the 1983 Rottweiler Club Show.
Torrey had been a group winner on three occasions, one of which was the Sydney Royal.
This dog would clearly have been a dual champion had he not been killed at an early age, constituting a great loss to the Australian show scene.
Australian Ch.
Anderjays Our Marcus won Best Exhibit at the 1988 Rottweiler Club at the Victoria Championship Show and went on to win runner-up in show at the 1988 Melbourne Royal Show.
Ch.
Schaden Illiad has won a Best in Show at Championship Show level and has also been the top winning dog on two occasions.
Aust.
Ch.
Muzairib Bobby McGee, owned by T. Truscott.
The show scene in Australia is very active, as are the obedience trials and latterly the fast-growing Schutzhund sport.
Registrations are still growing and have not yet peaked out.
The breed, however, is in good hands and can learn by mistakes made elsewhere.
The Rottweiler in New Zealand
The early history of the Rottweiler in New Zealand is somewhat hazy.
What we do know is that the first Rottweiler to be registered with the New Zealand Club was Auslese Montrachet, who was imported from Australia.
He was whelped on 17 March 1970, so the history of the Rottweiler in New Zealand is in its infancy, barely twenty years old.
This dog was soon followed by another Australian import, whose name was Asgardweiler Winston, whelped on 14 November 1971.
This dog was to become New Zealand's first recorded Rottweiler champion.
Two more Australian imports from the Auslese Kennel followed soon after: Auslese Lafite and Auslese Echezeaux.
It is thought that the first bitch to be imported was from England, Attila Bathsheba, who was imported in whelp to a good dog, Upend Gallant Alf.
The bitch was apparently diverted to New Zealand because all the quarantine kennels in Australia were full.
The litter born to this bitch on 24 July 1975 was the first to be whelped in New Zealand.
The second bitch to gain her New Zealand title was Ch.
Kinlock Sachsen, who, again, was imported from Australia.
The third bitch to be imported was Kerusgal Black Czarina, born 24 February 1976.
The fourth import into New Zealand, again from Australia, was probably the best of the early imports.
A very good bitch, known as NZ Ch.
Heatherglen Hebe.
Hebe was to win the Bitch CC in the 1976, 1977 and 1978 Nationals.
The two most prominent dogs around this time were Korobeit Hero and Grossheim Igor, who had been imported by Mr Alf Church of the Standhalf Kennels.
This dog was to sire NZ Ch.
Great Valour of Firgorran, who was to be the sire of the first Rottweiler to take Best in Show at Tux Nationals, Ch.
Salbo of Firgorran.
Mr Bernie Cok imported Chesara Dark Igor in October 1976.
He was by Chesara Dark Warlord out of Ch.
Chesara Byxfield Akela and around that time Chesara Dark Helen was imported.
She was sired by Chesara Rebel of Alastel, out of Tara Triomfator from Chesara.
The next group of imports was made by Mr C. W. Bradley, the first  being Heatherglen Beautique, sired by Adoram Matheson out of Heatherglen Freda, and originally imported from the UK into Australia.
The second import was NZ Ch.
Heatherglen Faber, again imported from Australia and, again, sired by Adoram Matheson, this time out of Heatherglen Adda.
The third import was Heatherglen Danni, who was sired by Chesara Dark Boris (who had been imported from the UK into Australia) out of Heatherglen Ina.
The fourth import, Heatherglen Lucette, was sired by Korobeit Hud, out of Chesara Dark Wishful, who had been imported from the UK.
The fifth import was Peterae Lynnes Star, and last was Lamez Caesar, both imported from Australia.
Mr and Mrs K. Newell, who live in Auckland, imported NZ Ch.
Javictreva Double Dutch from the UK.
She was bred by Noreen and Trevor Simmons and her sire was Chesara Dark Roisterer, her dam Javictreva Kaleidoscope.
This bitch was to take Best Bitch and Best of Breed at the 1980 Nationals.
From these early imports, rapid progress has been made, although large ears and weak heads are the most common faults to be found in New Zealand stock.
It is to the credit of the New Zealand breeders that  these faults were recognized and several imports from the UK were made specifically to help with this problem, notably NZ Ch.
Upend Gallant Zeberdee (bred by Barbara Butler), NZ Ch.
Yorlanders Migrant (bred by Kath and Brian Hindley), NZ Ch.
Jagen Blue Matchmaker and NZ Ch.
Nivelle Elite, who all sired some excellent stock, some of which was exported to Australia and at the time of writing, has taken Best in Show at Club Championship Show level.
All of these imports from the UK not only sired good stock but also gained their New Zealand Championships.
Migrant did particularly well, winning several Best in Shows at All Breed Championship Shows and won the title of New Zealand's Top Utility Dog.
He was sired by Jagen Blue Andante out of Ch.
Chesara Dark Hunters Dawn of Yorlander.
NZ Ch.
Jagen Blue Matchmaker, owned by A. Franks.
Some of the most notable dogs bred in New Zealand include NZ Ch.
Blair Gowrie Bayla Lugossi CDex UDex.
Bayla was the first CDex and UDex Rottweiler in New Zealand — a great achievement.
He was owned and trained by Alison Franks.
Also, Ch.
Great Valour of Firgorran, who was to sire Ch.
Salvo of Firgorran, the first Rottweiler to take Best in Show at the Tux Nationals.
Nz Ch.
Sanduka Midnite Manifesto is also  a Best in Show winner, as are Ch.
Anton v Storhund and Ch.
Teutonis of Firgorran.
NZ.
Ch.
Jagen Blue Matchmaker, owned by A. Franks.
Between 1974 and 1975, there were just two Rottweilers registered with the New Zealand Kennel Club.
By 1983/84, there were 388.
This can be explained in part by the large numbers of dogs that were imported initially, but it is clear that the breed has really taken off and is now firmly established in the top ten most popular breeds in New Zealand.
In 1988, 2,019 Rottweilers were registered from 204 litters, which seems an incredible amount of Rottweilers per head of population.
It is hoped that this phenomenal increase will soon level out.
The breed clubs in New Zealand are very active and are keen to encourage obedience and working trials activities.
It is obvious that the breed clubs will have a very difficult time in the next decade.
Fortunately for the breed, there are enough dedicated people who will be available to care for its welfare.
The Rottweiler in South Africa
The Rottweiler's appearance in South Africa is sketchy.
It is known that Rottweilers had been imported prior to the Second World War, probably by German and Dutch immigrants.
Again, not much is known, but it is thought they were probably pets or purely working dogs.
However, during the late 1930s/early 1960s, a great deal of interest was generated and, by the 1970s the breed was firmly established with the South African Kennel Club.
By 1980, registrations were around the 3,000 mark.
It is clear that all around the world, Rottweilers seem to have been discovered all at the same time.
By 1985, figures for Rottweiler registration had gone over 4,000.
It is thought likely that more than this have been bred and not registered, simply used as guard dogs by the booming security industry in South Africa.
One of the first kennels to establish itself as a consistent winner in the show ring was the Tankerville Kennel.
This kennel's top winning inmate was SA Ch.
Tankerville Digby.
Digby was the first Rottweiler in South Africa to win Best in Show at an All Breeds Show.
He was sired by Ch.
Upend Gallant Luke, who was bred by Barbara Butler in the UK.
His dam was Tankerville Heidi, who was Rottweiler Bitch of the Year from 1979–1983.
Another long-established kennel in South Africa is St Tuttston, owned and run by Denise Tutt and, latterly, her daughter.
In fact, SA Ch.
St Tuttston Bastian of Tankerville was the foundation stud dog of  the Tankerville Kennels and was probably responsible for bringing the breed to the notice of the general public.
During his show career, he won in excess of sixty Best of Breeds.
It is good that both these kennels, who were established right at the start of the breed's development, are still active today.
The Von Sophias Kennel is probably the most successful present-day kennel.
Kennel handler, Sue Hoffman, attends almost every Championship Show in South Africa.
The number of miles that it is necessary to travel in order to accomplish this are simply phenomenal.
It is not unusual for the Von Sophias Kennel to turn out seventeen Rottweilers at one show.
The Von Sophias Kennel's greatest achievement was winning Dogmoor Dog of The Year 1988 with SA Ch.
Von Sophias Wilbur.
In my opinion Wilbur is not the best dog in the Von Sophias Kennel, despite his success, since he is quite plain in head.
My two particular favourites would be SA Ch.
Von Sophias Bulli and SA Ch.
Von Sophias Jonnifer, who I personally consider to be capable of winning anywhere in the world.
The Dogmoor competition invites a dog and a bitch from each breed to compete.
When Wilbur achieved this great win, the bitch who was invited was SA Ch.
Vagabond v Kabou, owned by Kathy and Roger Bouton, an up-and-coming kennel from Port Elizabeth.
SA Ch.
St Tuttston Lando, owned by E.E.
Tutt.
In Johannesburg, the Sheidal Kennels have imported Ch.
Jagen Blue Ragged Robin of Sheidal from the UK.
This dog not only became a very good show dog, but also an excellent working dog and great stock getter.
He was sired by Ch.
Panelma The Adventurer, out of Ch.
Jagen Blue Aria.
Many imports  are now being made from Germany.
Their influence is yet to be fully evaluated.
To make a champion in South Africa, it is necessary to win a total of five points.
These have to be won under five different judges, with at least one CC being awarded outside one's home province.
If an entry attracts more than ten dogs, the CC is then worth two points.
Dogs who are already champions have to compete in the champions class.
Personally, I do not think the number of entries that are made at South African shows justify champion classes.
Compared with the number of dogs who are registered, entries to shows are quite small: fifty to a hundred entries compared with 3,000 registrations for 1986.
Another competition, held annually, is the Heads and Tails Top Dog competition, which is run by a magazine.
Once again, this was won by SA Ch.
Von Sophias Wilbur, who won it with 2,273 points.
The second  
SA Ch.
Jagen Blue Ragged Robin, owned by Mr and Mrs Lower.
Rottweiler dog in the competition was Ch.
Tankerville Digby, who gained a creditable twenty-second place with 805 points.
As we can see, the show scene is quite healthy in South Africa, receiving much sponsorship and assistance.
However, the working side is not neglected by any means.
South Africa has at the moment six Rottweiler specialist breed clubs, who are affiliated to the Kennel Union of South Africa: one in the Western Cape Province, one in the Eastern Cape Province, one in Durban, Natal and three in the Transvaal Province centred in and around Johannesburg.
These breed clubs have regenerated interest in the people who had for some reason left the breed and have now been asked to return to spread their knowledge to the younger members.
In working trials, there are a number of dogs who have qualified for CD and CDX, TD1, TD2.
There is now a lot of interest in international working trials, which seem to have captured the imagination of the South African Rottweiler owners.
When I last judged in South Africa, I attended a training meeting of the Meridian Rottweiler Club.
This was staged in the evening under floodlights on a football pitch.
I can truthfully say that there were about a hundred people, male, female, young, old, and of all races, happily  training their dogs, all spurred on by the infectious enthusiasm of Dave Lower and the committee of the Meridian Rottweiler Club, who all muck in to help.
SA Ch.
St Tuttson Lando taking the honours from Mr Hondo, a Japanese judge.
It was there that I had the pleasure of meeting Mrs Stella Gawthrop, who has not only the distinction of being a pathfinder for the breed in the UK, but having emigrated to South Africa, has also been of great assistance to the newly formed clubs there.
Mrs Gawthrop's first Rottweiler was Adda of Mallion, who held her own at All Breed Shows in the UK; she was placed, which was difficult for a minority breed at the time, in variety classes.
Adda was exported to South Africa when her owner emigrated, forming a link between the earliest Rottweilers in the UK and the earliest Rottweilers in South Africa.
The Rottweilers in South Africa now have a very strong breed club system and enthusiastic members.
Despite over-breeding and all its knock-on problems, the future of the breed looks very bright.
The Rottweiler in the Caribbean
Barbados
In general, Caribbean countries import from the UK.
Barbados has a good show scene with four or five Championship Shows a year.
The first two Rottweilers to be imported were a dog known as Herburger Count Nyjinksy and a bitch named Countess Kalinka of Herburger.
They were imported by Mrs S. DeGale in 1979.
Once the breed had established itself, many more imports were to follow: Herburger Count Rasputin was imported in 1981 by Mr J. Wilson.
Probably the best of the early imports was Hambraugh Perfect Choice, bred by Linda Baughan and imported by Mrs J. Tucker.
The next dog of great influence was Adoram Jamie of Elthor, bred by Michael Quinney and imported by Dr Wayne Welch.
The next bitch to be imported was Jagen Blue Moonstone bred by me and imported by Dr Welch.
Offspring from this bitch and Jamie were very good, the most notable amongst them was Ch.
Elthor Dark Darah, the only champion to have been bred in Barbados to date.
Jamaica
Unlike Barbados, Jamaica holds its own Breed Club Show and specialist judges are invited to officiate.
In 1985, Barbara Butler judged the RAJ Championship Breed Show and her Dog CC was Atlas of Marsden, who was owned by Mr and Mrs E.V.
Martin.
Best bitch was Sundance Sheezdi Queen.
Atlas was Best in Show and the bitch was Best of Opposite Sex.
In May 1986, it was the turn of Joan Clem to officiate.
Dog CC went to Ch.
Maown Monty of Kenour, who was Reserve Best in Show and Best of Opposite Sex.
He was owned by Mr Owen Munroe.
Bitch CC and Best in Show went to Ch.
Sundance Genevive Hellraiser, who was owned by Winston Tucker.
In 1987, Larry Elsden officiated.
Dog CC and Best in Show went to Kenpshot Bandit owned by Robert Bryan.
Bitch CC and Reserve Best in Show went to Phillsburgh Ebony, who was owned by Owen Munroe.
In 1988, Mary MacPhail judged the show.
Dog CC was given to Ch.
Sundance Doctor Bojangles, who was Best of Opposite Sex and was owned by Mrs Andrea Phillips.
Bitch CC was Ch.
Poirot Vanessa, who was Best in Show.
She was owned by Peter Phillips.
In 1989, Ann Garside-Neville judged.
Dog CC was given to Cuidado Dirty Harry of Marsden, owned by Vaughn Martin and handled by his UK breeder, Mrs Kate Wood.
Best Bitch and Best of Opposite Sex was Ch.
Poirot Vanessa, owned by Peter Phillips and Conrodd Chen.
In 1990, the judge was Mrs Pat Price.
Her Dog CC and Best in Show was Philsburgh Ezee.
Bitch CC and Reserve Best in Show was Ch.
Sundance Ballet Princess of Phillsburgh, both owned by R.P. Phillips.
Champions who have been made up in Jamaica give some insight into the breed's development: Chesara Dark Warrior of Copeland, owned by Clyde Fisher; Chesara Lady Macbeth of Copeland, again owned by Clyde Fisher; Attilla Brunhild of Natra, owned by E. Mignott; Chesara Dark Conspirator, owned by D. Walcott; Tasika Angus, owned by D. Judah; Lacie of Copeland, owned by T. Dunn; Carbeth-S Black Concha, owned by W. Evering; Paraiso's Black Caesar, owned by Clyde Fisher; Paraiso's Black Jack, owned by Mr and Mrs M. Fox; Sundance Poirot Northwind, owned by Winston Tucker; Sundance Genevive Hellraiser, owned by Winston Tucker; Sundance Loyal Duchess, owned by Winston Tucker; Maowm Monty of Kemour, owned by Owen Munroe; Sundance Doctor Bojangles of Phillsburgh, owned by Mrs Andrea Phillips; Sundance Baroness, owned by Winston Tucker; Sundance Black Charisma, owned by Mrs C. K. Galma-Tucker; Sundance Ballet Princess of Phillsburgh, owned by Peter Phillips; and Kempshots Drumbeat, owned by Meg Phillips.
During the time we spent in Jamaica, I was greatly impressed with the enthusiasm of the committed Rottweiler owners.
Comparing the  show scene with that in Barbados, I would say that the fact that there was an established breed club that held its own breed show with specialist judges made all the difference, Barbadian entries being quite small in comparison to the Jamaican ones.
Jamaica is a very cosmopolitan island.
The Rottweiler Club of Jamaica in its membership represents almost everyone, cutting across all barriers in a common bond.
The happy relaxed atmosphere that Jamaica is famous for was a joy to see.
Trinidad and Tobago
1 have never actually visited these islands, but I understand that the Rottweiler presence is quite strong.
I have actually exported two dogs to the islands myself, who have become champions: Trinidad and Tobago Ch.
Dens Dark Jewel of Jagen, winning at Best in Show level (All Breeds) and Jagen Blue Miami Dolphin, a bitch who gained her title quite quickly.
There have been other exports from the UK and Ireland who have done quite well, but news is difficult to come by in spite of many requests for information.
Mrs Pat Price judging the Rottweiler Club of Jamaica in 1990.
However, we do know that the first import into Trinidad was Bhaluk Princess Barbella, imported by Mrs Margaret Wattley.
This bitch gained her title and also qualified CD.
After this bitch, several more imports were made, but, apparently, were quite disappointing.
Unlike the other islands, Trinidad can actually buy from Germany or the USA direct.
It has been our experience that Trinidadians love their dogs and a good specimen is highly prized.
I am not aware of any breed club in the islands.
It is hoped that since the breed is becoming numerically stronger, it will be the next step taken.
Trin. and Tob.
Ch.
Densdark Jewel of Jagen, owned by Mr Ferguson.
THE BREED STANDARD
The Federation Cynologique Internationale (FCI) Rottweiler Standard
(Reproduced by kind permission of FCI)
The breed characteristics of the Rottweiler:
General Appearance
Rottweiler breeding aims at a powerful dog, black with well-defined mahogany markings, which despite a massive general appearance is not lacking in nobility and is particularly suitable as a companion, guard dog and working dog.
The Rottweiler is a robust dog, rather above medium size, neither clumsy nor light, neither tall on the leg nor like a greyhound.
His frame, which is compact, strong and well proportioned, gives every indication of great strength, agility and endurance.
His appearance gives an immediate impression of determination and courage; his demeanour is self-assured, steady and fearless.
His calm gaze indicates good humour.
He reacts with great alertness to his surroundings and to his master.
Size: Height at withers: Dogs 60–68 cm Bitches 55–63 cm 60–61 small 55–57 small 62–64 medium 58–59 medium 65–66 large 60–61 large 67–68 very large 62–63 very large
The measurement for the length of the trunk, measured from the breast bone to the point of the rump, should not exceed the height at the withers by more than 15 per cent.
Head
Of medium length, broad between the ears; the forehead line, seen in profile, moderately arched.
The occipital bone is well developed, without protruding too much.
The stop and zygomatic arch are well pronounced.
The relations of the head are 40 per cent of the total length between bridge of nose and inner eye angle, 60 per cent from inner eye angle to occipital bone.
Scalp Tightly drawn all over, only forming slight wrinkle when the dog is extremely alert.
The aim is head without wrinkles.
Lips Black, lying close, corners of the mouth closed.
Nose The bridge of the nose is straight, broad at the root and moderately tapering.
Tip of the nose well developed, broad rather than round, with relatively large nostrils and always black in colour.
Eyes Medium size, almond-shaped and dark brown in colour, with well-fitting eyelids.
Ears As small as possible, pendant, triangular, set well apart and high.
When the ears are well placed and laid forward the skull appears broader.
Teeth Strong and complete (42 teeth).
The upper incisors closing scissor-like over those of the lower jaw.
Excellent head and outline as demonstrated by Ch.
Rottsann Classic Crusader of Vormund, owned by Dunhill.
Neck
Powerful, moderately long, well muscled, with a slightly arched line rising from the shoulders; dry, without dewlap or loose skin on the throat.
Trunk
Roomy, broad and deep chest, with a well-developed forechest and well-sprung ribs.
Back straight; powerful and firm.
Loins short, powerful and deep.
Flanks not drawn up.
Croup broad, of medium length and slightly rounded, neither straight nor too sloping.
A lovely bitch head, neither too strong nor too weak, with the correct ear and eye size.
Tail
Carried horizontally, short and strong.
Must be docked if too long at birth.
Forequarters
Shoulders long and well set.
The upper arm lies well against the body, but not too tightly.
Lower arm strongly developed and muscular.
Pasterns slightly springy, strong, not steep.
Feet round, very compact and arched.
Pads hard, nails short, black and strong.
The forelegs, seen from the front, are straight and not set too close together.
The lower arms, seen from the side, are straight.
The shoulder should have a layback of about 45 degrees; the angle between the shoulder blade and the upper arm is about 115 degrees.
Hindquarters
Upper thigh fairly long, broad and well muscled.
Lower thigh long, powerful, sinewy, broadly muscled, leading to a powerful hock, well angulated, not steep.
The back feet are somewhat longer than the front feet, equally compact and arched, with strong toes and without dewclaws.
Seen from behind, the back legs are straight and not set too close.
In a natural stance, the upper thigh and hip bone, upper thigh and lower thigh, and lower thigh and metatarsus form obtuse angles.
The slope of the hip bone is about 20–30 degrees.
Movement
The Rottweiler is a trotter.
In this gait, he conveys the impression of strength, endurance and determination.
The back stays firm and relatively still.
The motion is harmonious, steady, powerful and unhindered, with a good length of stride.
Coat
Consists of outer coat and under coat.
The former is bristly, of medium length, coarse, dense and lying close.
The under coat must not show through the outer coat.
The hair is somewhat longer on both front and hind legs.
The colour is black with well-defined markings of  a rich, red-brown colour on the cheeks, muzzle, chest and legs, as well as over the eyes and under the tail.
Character
The character of the Rottweiler consists of the sum of all the inherited and acquired physical and mental attributes, qualities and abilities, which determine and regulate his behaviour toward his surroundings.
With regard to his mental make-up, his disposition is basically friendly and peaceful; he is faithful, obedient and willing to work.
His temperament, his drive for action and for moving about are moderate.
His reaction to disagreeable stimuli is tough, fearless and assured.
His senses are appropriately developed.
His reactions are quick and his learning capacity excellent.
He is a strong, well-balanced type of dog.
Because of his unsuspicious nature, moderate sharpness and high self-confidence, he reacts quietly and without haste to his surroundings.
When threatened, however, he goes into action immediately because of his highly developed fighting and protection instincts.
faced with painful experiences, he holds his ground, fearless and  unflinching.
When the threat passes, his fighting mood subsides relatively quickly and changes to a peaceful one.
The Rottweiler's disposition is basically friendly and peaceful.
He is faithful and obedient.
Among his other good qualities are: a strong attachment to his home and a constant readiness to defend it; he is very willing to retrieve and has a good capacity for tracking; he has considerable endurance, likes the water and is fond of children.
He does not have a well-developed hunting instinct.
In more detail, the following instincts and character attributes are considered desirable:
In daily life Self-confidence High Fearlessness High Temperament Medium Endurance High Mobility and Activity Medium Alertness High Tractability Medium-High Mistrust Low-Medium Sharpness Low-Medium  
He does not have a well developed hunting instinct.
As companion, guard and working dog All the qualities described above as well as the following.
Courage Very High Fighting Instinct Very High Protection Instinct Very High Hardness High
Guarding Characteristics Watchfulness Medium Threshold of Excitability Medium
Aptitude for nose work Searching Instinct Medium Tracking Instinct High Willingness to Retrieve Medium-High
It should be noted that these instincts and qualities may be present in varying degrees of intensity and that they often merge into one another and are interrelated.
They must, however, be present and as highly developed as is necessary for working efficiency.
Appearance and Working Faults
Appearance faults are noticeable deviations from the features described in the Standard.
They lessen the working value of the dog only to a limited degree, but they can obscure and distort the typical image of the breed.
Appearance faults, according to the Breed Standard, include the following: Light, tall, greyhound-like in general appearance; too long, too short, narrow body; prominent occipital bone; hound-like head and expression; narrow, light, too short, too long, or coarse head; flat forehead (little or no stop); narrow lower jaw; long or pointed muzzle; cheeks too protruding; ram's or split nose, bridge or nose dished or sloping; tip of nose light or spotted; open, pink or spotted lips, corners of the mouth open; distemper teeth; wrinkles on the head; ears set too low, large, long, floppy, turned back, not lying close, or irregularly carried; light (yellow) eyes, or a light and a dark eye, open, deep-set, too full, round, staring eyes, piercing gaze; neck too long, thick, weak muscled, dewlaps or loose skin on throat; forelegs set narrow or not straight; light nails; tail set too high or too low; coat soft, too short or too long, wavy coat, absence of undercoat; markings of the wrong colour, poorly defined or too extensive; white spots; dewclaws on the hind legs.
An otherwise good head spoilt by one ear flying.
Points of the Rottweiler.
More serious than the faults mentioned previously are those deviations from the ideal which affect both the appearance of the dog and its working qualities.
They are called working faults and they are listed in the Standard as follows: Weak bones and musculature; steep shoulders, deficient elbow articulation; too long, too short, or steep upper arm; weak or steep pasterns; splay feet, flat feet or excessively arched toes, stunted toes; flat ribcage, barrel chest, pigeon breast; back too long, weak, sway or roach; croup too short, too straight, too long or too steep; too heavy, unwieldy body; hind legs flatshanked, sicklehocked, cow-hocked or bow-legged; joints too narrowly or too widely angled.
Excluded from showing and breeding are:
1.
Dogs lacking one or both testicles.
Both testicles must be well developed and clearly visible in the scrotum. 2.
All Rottweilers showing an abnormality in the hip joint.
The degree of abnormality leading to disqualification and the measures to be taken by breeders, are set forth by the Breeding Committee.
3.
All Rottweilers with faulty bites and dentition, ie overshot, 4.
All Rottweilers with loose or rolled-in eyelids (entropion), as well as those with open eyelids (ectropion).
In case of doubt, veterinary examination is recommended when a dog with eye trouble is presented at a breed show or breeding eligibility test.
The judge is responsible for sending information about the dog in question to the Studbook Office.
If the trouble is still present when the dog is shown again, or if the eyelids have been operated on, the dog is forever banned from breeding.
Concealment of an eye operation is one of the worst deceptions and according to the show rules is to be prosecuted as a breeding violation. 5.
All Rottweilers with yellow eyes, hawk eyes, staring expression or with eyes of different colours.
6.
All Rottweilers with pronounced reversal of sexual characteristics (bitchy dogs, doggy bitches).
7.
All timid, cowardly, gunshy, vicious, excessively mistrustful and nervous Rottweilers, as well as those of stupid expression and behaviour.
Dogs which show obvious laziness, unusually slow reactions or extreme one-sidedness in their character should be watched and     examined with particular care before they are used for breeding (the possibility of deafness should be considered).
8.
Decidedly long-coated or wavy-coated Rottweilers.
Smooth-coated or short-coated dogs with an absence of undercoat should be used for breeding only with the permission of the chief breed warden.
Ear too large and low set.
Too throaty.
Obvious eye problems.
undershot and missing premolars or molars.
(X-rays are not accepted as proof of complete dentition).
Weak pasterns.
Cross-section of chest.
Dipping topline.
Lacks depth.
Long in hock.
Box head.
Sloping off at croup.
Sickle-hocked.
Steep upper arm, straight stifles, lacks second thigh.
Weak pasterns, incorrect tail set.
Dipping topline, sickle hocked, short in leg.
The Teeth
The adult dog has 42 teeth; 12 incisors, 4 fangs or corner teeth, 16 premolars and 10 molars.
The teeth are of extremely vital importance to the dog.
No Rottweiler will be judged or used for breeding who does not have a well-formed, correct and complete set of teeth.
The Rottweiler's teeth.
With very few exceptions, depending on the shape of the dog's head, all should have the so-called ‘scissor-bite’.
It is the natural, regular set of teeth, which all dogs have, whereby the upper incisors seize — slightly grinding — a little bit over the lower ones.
If this grinding touch is missing, there will be a clear space between the incisors of the upper jaw and those of the lower jaw.
This is called an overbite.
If the teeth of the lower jaw are in front of those of the upper jaw, one considers it an underbite.
Both forms are defects and result in disqualification of the dog.
A set of teeth like pincers, biting upon one another, i.e. both rows of the incisors touching each other directly, is still admissible.
However, it usually degrades the dog and puts him one class lower when he is judged.
Running Gear and Gaits
The hindquarters are the means of support and act as a leverage for locomotion.
In every type of action the forward thrust proceeds from the hindquarters, which are more strongly angulated and have more  powerful and complex muscles than the forequarters.
In conformity with the greater strain placed on them, the forequarters show a less angled system for support and braking.
The propulsive forces are transmitted to the forequarters through the trunk.
The back plays an essential part in the forward movement, the powerful extensor muscles of the neck and back co-operating with the lower neck muscles, as well as with those of the inside thigh and stomach.
Extremely strong and well-developed back muscles are essential for a good and enduring gait.
A loaded shoulder.
Incorrect exercise can thicken muscles under the shoulder blade, forcing it out outwards.
This in turn will push out the elbow.
The types of gait in the Rottweiler are the walk, the trot, the pace, the gallop and the leap.
In the trot, the forequarters and hindquarters are mutually synchronized (brace, lift, float, support).
The back remains relatively stable.
In the walk, the back movements are more visible; in the pace (simultaneous advance of the hind and front limbs on one side), they are more pronounced and strongest of all in the gallop, when the back is arched like a spring and throws the body forward.
Faulty types of gait are: stiff, constrained, too high or dragging the ground, short steps, rocking, swaying, rolling, weaving.
General Comments on External Appearance
Defects in harmony (balance) and soundness of the body structure detract from the dog's appearance and working ability.
A dog's working usefulness depends essentially on his ability to move and run, and these factors, therefore, receive particular attention in assessing the appearance and character.
There are several references in the Standard to the importance of the length and power of the limbs, the back and shoulders, the angulation of the joints and the muscles.
In judging a living thing, other imponderables also come into play, which only the trained eye of an experienced judge can correctly assess within the framework of the total picture.
A few figures may be mentioned for guidance: A Rottweiler, which is 65cm at the withers, should measure about 75cm from the breast bone to the point of rump.
The chest circumference should be about equal to the height at the withers, plus 20cm.
The chest depth should be neither more, nor very much less, than 50 per cent of the height of the withers.
The USA Breed Standard
(Reproduced by kind permission of the American Kennel Club)
General Appearance
The ideal Rottweiler is a medium large, robust and powerful dog, black with clearly defined rust markings.
His compact and substantial build denotes great strength, agility and endurance.
Dogs are characteristically more massive throughout with larger frame and heavier bone than bitches.
Bitches are distinctly feminine, but without weakness of substance or structure.
Size, Proportion, Substance
Dogs: 24in. to 27in.
Bitches: 22in. to 25in. with preferred size being mid-range of each sex.
Correct proportion is of primary importance, as long as size is within the Standard s range.
The length of body, from prosternum to the rear-most projection of the rump, is slightly longer than the height of the dog at the withers.
The most desirable proportion of height to length being 9 to 10.
The Rottweiler is neither coarse nor shelly.
Depth of chest is approximately fifty per cent(50%,) of the height of the dog.
His bone and muscle mass must be sufficient to balance his frame, giving a compact and very powerful appearance.
Serious Faults Lack of proportion, undersize, reversal of sex characteristics (bitchy dogs, doggy bitches).
Head
Of medium length, broad between the ears; forehead line seen in profile is moderately arched; zygomatic arch and stop well developed with strong, broad upper and lower jaws.
The desired ratio of skull to muzzle is 3 to 2.
Skull is preferred dry, however some wrinkling may occur when dog is alert.
Expression is noble, alert and self-assured.
Eyes
Eyes are of medium size, almond-shaped with well fitting lids, moderately deep set, neither protruding nor receding.
The desired colour is a uniform dark brown.
Serious Faults Yellow (bird of prey) eyes, eyes of different colour or size, hairless eye rim.
Ears
Ears of medium size, pendant, triangular in shape; when carried alertly the ears are level with the top of the skull and appear to broaden it.
Ears are to be set well apart, hanging forward with the inner edge lying tightly against the head and terminating at approximately mid-cheek.
Serious Faults Improper carriage (creased, folded or held away from cheek/head).
Muzzle
Bridge is straight, broad at base with slight tapering towards tip.
The end of the muzzle is broad with well developed chin.
Nose is large and always black.
Lips always black; corners closed; inner mouth pigment is preferred dark.
Serious Faults Lack of pigment (pink mouth).
Bite and Dentition
Teeth 42 in number (20 upper, 22 lower), strong correctly placed, meeting in a scissors bite — lower incisors touching inside of upper incisors.
Serious Faults Level bite, any missing tooth.
Disqualification Overshot, undershot (when incisors do not touch or mesh); markedly wry mouth; 2 or more missing teeth.
Neck, Topline, Body
Neck Powerful, well muscled, moderately long, slightly arched and without loose skin.
Topline The back is firm and level, extending in a straight line from behind the withers to the croup.
The back remains horizontal to the ground while the dog is moving or standing.
Body The chest is roomy, broad and deep, reaching to elbow, with well-pronounced forechest and well-sprung, oval ribs.
Back is straight and strong; loin is short, deep and well muscled; croup is broad, of medium length and only slightly sloping.
Underline of a mature Rottweiler has no distinct tuck-up.
Tail docked short, close to body.
The set of the tail is more important than length.
Properly set, it gives an impression of elongation of topline; carried slightly above horizontal when the dog is excited or moving.
Forequarters
Shoulder blade is long and well laid back.
Upper arm equal in length to shoulder blade, set so elbows are well under body.
Distance from withers to elbow and elbow to ground is equal.
Legs are strongly developed with straight, heavy bone, not set close together.
Pasterns are strong, springy and almost perpendicular to ground.
Feet are round, compact with well-arched toes, turning neither in nor out.
Pads are thick and hard.
Nails short, strong and black.
Dewclaws may be removed.
Hindquarters
Angulation of hindquarters balances that of forequarters.
Upper thigh is fairly long, very broad and well muscled.
Stifle joint is well turned.
Lower thigh is long, broad and powerful with extensive muscling leading into a strong hock joint.
Rear pasterns are relatively short in length and nearly perpendicular to the ground.
Viewed from the rear, hindlegs are straight, strong and wide enough apart to fit with a properly built body.
Feet are somewhat longer than front feet, turning neither in nor out, equally compact with well arched toes.
Pads are thick and hard.
Nails short, strong and black.
Dewclaws must be removed.
Coat
Outer coat is straight, coarse, dense, of medium length and lying flat.
Undercoat must be present on neck and thighs, but is not to show through outer coat.
Amount of undercoat is influenced by climatic conditions.
The coat is shortest on head, ears and legs, longest on breeching.
The Rottweiler is to be exhibited in a natural condition with no trimming.
Fault Wavy coat.
Serious Faults Open, excessively short or curly coat; total lack of undercoat; any trimming that alters the length of the natural coat.
Disqualification Long coat.
Colour and Markings
Always black with rust to mahogany markings.
The demarcation between black and rust is to be clearly defined.
The markings should be located as follows: a spot over each eye; on cheeks; as a strip around each side of muzzle, but not on the bridge of the nose; on throat; triangular mark on either side of prosternum; on forelegs from carpus downwards to toes; on front of rear legs from hock to toes, but not completely eliminating black from back of rear pasterns; under tail; black pencilling on toes.
The undercoat is grey or black.
Quantity and location of rust markings is important and should not exceed ten per cent of body colour.
Serious Faults Straw-coloured, excessive, insufficient or sooty markings; rust marking other than described above; white marking any place on dog (a few rust or white hairs do not constitute a marking).
Disqualifications Any base colour other than black; absence of all markings.
Gait
The Rottweiler is a trotter.
His movement should be balanced, harmonious, sure, Powerful and unhindered, with strong fore-reach and a powerful rear drive.
The motion is effortless, efficient and ground  covering.
Front and rear legs are thrown neither in nor out, as the imprint of hind feet should touch that of forefeet.
In a trot the forequarters and hindquarters are mutually co-ordinated while the back remains level, firm and relatively motionless.
As speed increases, the legs will converge under the body towards a centre line.
Temperament
The Rottweiler is basically a calm, confident and courageous dog with a self-assured aloofness that does not lend itself to immediate and indiscriminate friendships.
With little suspicion and high self-confidence, the Rottweiler responds quietly and with a wait-and-see attitude to influences in his environment.
He has an inherent desire to protect home and family and is an intelligent dog of extreme hardness and adaptability, with a strong willingness to work, making him especially suited as a companion, guardian and general all-purpose dog.
The behaviour of the Rottweiler in the show ring should be controlled, willing and adaptable, trained to submit to examination of mouth, testicles etc.
An aloof or reserved dog should not be penalized, as this reflects the accepted character of the breed.
An aggressive or belligerent attitude towards other dogs should not be faulted.
Faults
The foregoing is a description of the ideal Rottweiler.
Any structural fault that detracts from the above described working dog must be penalized to the extent of the deviation.
Disqualifications
Overshot or undershot (where incisors do not touch or mesh); markedly wry mouth; 2 or more missing teeth; long coat; any base colour other than black; absence of all markings.
Buying your Puppy
Buying your puppy is probably the most important decision you will make concerning your dog.
It is amazing how little thought goes into this.
Why a Rottweiler?
It is important to ask yourself why you want a Rottweiler.
Is it really the breed for you?
Ch.
Jagen Blue Trigo, owned by Broom and Rutherford.
The Rottweiler is very adaptable.
One bitch we bred, Champion Jagen Blue Trigo, did the original job she was bred for many years.
Owned by Jo Rutherford, Trigo rounded up the milking herd and brought it back to the milking parlour in Devon.
In Vienna, a Rottweiler was awarded the title King of the Guide Dogs.
I have seen Rottweilers retrieving game, rescuing people buried under snow, working for the army, rescuing people from the water.
Trials dogs, Schutzhund dogs, agility competitors, pulling carts or sledges; the list is impressive.
What a Rottweiler is not is a dog you can keep shut up for twenty-three hours a day.
He is content when he is working, because when he is working he is pleasing his owner and that is what a Rottweiler really loves to do.
He is happiest when he is with his master or mistress.
To be left alone on a chain is heartbreaking, literally.
So whatever the reasons you choose this breed, his intelligence and exercise requirement must be borne in mind.
A Rottweiler doing the job he was once bred for.
Dog or Bitch?
Having decided that a Rottweiler is for you, you must then decide whether to have a dog or a bitch.
I always advise people to have a bitch if it is their first Rottweiler.
I must admit to preferring bitches myself, although I can see the appeal of a dog.
Bitches are easier to live with, except for when they come into season, which must be endured.
They are not arrogant, yet can guard every bit as well as a male.
A bitch will enjoy a cuddle, whereas a dog will pretend not to enjoy love, even when you can tell he does, and I generally find that bitches make more loyal companions.
Breeding
Very good bitches can be bred from.
Only excellent dogs may be used at stud.
If you intend to build up a show kennel, a very good quality bitch is your first priority.
You can always use the best stud available.
It is very rare that you can buy a dog good enough to used at stud.
It requires a solid apprenticeship in the breed before you are able to cope with the responsibility of stud dog ownership.
Why a Puppy?
Some People do not like the puppy stage and go for an older dog or bitch.
There is always a risk with a second-hand dog, although hundreds of Rottweilers have been rehoused successfully in the UK by the Rottweiler rescue scheme.
A registered charity, all dogs and prospective owners are vetted and this accounts for the high success rate but it must be kept in mind that people who need to find a new home for their dog usually have a problem, or a problem dog.
Be careful: it may be a problem passed on to you.
Choosing the Right Puppy
So often, I have watched people pick over one of our litters, sometimes nervous or apologetic for taking so long.
I tell them to take their time; it is hoped that the dog will be with them for the next ten years or more — what are a few minutes?
If you need help, just ask.
It is extremely important to go to an experienced breeder with a proven track record; he will have seen the litter every day and will know each pup's individual character, faults and virtues.
In truth, most good breeders have already graded the litter time and time again, long before you arrive.
You may want a show prospect, an obedience or trials dog, or just a pet.
first choice of a litter may depend on what you require of your acquisition.
The breeder is best placed to advise you.
If you do not trust your breeder of his choice, re-examine why you have gone to this particular person in the first place.
Perhaps a look elsewhere would be in order.
It is important to be able to relax and feel comfortable.
If you are on edge, perhaps you are being pushed into something you might regret.
To arrive at your choice of breeder, you have started gathering information months, perhaps years beforehand.
A study of showing form, or one particular individual may draw you to a particular breeder's kennel.
Perhaps consistent wins in the obedience ring or in trials by a breeder's dogs inspires you to want to own a great working dog; or perhaps the reason is just recommendation from a trusted friend.
Whatever the reason, let it be a good one.
So often I hear of people  who see an advertisement in the local press, go that very evening and purchase purely on impulse.
This, I am afraid to say, often leads to disappointment.
By sunrise, one or two members of the family, having slept on it, start to think, ‘but I wanted to show’, or ‘1 wanted to work our new dog’ and on reading the pup's ancestry find no track record for either.
So the most important factor is, of course, that a dog is a sound family friend and companion, but having said that, why limit your aspirations?
Typical outgoing six-week-old puppies.
The following is a check-list for prospective puppy buyers:
1.
Have the parents been X-rayed for hip dysplasia and do they hold eye certificates? 2.
Have the parents been through an approved character test? 3.
Can you meet and handle the pup's mother? 4.
Does the breeder replace the pup free-of-charge if it is found to suffer from any hereditary fault? 5.
Does the breeder give a full back-up service, with practical help and advice? 6.
Have the parents been shown?
If so, what awards were achieved?
Are they champions? 7.
Have the parents any working qualifications?
Points 1–5 are imperative; gold stars for 6 and 7.
It is impossible to detail every virtue or fault you should look for when making your choice, but here I list a few pointers which may help.
Check the teeth.
When closed together, the top set of teeth should be just in front of the bottom set.
This is known as a scissor-bite and is discussed in more detail on page 74.
The eyes will not yet have their permanent colour, but pale grey eyes will not often turn yellow, so choose the darkest.
The ears should be neat and in proportion to the head.
Puppies do not grow into very large ears, as some people try to tell you.
The neck should never be too short or stuffy.
The body is cobby at this stage.
Pups tend to lengthen in body as they grow.
Correct proportions are as 9 is to 10 (height to length).
Check the legs and feet.
A well-reared puppy should have a fair amount of bone and a strong, straight front, that is the forelegs should appear parallel when viewed from the front, the feet turning neither in nor out (a certain allowance may be made for puppyish softness).
The feet should be tight and never splayed.
Movement is always hard to assess at this age, but avoid any puppy who moves erratically or is obviously lame!
Examine the coat.
At eight weeks, most pups have a soft coat.
Look out for overlong coats or wavy coats.
Actual long coats, although difficult to spot at this age, will show in fluffy long hairs on the ears in particular.
A good, rich, well-defined tan is desired.
Discard light, over-marked or very dark colours.
Assess temperament.
Puppies should always be outgoing.
Avoid shy puppies.
These tips are intended to help, but should not be regarded as foolproof.
Many swans turn to geese and vice versa!
A well-socialized Rottweiler.
Having made your choice, it is time to take your puppy home.
As a breeder, I give one week's supply of food with each puppy.
If your breeder does not do this, ask if you can buy some food that the pup is used to.
The puppy will be stressed enough without a change of diet to contend with.
Insurance should be arranged as soon as possible.
The first six months are the most dangerous and can be very expensive.
Insure against veterinary fees and loss and, of course, third party liability.
The first night home is the worst.
Your puppy is tense and will more often than not cry after being taken from his litter-mates.
A warm bed and an alarm clock for company often work since it is said that the clock's ticking sounds like mother's heartbeat.
Do not give in and take your puppy to bed with you; rather, invest in some cotton wool for your ears!
It is important that dogs do not become accustomed to sleeping in your bedroom.
This is your inner sanctum, in basic dog psychology.
The dog will feel that he has taken one step up the ladder if he is allowed into your sleeping quarters.
It is a fact that most people bitten for the first time by their own dog are bitten in the bedroom.
In our breed, it is important to treat dogs as dogs.
I do not mean you should love them any less, but discipline is very important and must be started from the outset.
Development and Training
The bond between man and dog goes back ten thousand years.
The dog has a special relationship with man and is described as his best friend.
But sometimes, this friendship breaks down, usually through the stupidity of the human partner.
Dogs in general, Rottweilers in particular , are loyal and reliable; dare I say, much more reliable than human beings!
We have taken from the Rottweiler, companionship and help in many fields: hunting, protecting our homes and family, pulling carts, acting as guide dogs for the blind, search and rescue, herding cattle and so on.
In return, we give our companion shelter and food.
It is an unwritten agreement and if we renege on it, let us not be surprised if our dog loses his respect for us, for we are not worthy of being called Master.
In modern times, the demands we make have changed in some ways.
The tasks we had set the Rottweiler have become lost and very rarely will you find a Rottweiler today herding cattle anywhere in the world, although most could still accomplish this task if required.
The majority of Rottweilers are kept as pets: this is a pigeon-hole Rottweilers do not fit into with ease; there has to be something else.
Some people show their dogs, some work them.
Whatever you do, it is as well to remember our half of the bargain; a Rottweiler is far too intelligent to be left in a kennel for twenty-three hours a day.
Rottweilers as a breed need some activity or work if they are not to become bored and frustrated.
The form this takes depends entirely on the circumstances of the owner.
People who show their dogs expose them to many new forms of stimuli.
The dog is with his owner for the greater part of the weekend and, through the week, the dog is road walked to produce fitness and show condition, so the ordinary show dog, apart from receiving the care and love of his owner, receives exercise and mental stimulus and is bonded with his owner by a common purpose.
Much in the same way, although on a higher level, the obedience competitors, in which I include trials and Schutzhund workers, train their dogs throughout the week and aim either to win a  qualification or pass a test.
Again, man and dogs are bonded by the same purpose.
The end result is that both dog and owner gain satisfaction and a richer existence.
Even the most beautiful house and garden can become a prison.
A Rottweiler needs more than this; he must have some purpose.
Having said that, each and every Rottweiler who is taken out into the public's glare is an ambassador for the breed and we must do the best we can.
Jealousy and Fighting
It is not uncommon to find households with two or more Rottweilers and it is in these situations, that sometimes, the green-eyed monster can appear.
This usually happens when the pecking order in the pack is upset, or a new arrival causes confusion to the status quo.
One theory is that you should dominate the dog who is lowest in the pecking order to make him realize that he is the lowest and to prevent problems from occurring.
However, I feel it is better to dominate all dogs equally and make them come to a submissive position in front of the owner, preferably the down position.
By reinforcing your own dominance, you may well steal the thunder of the antagonists.
I have always found Rottweiler bitches to be worse than dogs in this respect.
The presence of one antagonistic bitch turned our kennels into a constant battleground and caused resentment which was too deep to heal.
So, for many years, we just had to learn to live with it and all our bitches were walked individually.
Dogs will respect an older dog or bitch.
I have seen our old matriarch walk between two younger antagonists and break up a fight with a snarl, even though she was aged and barely able to walk.
The respect the younger dogs showed this bitch was quite amazing.
I have been told by many other breeders that they have experienced a similar thing in their own kennels and so we can assume that the pecking order is not always maintained through physical strength.
Age and experience also command great respect.
Fights between dogs can start over the smallest thing.
I once heard of a case where two dogs fought almost to the death over an empty sweet paper.
It is essential that the owner is pack leader at all times and that the dog is affectionately subordinate.
Disobedient dogs must be disciplined consistently by voice command and direct stare.
When you show disapproval to a dog, reinforce this by ignoring him for a time.
Do not scold and then pet a short time later as this will only confuse him.
The Character of the Rottweiler
To define Rottweiler character, we must look back to the breed's history.
The Rottweiler is a working dog, a cattle dog.
He exhibits protecting and guarding qualities and for many years has been used as a Schutzhund sport dog.
We have all seen, in the Breed Standards, certain definitions of what is required of Rottweiler character: self-confidence — high; fearlessness — high; sharpness — medium/low; fighting instinct — high; defensive instinct — very high; hardness — high, tractability — medium.
Self-Confidence
Self-confidence describes the dog's ability to act on his own initiative and to face stressful situations without becoming fearful.
The term that comes to mind and is much used by Germans in the training clubs is ‘empty vessels make the most noise’.
In other words, a dog who continually barks and shows fear can never be regarded as a dog with high self-confidence.
A dog who has high self-confidence is never worried by strangers or strange stimuli.
He is totally aware that he is able to cope with every situation.
He will look you squarely in the eye, with a steady gaze.
If you suddenly raised your arm to scratch your head, he would not duck.
He is not afraid because you represent no threat to him.
Having said this, there is a great difference between a dog with high self-confidence and a gentle, phlegmatic one.
The former will always appear arrogant, while the latter will seek appeasement.
Fearlessness
Fearlessness is self-explanatory and is demonstrated by the dog's tolerance of unusual or disagreeable stimuli.
Fear is an emotional state of mind, caused by a sense of impending danger or pain.
So fearlessness and self-confidence have a very narrow dividing line and in some respects are the same.
Sharpness
Sharpness describes a dog’ s reaction to hostility or unfriendly approach.
Perhaps this is the biggest bone of contention in our modern-day evaluation of the Rottweiler.
Whereas the pet Rottweiler living at home would require a low degree of sharpness, a Schutzhund dog or a dog  who is required to guard a family home would need to have at least a medium degree of sharpness.
What we most certainly do not want is a dog with high fearlessness and high sharpness.
This would be a very dangerous dog in a non-working environment.
Sharpness can be learned in training and can also be inherited.
The Rottweiler with a naturally high degree of sharpness, without any form of training should be considered undesirable.
Fighting Instinct
The Rottweiler's fighting instinct is high.
It is mainly inherited, although it can be learned at a very early age in the nest.
Fighting instinct has a direct parallel with play instinct and in puppies can be observed as being one and the same.
Play instinct is redirected into working ability and willingness to perform tasks.
In Schutzhund work, fighting instinct and play are used to teach the dog to take the sleeve.
As I have said before, there is no animosity between the dog and the helper.
It is a trick he has been taught and he enjoys doing it.
If the sleeve is released and dropped on the floor, the dog will pick it up and run round shaking it in a play-type mode.
Defensive Instinct
A dog's defensive instinct is his need to protect himself and the other members of his pack, which in these days usually includes the family unit.
In the Rottweiler, this instinct is very high and can be developed by training, quite easily unfortunately.
Many Rottweilers have been encouraged forward at an early age by less than proficient trainers, who then find that the dog's defensive instinct matures, they are powerless to control the fruit of their labour.
Many Rottweilers are thought to be too soft when young and encouraged forward, forward, forward, in their defensive instinct.
A six-month-old Rottweiler dog may appear quite a large dog in size, but mentally he is still very much a baby.
The defensive instinct must be allowed to mature slowly, like a good wine.
So many good young dogs have been ruined at an early age by incompetent trainers.
Hardness
A hard Rottweiler is one who does not allow bad experiences to affect him permanently.
If one were to step backwards onto a hard dog's foot, the dog may give out a yelp but will return immediately to the handler, who, it is hoped, would bend down and apologize for his action.
A soft dog would cower, perhaps holding his foot up to let you know that he has been hurt and even if you move towards him to apologize, he will move away with a worried expression.
It is only if you kneel down and call him to you that will he come slowly for his apology.
A hard dog will usually have forgotten the experience by now and will be back at heel.
Tractability (or Biddability)
A Rottweiler who is both biddable and hard will have the true Rottweiler character.
It is this wonderful mix that makes the Rottweiler so unique.
I think many people who have tried to analyse Rottweiler characters have not realized how much this unique mix plays a part.
Ch.
Jagen Blue Aria
Stages of Development
The temperament we look for in our dog primarily depends on the work or function assigned to him.
To say that temperament is to a certain degree putty in the owner's hands, is fair comment.
The temperament of a dog is partly inherited and partly moulded by environmental aspects.
The inherited traits can be suppressed because a puppy is born with a brain that is not fully developed.
Much of the development takes place after birth, so the young puppy requires an environment with stimulating surroundings.
Up to Three Weeks
The puppy is born blind; it sleeps and eats a great deal, gradually building up its size and strength.
It is important that the dam is kept as quiet a possible — a relaxed mother has contented pups.
Do not bring the neighbours and family around to see the newborns, as this will only induce stress in the dam which will be passed to the pups.
It can also cause a reduced milk yield, thus making the pups cry, creating yet more stress.
Two-day-old pups, rounded and content.
Four to Eight Weeks
The puppy can now see and identifies its environment: dam, breeder, food and litter-mates.
This is a very important stage in the development of a Rottweiler and the breeder can make or break a puppy at this stage.
His influence is vital.
Mistakes made now cannot be rectified later in life.
It is important for the breeder to handle the puppies carefully at least once a day, in order to establish human contact.
The hands of a human should make the puppy feel warm and reassured.
Later in life, hands will give praise, love and food.
Eight to Twelve Weeks
The puppy will now be in his new home.
He will learn very quickly after the first stressful period when he leaves his litter-mates.
House-training and primary obedience can start now.
This is the period when the new owner asserts himself as pack leader.
Lots of affection and praise should be given when the pup is good, or performs a new task successfully.
Twelve to Seventeen Weeks
This stage is similar to the last, but the puppy is stronger and growing fast.
Rottweilers need plenty of new stimuli: rides in the car and very short walks outside the home environment.
Play is very important but, with a strong, guarding breed, the play must be controlled.
The owner must firmly, but gently, win all the games.
In this way, he confirms his pack leadership.
In the same way, the rest of the family must be equally firm, thus establishing the pecking order.
The puppy must be on the lowest level.
Once this is established, he is quite happy.
Never feed the puppy before the family — this way he understands he is last in the pecking order.
Six to Twelve Months
This stage can be difficult, in the same way that teenagers are difficult for human parents.
It is important to keep calm and firmly reinforce the lessons already learnt.
I am not against physical punishment if it is needed, but only if it is called for.
Sometimes a puppy will aggressively resist our demands, or ignore us completely.
The first deserves a whack, the second does not.
You cannot blame the puppy if you are being boring!
If you decide to whack, you must always finish up being  the dominant one — do not hit and run.
The puppy must be held down until it stops growling or acting aggressively.
You must put a growl in your own voice when reprimanding the pup, while holding the loose skin on the neck.
It will be observed that this is the way its own mother asserts her dominance and will easily be understood by the pup.
Twelve Months to Two Years
In this period, the Rottweiler attains his sexual maturity and guarding instinct.
His home and garden is patrolled, without command.
It always seems funny when a Rottweiler guards for the first time, barking loudly, usually backing off, not quite sure if he is doing the right thing.
When dogs bark, it is a call for assistance, calling up the pack if you like.
A barking dog is not usually dangerous.
If you see a dog make a controlled attack in a Schutzhund test, that attack is always silent, except when he is holding the helper at bay in the hide, when he again calls up the pack (his handler).
So when your youngster barks and looks back at you, reassure him with a pat.
If it is the postman, introduce them; let him know this man represents no threat.
The Adult Dog
Your puppy is now a young mature adult and let us assume he has gone through puppyhood with no problems.
Even at this stage, he can develop new behaviour patterns, which we may consider undesirable.
He must be prepared to curtail this new behaviour before it becomes a habit.
The basic principles of correction and praise apply not only to the well-balanced puppy, but also to the adult dog who has been acquired second-hand.
With a large dog, like a Rottweiler, it may be beyond the capability of the new owner to dominate the newly acquired adult dog.
In such cases, I would recommend that you seek professional help, for the dog you have acquired may have already been in conflict with his former family and won the contest.
Such dogs do not take well to a lower pecking order and skilful training is necessary.
Any Rottweiler that makes an unprovoked attack on a human being should be destroyed.
Here in the UK, we have to clean up the image of our Rottweilers, which has been so tarnished in recent years.
We cannot afford any more incidents.
In the same way, any dog who will not accept dominance in his new pack is not an asset to anyone.
He is a liability, not only to the family, but also to the breed.
Old Age
The life expectancy of a Rottweiler varies from ten to fifteen years, and, in the main, bitches tend to live longer than dogs.
Older Rottweilers have special needs.
They need somewhere warm and soft to sleep and the bed should be made twice as thick as it is normally.
Old Rottweilers may need to be let out more frequently to answer the call of nature, but for shorter periods.
Older Rottweilers tend to drink more and sleep more.
People often worry about introducing a puppy into a home where there is already an aged Rottweiler, feeling that this will upset or unsettle the older dog.
I have found quite the opposite to be true.
The puppy often gives the older dog a new lease of life.
The single dog, who has probably been bored for many years, suddenly has a new playmate, who like himself, sleeps most of the time, but will enjoy a game for short periods.
The older dog also teaches the younger puppy good habits and the puppy will often watch and copy the older dog's actions.
It is wonderful to see.
And when that dreadful day comes when the old-timer leaves you forever, that parting may not be so painful.
Old-timers can teach a lot to young pups.
Psychology of Training
Correction-Praise
The first common mistake people make is to imagine that a dog thinks in the same way as a human being.
Dogs do not reason; they learn mainly by association.
Training by association or ‘correction-praise' works on the principle that a dog is motivated by knowing that a good action is followed by pleasure and reward and a bad action is followed by correction.
If we command our dog to sit and he responds, we then pat him and tell him what a good boy he is.
Very basic.
The dog knows that if he obeys our command, he will be rewarded by pleasure.
It is an extremely good method of training but, to be effective, the praise or correction must be given immediately.
There is no point in correcting a dog even thirty seconds after he has committed the misdemeanour.
It must be done at the time.
Many a good dog has been ruined when he has done something good and, for some reason, not received the right response from the handler; in other words, the wrong association has been created.
It is a long haul back to the beginning.
Reward is often denied by people who train by correction only: the dog is commanded to sit and, if he does not respond, he receives a whack and is pushed into position.
In the dog's mind, the association is purely negative: ‘If I don't sit, I receive a whack’.
The correction-praise method  elicits a far better response.
The dog is commanded to sit and if he doesn't do it the first time, he is pushed gently into position.
When in position, he is lovingly praised.
The most common example of correction-praise going wrong is where a dog runs off and refuses to come back, either rabbiting or playing with other dogs.
The owner pursues the dog and eventually catches him.
The angry owner then proceeds to whack the dog, thus reinforcing the idea that if the dog comes back, he receives a whack, which is totally opposite to what the owner is trying to achieve.
The ideal thing to do in such a situation is to praise the dog lavishly when he is caught even though deep in your heart you would like to strangle him!
Often, dogs that run off and stay just out of distance can be discouraged from this habit when the owner hides.
The dog looks back to see where the owner is, panics at being unable to see him and comes running back.
As he runs back, the owner shows himself.
The dog will always run to the owner to be reassured.
Lavish praise should then be heaped on the dog and the dog be allowed to go again.
Do not immediately put him  on the lead, for this will reinforce the idea that when he comes back to you, he is immediately going to be taken home and, in future, will associate coming to you with the end of the walk or game.
The Owner's Example
Many owners do not realize what effect their own behaviour has on their dog.
A dog is a pack animal and will pick up pack instincts.
Some behaviour patterns are learned.
For instance, horses in a field on the side of a road will totally ignore traffic rushing by because the older horses show no fear and just continue grazing.
The youngsters learn that there is nothing to fear and, after a time, they also totally ignore the traffic noise.
But, say a wolf or a lion entered the field.
The older horses would immediately thunder off in the opposite direction and the youngsters would immediately follow.
In this way, youngsters learn what is dangerous and what is not to be feared.
In the same way, the owner of a dog can pass on his own phobias.
Let us assume a situation where the owner has a fear of low-flying aircraft.
If the young adult dog or puppy sees the owner run screaming to the  house in terror, it is not unreasonable to assume that the dog will quickly follow.
As I have said before, the dog is a pack animal and so much of his learning comes through conditioning.
He sees that his pack leader is terrified by the aeroplane and so he, being on a lower level, will accept that this aeroplane represents a real danger.
Therefore, when the next plane arrives, he will also show signs of tension, stress and fear.
Good companions.
Both these dogs had been re-homed, and are now firm friends.
Reverse Training
Some annoying habits, like jumping up, can be reversed.
The puppy was probably encouraged to jump up when he was small and everyone thought it was quite fun, but now he is large, and has probably just come in from a swim in the pool and Aunty is standing there in her Sunday best.
The best-turned out person in the world can be quickly reduced to tramp-like condition by a muddy Rottweiler.
The way to reverse this habit is to have the dog on a check chain and lead.
One person holds the lead and stands behind the dog who is sitting.
Another person approaches and encourages the dog to jump up.
As the dog does so, he is taken down by a snatch on the lead.
The process is then repeated with another person approaching, who also encourages the dog to jump up.
Again, he is taken down by a very firm snatch of the lead.
It is rare for a dog to jump up on the third occasion.
However, to maintain this amended behaviour pattern, it may be necessary to repeat this training once or twice a week to ensure that it is permanently reinforced.
As you can see, for every problem or bad habit, there is usually someone who knows a foolproof solution.
If you have a problem and you are getting nowhere yourself, do not continue to struggle on alone, but seek advice, either from a training club or from a Rottweiler club.
They are there to help you and their experience is there to be tapped.
Keeping the Dog's Interest
A dog must enjoy working.
When I say working, I include just everyday general obedience, for I class this as working every bit as much as training dogs up to very high Schutzhund standard.
Most dogs will be motivated by praise and will therefore enjoy training sessions.
It is clear to see at most training clubs that praise is in very short supply with novice and even more experienced handlers.
Some people train by correction only.
This kind of training never has long lasting results, only very unhappy dogs.
At the end of every exercise, praise your dog.
It doesn't cost anything.
In the years I have trained Rottweilers, I have always found there to be a barrier at a certain stage where the dog becomes stubborn.
If you tell him to jump a jump twice, he does it; but when you tell him to jump it a third time, he says, ‘I've had it, I've done it twice and I'm not going to do it again!’
It is extremely important that you do not give up at this point and this is where training really begins.
He is made to jump it a third time, even if you have to stand there all night.
The dog must not be allowed to win.
I am only using jumping as an example.
It applies to all things.
Some Rottweilers, having done heel work for five minutes, will sit down and refuse to go any more.
Unless there is an injury or an hereditary problem, there is no excuse for it and I must admit that there is this stubborn streak which runs through the breed.
Some people say it is a sign of intelligence.
Personally, I do not share that view but whatever the reason, stubbornness must not be allowed to succeed: the dog must do what he is commanded to do, not in his own time, when he feels like it, but immediately; and if it is done correctly, he should receive praise and lots of it.
If it is not done, he is corrected and made to do it.
However, it is important that training sessions are properly and sensibly structured.
A particular exercise should be repeated only a certain number of times during any one session, otherwise, the dog will become bored.
If a dog enjoys his training sessions, they will be far more effective.
There are two golden rules in training.
The first is: every command that is given must be obeyed.
The second is: every command you give must be broken only by you, by which I mean do not tell your dog to sit then go off and make a cup of tea and forget all about him.
You must release him from the command; if you allow him to break the command on his own, you are effectively untraining him.
Initial Training
It is a known fact that the treatment a puppy receives in the early stages of its life, even from weaning, will influence its whole future behaviour.
The chances of achieving great things with your puppy increases if training begins at an early age.
Obviously, rapport between you and your Rottweiler will be deeper if training is started while the dog is still quite young.
However, I have never started seriously training dogs at a very early age; I prefer to leave it until the puppy is about eight months old.
But dogs can learn a lot by that age and may have picked up some very bad habits, so it is important that very basic training begins at eight weeks, and is increased in very gradual stages.
House Training
The first thing you will teach your Rottweiler puppy is to be clean in the house.
It is important not to be brutal in this respect: one cannot expect a puppy to go all through the night and be clean in the morning — it is physically impossible.
Paper should be left on the floor and the puppy encouraged to defaecate on it.
The area of paper is decreased slightly each day and moved nearer the door.
As the puppy gets older, he will want to go outside to the soiled piece of paper that you have positioned in a place that you may want him to use.
Rubbing a dog's nose in his faeces is not effective and is not conducive to further training.
Lead Training
It is best if lead training is started quite young so that, as an older puppy, it will freely accept a check chain when it is placed around its neck.
For a dog who has never had a collar, a check chain can be quite frightening.
The collar should be introduced first to allow the puppy to become accustomed to wearing it.
When the puppy has accepted it, the lead can be introduced.
When you take him out for his first walk on the lead, it is always nicer if an older dog accompanies you.
The youngster will freely follow the older dog and soon become used to the collar and lead.
No Rottweiler, no matter how good or bad, should be taken out without a lead on.
Car Training
Car training should be started as early as possible.
Some puppies seem to be sick no matter what you do or how soon you accustom them to the car.
It is best to start with a very short drive, just a mile or so and back home.
For longer trips, there are travel sickness tablets especially for dogs and even those made for human consumption can be very beneficial if used according to the instructions for dosing a child.
If your puppy is one of the few to suffer from travel sickness, it is best to get it started on tablets as soon as possible.
The more the puppy is travel sick, the more it associates the car with a bad experience and the harder it is to break this association.
Recall
The initial stages of training a dog to recall start now.
Every time you feed your Puppy, call it by its name.
When the puppy comes to you, put the food down.
This is a simple recall which is immediately praised with the reward of dinner.
It is very basic but very effective.
In the same way, always try to make sure that when you are out with your puppy, you have a titbit in your pocket.
When the puppy comes to your calling its name, reward it with a titbit, then put his lead on in your own time, praising and stroking it.
Your puppy must be used to walking on the lead before you start any proper heel work training.
Joining a Club
If you are competing in general obedience, or in trials, the advantages of joining a club are many.
Most Rottweiler clubs have training classes of their own although there are many all-breed dog training clubs that  will accept Rottweilers.
In these types of club, the trainers are trained rather than the dogs.
Mistakes made by fellow members can be seen and eliminated from your own home training programme.
It is no good going to a dog training club once a week and forgetting about it the rest of the week.
That is not what the clubs are there for.
You must train on your own for at least ten minutes a day.
This is all that is required to have a really well-trained dog.
If you want to progress to competition obedience, trials or Schutzhund, this is where you should start.
Some clubs are better than others, not all are interested in competition obedience, so if this is where your ambitions lie, make sure that the club you join is the type you are looking for.
Many good books have been written about obedience; there are usually several to be found in any library.
It is most beneficial for the novice trainer to read and fully understand one of these excellent books before he initiates his training programme.
Once you have mastered the initial stages of training, there are many great areas to progress to, including the mysteries of scent discrimination, one of the most fascinating aspects of the dog game and one which so many people, including show people who have been in the breed for many years, will never come to appreciate.
Of all the obedience programmes designed to test dogs, I feel that the Schutzhund test is the most suited to the Rottweiler, although a close second must be the trials arena, which is built along very similar lines.
The first stakes in this programme are CD (Companion Dog); the second stakes are UD (Utility Dog); the third, WD (Working Dog); the fourth TD (Tracking Dog) and the fifth PD (Police Dog).
All these stakes are subdivided into other groups.