

CRIME STOPPING CRIME STARTS WITH YOU YOUR PRACTICAL GUIDE
CONTENTS
PROTECTING YOUR FAMILY 3–10
PROTECTING YOUR VEHICLE 11–18
PROTECTING YOUR HOME 19–26
PROTECTING YOUR POSSESSIONS 27–32
PROTECTING YOUR BUSINESS 33–38
PROTECTING YOUR COMMUNITY 39–42
EXTENDED HELPLINES 43–44
INTRODUCTION
Crime is a growing problem.
In a recent international survey Northern Ireland had one of the worst crime rates for car theft in the whole of Europe.
But the news isn't all bad.
We also have one of the lowest crime rates for theft and burglary.
But, overall, our crime rate could and should be even lower.
Because — even though most crimes are against property not people — only people can help prevent it.
People everywhere, of all ages, from all walks of life.
The simple fact is that most crime is the result of giving a criminal an easy opportunity.
In Northern Ireland it's against the law to leave your vehicle unlocked and unattended even if you're just popping into a shop.
Despite this, a pilot survey indicated that 10% of drivers still forget to lock all doors, shut all windows or lock the boot.
In over 30% of domestic burglaries, the burglar simply walks in without using any force because a window or door has been left open.
Quite simply, we all need to make things much tougher for the criminal.
This new booklet will tell you how.
It has been completely revised and updated to give you all the practical information and advice you need to help protect your family, your property and your community.
You should read it carefully, think about it — and most importantly — act on it!
Stopping crime starts with you.
PROTECTING YOUR FAMILY
CHILDREN
TEENAGERS
THE ELDERLY
WOMEN
HELPLINES
PROTECTING YOUR FAMILY
CHILDREN
Most crimes are against property, not people.
The chances that you or a member of your family will be the victim of a personal attack  is already low.
But if you are worried about your own safety or the safety of someone close to you, it is possible to minimise the risk even further by taking some simple, sensible precautions.
Always remember to check carefully the identity of any caller whatsoever who wants to gain admittance to your home.
CHOOSING A BABYSITTER
Choosing a suitable babysitter can be difficult.
A trusted family or friend with whom you and your child feel comfortable is ideal.
Failing that, ask your friends to recommend a babysitter or arrange to babysit each  others children.
Always be very aware of your  childrens' reaction when you tell them a particular babysitter is coming.
If you must use a stranger, make sure you get several references and check them carefully.
Always provide your babysitter with emergency telephone numbers and other contacts.
If you still feel worried while you're out, ring home and reassure yourself by speaking to your child.
YOUNG CHILDREN
It makes sense to train your children how to stay safe.
The organisation ‘Kidscape’ have produced a special ‘Keep Safe Code’which warns children of possible dangers without worrying or upsetting them.
Read through the Kidscape code with your children and make sure they remember it.
Kidscape KEEP SAFE CODE
1 HUGS
Hugs and kisses are nice, especially from people we like.
Even hugs and kisses that feel good and that you like should never be kept secret.
2 BODY
Your body belongs to you and not to anyone else.
This means all of your body, particularly the private parts covered by your swimsuit.
If anyone ever tries to touch your body in a way which confuses or frightens you, say NO and TELL.
3 NO
If anyone older than you, even someone you know, tries to kiss or touch you in a way you don't like or that confuses you, or which they say is supposed to be a secret, say NO in a very loud voice.
Don't talk to anyone you don't know when you are alone, or just with other children.
You don't have to be rude, just pretend you didn't hear and keep on walking.
4 RUN
If a stranger, or a bully, or even someone you know tries to harm you or touch you in a frightening way, RUN AWAY and get help.
Make sure you always run towards other people or to a shop if you can.
5 YELL
Wherever you are, it is alright to yell if someone is trying to hurt you.
 Practice yelling as loud as you can in a big, deep voice by taking a deep breath and letting the yell come from your stomach, not from your throat.
6 TELL
Tell a grown-up you trust if anyone frightens you or tries to touch you in a way which makes you feel unsafe.
It is NEVER your fault if an older person does this.
If the first grown-up  you tell doesn't believe you, keep telling until someone does.
It might not be easy, but even if something has already happened that you have never told before, try to tell now.
Who could you tell?
7 SECRETS
Secrets such as surprise birthday parties are fun.
But some secrets are not good and should never be kept.
No older person should ever ask you to keep a kiss, hug or touch, secret.
If anyone does, even if you know that person, tell a grown-up you trust.
8 BRIBES
Don't accept money or sweets or a gift from anyone without first checking with your parents.
Most of the time it will be alright, like when you get a present for your birthday from your granny.
But some people try to trick children into doing something by giving them sweets or money.
This is called a bribe.
DON'T EVER TAKE ONE!
Remember it is possible that you might have to do what a bully or older person tells you, so that you can keep yourself safe.
Don't feel bad if that happens because the most important thing is for you to BE SAFE.
9 CODE
Have a code word or sign with your parents or guardians, which only they and you know.
If they need to send someone to collect you, they can give that person the code.
DON'T TELL THE CODE TO ANYONE ELSE.
10 D.I.Y.
What are your own ideas to keep safe?
TEENAGERS
If you are a teenager you should try to follow these basic safety guidelines.
They may seem inconvenient, but they are for your own safety.
If you're going out at night, make sure your parents always know where you are, who you are with and how to contact you.
If you're going out alone — arrange for your parents, a relative or friend, to take you there and if possible to bring you back.
After a concert or disco, if you've arranged for someone to pick you up and they don't arrive — speak to the organisers and ask them if you can phone home.
Wait inside until your lift arrives.
Never accept a lift from someone you've just met!
If you're looking for a part-time job such as babysitting or a paper round, try to find one through family or friends.
If you are babysitting, make sure you have an emergency contact number for the child's parents.
If a stranger calls at the house, don't let them in.
If anyone telephones, don't give them your number.
Never tell anyone that you are alone in the house — ask them to call back later.
When working on a paper-round, don't accept invitations into stranger's homes or accept lifts.
Refuse and move on quickly.
Tell the newsagent and your parents what happened.
PROTECTING THE ELDERLY
THE ELDERLY
Crimes against the elderly, especially violent crimes are quite rare.
However you can further reduce the chances of ever becoming a victim.
Here are some useful points for you to consider.
Then turn over and read the advice on pages 8–10.
WHEN SOMEONE CALLS
Most callers at your home will be genuine, but some might be out to steal or cheat you out of your money.
Before you open the door, call out and ask who it is and always put the door chain on (if you don't have one  its worth getting one fitted, see page 22).
Ask to see some identification.
If you are unsure, don't let them in.
Ask the caller to return later.
Phone the organisation or company they claim to represent and check their story.
If you are suspicious — call the police.
Here are three examples of callers who may try to trick their way into your home.
THE FAKE OFFICIAL
Well-dressed and well-spoken, he may claim to be a solicitor, an official from a well-known organisation, or from the local council.
He may in fact really be a common thief.
Ask for identification and check his story carefully.
THE FAKE DEALER
Someone may call and offer to buy your furniture or other items at what might seem like a good price.
But they're really trying to trick you into parting with something at well below its true value.
If you want to sell any item, have it valued by at least two reliable dealers.
THE FAKE WORKMAN
Watch out for workmen who say they need access to your home to check something or make urgent repairs.
They may just want in to steal.
You should also be wary of callers who offer to make building repairs or lay tarmac.
Any of these people may ask for cash in advance — and then disappear.
So — be careful!
PROTECTING WOMEN
AT HOME
If you're a man — don't stop reading.
The information and advice in this section applies to you too.
So read it, think about it and follow it!
And if you're a woman, since this section has been compiled specifically with you in mind, you should read it particularly carefully, and more importantly — act on it!
Check your house carefully.
Is it secure?
If you're in any doubt, read the advice and guidelines starting on page 20.
Remember — the best security systems only work when you use them!
So always lock up properly, even when you're staying in.
If you come home and see signs of a possible break-in, a broken window or an open door — DON'T GO INSIDE OR CALL OUT.
Go to a neighbour's house and call the police.
If you're selling your house, try not to show people around on your own.
Ask your estate agent to send a representative with potential buyers.
And if you move to a new house, remember that other people may still have keys to the premises — fit new locks, and use them!
When answering the telephone, don't give your number.
Never reveal any information about yourself to a stranger or say that you are alone.
If you get an obscene or abusive phone call, don't say anything and hang up immediately!
An emotional reaction is what the caller wants.
If the calls continue, tell the operator and the police.
OUT ON FOOT
If you are going to be out late, organise a lift home or book a legal taxi from a reputable firm.
Never HITCH-HIKE OR ACCEPT A LIFT FROM STRANGERS.
If you have to walk home after dark, avoid ‘short-cuts’ through badly lit alleyways and waste-ground.
You might consider buying a screech alarm.
Carry it in your hand, not in a bag.
They're available from most DIY stores.
When on the pavement always walk facing the traffic and well out from any buildings.
That way a car cannot stop unnoticed behind you and anyone lurking in a doorway will have further to come to reach you.
If a car does approach you and you are threatened — scream as loud as you can and run in the opposite direction.
This will give you a head start and make it difficult for the driver to follow.
If you think someone is following you on foot, check your suspicions by crossing the street, more than once if necessary.
The move as quickly as you can to the nearest place where there are other people such as a bar, a restaurant or a house with lights on.
WAIT UNTIL YOU REACH A SAFE PLACE BEFORE RINGING THE POLICE.
WHEN DRIVING
If driving in town, keep your car doors locked and valuables away from open windows.
Try to park in a well-lit, preferably busy area.
When you return to your car, have your key ready and check that there is no one in your car or acting suspiciously nearby.
If you're going on a long journey alone, plan your route in advance using main roads as far as possible.
If you can, telephone before leaving to give your route and estimated time of arrival.
Carry some loose change to make emergency public telephone calls.
If you have car trouble, try to get as close to a telephone as possible.
If you're on a motorway, look for the marker arrows and follow them.
They will direct you to the nearest telephone which is free of charge .
Never attempt repairs to the offside of the vehicle.
Be wary of hitch-hikers.
If someone tries to flag you down, make sure it is a genuine emergency before getting out of your car.
If you're in any doubt — drive on and call the police.
Women are advised to tell the emergency phone operator if they are alone and to wait where they are not immediately visible to approaching traffic.
Wait on the embankment or nearby land until help arrives.
If you feel threatened then jump into your car and lock all doors until you feel it is safe.
If a stranger stops and offers to help, don't get out of the car.
Roll the window down just enough to make yourself heard and tell them help is on the way.
IF THE WORST HAPPENS
Following these guidelines will considerably reduce the chance of you being attacked.
But if the worst happens, you have every right to defend yourself with reasonable force.
An umbrella, hairspray or keys are examples of  every day items you might carry and can use against your attacker.
Remember, the law does not allow you to carry anything which can be described as an ‘offensive weapon’ such as a sharpened comb or a knife.
IF YOU HAVE BEEN ATTACKED
Assault and rape are both very serious crimes.
If you have been the victim of any kind of personal attack, call the police immediately.
They need your help to track down the attacker.
If you have been raped, even though your immediate and understandable reaction will be to wash, try not to.
You might destroy vital medical evidence which will help prove the case against the person who assaulted you.
Tell the police and then seek medical treatment from your doctor or local hospital as soon as possible.
If the case comes to trial, don't worry, you will remain anonymous.
Newspapers are forbidden by law to publish anything which might identify you.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
If you are attacked by a member of your family and you don't want to press charges, the courts can still help you.
They can prevent a person from entering your home or even your neighbourhood.
You can also obtain advice and help from various organisations (see ‘Helplines’).
HELPLINES
Childline — confidential 24 hour counselling for any child with any problem
Northern Ireland Federation of Victims Support Schemes:for victims of assault and robbery
Social Services — see local area
Women's Aid:provides advice, support and accommodation for abused women and children.
See index on page 43 for full listing 
Ask a trusted family member to babysit your children
Kidscape — free guide available from Kidscape 82 Brook Street London W1Y 1YG (enclose large SAE)
Make sure your parents always know where you are
Never leave cash or other valuables lying around
Check every caller's identification carefully
Carry a screech alarm in your hand, not in a bag
Avoid short-cuts through badly-lit alleyways
On the motorway, follow the arrows to the nearest phone
PROTECTING YOUR VEHICLE
CAR THEFT IN NORTHERN IRELAND
SECURING YOUR CAR
STOLEN CARS AND MOTORCYCLES
HELPLINES
PROTECTING YOUR VEHICLE
CAR THEFT IN NORTHERN IRELAND
Northern Ireland has one of the highest levels of car theft in Europe.
Approximately one car owner in ten will have their car broken into or stolen this year — that makes it a major problem.
Most of the car thefts in the Province take place in the Greater Belfast area and the people who carry out the thefts are often called ‘joy riders’.
‘Joy riding’ is in fact nothing more than common theft and anyone who takes and drives away a car without the owner's permission is simply a criminal.
Even though the majority of cars stolen in these so-called ‘joy-riding’ incidents are recovered, the cost of repairs, replacing stolen or damaged equipment and the resulting increased insurance premiums are certainly no joy for the victim.
STOPPING CAR THEFT STARTS WITH YOU
Car thefts are not always committed by determined professionals, most cars are stolen by casual thieves who take advantage of an easy opportunity.
Police estimate that a large proportion of these crimes are a direct result of someone giving the criminal an open invitation — leaving a door unlocked or a window open.
Car thefts could be cut drastically by making things tougher for the criminal.
So often, people make it so easy for the criminal — it's a gift!
In a recent special study of car theft in Belfast carried out by The Extern Organisation the make and model of stolen cars was examined as well as the time and place of the theft.
BUYING A CAR
If you're thinking about buying a car, put security high on your list of priorities.
Ask your car dealer these questions:
What security devices come as standard?
What optional extra security devices are available?
How difficult is the car to break into?
How does it compare to other models for security?
IDEALLY, THE CAR YOU BUY SHOULD HAVE:
High security locks or deadlocks on all doors — and the boot — preferably with central locking.
Laminated windows
A warning alarm if you leave your keys in the ignition
Security coding on any fitted audio equipment
An alarm which will electronically immobilise the engine
No protruding sill buttons
Protected bonnet release catches
Shielded internal door latching components
Catches used for tipping rear seats housed in the boot and not in the passenger compartment
A ‘slam shut’ boot lid
SECURING YOUR CAR
‘BUT MY CAR'S NOT WORTH STEALING’
Yes it is!
Even if the re-sale value of your car is low, think how much it would be worth stripped down and sold for parts — the criminal has.
‘MY INSURANCE WILL COVER ME IF MY CAR IS STOLEN’
Will it?
Insurance may ONLY cover the current market value of your car, not what you paid for it.
So if your car has depreciated in value since you bought it…the loss could be yours and, unless you have a no claims protection policy, you may find that you could lose all or a part of your no claims bonus — check with your insurance company.
And if you're buying the car on a loan or HP agreement, you might well owe more than the car is worth — your loss again!
WINDOW ETCHING
Etch your registration number on all windows, wing mirrors, lights and any radio or hi-fi system.
Put a sticker in the window to let the thief know you have done so — it might make  then think twice.
Some manufacturers and car dealers provide an etching service.
Alternatively you can buy a DIY etching kit from around £5.00.
RADIO CASSETTE PLAYERS
If you're buying a car stereo, try to get one which is either security coded or can be easily removed and taken with you when the car is parked.
CAR ALARMS
If your car doesn't have a car alarm, or immobiliser device, get one fitted.
Alternatively, an economical and effective way of securing your car is to fit a strong chain and padlock around the steering wheel and attach it to the seat, clutch or brake pedal.
STEERING LOCK
If you don't have a built-in steering lock, get one and ALWAYS use it if you're leaving your car unattended.
LOCKABLE FUEL CAP
A lockable fuel cap stops thieves stealing your petrol and also forces the casual thief to abandon your car when it runs out of fuel.
LUGGAGE AND VALUABLES
Never leave anything that looks valuable openly displayed in your car.
If you can't take it with you, cover it up, or better still, lock it in the boot.
WHEEL NUTS
Lockable wheel nuts can stop a thief from stealing your wheels.
DOOR LOCKS
Always lock all your doors and the boot — it's an offence not to.
And if you have a deadlock system, don't forget to engage it.
STOLEN CARS AND MOTORCYCLES
Stolen cars are often offered for sale and if you buy one — even unwittingly — the original owner or their insurance company will usually have first claim on the vehicle.
You could end up losing your total investment.
And since a car is probably the second biggest investment you'll ever make — buying a stolen one could cost you a lot of money!
MOTORCYCLES
You can help ensure that the vehicle you buy is not a stolen one by taking a few simple precautions:
Always insist on seeing the registration document.
Check it carefully and make sure the seller's name and address is the same as that shown on the document.
Most vehicles have a chassis/frame number either stamped on or fixed to the body shell with a plate.
Check that this number corresponds with the one on the document.
If the stamped-in number is too hard to find, check the registration number against the excise licence.
Look at the number plates.
If they are new or have anything unusual about them, ask the person selling the vehicle for an explanation.
If you buy the vehicle, insist on getting a receipt with the seller's name and address on it.
Avoid meeting a potential seller in a street outside a ‘house’.
It may not be their home at all.
Or if the person brings the vehicle to you, make sure you have some way of contacting them again.
Watch out for any vehicle that seems too good a bargain.
It might be stolen.
A thief wants to sell quickly and can offer an unusually low price.
Don't forget to ask the seller for the ‘spare’ set of keys to the vehicle you are buying.
If in doubt, don't buy and if you are suspicious ring the police and give them as many details as you can.
STOPPING CAR THEFT
If you see someone attempting or actually stealing a vehicle, or see someone acting suspiciously near vehicles — ring the police immediately.
Don't worry if it turns out to be a false alarm — it's always better to be safe than sorry.
It also helps if you can — to note
Where and when the incident happened.
How many people were involved and what they looked like.
The colour, make and model of the vehicle involved.
The direction of travel.
Remember — it costs nothing to dial 999.
STOLEN CARS AND MOTORCYCLES
STOPPING CAR THEFT CHECKLIST
Don't give a criminal an open invitation.
When you leave your car unattended:
Always lock every door and close every window.
Turn on or activate any security devices you have fitted.
Park in a well-lit area or use an attended car park and never leave your parking ticket in the car!
Avoid parking in residential side streets or in unauthorised car parks.
If you park in the city centre at night, be especially careful.
If you're parking at home, use a garage if you have one and lock it.
If you don't have a garage, park as close to your home as possible, preferably somewhere where you can easily observe the car.
Chain your steering wheel to the clutch, brake pedal or a seat.
HELPLINES
Royal Automobile Club 24 hours members only
Insurance Company : always remember to advise your insurance company of any change in circumstances, theft, malicious damage, etc.
Breakdown Services — in addition to privately operated breakdown services, make use of the free breakdown telephone service on motorways
Local car or motorcycle dealer — always keep a note of your  dealers telephone number.
Insurance companies sometimes offer free window etching for motor policy holders.
See index on page 43 for full listing 
Check the chassis number against the registration book
Never leave your parking ticket in your car
Make sure you get all spare sets of keys
An unusually low price might mean the car is stolen
Secure your car by chaining up the steering wheel
PROTECTING YOUR HOME
PROTECTING YOUR HOME
DOORS/WINDOWS
PROTECTING FLATS
GOING ON HOLIDAY
HELPLINES
PROTECTING YOUR HOME
YOUR HOME
Wherever you live, whatever type of house you have, a burglary can be one of the most shattering experiences of a lifetime.
When a complete stranger breaks into YOUR home and helps himself to YOUR most valued possessions — its not just the expense that hurts.
And even though Northern Ireland has one of the lowest crime rates in Europe for theft and burglary, it could and SHOULD be even lower.
Most burglaries are the work of petty thieves on the look our for an easy opportunity.
If they have to make a lot of noise, spend a lot of time or risk being seen while breaking into your home, they may not even bother.
But all too often, they don't have to use force to get into a house because a door or window has been left open.
A recent survey of domestic burglaries in Northern Ireland, showed that almost half of he victims had left a window open and a similar number had left a door open.
Very few of the houses burgled had even the most simple of security devices fitted.
Your home could be at risk if you don't take some basic precautions — and not taking them now is giving a burglar an invitation for later.
BACK DOOR
Many burglars enter through a back or side door where they can work with less risk of being seen, so fit a deadlock and use it.
(see page 22)
WINDOWS
2 out of 3 burglars get into a house through a window — so fit window locks and use them!(see page 23)
FRONT DOOR
If your doors aren't secure, neither is your house (see page 22).
Begin by making certain that the door itself is strong enough.
If it's not — replace it.
BURGLAR ALARMS
Visible alarms make burglars think twice.
If you decide to have one fitted, make sure it is done by a reputable company and meets recognised standards.
Ask your local Crime Prevention Officer for advice on the best alarm to buy.
SPARE KEYS
Never hide spare keys under doormats or in flowerpots.
Thieves aren't stupid — they will look there first.
SECURITY LIGHTING
Leaving an outside light on after dark can discourage a potential burglar.
Your local Crime Prevention Officer can advise you on what type of security lighting to install.
Leaving on an interior light as well during the night can also discourage a potential burglar.
GARAGES
Always lock your garage or garden shed.
Tools or ladders can make life easy for the thief.
If you can't lock ladders away inside, chain and padlock them horizontally to a fixed point.
SIDE PASSAGES
Don't allow the thief easy access to the back of your house.
Fit a strong, high gate or fence.
If you share an alleyway with a neighbour, invite them to share the cost.
GATES AND FENCES
Check around the outside of your house for weak spots where a thief could get in — a low fence, an unlocked gate.
STRANGERS
If you see someone acting suspiciously near a house — call the police immediately.
DOORS
If your front and back doors aren't secure, then neither is your home.
The first thing to do is make sure the doors themselves are strong enough.
If any of your doors seem flimsy — replace them.
You should also consider fitting some of the security devices which are illustrated here — they are inexpensive and available at most DIY stores.
Get the advice of your local RUC Crime Prevention Officer.
He can give you free advice on the security precautions that best suit you and your home.
AUTOMATIC DEADLOCK
An automatic deadlock locks automatically when the door is closed — but could be opened from the inside without a key.
At the turn of the key the lock is prevented from being opened from the outside.
MORTICE DEADLOCK
A deadlock can only be opened with a key so a thief cannot smash a pane of glass and open the door; or if he gets in through a window, he can't carry your property out through the door.
When buying a deadlock, look for the British Standard kite mark.
DOOR VIEWER
Identify callers before you open the door.
If in doubt, keep them out.
CHAINS
A door chain allows you to speak to a stranger without fully opening the door.
Check the credentials of any caller before unhooking the chain.
HINGES
Check that all door hinges are secure.
For added protection, fit hinge bolts.
These help to reinforce the hinge side of your doors against the use of force.
Don't forget — in case of fire, you'll need to find your keys quickly.
So make sure you keep them somewhere handy at all times.
WINDOWS
Burglars often enter a house through a window.
It's possible for a thief to wriggle through a remarkably small gap — so even small windows like skylights or bathroom fanlights are vulnerable.
Double glazing may act as a deterrent, and may firms fit window locks as standard.
If you're having double glazing fitted — make sure it's by a reputable firm.
Again your local Crime Prevention Officer will be happy to advise you.
Window locks on their own are inexpensive and effective.
Burglars don't like locked windows — breaking glass attracts attention.
For around £5 each, DIY shops sell locks to fit any kind of window which makes them impossible to open without the right key.
Secure ground floor windows first and any window which can't be seen from the street or which can be reached from a drainpipe or flat roof.
If you have patio doors, get specialist advice.
They need special locks fitted to the top AND to the bottom.
Also install an anti-lift device to stop a thief simply lifting the door off its rail.
FLATS
PROTECTING FLATS
If you live in a flat,(unless you are on the ground floor or have a fire escape running past your window) the most vulnerable part of your home is probably the front door.
It may not be as strong as the main outside door.
Ask your landlord to replace your door if it is flimsy and get hinge bolts fitted to help prevent it being opened by force.
If your block of flats doesn't have a door telephone entry system fitted, talk to other tenants and ask your landlord to have one fitted.
If you do have a door telephone entry system, don't ‘buzz open’ the main door for strangers who call with a plausible excuse.
Also, never hold the main door open for a stranger who arrives as you are leaving.
If your name appears on the entry system, just list your initial and surname — don't say whether you're a ‘Ms’, ‘Miss’, ‘Mrs’ or ‘Mr’.
Or, alternatively simply list the number of your flat or apartment.
WHEN AWAY FROM HOME
GOING ON HOLIDAY
While you're on holiday your home can be particularly vulnerable — so don't give the burglar an open invitation:
Before leaving, lock all doors and windows
Cancel milk, papers and any other delivery which would let a thief know that your house is empty.
Lock any shed, garage or outhouse.
Ask a neighbour to keep an eye on your house.
You can do the same for them when they go away.
Deposit jewellery or other valuables in the bank.
Don't draw blinds or curtains.
you should also consider putting in lighting time switches.
These will turn your lights on and off automatically, giving the impression that your house is occupied.
Cut the grass before you go and if necessary arrange to have it cut again while you're away
Tell the police that you are going away and when you'll be back.
Also tell them who has keys to your house and how to reset your alarm if you have one.
IF THE WORST HAPPENS
Burglars seldom break into a house if it is occupied.
However, if you do wake in the middle of the night and hear an intruder:
Don't lie still and pretend to be asleep.
Turn on a light, make as much noise as possible, and even if you're alone, call out loudly to an imaginary companion.
Don't confront the burglar.
Most burglars will flee empty handed rather than risk a confrontation.
Ring the police as quickly as you safely can.
IF YOUR HOME IS BURGLED
If you are the victim of a burglary, the value of the property that has been stolen might be large or small, but the emotional upset and the feeling that someone else has been in your home can live with you for a long time.
You can get help from the Police and your local Victim Support Scheme (see ‘Helplines’).
They offer confidential counselling, basic crime prevention advice and help with practical details like insurance claims.
PREVENTING IT FROM HAPPENING AGAIN
If you have been a victim of a crime do not assume that it cannot happen again.
There is evidence to suggest that one victim in five in Northern Ireland is likely to be the victim of another similar offence within the same calendar year.
In addition one victim in two is likely to be victimised at least once of an offence of a different kind.
So look closely at your lifestyle, your behaviour and habits in case there are some steps you can take to make it less likely that you will be a victim again.
PROTECTING YOUR HOME CHECK LIST
Don't make a present of your property
When you go out:
Always try to make it look as if someone is in the house — leave a light on or a radio playing.
Lock all doors and windows
Fit security devices recommended in this booklet — and use them!
Ask a neighbour to keep an eye on your home.
You can do the same for them.
HELPLINES
Insurance Company:some firms offer lower premiums to people who fit security locks and alarms.
Building Society or Bank:they may be willing to lend you money for extra security, and to add it to your mortgage.
Good security can increase the value of your property.
Crime Prevention Officer:at the local police station — he or she can give you the names of local locksmiths and security firms and will visit your home to assess your security needs.
(Telephone number as per RUC stations).
See index on page 43 for full listing.
PROTECTING YOUR POSSESSIONS
CARAVANS
BOATS
BICYCLES
CASH AND CREDIT CARDS
MARKING YOUR VALUABLES
HELPLINES
PROTECTING YOUR POSSESSIONS
CARAVANS
Your caravan is like a second home so you should protect it and its contents in exactly the same way you protect your house or flat.
SECURING YOUR CARAVAN
You wouldn't let a thief tow away your home — but that's exactly the sort of invitation you give a criminal if your caravan isn't secured!
Cover the towbar of your caravan with a hitchlock — preferably one with a padlock.
And even if you're parking it in your driveway or close to your home, lock and secure it at all times.
As an additional precaution you should also secure the corner legs and wheels.
Padlocking steel collars onto the corner legs will help prevent even the most determined thief from moving your caravan.
Fitting wheel locks or clamps can make doubly sure.
LEAVE YOUR MARK
Mark your caravan by etching or engraving each window with your postcode.
This will help the police to identify and recover your property if it is stolen.
Advertise the fact that it is marked with a sticker.
It might make a thief think twice.
THEFT FROM CARAVANS
Breaking into and stealing from a caravan is usually the work of casual thieves.
You can easily reduce the risk by taking a few simple precautions.
Always close and lock all doors and windows when you leave your caravan — even if it's only for a few minutes.
Keep any valuables out of sight, or better still, take them with you.
For added security, you should consider fitting a good quality deadlock and an alarm.
If you are leaving your caravan at night, leave a light on.
You can buy an inexpensive ‘night light’ which is either electronically triggered to come on as darkness falls or is battery-operated with a timer switch.
And just as you would keep a watch on your neighbour's house if they were away, you should do the same for unoccupied caravans on the site and report anything suspicious immediately.
BOATS
A boat can be a target for a sneak thief on the look-out for an easy opportunity.
So it's important to secure your craft.
Before going ashore, secure hatches and lock all portholes and doors.
Put any valuables out of sight, preferably in a strong locker with a secure padlock.
If you use a dinghy or a small boat, chain it up to a ring when you land and then padlock the chain.
Outboard motors are fairly easy for you to unship — so it's just as easy for a thief, and more rewarding!
Always secure your motor with an anti-theft device!
And if you're leaving the boat at moorings, don't forget to either take the engine home with you, LOCKED in the boot of your car, or secure it by chaining it to the mast or inside the cabin.
Always remember to drain off excess fuel first.
BICYCLES
Bikes are easy to sell and easy to sell.
That makes them very popular with thieves.
To protect your bike, always lock it every time you leave it, even if it's only for a few minutes.
The best type of lock to use is one made from a loop of solid steel.
Try to lock your bike to something immovable like a railing or  lampost , preferably in a well-lit area with people around.
If you have quick release wheels, take off the front wheel and lock it to the frame and back wheel.
In case your bike is stolen, make it easier for the police to identify and recover it by marking the frame with your postcode.
Then prominently display a ‘coded cycle’ sticker — it might make a thief think again.
Every bike has a serial number near the crank shaft.
Take a note of it as it cannot be disguised.
CASH AND CREDIT CARDS
It only takes a moment's carelessness to make a present of your valuables to the thief.
You should never leave credit cards, cheque books, wallets or handbags lying around — no matter where you are.
Whether at work, at home or out for the evening, always keep them close at hand.
Cash is obviously a favourite with thieves; try to avoid carrying large amounts — and if you're on holiday take travellers cheques instead of cash — it's simpler and safer.
Always keep your cheque card and cheque book separately — a thief needs both to encash a cheque.
And if they are stolen, inform your bank immediately.
Similarly, if your credit cards are stolen, let the company know IMMEDIATELY.
Always keep a note handy of the numbers to ring in the event of having your credit cards or cheque book stolen.
Any delay could cost you money!
If you carry a handbag, make sure it has a secure clasp or zip.
A sneak thief can easily dip into an open handbag!
Never let your handbag out of your sight.
In the car, keep your handbag out of sight and keep the passenger door locked.
In the office if you have to leave your handbag, lock it in a drawer when you go out.
Avoid carrying the keys to your house or flat in your handbag.
If a thief steals it, you could be giving him an open invitation to your home!
MARKING YOUR VALUABLES
An effective and economic way of protecting your valuables is to indelibly mark them with an identification such as your postcode or part of your name and address.
Property marking kits such as etching or ultraviolet pens are inexpensive and readily available.
The markings not only make it harder for a thief to sell your property but will also make it easier for the police to identify the rightful owner whenever stolen goods are recovered.
If items are difficult to mark, such as jewellery, silverware or antiques, photograph them instead.
Set each item against a contrasting background so that it shows up clearly and lay a ruler alongside it to give a guide to its size.
You should also make a note of the serial numbers of your television, video and hi-fi equipment and any other items of value.
HELPLINES
Insurance Company:some firms offer lower premiums to people who fit security locks and alarms
Banks, Building Societies and Credit Card Companies:keep the telephone numbers to call in the event of your cheque cards, cheque books or credit cards being stolen.
See index on page 43 for full listing 
You wouldn't let a thief tow away your home — so don't make a present of your caravan
When you dock, secure your craft properly inside and out
Easy to steal, easy to sell.
Secure it!
Make a note of the chassis number
Lock your bicycle  everytime you leave it
Never let your handbag out of your sight
Photograph jewellery beside a ruler for scale
Mark your valuables with your postcode
PROTECTING YOUR BUSINESS
FARMS
INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
HELPLINES
PROTECTING YOUR BUSINESS
PROTECTING YOUR FARM
Farmhouses are often isolated, so they can offer an ideal opportunity for the burglar — that's why  its essential that you make sure your farm is as secure as possible.
For detailed information on how to beat the burglar, read pages 19–26 —‘Protecting your Home’
Farmers need to take additional precautions, especially if cash or weapons are kept in the house.
For safety, all firearms should be kept securely locked in a proper gun cabinet
If you have large amounts of cash on the farm, you should consider purchasing a strong safe.
Your local Crime Prevention Officer can advise you on the best type to buy to suit your specific needs.
And it's not just your home which is at risk; farm machinery, livestock, feedstuffs, chemicals and equipment are all highly valuable and must be protected from the criminal.
FARMYARDS
Keeping your farmyard and the surrounding area well lit with security floodlights at night is a cost-effective way to help keep criminals away.
Also — wherever possible keep valuable livestock, feedstuffs or other bulk materials as close to the farmyard as you can.
A dog — or better still — a gaggle of geese not only act as a deterrent to a prowler, but also provide an excellent ‘alarm’.
FARM BUILDINGS
Outhouses and other farm buildings should be secured in exactly the same way as you protect your house.
The thief is on the look out for an easy opportunity and if you leave chemicals, feedstuffs or hand-tools in unlocked sheds or outhouses, you're giving a criminal an open invitation.
FARMING EQUIPMENT
Tractors, harvesters, balers, even small equipment such as handtools — they are all valuable, and the thief knows it!
Whenever possible, all your equipment should be ‘marked’ with either die stamping or by arc-welding your postcode to the chassis or some other part of the equipment.
Again, your local Crime Prevention Officer can advise you.
INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
THE COST OF CRIME
Crime is big business, the total cost runs into millions of pounds every year.
Some estimates even put it as high as 5% of turnover.
This means that crime could be severely cutting your profits.
And the cost isn't only financial!
Fear, injury, stress and illness are all direct results of crime and can lead to absenteeism, decreased productivity and higher staff turnover.
Yet very few businesses have any clear idea of what crime is actually costing them.
And fewer still take any systematic protective steps.
But crime is a business risk which should be managed like any other.
From boardroom to junior staff, crime prevention should be as much a part of basic working practice as health and safety.
STOPPING CRIME IN BUSINESS
A recent CBI report ‘Crime — Managing the Business Risk’ made the following three key recommendations on how best to manage, reduce and monitor the risk of crime in business.
Start by calculating the real cost of crime to your business and your employees by carrying out a ‘Crime Audit’ and use it to produce a written strategy on crime prevention in your business.
Make crime prevention a core responsibility for all managers and staff and train all company personnel in the company's crime prevention policy and practice.
Make crime prevention a major focus of community involvement.
CARRYING OUT A CRIME AUDIT
A ‘Crime Audit’ can tell you the scale and cost of crimes against your business and should also show how adequate or otherwise your existing security practice and management structure is in tackling this problem.
To conduct a successful crime audit you will need to:
Assign clear responsibility and provide appropriate resources.
Define precisely what you mean by ‘crime’.
Theft, fraud, arson and vandalism are the most obvious crimes against the business itself, but you must also take into account any crimes against individuals who work for your company.
It's worth noting that workers blame their jobs for over a quarter of any violent incidents in which they are involved — these kinds of crime can cost business dearly!
Gather all relevant information on the different categories of crime in your business in a systematic way.
Involve your staff at every level.
The people who know best where crime can and does occur are your employees.
By having each and every one of them involved, you can not only tap their expertise but also get their commitment to tackling a problem that affects the entire company.
Finally, consolidate the results of the crime audit into an ‘Action Plan’ in which responsibilities are clearly allocated.
INVOLVING YOUR STAFF
Staff are the key to effective crime prevention.
Every member of staff has a role in reducing and preventing crime.
Each of them must be aware of what that role is and understand how crime affects profitability, investment and employment opportunities.
Every member of staff should feel that they have a stake in the business and by extension, a stake in up-holding a crime free environment.
REACHING OUT TO THE COMMUNITY
Business and the community can benefit and learn about crime prevention from each other.
Police, local authorities, schools and crime prevention teams are all involved in tackling crime around the workplace, and business should play a part in this effort.
The great majority of non-employees who commit crimes against business will live in the immediate area.
Getting involved in local community crime prevention initiatives will have a tangible positive outcome.
HELPLINES
Industry and Commerce
Crime Prevention Officers can provide managers and staff with free advice on methods of reducing the risk of crime at work and guide companies wanting to increase their involvement in crime prevention.
Insurance Companies can provide advice and may send a surveyor to inspect your security arrangements and make recommendations 
Keep bulk feedstuffs as close to the farmyard as possible
Keep outhouses security locked
Don't give a thief an open invitation — lock up!
Die stamp or arc weld your postcode on valuable equipment
Crime costs.
It could be severely cutting your profits
Business and the Community can act against crime together
PROTECTING YOUR COMMUNITY
WITHIN YOUR COMMUNITY
CRIME PREVENTION OFFICERS
YOUNG PEOPLE AND CRIME
A ROLE FOR EVERYONE
HELPLINES
PROTECTING YOUR COMMUNITY
WITHIN YOUR COMMUNITY
Protecting our communities from crime is everyone's concern.
You can't just leave it up to the police, or to someone else — and ignoring it won't make it go away.
To stop crime effectively, we all need to get involved whether it's at work, at home, at school or in your leisure time.
Playing your part can be as simple as being a good neighbour — keeping an eye on a neighbour's house while they're away; or even just letting the Police know if you see someone acting suspiciously around cars or property.
Read the following suggestions on how you can help stop crime in your community — then get involved!
PUBLIC TRANSPORT
Travel should be one of the more pleasant necessities of life.
Research shows that both men and women have some safety concerns when using public transport, especially at night.
So remember when travelling on public transport to:
trust your intuition
plan ahead
be alert when out and about
walk away from danger
avoid putting yourself at risk
HOUSING ESTATES
Joining a tenant's association or local community group can be an effective and powerful way to lobby for help and contribute towards good crime prevention practice.
COMMUNITY CENTRES
A community centre is the ideal place for local residents to get together to discuss crime prevention or hold special events on particular subjects like stopping local car theft or vandalism.
SCHOOLS
Schools can not only make crime prevention part of their curriculum by organising talks and projects, but can also help by allowing voluntary groups to use their facilities, especially those working with young people.
BUSINESS
Crime is big business.
So crime prevention should be too.
For detailed advice on how to stop crime in business see page 36.
Businesses can also help by providing management skills, technical expertise and sponsorship for community based crime prevention projects.
CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE
As a focal point for commercial interests in the community, Chambers of Commerce are often ideally placed to initiate and support local crime prevention projects.
SHOPS
Retail associations can help individual traders solve crime problems.
BARS
Owners, management and staff can play their part by being on the lookout for drunkenness, under-age drinking or drug-dealing.
CRIME PREVENTION OFFICERS (CPO)
It's a Crime Prevention Officer's job to help you stop crime.
They often work out-of-uniform, giving expert advice free of charge, to anyone who wants to know what they can do to prevent crime.
And here are just a few examples of how they can help.
Local problems
If you want to organise any kind of crime prevention activities within your community, like a neighbourhood watch scheme or tenant group to combat crime, your local Crime Prevention Officer (CPO) can provide information and advice.
Home surveys
You can ask your local CPO to arrange a survey of your home or business premises and recommend what steps you should take to make sure they are secure
Architectural advice
There are also specialist CPO's called ‘Architectural Liaison Officers’ who will look at planning applications for building projects like new shopping centres or housing developments.
They can examine plans and recommend changes to reduce the incidence of crime.
YOUNG PEOPLE AND CRIME
HELPING KEEP YOUNG PEOPLE AWAY FROM CRIME
It's a sad fact that a significant amount of crime is committed by young people.
Most often they are involved in crimes against property — shop-lifting, burglary, vandalism.
Drinking is often a contributory factor.
That's the bad news.
The good news is that as they get older, most young people stop offending.
But that doesn't mean you should just wait and hope.
Whether you're a parent, a teacher, a youth worker or a friend, there are positive, practical steps you can take to help keep young people away from crime.
IF YOU'RE A PARENT OR GUARDIAN
Know where your children are, what they are doing and who they are with — at all times!
Help your children to make the most of their leisure time by encouraging them to take up a sport or join a local youth club
Talk together about what kind of behaviour is illegal and make sure they know the consequences of becoming involved in crime.
Look out for changes in their behaviour at home or in their performance at school.
It may just be another part of ‘growing up’, but take time to find out if anything is bothering them.
Even though we don't have major problems with drug or solvent abuse  in Northern Ireland, sudden changes in behaviour could mean they are in some kind of trouble.
If you do suspect that your child is involved in anything undesirable, whether it's alcohol, drugs or solvent abuse — get help immediately!
Talk to your family doctor and the police; they will both be sympathetic and put the interests of your child first.
See the ‘Helplines’ column at the end of this section.
IF YOU'RE WORKING WITH YOUNG PEOPLE
If you are a teacher, a youth worker or someone with responsibility for young people, you can make a real contribution toward keeping them away from crime.
Talk about crime and crime prevention.
Your local Crime Prevention Officer will be only too happy to provide advice or material for a discussion or a project.
Get to know the young people with whom you have contact and watch for changes in their behaviour, achievement or attention.
Find out about the problems which can affect them.
Information on matters like drug and solvent abuse is widely available and will also tell you what signs of possible abuse to look out for.
If a problem does arise, you can get sympathetic help and advice from the appropriate bodies or authorities.
Check the ‘Helplines’ column on this page.
A ROLE FOR EVERYONE
Keeping young people away from crime shouldn't be left entirely to parents, church organizations and teachers.
Everyone could, and should, get involved.
If you're in business, you can help with sponsorship and support.
If you have sporting experience or a special skill, you could coach or teach youth groups.
Young people are the future of our communities.
By getting them to respect property, people and themselves, we're not just stopping crime today, we're making an investment for tomorrow.