

Two Hundred Metres of Burgundy
Peter Mayle
‘Of course,’ said the old man, ‘since the telephone and mains sewage, one is as modern here as in Paris.’
He placed the last evil half inch of his yellow-papered cigarette carefully into the corner of his mouth.
His hand, a freckled ham, was missing the top two joints from the index finger.
A pruning accident.
That and his nose, seasoned to a delicate pinky-purple by two litres of wine a day for sixty years, testified to a lifetime of labour in the vineyards.
He stood wheezing contentedly in the flat evening sun.
In his brown canvas boots, faded blue trousers, checked shirt and frayed cap, one might have mistaken him for a man of no consequence instead of a senior member of local government.
He was our self-appointed guide to Bouilland, population 136, sixteen kilometres from Beaune.
Our journey was to take us from one end of the village to the Bar-Tabac at the other end, a trip of some 200 metres down the straight street that led to the plump, vine-studded hills in the distance.
We started at the World War I Memorial, clearly the object of great respect and attention.
The grass was clipped, and banks of flowers grew round the base, hiding some of the names cut into the stone slab.
There were many names for such a small village, and the old man remembered most of them from his childhood.
Fallen for the glory of France.
It's a bad business, war.
He shrugged and moved on.
We walked between two ancient plane trees which generations of hard pruning had reduced to bunches of arthritic grey knuckles, and arrived at Bouilland's 200-year-old launderette.
It was the size of a double garage, open on one side, built of stone and roofed with tiles.
In an English village it would have been converted into something quaint, selling teas and postcards.
Here it was neglected.
The stone table once used by the village women to pummel their washing had patches of moss growing on it.
The water trough was empty except for a layer of scum, a beer bottle and some sweet wrappers.
A peeling notice warned us not to throw ordure.
The old man flicked his cigarette end into the trough as we asked him when the laundry had stopped being used.
‘The year electricity came,’ he said, ‘Madame Rivarel got a washing machine.
Now the village has ten, maybe twenty machines.’
He pulled the lobe of his ear reflectively.
‘One must profit from progress.’
He seemed pleased to remind us of yet more evidence of Bouilland's humming modernity, and took us out into the sun again.
At a slow but purposeful lurch, he led the way towards the Bar-Tabac.
The street was wide for an old village, and the houses were solid.
The architecture was all of a piece; nothing recent, nothing flimsy.
Wooden shutters of washed-out blue and green were folded back against the walls to show thick, beautifully patterned lace at the windows.
Almost all the front doors were open, but it was impossible to see inside.
Each door had its curtain — not the traditional strings of wooden beads, but bright strips of plastic or curious brown furry segments, like end-to-end caterpillars writhing in the breeze.
Geraniums sat on the window ledges and oleanders grew from old Elf oil drums outside the doors.
And inside, unseen but definitely there, were the inhabitants.
We felt them looking at us from behind the lace and from the shadowy hallways, peering through their caterpillar curtains at these strangers with clean shoes and light, impractical clothes.
Tourists.
In a gap between two houses, an old wine barrel rested on its side doing duty as a kennel.
A large mud-coloured dog was in residence, front paws crossed, the remains of a stale baguette within gnawing distance.
He opened an owlish eye and barked unconvincingly at us before yawning and going back to sleep.
We wondered if French dogs are taught in puppyhood how to cross their paws.
It's not something English dogs do.
The approach to the bar's terrace was guarded by two old women taking the sun on a wooden bench.
Black cotton dresses, ankle-height zippered carpet slippers, stockings like brown bandages, not quite thick enough to conceal the knots of varicose veins.
We smiled and nodded.
They nodded and smiled, exposing a total of not more than seven teeth between them.
‘Sisters,’ said the old man.
‘They both lost their husbands in the war.
Now they're losing their teeth.
They can only eat soup.’
The bar was dim and neat, with a zinc counter and a fine rich smell of coffee and black tobacco.
Taped to the mirror behind the bottles was a poster of the Lapierre of Dijon cycling team squinting into the sun, arms crossed, immense thighs bulging from long black shorts.
Across the upper half of the poster, someone had scrawled, ‘Un verre, c'est con.
Trois verres, c'est bon’, and drawn a crude wine glass balancing on the top of the team manager's head.
Wine is more profitable than bicycles in this part of France.
At a corner table, three men and an ample woman in an apron played cards noisily, the slap of the cards punctuated by bursts of virtuoso coughing, that cavernous café cough which echoes up from the boots.
The hand finished, Madame negotiated her bulk through the tables, wiping her hands on her apron.
We ordered white wine.
Did we want Aligoté or Chardonnay?
Aligoté?
Bon .
The glasses were generous, so full that the surface of the wine trembled just above the rim.
The old man dipped his nose and took a first careful sip.
We followed him outside and sat at the tin table under the tree.
We were just in time to watch the evening rush hour.
Led by a small boy in shorts and singlet and over-large wellingtons, a herd of cows was coming in from the fields.
Buxom cows, creamy-white and clean, with proper horns that had somehow escaped the French passion for pruning.
Twenty or thirty of them swayed past in dignified convoy, followed by the farmer and a matted dog of uncertain ancestry.
He exchanged insults with the dog in the wine barrel and got a kick in the ribs from his master.
The procession disappeared up the street as the old man sucked his glass dry and sighed hopefully.
Another?
Well, since he's not pressed for time, perhaps one more.
With the new round of drinks, he insisted that I try one of his yellow cigarettes.
It was like smoking a bonfire rolled up in lavatory paper.
From the far end of the street came an irregular clanking sound, and a small, thin man in blue overalls appeared, carrying a handbell and a clipboard.
He stopped outside the bar and rang his bell vigorously before reading the six o'clock news from his board.
‘The Electricity of France wishes to announce a power stoppage due to work on the main transformer.
There will be no electricity from seven until noon on the morning of Thursday, the 14th of June.
Members of the commune are advised to arrange themselves accordingly.’
‘Merde!’
A deep voice from behind us.
It was Madame in the doorway, loudly disputing the accuracy of the information and the need for a power cut.
The man with the bell glared at her.
They were obviously familiar enemies.
‘Thursday, the 14th of June.
Seven till noon.
Pas de jus.’
He flourished his bell and started back up the street before she had a chance to reply.
Madame snorted and returned to her cards.
The old man cackled.
‘He is like the weather forecast, that one.
Never correct.
The noise of the bell makes an omelette of his brains.
It is also my opinion that he cannot read.
Not a man to rely on.’
The next day, Wednesday June 13, dawned clear and sunny, with the promise of more heat.
There was, however, no electricity.
Questions in El Salvador
David Brierley
Where's the damn army?
Why aren't they guarding the airport?
At Belize, a twenty-minute hop away, there are camouflage nets and sandbags and RAF Hawks and squaddies with pink British faces.
At El Salvador International Airport, not a single soldier, in a country torn by civil war.
Maybe the army aren't at the airport.
They're everywhere else.
So is the Guardia Nacional.
Also the police.
They all carry automatic weapons.
The police patrol the capital in black and white gas-guzzlers, rifles poking out of every window.
The army ride round in jeeps, rifles in the crooks of their arms.
The Guardia Nacional wear jackboots and hook their fingers in their trigger guards.
Two blocks from the hotel is a McDonald's.
It was blown up last year.
Now it has two security guards.
They carry rifles and check every car coming into the parking lot.
This must be the end of civilisation as Americans know it.
Civil war has been eating up the country for five years.
The army and the  guerrillas are not the greatest sufferers.
Forty-five thousand (or is it fifty-five thousand — it's difficult keeping a body-count) ordinary citizens have been killed.
The guerrillas shot some; most were murdered by the escuadrones de la muerte .
These are the army and the police out of uniform.
A night on the town for the boys.
The army is directing traffic at a crossroads.
It's a job-creation scheme.
One holds up the east-west streets.
Another waves on the north-south streets.
On each corner stands a pair of soldiers, rifles aimed at the lines of cars.
You've never seen such careful drivers.
The National Museum has an exhibit that makes my eyes blink.
A statue shows a priest dressed in the skin of a prisoner who has been flayed alive.
Such sacrifices were common in these parts.
Still are, when you consider the fifty-five thousand.
The victim has been scalped and the priest wears the hair.
The skin is flecked with bits of flesh.
It is in two pieces, like a pair of pyjamas.
It helps the crops grow, a museum guide explains to three teenage girls.
They nod.
Their faces show nothing.
They express no horror.
If I could understand why they accept such cruelty, I could understand why there is so much violence here.
The National University was closed four years ago by the army.
Too many subversives, they said.
The gates are barred, the grass grows long, the paint peels.
It is completely deserted.
Then, passing the Dental Faculty, you notice the rifles pointing at you.
I take the bus to Santa Ana, the second city of El Salvador.
Its welcome sign says it has 90,000 inhabitants.
It feels smaller.
The main square holds the three buildings of importance.
One is the town hall, elegant with colonnades.
Then there is the theatre, built in jungle opulent, with pillars and balconies and statues lifting off on wings.
On the third side is the cathedral, which has its inspiration in Prague.
It doesn't seem out of place because of the whiteness of the stonework, so brilliant in the sun it could be spun sugar.
This is a facade.
At the sides the cathedral is built of red brick and looks like the headquarters of some great insurance company before computers replaced clerks.
Right and proper, I decide, for spiritual insurance is an urgent need here.
I'm called back by a member of the Guardia Nacional.
They're the ones in jackboots.
‘Where are you going?’
To the square.
‘Not to that building?’
I realise I have been crossing the street towards an open door.
A sign says it is the Governor's office.
No, I insist, and bring out my passport.
‘You're English?’
Yes.
He flips over the pages: US visa, Turkish stamps, Czechoslovak visa.
He lingers over that and I wait for him to ask why I was visiting a Communist state.
But he grins at me.
I grin back.
My cheeks ache with the grin.
Okay, I can go.
‘Hey,’ he calls and I turn back.
His hand is out to shake.
Another day, another bus.
It skirts a smouldering rubbish tip outside Santa Ana.
A man and a woman pick through the filth while cattle forage.
The bus passes nameless villages.
Posters hold the shacks together:Coca-Cola es asi, Doberman Jeans — New York, Paris, London, San Salvador .
The bus halts.
It is an army roadblock and everyone gets out.
The men stand with arms raised while soldiers search for weapons.
A young conscript feels my back, my crotch, my legs.
Nobody speaks.
My passport causes excitement and a soldier thumbs through the pages.
When he reaches the photo, he realises he's been holding it upside down.
If they cannot read, why check papers?
It's a ritual, showing who has power.
He goes off to report to the sergeant.
We stand like cattle in the sun for a quarter of an hour while the sergeant clears me on his radio.
Finally we climb back and the bus continues.
Nobody comments on this check.
Happens all the time.
And so pointless: the soldiers never searched the luggage.
The land is dry and poor.
The hills are tiny.
They look violent, as if just made.
Crows circle, looking for carrion.
Metapan is squalid beyond imagining.
A two-storey building would be a skyscraper.
The town centre is a huge jumble sale: combs, mirrors, ballpens, lipsticks, exercise books, clothespegs, Chiclets, knickers, buttons, baseball caps, sweetcorn, dried fish, the Encyclopedia of Sex (in eight Roneo-ed pages), belts, scissors, batteries, plates, machetes, crucifixes, razor blades, padlocks, strips of mango in plastic bags, everything well-fingered.
‘Senor.’
I turn back.
There are three of them, Guardia Nacional.
‘Your papers.’
They inspect my passport and I do not find favour in their eyes.
‘Why are you here?’
To see the church and have a meal.
‘Where are you from?’
England.
‘Where is your car?’
I came by bus.
Behind them in a doorway is a man wearing plain clothes and dark glasses.
Anger runs in furrows across his forehead.
‘Why Metapan?
Where are your companions?’
I am alone.
He wants very much to take me inside for further ‘questioning’.
It shows in his face.
Reluctantly I am let go.
That pain in the back of my neck is four pairs of eyes watching every step I take to the church.
I have an introduction to L, an army conscript.
He picks me up in his mother's car and we drive through Colonia Escalon to a roundabout where cars park beside Snack stalls.
How long have you been in the army?
‘Two years.’
How much longer must you serve?
He shrugs.
‘Until this is finished.’
Or until he is finished.
He pushes back his sleeve to show scars where I have vaccination marks.
A bomb blew up near his truck.
Shrapnel wounds never look healed.
The skin is purple and puckered.
How is the war going?
‘It is getting worse.’
The guerrillas are highly motivated.
The conscripts have little stomach for a fight.
If they surrender they expect to be stripped of uniforms and weapons and sent back naked.
An officer would be tortured for information.
Corruption is widespread.
Wherever American aid goes, dollars stick.
An officer becomes a colonel, moves into a mansion, buys a bulletproof Mercedes.
He never goes on patrol.
Instead he visits army corps with a photographer.
L drops me near my hotel.
Perhaps he should have dropped me further away.
A man comes on to the terrace while I'm eating breakfast.
When I finish, he walks over and sits down.
‘Are you American?’
British.
‘I could have sworn you were American.
What are you doing here?’
Looking and listening.
I ask what he does.
‘I'm a businessman from Indiana.’
Here on business?
‘On vacation.’
You must be the first tourist in years.
‘Right.’
Been here long?
‘A couple of days.’
His tone is friendly but the questions are direct: where I've been, who I've talked to, what I'm doing that day.
He calls for our bills in Spanish.
I sign mine.
He pays cash.
When he leaves he doesn't deposit a key at reception.
And his face is very tanned for a man two days away from an Indiana winter.
The coast is a different world, humid and lethargic.
There's a shanty town built of flattened oil barrels and packing cases.
People camp inside their shacks: a hammock, a bed made of driftwood, a Madonna, a machete, a doll, a dangling lightbulb.
Outside children play among fermenting puddles.
Why don't they run on the beach?
Afraid of its freedom?
The beach stretches to the horizon.
Coconut palms, bananas and papayas shade the edge.
The sand is soft, the colour of old pewter.
The beach is all mine but I cannot stay long for I lack a senorita to oil my back.
I walk into the village and choose a restaurant.
A mariachi band approaches and launches into a lively lament on what it is to be alone and without love.
I order a second beer.
We are very macho about it here, drinking straight from the bottle.
Pacific breakers curl in, the sun blazes, the prawns are amazing.
I leave and there he is, the man from breakfast, walking along the back of the row of restaurants.
He carries no bag, such as might hold a towel and swimsuit.
‘Hi,’ he says, ‘I see you made it.’
That night I ask the opinion of an American reporter.
‘Paid cash for his breakfast?’
Yes.
‘Didn't leave a key?’
No.
‘Followed you down to La Libertad?’
Yes.
‘When are you leaving?’
In the morning, I say, and order more drinks, doubles.
The taxi goes down Paseo Escalon.
We pass the statue of Jesus standing on top of the globe.
El Salvador del Mundo, the Salvadorans call it.
Christ on the ball, the Americans say.
We turn right and left and I check the route, just in case.
‘American?’ the driver asks.
No, English.
‘What is your profession?’
Questions, always these damn questions.
Head Transplant and the Hanging Tree
Dennis McDonnell
On a bend of the Colorado river we made camp for a month.
Well, to be strictly truthful, camp had already been made for us by some hi-tech realtors.
And the mighty Red River, having been dammed six times for hydro-power, was actually the motionless mud-coloured Town Lake in the middle of Austin, the State Capital of Texas.
The University of Texas at Austin is very rich — it had the good sense to find oil on its own land.
Some of the money has been spent on a great collection of literary manuscripts.
We had come to study some of them.
It's hard to be humble if you're from Texas —car sticker 
Not all Texans are true Texans…send $18.95 for your Authentic Texan Heritage certificate (suitable for framing)—ad for the Association of Certified Texans 
To describe the 150 miles from Houston airport to Austin as undramatic would be to over-dramatise unforgivably.
For the first sixty miles, State Highway 290 offered hardly a bend, hardly a hill: just dry pastures and an almost empty road.
Once clear of Houston there weren't even many billboards, apart from those offering acreages for sale — some as ‘farmettes’, others as ‘ranchettes’.
Every now and then a straggling two-dimensional township, with its sign: BLOGGSVILLE CITY LIMIT.
Pop 912.
Groggy with heat, Jackie wondered feebly if they changed the sign with every birth and death.
LITTERING IS unlAWFUL —highway sign 
Our rental car was called a Ford Escort, but you could have fooled me; somebody had smoothed off all the corners.
Still, it went, and the air-conditioning worked.
After a long flight your perceptions are dulled, and everything is synthetic.
But on Highway 290 unreality ruled.
In the unchanging landscape we drove but we didn't get anywhere.
In the October heat haze we sat in stately convoy among huge 5-litre cars — all floating like ships becalmed at a docile 54mph.
I will never understand how a country that savagely defends the right of every citizen to carry a gun (and that won't enforce seat-belt laws because they interfere with the rights of the individual) meekly accepts the 55 mph speed limit.
CHILD RAISED AS CAT —newspaper headline 
Austin is a good deal smaller than Edinburgh, but has about as much motorway as the UK.
We rolled recklessly down concrete channels, bombarded now by meaningless names and unfamiliar imperatives: E. NACOGDOCHES; R LANE MUST EXIT R.
‘Look — Hyde Park!’ shouted Jackie.
‘Stella said that's near the campus — very posh.’
But next to the Hyde Park Drug Store is the Hyde Park Tattoo Parlor, and The Texas Plasma Center (‘Earn $$ in your spare time!’) and the Wild Snail Pawn Shoppe.
But clinging to the numbered street grid system we found, and flopped into, our riverside home.
All the frogs legs you can eat — Monday nite $7.95 —sign at Cactus Joe's Watering Hole 
The apartment was new, and cool, and decently furnished, and we liked it.
We were appalled, though, at its appetite for electricity, even apart from the air-conditioning: the tiny kitchen had the water heater, the mighty cooker (with its spotlights and extractor hood), the fridge, the dishwasher, the waste disposer — and, already plugged in, the coffee-maker, the toaster and the electrical can-opener.
A terrific place to have breakfast in, but hopeless to cook in: no strainer, no grater, and not a knife sharp enough to cut a lemon.
Little more than a century ago, when the river ran free, the Comanche would have taken our scalps for being here.
Now the Indians are in their reservation, which you can visit like any zoo (‘a special part of Texas’ say the billboards tactfully).
And our air-conditioned box is a stunning assertion of man's victory over heat and danger and wild country.
It differs from a moon-shot only in degree.
A power-cut, though, would leave us like stranded fish, unable to live.
If you don't like the way I drive, stay off the sidewalk —car sticker 
‘Hi, yo'll!
I want you folks to have a nice day, now!’ said an official in what was surely a parody of a Texas accent.
But everybody talked like that.
And everywhere, even in restaurants, enormous men strode around in cowboy boots and 10-gallon hats.
We weren't prepared for Texas to be quite so — er, Texan.
It was as if all Scots wore the kilt, or all Cockneys dressed as Pearlies.
Passer-by weds jilted bride —newspaper headline 
The official was helping us get a parking pass from the Campus Police.
The university has 50,000 students and 20,000 staff, and parking is a serious business.
There are Campus Police roadblocks as you go in, and parking in the wrong place gets you a $12 fine.
We heard that some rich kids just ignored their fines; theirs will have been the Porsche 928s we saw about the place.
The university's smart answer has been to  withhold their degrees, but a law student is currently taking them to court, claiming violation of his rights.
Theatre tour of London If you love the theatre, here's a tour you must act on.
You'll be treated to four of the hottest plays in London: CATS SINGIN' IN THE RAIN THE MOUSETRAP NO SEX PLEASE WE'RE BRITISH!—British Caledonian ad in Texas paper 
At first we thought we had no neighbours down by the river: nearly all the picture windows were blank.
In fact people kept their drapes drawn as insulation.
Practical, but eerie.
Most of them looked to be students, but in a month we never managed a longer conversation than ‘Hi!
How are you today?’
Then they vanished into their square caves.
‘V-P Bush utilised his sense of humor by laughing’—University of Texas speech coach, adjudicating on V-P TV debate 
I noticed a job ad which ended ‘an equal opportunity employer: m/f/h’.
But on Channel 21 (of our 42!) when a Baptist minister was asked about homosexuality he almost frothed at the mouth: ‘…an abomination…
Leviticus…a nation shall vomit them forth…
We get 1,500 homosexuals a week who come to us, glad to give it up and turn to Jesus!’
In this land of big boots and Stetson hats, it's probably hard to be (m).
Or (f).
Or, particularly,(h).
‘I'm a firm believer in the old hanging tree’—Stuart Huffman, Sheriff of Johnson County 
Austin didn't exist until 1846, when some prominent Texans decided it would be a good place for the new state's capital.
Antiquity is in short supply, and over-valued.
We felt almost guilty that our unremarkable house in Edinburgh would have been one of the dozen oldest buildings in Austin.
And we didn't know what to make of The Butler Window, a landmark in Zilker Park.
Mr Butler, it seems, was a prosperous merchant who supplied the bricks for some of Austin's main buildings earlier this century.
He died, and when the time came for his house to be demolished, a window from it was preserved and rebuilt in the park on a pedestal.
Through it you can look out on some trees.
HUMAN HEAD TRANSPLANT —newspaper headline 
Though nobody knew we were there, our phone rang quite often.
Usually it was someone congratulating us on having won a free dancing lesson or test drive; but there were quite a few grumpy wrong numbers, which made us feel at home.
(Scots get very querulous if you're not the person they thought they were ringing.)
I read in a paper that in some states more than 50 per cent of subscribers are now ex-directory.
This must make it hard for the agencies who undertake to deliver telephone sales messages.
If the trend goes on, their teams of congratulators will be calling fewer and fewer people, more and more often — until the remaining subscribers are always engaged, because they are always being congratulated.
‘This is a dry county, very dry…the beer drinkers here carry posthole diggers in the backs of their cars.
They don't throw the beer cans out; they bury them’—Dan Saunders, Sheriff of Martin County,(Quoted, like Sheriff Huffman, in Texas Monthly)
Some of the campus buildings have unnervingly jocular names, like the Sid Robertson Building, or the Harry Ransom Centre.
We make condescending jokes about Johnny Balliol College and the Bert Sheldon Theatre.
We're wrong, of course.
Paying public respect to eminent people is a good thing; and using the names by which they were known is direct and refreshing.
(All the same, we mumble, we didn't call it Winnie Churchill College.)
We work in the Harry Ransom Humanities Center, where the facilities for study are magnificent and the people very helpful — though we had to get used to being greeted each morning with loud cries of ‘Hi, you guys!’ from the librarian.
Not at all like the National Library of Scotland.
The building itself, though, worried us.
It's new, a massive seven-storey cube, with only a few, irrelevant, windows.
Inside there are spacious archives and art galleries, but you have no sense of the form of the building, or of which part you are in.
The lifts are scattered about, and each one serves only selected floors.
Ours went, I think, to 2, 5 and 7; the other floors might have been in another building, or another town.
One morning we went in out of blazing sunshine.
Four hours later we came out to find that three inches of rain had fallen, creeks had burst their banks, cars had been swept away, and people were injured and homeless.
Up in the vast cool reading room, none of this had happened.
A few days later we heard a reading room receptionist telephoning the ground floor police desk to ask if she needed her umbrella to go to lunch.
(film of ambulance; male voice over)‘…it's nice transport — even sleeps two…but it's never saved a life on its own!
Our trained people do that!
We don't only get you to the hospital — we get you there alive !’—commercial for a private medical firm 
Dept of Coy Euphemisms: Austin is, of course, a very proper city.
But less-than-proper advertisers offer real dollar notes to Yellow Pages, so an accommodation has to be reached.
This must be why Abracadabra Nude Modeling and Midnite Cowboy Exotic Massage both solemnly undertake Outside Calls to Residences and Nursing Homes.
(‘Nurse…nurse…
Aargh!’)
If guns are outlawed, only outlaws will have guns —car sticker (Is this the silliest piece of circular logic ever?)
During our stay there was a two-day symposium about ‘The Texas Myth’.
Much high-powered theorising and introspection.
We smiled our superior Old World smiles, of course.
But we couldn't think of many states with a strong enough identity to have a symposium about.
‘The Idaho Myth’?
‘The New Hampshire Myth’?
No.
We were, after all, visitors to the most interesting state in the union.
A Day in Narnia, A Night in Phang Nga
Robert Tasher
On the village green in front of the Chinese  Buddhist temple a fair-ground was being erected.
The skeleton of a Ferris wheel loomed; shooting galleries and hoopla stalls were being knocked together.
The purpose of the structure immediately outside the temple was not so obvious.
The men hammering it together had beckoned us, beaming, inviting inspection.
A raised wooden runway, carpeted with the pin-sharp points of six-inch nails hammered through from the bottom, ran out 50ft and ended in a bed of nails laid on the grass.
At the foot of the bed, guyed by wire ropes, a forty-rung ladder rose vertically.
The rungs were steel knives, blades up.
The message was clear —‘Come back at nine this evening’— though they spoke no English, we no Chinese and no help was to be had from the Thai phrasebook.
We had come to Phang Nga to visit the limestone islands that rear in their hundreds from the bay.
These natural wonders occur only here and in the gulf of Tonkin: connoisseurs rate Phang Nga.
A day-trip from Phuket had only whetted our appetite and we had left that tourist ghetto by local bus and moved into a hot and grubby Chinese hotel in Phang Nga town.
The boy who had carried our bags up to our room so eagerly was of course a boatman.
Would we like to sail out into the bay?
As a matter of fact we would, tomorrow.
He would take us all day for 1,000 bhat.
We threw up our hands and bargained, and agreed that he would find two more travellers and we would each pay 200 bhat.
That settled, we wandered down to the river looking for food and natural wonders.
The limestone scarps that rushed down to the sea and broke up into islands hung over the town, dripping green and yellow trees.
Women sat under carved wooden verandahs preparing vegetables, fish and chicken.
Children abandoned their play and pointed at the Farangs.
We had travelled only forty-five miles and had moved into a culture completely different from that of Bangkok, Chiang Mai and Pattaya.
Everything was in Chinese.
The banners of yellow Paper hanging between the bright silk banners and red lacquered columns in the temple by the village green were covered in lists of Chinese characters.
The advertisements for Coca Cola were in Chinese.
The three dozen life-size turtles, made of dough and coloured red, standing on racks in the temple forecourt, had their names, perhaps, painted in gold Chinese ideograms on their crusty shells.
After dark we followed the smell of sizzling meat down to the fair-ground.
Families eating candyfloss under strings of coloured lights, crowds of bikers guzzling frogburgers, country music wailing from loudspeakers; we could have been on Hampstead Heath on Bank Holiday night.
Except for the drumming and chanting coming from the temple, and the photo display of the horrors of VD which had attracted a huge audience of twelve-year-olds.
We found a tent where they were cooking omelettes filled with clams.
Two huge frying pans were being wielded on charcoal fires by a pair of vividly made up girls in blue jeans and flowered blouses.
But a few sidelong glances revealed them to be He-Shes.
The Thais are very keen on transvestism; way off any tourist route we would find them, making up and giggling, modelling clothes for each other and generally being girlish.
Nobody seems to mind; as an aberration it rates low, on a level with Christianity or driving carefully.
We sat down and gorged.
Sharp at nine a conch shell sounded and the temple courtyard filled up with Thais, dressed in white trousers with embroidered aprons, chanting and shaking in time to gongs.
The first one mounted the runway and briskly walked its length, barefoot on the nail points.
Stepping down at the end, he lay on the bed of nails and rolled across it to the foot of the ladder, which he climbed, pausing on each blade to detach a yellow paper prayer flag and send it fluttering to the ground.
For those unmoved, the Ferris wheel spun its neon lights and the shooting galleries popped.
But as more young men, then older men, then women, came forward to walk the nails and climb the knives, so the general air of fun increased.
Spectators eating ice cream crowded round the performers thirty deep, and cheered and clapped.
As the only Farangs there, we were drawn by friendly hands to the best viewing spot, and beamed at and invited to climb the ladder.
But still we could not discover the why of this ordeal by steel.
Next morning in the market, shopping for a picnic, our struggles with the phrasebook brought an English-speaking Thai to our rescue, explaining that the quail eggs we had bought were raw, but could be cooked for us in the soup cauldron wherever we took breakfast.
And the performance with the nails and the knives?
A thanksgiving.
All those who went through the ordeal had at some time survived an accident or illness when their lives had been despaired of.
In gratitude they undertook to walk the nails and climb the knives every year until they died.
They spent the day chanting and dancing, and when they came to walk and climb they could be heard speaking Chinese, a language none of them could speak during the rest of the year.
Sapan, the boatman, had found two other tourists to share the fishtail boat and the cost.
Peter was from Germany, and Helga was from California: they were solo travellers looking for entertainment, travelling together for her convenience.
Sapan had brought along a couple of passengers too.
Mike was from Phang Nga town, back from studying economics in Bangkok; Strawberry was from Panyi Island, like Sapan himself.
We had a momentary chill when they climbed aboard…piracy?
Would we ever be seen again?
But when Strawberry reached under the seat and produced the first bottle of an apparently endless supply of Star Tiger rice spirit we realised it was not going to be that kind of adventure.
The islands rose sheer out of a millpond sea, pillars of white limestone with ochre splotches capped in crinkly green.
Rank on rank they stretched to the horizon, their reflections shimmering towards us on a blue mirror.
The coast dropped away into mist and we nosed into a world of fantasy.
It bore no resemblance to our map.
Getting closer we saw that the islands rose more than sheer, their bases eaten away by the sea.
Sapan sailed in beneath the overhang of limestone.
He leapt up on to the ledge of rock which ran around the whole island under the overhang like some inside-out cloister, and tied us up.
From the cool of this cloister the island-dotted sea shimmered in the sunlight.
We found our torches and entered the caves beneath the island.
Later we drifted and found: a beach, 20ft of yellow shingle under a dozen palm trees; a grotto more lurid than Lourdes, every glittering bowl crying out for a plaster Madonna; a lagoon in an island's heart reached through a rock tunnel.
In a gallery of stalactites, baobab roots seeking water winding down from the roof, we asked Sapan what the island was called.
‘It has no name,’ Sapan said, ‘but when I told some other people I brought here that it had no name, they said to me that it was called Narnia.’
He looked puzzled.
We ate quails' eggs, drank Star Tiger, swam in the warm sea floating from sun into shade and back again under trailing vines.
The sun tumbled the islands' shadows on the sea.
Panyi island, where Sapan and Strawberry lived, had only enough room on it for the mosque.
The rest of the village was on stilts, a Southend pier of teak, and we stopped there for petrol and beer.
Oily water glittered through gaps in the teak boards as we climbed the gangplank.
A plump old man sitting in a wooden scaffold on a marine building site sawed the top off an immense teak column to make it flush with the decking.
The village was expanding.
Seen through the lacy walls of the village pool hall the polystyrene floats of the fish farm bobbed busily.
While Sapan found the petrol we strolled the boardwalk where ladies sold shells and coral jewellery.
One in jeans and blouse laid a hand on Ann's arm.
Despite the nail varnish, it was a man's hand, ‘What's your name?’
He-She asked huskily.
‘Ann.
What's yours?’
He-She simpered prettily.
‘My name is Linda.’
Sitting in a bus next morning, eating pineapple and waiting for the driver, we heard that the survivors were going to walk on fiery coals that night down on the fairground.
But we were bound for Tekua Pa, and rumours in our guidebook of an ancient city.
The Drums of Nefta
D. A. Callard
It is late evening and Marianne, Walter and I have just finished a large couscous washed down by several bottles of heady local wine.
My companions start talking in Arabic again and I have the depressing sense of being a hick tourist fallen among real travellers.
Wine-numbed and bloated, I lapse into silent recapitulation of what has brought us here.
I met Marianne on Jerba, an island claiming mythic status as the place where the Sirens held Ulysses.
I too was becalmed, though the Sirens were inaudible.
I would take bus trips from the island to towns in southern Tunisia but they never lasted longer than a day.
Their chaos and squalor did not compare well with the pristine beauty of Jerba and, as a lone male out of season, I was prey to a horde of street hustlers.
On Jerba I had made it clear that I was not in the market for anything and they left me alone.
Returning on the bus from Medenine I noticed a solitary blonde whom I assumed was a stray package tourist from one of the hotels on the west of the island.
I asked if she was lost.
She was not.
She had just arrived and was looking for a cheap hotel.
I suggested mine which was cheap, central and practically empty.
So our friendship began, and the Siren spell was broken.
Her story is barely credible.
She is Dutch, in her late twenties, and she has been in North Africa for one-and-a-half years.
During this time her sole contact with a European has been a fortnight with a German woman in Algeria.
She has almost always travelled alone and has lived with very poor and very rich families, participating in the most private aspects of Arab family life.
At times she has dressed as an Arab woman, worn the ha'ik , looked at the ground as she walked, among women only.
At other times she cut her hair short, wore a djellaba and travelled as a man.
In relatively Europeanised Tunisia she has shed these disguises.
She is fluent in the Moroccan dialect of Arabic, to the amazement and amusement of the Tunisians.
She has penetrated other exclusive worlds before this.
In spite of the slimmest Jewish credentials, a surname inherited from a non-practising father, she spent six months at a yeshiva in the ultra-orthodox Mea Shearim quarter of Jerusalem.
By virtue of her fluent Hebrew she once led prayers at a Passover feast of wealthy Moroccan Jews — the only one present who could read them in the absence of a rabbi.
She had no ideas of conversion since she previously spent six months in an ecumenical Christian community in the South of France.
Why had she done these things?
‘How else do you find out?’
I have no answer to that.
A trail through several Saharan oases brought us to Nefta, close to the Algerian border.
If Jerba was picturesque, Nefta is magical and I regret that I must fly home in a week.
Our hotel in the medina is run by an amiable eccentric whose vagueness probably results from constant imbibing of palm wine and smoking harar , a local herb similar in effect to mild hash.
Last night he claimed that President Bourguiba used his hotel before he came to power and that Brigitte Bardot, accompanied by a canine entourage, stayed there in the early Seventies.
He produced newspaper cuttings proving that BB came to Nefta but I am not convinced that she stayed in the Hotel de la Liberté, whose plumbing leaves everything to be desired.
But little would be surprising in Nefta.
It is on the edge of the Chott el-Jerid, a saline depression in the Sahara once part of the Mediterranean.
From late morning onward the combination of sunlight, heat and the reflective properties of its salt surface throws up a host of mirages.
Seen from the hills above the town the Chott becomes not an arid wasteland but a phantom sea, piercingly blue.
Dominating Nefta is another extraordinary feature, so incongruous that at first sight it might well be a mirage.
It is the Sahara Palace Hotel, the most luxurious in Tunisia, a cavernous, currently near deserted edifice with all the charm and intimacy of an international airport lounge.
Below it is the old palmerie, the Corbeille, nourished by channels of water running from a hot spring poetically named The Source.
In the heart of the palms is a pool credited with miraculous curative powers where the Neftis come to bathe: women in the morning, men in the afternoon.
Looking toward the town from here, the sky is dominated by the seat of a religious brotherhood from whose minaret a human muezzin, instead of the usual loudspeaker, calls the faithful to prayer.
Nefta has more than sixty places of worship and is a centre of Sufism, but there is no fanatical edge to its people.
Once, being led by a boy through the maze of the medina, Marianne asked our guide if the people were religious.
He laughed loudly.
‘No, we are not religious.
Nefta is a town of drunks and revolutionaries.’
I was heartened by this news though Marianne, who has experienced the unpredictable effects of alcohol on the North African male to her cost, was less amused.
We both met Walter a few days ago.
He is a German working at a doctorate on the post-colonial development of the region.
He has lived here for eight months and knows more about the town than the Neftis, who are infuriatingly vague when it comes to giving directions.
He knows nothing of Brigitte Bardot's visit but confirms that President Bourguiba used to stay at our hotel, though he now spends two months every year at the Sahara Palace.
Mercifully Walter and Marianne soon exhaust their mutual stock of Arabic and, in the silence that follows, we all become aware of a faint constant drumbeat in the medina.
Walter says that it is probably a wedding but suggests that we investigate.
We leave, and Marianne stays behind picking at a fruit salad.
The drums lead us through the warren of narrow alleys to a courtyard whose entrance is blocked by a knot of people.
Walter sees a friend among them and asks if this is a private wedding party.
He is told that it is a ceremony connected with Sidi Bou Ali, a long dead Sufi mystic whose precepts many Neftis follow.
The friend is an invited guest and asks us to join him.
The courtyard is illuminated by a single light and against the far wall five drummers keep a constant rhythm, breaking into occasional chanting.
Beside them a group of older men sit impassively, eyes closed, listening intently to the music.
To the fore of the courtyard about twenty male, mostly young, dancers shake their bodies rhythmically but independently as a man carrying a pot of burning incense weaves among them.
A larger group of people stand on the outskirts surveying the spectacle and we join them.
In two rooms off the courtyard are women, children and a few greybeard patriarchs.
Walter's young black friend serves us tea.
Drinking it, I wonder what to do about Marianne since this is an all-male affair and I am reluctant to leave.
Walter solves the problem by volunteering to report back to her and I am left alone, highly conspicuous but undisturbed and ignored by the crowd.
There is a sudden scuffle as one of the dancers collapses, delirious on to the stone floor.
Two spectators jump in, seize his trembling body and carry it away from the dancers.
I watch as the convulsions subside, the delirium leaves his eyes and he returns, slightly dazed, to normality.
Then it happens to another dancer and, as I am watching the same pattern of recovery, the man next to me throws his arms into the air, totters forward and begins to experience apparently involuntary spasms.
Two other watchers take hold of him, lift him up to remove his shoes and thrust him into the dance.
The drums and the chant continue.
Others join the dance in the same way and others collapse.
To dance, it seems, is not by choice: you dance when the drums call you and you stop when whatever moves you to dance ceases.
For a supposedly religious ceremony there is a very secular feel about the whole affair.
The spectators smoke and laugh among themselves: near the doorway a youth records the drumming on a cassette recorder emblazoned with a Rolling Stones decal.
Many of the men are black or half-caste descendants of freed Saharan slaves and I feel that what I am watching is not Islamic at root but a practice brought by their ancestors and grafted on to the religion.
From the corner of my eye I see Walter return and realise with a start that the person accompanying him enswathed in a black bournous is Marianne.
Fortunately all eyes are elsewhere and no-one seems to notice.
However, Walter's friend is not fooled and, drawing a seat and offering tea, whispers pointedly, ‘Bonjour Mademoiselle ’.
He seems very amused by the subterfuge.
The drumming and dancing continue for another hour, reaching no climax and no greater or lesser degree of intensity.
Suddenly it stops and, it seems within seconds, drummers, dancers and audience disperse.
As we leave someone tells Walter that there is a later, private part to the ceremony.
Back at the hotel we hear the drums begin again and continue long into the night, past the time when exhaustion overcomes the excitement which keeps us from sleep for many hours.
Modern History
Felicity Harvest
Mohan Lal was waiting for us when we came out to breakfast on 31 October.
We decided to hire him for the day, and negotiated a price.
Before we set out, he showed us his letters of recommendation from delighted tourists.
But with Mohan Lal this went a bit further.
We were to ride in a rickshaw which was itself a gift from a delighted tourist.
The name and occupation of the donor were painted on the back: Professor X, Institute of Theoretical Physics, Stuttgart.
He dropped us in a short street which led to the entrance to the Taj.
We bought our tickets and went through into the grounds, sitting down just inside to admire.
The building was so perfect that it became fantastic, and we imagined a huge finger coming from the sky and pressing on the dome.
The minarets would start to revolve, and organ music would strike up (‘Oh, kiss me my sweet, it's the loveliest night of the year’).
We explored, we gazed a bit more, and I discovered the pleasures of walking barefoot on marble.
The world's greatest monument to the exploitation of women had its appeal, I had to admit.
On the way back to Mohan Lal, we stopped for soft drinks.
The pips of a time-check echoed across the street.
‘Funny,’ I said, ‘that's the first time I've heard the pips this trip.’
A boy rushed up with a transistor radio.
‘…attempt on the Prime Minister's life.
Leaders of all opposition parties have condemned the act.
The President is flying home from his visit to the Gulf…’ and on, with statements from every leading politician but no hard information till right at the end.
‘A bulletin on the Prime Minister's condition is expected shortly.’
There were seven of us round the radio, English, Hindu and Sikh.
One of the Hindus asked, smiling, ‘Prime Minister gone out?’
‘Not yet, I don't think,’ said Ruth.
We all laughed.
We walked back to the rickshaw, saying ‘well’ to one another, not knowing what else to say.
We spent the middle of the day at the red fort, returning in the late afternoon to catch sunset at the Taj.
We arrived again at the street where we had heard the news of the assassination attempt.
Men were pulling down the shutters of the gift shops.
It was five o'clock.
At the Taj, Indian families were grouping themselves for the professional photographers who swarmed over the central platform.
Tourists of all kinds wandered by.
A plaque beside the empty reflecting pool and its silent fountains explained that the water system which filled it had become ‘obsolete’ in the nineteenth century.
The sun set behind us, reflecting gold on the building.
The Taj turned silver, and then a late pink.
The light went.
It was getting cold.
The dogs were appearing.
Back at the Agra Hotel we ordered coffee to warm up and started a game of Scrabble.
Some Indian guests arrived and sat under the portico.
The manager joined them.
‘Mrs Gandhi died today.’
We froze.
‘She's actually dead,’ said Ruth.
‘There'll be riots everywhere.’
November 1.
We sat down to breakfast in the garden, and listened to the World Service news.
There was mention of trouble in ‘some areas’.
The next programme started — an analysis of political and social life in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
As we heard a description of a day in the life of the mayor, a Sikh in a green turban wandered out into the garden, brushing his teeth.
The car which we had ordered to take us to the station never appeared, and we travelled instead in a dilapidated tonga.
We arrived at 9.30, went through the usual contortions to buy a ticket, and were told to expect a train at 10.30.
We sat down to read.
Ruth constantly complained about the fidgeting child next to her.
Ten-thirty came but the train did not.
We wandered up and down to the inadequate refreshment kiosk, drinking soda and eating buns.
Up the track came an engine pushing a blazing box-car.
It seemed odd, but not remarkable.
I looked at our fellow passengers.
There were two men in identical fawn clothes.
One was short-haired, dark and fat.
The other was a Sikh, very small and slim.
They looked like a comic turn.
There was a tall Englishman, dressed in white, with silver and turquoise earrings and a beard down to his waist.
There was a young Sikh in a red turban, wearing a blue quilted jacket despite the heat.
At one there was an announcement.
The train from Bangalore would soon arrive.
We leapt into a carriage at the end of the train.
We were followed by a family — mother, father and daughter.
The mother, large and jewelled and forceful, was determined to let us know she spoke English.
‘So this is a second class carriage.
It is not bad.’
They ate an elaborate snack.
‘You might as well get as much pleasure as possible out of every situation,’ she said, packing the dishes away.
Ruth and I played a spiritless game of Scrabble.
We dozed.
When we woke, the light was low and yellow.
We passed a sign saying ‘District of Delhi’.
Ruth was by the window.
She turned to me as the train slowed, her hand over her mouth and her eyes wide.
‘There's a dead body out there.’
We are on a train, I thought.
This is what they did in 1947.
They stopped trains.
‘A body?
What do you think's happening?’
I don't know,’ she said.
‘It's just someone's body.’
Through the window I could see a group of men walking away.
One was carrying a crash helmet.
They cast long shadows.
They started to run.
The train moved forward a few yards and stopped.
‘What the hell's happening?’ asked Ruth.
I knew what was happening, and my voice expressed the knowledge.
‘Shut the windows!’
I shouted.
On the other side of the train, the mother protested.
‘They will think we have something to hide.’
‘But you have already got your windows down,’ we shouted back, as we pulled at ours.
Young men walked through the train, looking under seats, looking hard at faces.
‘They are looking for someone who is hiding,’ said the mother.
‘Who?’
She leant towards us and whispered, in dramatic tones.
‘A Sikh.’
A large group of men passed through the carriage.
They were carrying bamboo poles.
They were intent on murder.
The mother told her daughter to get on a top bunk.
I said to Ruth that we should do the same.
I did.
She did not.
She sat with the mother on the station side of the train.
She took her earrings off.
‘What the hell's happening?’
I had read about 1947.
Now the same thing was happening only yards away.
More groups of young men pushed through the train.
just out of sight, someone started to shout.
The mother shushed them.
Scuffling outside.
Another train passed, going the other way.
The mother said something to Ruth, which the daughter repeated to me.
‘You know the young man on the platform in the red turban and the blue jacket?
They are burning him now.’
‘But why?’
‘Because he is a Sikh, and they have killed Mrs Gandhi.’
I wanted to express my fear and my horror.
I wanted to drum my heels and wail and be comforted.
But how could I seek comfort?
I was not central to this drama.
I lay peripheral, uncomforted, afraid.
Time passed.
‘Here are the police.’
‘A bit late,’ said Ruth.
There was running and shouting outside, then a long wait in silence.
There was nothing more to comment on, and no comment to be made.
The train started to move.
Everyone was climbing on to the top bunks.
‘What's happening?’
I asked Ruth as she joined me.
‘The train which was coming the other way had all its windows broken.’
‘Protect your face,’ cried the mother to the daughter.
From where I lay I could see the repeated pattern of the sleepers slowly passing beneath the train.
Again and again we slowed, almost stopped.
We drew into the suburban station where the train terminated.
We were advised to catch the local into New Delhi.
As we tried to calm ourselves with sweet coffee, a Swiss traveller appeared.
‘There are a group of us just down the platform, come and join us.’
Twenty tourists of all kinds had huddled together.
Among them was the young man I had seen earlier.
‘Look,’ said Ruth, ‘his beard's gone.’
A few minutes later we were in Delhi.
We crossed the footbridge and went out into a silent forecourt.
To our left were rows of deserted taxis.
Straight ahead, the motto of the Indian Railways was written, seven feet high, in English, on the wall.
PUNCTUALITY, SAFETY, SECURITY.
One more Burmese day
Stan George
At five in the morning Rangoon shakes off sleep.
Paraffin lamps cast pools of sputtering light on the wet streets.
After a night of drizzle, the city murmurs as though sound, like the dust, has been cleared from the air by the rain.
The lamps wheeze.
In a café doorway a man slaps chapati dough on to a board, and stacks the rolled balls into ranks.
A boy yawns and adjusts his lunghi .
He oversees a water tank parked in the road.
Water splashes from a faucet into a jerrican, and when it fills the boy sluggishly replaces it from a line of empty ones.
A truck, far off, grinds gears and whines, coming slowly closer.
At dawn the city has a somnambulant purpose.
Gaunt men emerge from doorways, and proceed, swinging rolled umbrellas down the street.
The city is empty.
Traffic lights blink impotently at the odd cyclist who now, as later, ignores them.
And in the soft light which permeates below the cloud cover, the city is familiar.
Awash in greys and blues, the Victorian tenements melt into the dawn mist, reminiscent of Glasgow or Liverpool, once grand, now in decline.
Except that here the foliage is more determined.
Rhizoids of jungle creep between the paving stones.
The buildings weep ironwork.
Gutters, overhung with herbaceous toupees, wave dangerously from the rooftops.
Balconies cling to walls like frightened climbers.
Stucco lies in drifts of powdered plaster.
Street lighting is spasmodic and piped water comes in sluggish fits and starts.
Blocked storm drains flood the streets.
It seems as though a slammed door would level the city.
Writing in 1934, George Orwell feared that modernisation would sweep aside Burmese culture.
He needn't have worried.
The Burmese are truly living in the past.
The country goes its own way.
Even in the capital, life ticks by with the rhythm of the rice-growing cycle.
There are no slums, and no discernible wealth, just an equal distribution of what looks like poverty.
Yet a scorn for materialism, the measurement of wealth, is fundamental to Buddhism which is rooted in the national psychology.
Because life is an illusion, what is the significance of development?
Why worry about efficiency?
Of course the buildings decay, and so must everything!
This fatalism lends itself to the infamous Burmese bureaucracy, partly because bureaucracy looks like efficiency, partly because bureaucracy fits so neatly into the unchanging Buddhist worldview.
And inevitably a static officialdom leads to corruption.
Yet, as an ageing journalist in Rangoon explains, corruption is a Western value judgement.
Bribery, familial influence, the black economy are endemic in Asia.
Because Burma is not a rich country the potential for racketeering is limited, and shrugged off, For those Burmese who want one foot in the material world, at least so far as the occasional bottle of Scotch is concerned, the black market exists.
At times in Rangoon it seems that the second economy is all pervasive, and gaps in conversation are filled by discreet requests to change money.
Rangoon airport is the first contact with the workings of the second economy.
Guidebooks advise travellers to bring their fully duty-free quota, to offset the official rate of exchange.
Moving through the customs shed, itself a film set from Casablanca , new arrivals encounter a pantomime.
On one side of the desk officials leisurely scrutinise and catalogue every marketable item, and on the other, baggage handlers maintain a cacophony of stage whispers, demanding ‘Johnny Walker’.
Yet even the black market in Burma has an ease unknown in the rest of Asia.
Hustlers are polite and accept refusal amiably.
Apart from a few pickpockets in Rangoon, street crime does not exist.
It is a remarkably well-adjusted society where the alienation of adolescence, universal throughout Europe and Asia, is unheard of.
The largest identifiable youth group are the monks.
Although Burma is an oil producer, national lassitude and the lack of a desire for ‘development’ ensure a leisurely extraction, and petrol is rationed.
A lack of foreign exchange means that, apart from a few Toyotas, there are virtually no new cars in Rangoon.
Overladen buses trundle about the city, and a taxi fleet pensioned off in colonial days still plies its trade like a permanent veteran car rally.
What rush hour exists is merely a breeze of bicycles.
The Schwe Dagon Pagoda on the edge of Rangoon is a religious city.
Armies of monks in blood-red robes hang around the place.
They stand about chatting, smoking cigarettes and chasing dogs from the temple grounds.
Some monks sweep the long expanses of the stone plateaux; some carry offerings of donated food; so we undertake pagoda business, receiving visitors in drafty offices where money is handed over.
For Burmese, the upkeep of religious centres is a way of acquiring merit for a future incarnation.
The main courtyard is a jumble of shrines and small temples.
It is a mixture of the spiritual and the profane.
Yet an unexpected feeling of fun and clutter pervades the complex.
Children daubed with circles of yellow ochre offer tiny figurines and toys for sale.
Old ladies peddle incense.
Child monks play in the alcoves.
There is even a sideshow where a large gilt stupa rotates on an electric motor.
Punters throw coins, trying to score a hit in the tin trays.
When they are successful a bell rings and a mechanical buddha lights up and makes a creaky obeisance.
The prize is the motto printed next to the tray: ‘Freedom from Five Enemies’, ‘May you be Well and Happy’.
A couple of English-speaking students explain the hold of religion on the populace.
All young boys spend time in monasteries.
They grin at the idea, crinkling their noses in mock distaste, suggesting that the monastic life holds no attraction for them.
There is no dividing line between the pagoda and life outside.
Recently when a gang stole some large buddha images from the temple complex at Pagan, the whole country was outraged.
There were no ‘safe’ houses for the thieves, who were quickly apprehended, and the images were returned.
The students mention the seventy-year occupation of the Schwe Dagon by the British army, and the devastation they left behind.
They relate the story in a hushed tone, watching carefully for a reaction.
And then to dismiss any embarrassment they laugh.
The history of Burma has been one of imperialism.
The Burmese are descendants of the Mongols, and now they try to dominate the Shans, the Kochins and the Karens.
The students shrug; that's life, they seem to say.
Pools of rainwater collect on the uneven pavement.
Tiny gilt bells record the passage of the wind, and an amiable buddha expresses a worldly, less than tranquil smile on the bustle around his feet.
The Strand Hotel, near the waterfront, was the Imperial equivalent of the Schwe Dagon.
Like Raffles in Singapore it holds in amber a record of the past.
Yet, whilst the Burmese retain a grudging respect for the British, they exact a characteristic vengeance upon the sanctified edifice of their former masters.
The palm court, both vegetation and orchestra, has long since been repossessed.
Only the clank, clank of the wrought iron lift cage provides a kind of background music, echoing through the empty building.
Damp stains creep down the walls to join in sombre triumph the black fungi ascending from the floor.
Cadillac cockroaches, friction-driven, ply the roadways of the corridors.
Cigarette burns lacerate the teak furniture.
In a far-flung foyer three Burmese officials drink in silence, as though in respect for the spirits of the departed.
There is no barman but the hotel receptionist, under duress, rummages a bottle of beer from a tin box and wanders away in search of a glass.
Above, in the gloomy upper reaches of the hotel, a lavatory cistern clangs.
Dust-wreathed propellers turn overhead, twisting and turning the grime of centuries into the crannies of the moulded ceiling.
Beside the reception desk there is a large glass cabinet, labelled ‘Lost and Found’.
It is one of the sights of the city.
A time capsule containing the personal effects of a long dead civilisation: the pince-nez of an extinct dowager, a tarnished cigarette case, two withered clasp hand-bags, indeterminate items of jewellery, and the desiccated remains of insects.
Each item is separately labelled and lies on perpetual display, reducing all the pomp and ceremony of Empire to a few mute and pathetic items.
On the last silvered patches of a fading mirror, the ghost of Orwell smiles.
A Visit to Dominica
Caroline Dilke
A strange thing happened this year.
A man I'd met only twice, a bit of a loner, invited me to go with him to the West Indies.
I fancied him so I said yes.
I knew of Dominica only as the birthplace of Jean Rhys, a writer I deeply admire.
Now when I read about the island I discovered that it is volcanic and mountainous and is the last refuge of the Carib Indians, the descendants of proud cannibals who starved to death rather than accept the fate of slavery.
It is one of the wilder places on earth and contains rainforest, and boa constrictors.
The Caribbean is a vast sea, the islands so small.
From the air they all look different.
We flew over dry, brown Antigua with its ruined sugar mills standing solid as castle puddings; butterfly-shaped Guadeloupe with city boulevards; green Martinique and Marie Galante.
Then sliding reluctantly over the ocean came a thunderous grey cloud, and under it was the crumpled, dark green lozenge of sulky Dominica.
There wasn't much of an airport: just a largish shed with a corrugated iron roof, open at the sides like a cattle shelter.
Roseau, the capital, had primitive street lighting, no smart shops, and nowhere to post a letter.
Concrete drains ran down the sides of the streets, with a bridge across to each house.
In the botanical gardens a huge tree had fallen and crushed a bus.
It looked startled and bedraggled, like a rat in a trap.
The town ended sharply, and we were driving along a bumpy lane through the jungle at reckless speed.
It began to rain.
In the porch of a wooden shack a small boy dangled a land crab on the end of a makeshift fishing rod; it clawed the air, defensive and gaudy.
When we arrived at Papillote, which had advertised itself as being ‘in the rainforest’, we found that its flimsy buildings were half engulfed by the surrounding forest.
The owner of the guest-house, Mrs Anne Baptist, was a small, shy, American woman.
She greeted us guardedly, smoothing her wispy hair.
She urged us to order supper straight away from a painted board which said:
KINGFISH
FLYFISH
CRAYFISH
CHICKEN
MOUNTAIN CHICKEN
‘Mountain chicken is not available,’ she added, ‘because the frogs are still in their breeding season.’
We sat in the open-sided restaurant and saw forest all around.
There was a pressing, gently swaying wall of vegetation in a thousand shades of green.
Beside the kitchen a communal bath, fed from a hot sulphur spring, was built into the wall.
A whole family sat in this, nattering and chuckling in the brown steam.
They had walked up the road from Roseau.
With a tinkling sound, the spring emptied into a shower basin at the edge of the jungle.
Fowls stalked out of the vegetation, looking incongruous: geese, peacocks, guineafowl.
Mrs Baptist grumbled, ‘The snakes are very unpopular here.
Boa constrictors.
However you build your henhouse they'll sneak through a crack.
Then of course, when they've eaten they can't get out again.’
Our room was tiny and wooden.
Through the slats of the shutters we saw the high, green sides of a ravine and a solitary tree fern growing luxuriantly, a living fossil from the coal forests of the Carboniferous.
‘I'm sorry I don't love you,’ my friend said.
‘Don't be sorry.’
We heard a chorus slowly start up and deepen, far back into the forest night.
Something high in a tree clinked sharply, over and over again like a coin thrown into a metal dish.
Other voices mewed, rattled, croaked, quacked and barked.
They were frogs.
One of them was the mountain chicken, emitting a discreet, woof.
I lay in the cacophonous darkness thinking about magic.
There was magic here.
Even in our short journey the taxi driver had spoken of the soukoyant , the witch who takes off her skin at night and flies about like a bat.
Magic: it lubricates the gap between what we can see and understand, and what unhappy feelings haunt our dreams.
Anne Baptist joined us as we explored her jungle garden before breakfast.
She showed us trees with calabashes and wooden fruits, and a thicket of juicy ginger stalks which sheltered huge, pink plastic blossoms.
She pointed out tiny, delicate orchids growing on trees, and the dammed ponds in the river where she planned to breed crayfish.
Some way below the garden a man stood quietly washing himself in the hot water from the spring; it was channelled down there in a homemade aqueduct of halved bamboo stalks resting on forked twigs.
‘For every improvement to the guest-house, I make something for the local people,’ Anne said.
‘It's their island.’
I wanted to see the rainforest I'd read about, a place where vast trunks rise up like the pillars of a gloomy cathedral, where lianas hang down, where bright parrots chatter in the sunlight of the tree canopy.
‘Before the hurricane we had rainforest everywhere,’ Anne said.
‘Now it's just jungle.’
The hurricane struck in 1979 and blew the roof off Papillote.
A wall fell across Anne and her Dominican husband and protected them.
All over the island tall old trees crashed down, and less tall trees whipped about and were filleted of their leaves and branches.
‘Trouble is,’ Anne said, ‘hundred-year-old trees take a hundred years to grow.’
We hired a truck and a driver and explored the island, jolting along rough wet roads through an endless banana plantation.
Yard-high walls of bananas waited at road turnings for the Geest lorry to collect.
We saw the pale brown, almond-eyed Caribs spiritlessly making baskets for tourists.
We saw dead volcanic lakes, grey under the grey sky.
We picnicked on beaches of jet black sand under windy coconut palms, where surf rolled in from Africa.
We swam in the chilly river of the Titou Gorge where it winds through caverns underground.
On our last evening in Dominica the weather was clear, after days of rain.
Anne's husband, Cuthbert, said there'd be fireflies tonight.
He asked, with relish, ‘Ever seen mushrooms that light up in the dark?
Like to see them?’
He led the way up a path through the jungle.
We saw the moon appear and disappear, veiled by clouds.
Gradually we could make out the shaking fronds of the trees, the thick herbs at the side of the path.
‘Fireflies!’
The small, brave lights wandered among the trees, keeping together for comfort.
They were like tiny aircraft following a demented flight-path, having lost their way.
Something else was alight in the undergrowth.
Cuthbert drew out a damp stick on which were two pale blue, phosphorescent toadstools with delicate gill clefts, glowing like the harsh strip lights in a modern kitchen.
By the time we reached the airfield next morning a tropical storm was raging.
We waited in the shed while rain boomed and clattered on to the metal roof, and no aircraft took off or landed for hour after hour.
When we realised that we'd missed our flight to London from Antigua, my friend said, ‘Let's find where Jean Rhys lived.
We could stay the night there.’
Anne had told us it was in Cork Street, Roseau, and had been converted into a sleazy guest-house.
It was a two-storey building, rather flimsy-looking, not old.
The courtyard behind was now a restaurant, and had a tree which Jean Rhys might have remembered.
Inside, Vena's guest-house was certainly sleazy.
The small lobby had a high plastic desk at which the manageress sat.
She demanded payment in advance.
‘It's like a brothel in a French film,’ my friend muttered.
From somewhere inside the house came the loud, curlew-like cry of a tree frog.
There was no character to the room we were shown into.
It was impossible to tell what part of the house it had been.
A pantry?
A slice of a larger, more commodious room?
Cheaply varnished, huge furniture leaned into it.
The shutters were wedged shut behind a carelessly installed washbasin.
When it came to sleeping on the horrid, plastic bed in the sultry room we had the choice of suffocating in the heat or enduring the groaning clatter of an electric fan, which sounded like the soukoyant flapping her leathery wings, rattling at the unopenable shutters and trying to get in.
It was a relief to get a flight the next morning, yet I felt I'd been dragged away from Dominica: I had not explored its dangerous magic as I ought to have done.
The island had cheated and spared me, like a love affair where there has been no delusion, no passion and no remorse.
Since we returned, I've seen my friend twice.
He is a bit of a loner.
Big Game in the Okavango Swamps
Elizabeth A. McCormick
Stranded in the Kalahari desert we had no water and half a packet of Marie biscuits.
The bus from Francistown had broken down again and the passengers disembarked, squatting in the cumbersome shade of a baobab tree.
They, like us, were shifty-eyed; there had been no rain in Botswana for four years and the lions of the Kalahari were getting hungry.
In Gaborone, a week before, we had watched the mauled body of a German girl carried into the hospital.
Her death reminded us of the dangers of complacency in Africa.
In the shadow of the bus, a vulture wheeling overhead, I kept my eyes fixed on the bush behind us.
The driver and friend tinkered with the engine which had burst into flames twice, and been push-started once by the passengers.
Nobody seemed in any great hurry.
Perched on the step of the bus, circa 1935, an old man in a military coat fished a handful of polished knucklebones out of his pocket.
He rattled them between cupped hands and threw them into the dust.
He stared hard at the pattern, gathered them up, threw them down again.
He raised his eyes from the pattern and stared a long time at my friend and I — the only two white people on the journey.
The wings of the vulture rustled over our heads.
Feeling uneasy, we turned to our Africa on a Shoestring handbook, learning that the Kalahari consists of some of the most arid and remote land in the world.
We realised that only two cars had passed us all morning.
By midday we realised we had finished our water and were sweating profusely.
The driver whistled through his teeth.
Nuts, bolts, a broken fan belt dropped from the engine.
It was 40 °s C in the shade and so quiet that all we heard was dust settling, the rattle of bones and the rustle of wings.
A spring fell out of the engine.
But it coughed, wheezed, and shrieked into life.
The driver cavorted round the bus, beaming — no less surprised and pleased than we were.
After 100 miraculous kilometres we met the other bus returning to Francistown.
Discretion erring, our driver announced we would swap buses.
There followed much confusion.
Passengers were still climbing off while the second load of passengers were scrambling on.
Rugs, clothing, mielies, were tossed on top of the buses while the first load of passengers were still trying to reach their luggage.
Finally, each bus made a three-point turn in a cloud of dusty exhaust, and off we went; 300km to Maun, on the very edge of the Okavango Swamps.
I woke, cold and stiff, at 4am as the bus lurched into Maun.
The heat of the day had been replaced by searing cold and the bus was nearly empty.
I dimly remembered having watched the sun set, copper orange over a colourless world.
Then I had slept and awoken as the bus stopped amongst a scatter of mud huts.
Somebody told me we were halfway to Maun and gave me some water which I was too thirsty to sterilise.
Sitting up in the cold morning light we could have been sprayed by a fine grey snow as we slept — dust from the Kalahari which I can still smell in my clothes.
The Okavango river flows across the desert to form a huge swampland, a watery jungle where animals roam; a fascinating, dangerous place.
With a friend we visited the local hospital and saw victims of crocodile, hippo, and lion attacks, and a man blinded by a spitting cobra.
The patient with the hippo bite told me that hippos have become the most dangerous animals in Africa.
‘Once they were shy,’ he told me, ‘but now they attack because the white man…’he pointed an imaginary rifle at the window and pulled the trigger.
Using exceptionally sharp teeth, the hippos can crunch up both dugout canoes and their occupants.
Indeed, the injured man did not even know he had been bitten until the water turned red as he swam to shore.
I found this vaguely reassuring; a short, sharp death seemed preferable to a long, slow chewing underwater.
However, as if this excitement were not enough, we were warned against malaria, bilharzia, and tsetse fly, all of which flourish in the swamps.
The following day we flew into the swamps in a six-seater plane.
Dry desert gave way to blue lagoons full of water lilies, palm trees, islands and deep blue lakes.
Herds of giraffe and waterbuck raced across the swamps in our shadow as we swooped on to the sandy airstrip.
A 15-foot canoe waited along with our poler for the week, Matata.
As he pushed away from shore, the reeds of the swamp parting before us, I asked him what his name meant in Setswanan.
‘Problem,’ he translated with a very disarming smile.
Did it mean he was a problem, or could he solve problems?
We did not dwell on it.
We slid through the swamps while animals criss-crossed our path before and aft; kudu, zebra, buffalo, impala, and a herd of fifteen giraffe, splashing through the water with feet big as plates.
Matata poled gracefully; he could have been punting down the Cam as his pole pushed blue and white water lilies aside.
His ears were sharp as a jackal's and he could spot the tracks of a hippo from an extraordinary distance.
The lilypad sized footprints, at least one foot across, sank deep into the mud — heavy, purposeful tracks.
We camped on an island of palm trees.
Matata built a fire over which we cooked a supper of beans and rice while he caught a fish with a piece of string and what seemed very little else.
The night air amplified the snort and splash of animals and I was very grateful for the orange glow of the fire through the canvas walls of the tent.
Matata slept outside and promised to keep the fire burning; I hoped he was a light sleeper.
When I awoke it was very dark and the fire had gone out.
I lay very still, the hair rising on the back of my neck as something nudged me through the canvas.
There was a snuffle, a grunt, followed by the sound of chewing.
It started to rain.
The animal pushed against the floor of the tent.
The German girl killed by a lion had been sleeping in a tent like ours.
I screamed.
‘Matata!’
My friend, slumbering fitfully by my side, awoke with a yell.
Matata's voice said in my ear, ‘Let me in, please.
Quickly.
It's raining.’
For an hour the three of us crouched inside the leaking tent.
When the rain eventually stopped Matata crawled outside to relight the fire.
I closed my eyes but seconds later there was a scream and the sound of crashing undergrowth; Matata had found a snake curled up in the warm ash of the fire.
There was only one thing to do; light another fire to drive the snake away.
We spent the rest of the night collecting wood, examining each piece by torchlight before touching it.
We soon learned to give animals the right of way in the swamps, sitting for hours at a time in the dugout, watching elephants plod by.
Our unwound watches lay in our rucksacks and when they stopped we followed the pattern of night and day instead.
Eating supper early, we were asleep by eight, before waking at five for the dawn.
In spite of Matata's shock-horror tactics, he was the most wonderful guide, in tune with the swamps by some atavistic sixth sense.
After we woke, he would take us on to the bigger islands, known as the Big Bush’.
Here he tracked animals, and we followed, wading waist-deep through swamp water, crawling on our stomachs to be as close as possible.
The brooding atmosphere of the swamps accentuated our smallness and vulnerability.
Even sounds at night dominated us, as the firelight picked out bright eyes, blinking through the darkness.
I was comforted when Matata showed me a Boer war rifle wrapped in rags in the bottom of the canoe.
I doubt whether it could have found its target but the very shape of it in my hands was reassuring.
A very small pocket penknife (with hoof-pick and corkscrew) hadn't been lending me much courage.
We told Matata we wanted to go further north still, into the Chobe and Moremi game parks.
He missed a beat with his pole and muttered the word ‘Caprivi’, shaking his head.
He told us his cousin was a game scout in Moremi, employed in order to prevent poaching.
He was the only man for hundreds of miles, without radio or vehicle.
He saw no more than four people a year, and was given three bullets a month with which to catch his food.
Matata shook his head again, as if we were fools.
After a week in the swamps he left us in a camp at the north end of the Okavango.
We drank from the crocodile-infested river, and lions visited the camp every night.
I missed Matata's sixth sense and the Boer war rifle.
I missed the wet, swampy jungle and the snort of the hippos.
I found my penknife and kept it close as the shadow of a vulture wheeled over the tent.
I remembered the old man in the military coat and knew I would have felt safer with a handful of dry knucklebones in my pocket.
A Second Shufti at Jordan
Betty Cooper
The Queen beat me to it she got to Petra first!
But I doubt if she had as much fun.
There was she, a horse loving woman, bumping through the Siq in a Land Rover, wearing a skirt and hat.
Whereas touristy me — town-bred and with no more knowledge of nags than a few donkey-rides sixty years ago — I rode high and proud on Suzy, a two-year-old Arab who was full of wind and nervous at moving so slowly.
Holding my back straight and clutching the plaited strings that had once been reins, I felt as intrepid as Stark, as hardened as Lawrence, as much the explorer as Burckhardt.
I was there — at last!
Petra to me had been listed with the Pyramids, Timbuktu, Venice, Hadrian's Wall and Troy as places that I had to visit before I died.
Some of these have been ‘ticked off and none has failed me.
But Petra!
Petra surpassed anything that I had visualised in my kitchen fantasy-life.
That ‘rose-red’ cliché rang true but Burton hadn't gone far enough in hyperbole.
Here were all the colours of the pink-side of the palette, from blush-veined ivory to the deepest purple.
Layer upon layer of shot-silk sandstone soared skywards in the warmth of the sun.
However, not everyone sees Petra so romantically!
Edward Lear's Albanian cook declared —‘O Master!
We have come into a world where everything is made of chocolate, ham, curry-powder and salmon!’
Well, we can't all be poets; some of us get no further than alliteration!
I'd done my homework in advance.
I knew I'd see the facades of Nabataean temples chiselled into the rock and that the cliff-walls would be riddled with empty tombs.
But I hadn't realised that there were extensive Roman ruins as well, and that the wide valley waited for archaeologists to dig deeper.
At this karavanserai merchants had bartered Damascus brocades for Chinese spices; camels and goats for slaves; thin, brittle pottery for water or weapons.
Only when Red Sea dhows replaced camel-trains did Nabataean prosperity diminish.
Nor had I expected to see people living in this city of the dead.
As we climbed up the crags of Petra, black goats eyed us warily from black holes.
Donkeys saluted our passing with those howls of anguish that had made maiden ladies establish animal sanctuaries in Cairo between the wars.
Tiny children, barefoot and dirty, tried to generate enough courage to touch us for a few fils ’.
The caves gave shelter to a new generation of troglodytes — European nomads, Australian girls ending their ‘Grand Tours’ by going native, those few English women who had felt the lure of the desert so intently that they now nursed fair-haired, olive-skinned babies and hung their washing-lines from one eroded pinnacle to another.
Another day I went into the Siq when the sun was setting and the air was already chill.
Smoke from charcoal fires swirled from these windowless dwellings.
Birds argued sleepily in the thornscrub.
The older children were back from school in Wadi Musa, the village outside the Siq where water bubbles from the rock once struck by Moses.
Here the nomads water their flocks and the horses drink their fill when the tourists have dismounted.
Wadi Musa has electricity, provisions, a mosque, teachers, police, a doctor and cultivated terraces of crops, the only green in that wilderness of tortured stone.
Petra is parched and primitive.
Those who choose to live there keep it undefiled.
Perhaps they feel an affinity with its ghosts.
If this is so, time is not on their side.
Soon simplicity must give way to sophistication.
Petra's new hotel, built outside the Siq, is run by an Englishman who cut his catering teeth in the palaces of Saudi Arabia.
He has the personal directive of the King to develop the tourist-appeal of the site and already talks of a helicopter pad and a VIP's ‘cave’ on one of the mountain summits.
So the Queen and I just made it before the deluge!
If you have the same urge for desert places — go now .
The pioneering days are all but over.
Jordan has no oil.
It has very little that anyone covets, so the Hashemite Kingdom has no choice but to woo the traveller; to see that he has ice for his drinks, a soft bed, a flushing loo and a dash of Bedouin mystique to add zest to his package-deal.
Let's have a ‘shufti’ at this kingdom.
Do you know this word?
If you do, you give away your age.
Shufti was Desert-Rat slang in the Forties.
To ‘take a shufti’ was to explore a new posting.
To find a girl was to ‘shufti bint’.
For me, this was a second shufti, for I had visited Jordan almost forty years before.
I was working then in Palestine, a territory torn apart by Arab and Jew, held together by the British Mandate.
A boyfriend offered me a weekend in Amman, with no strings attached.
A chance to buy presents in Amman's bazaar to take home to ‘utility’ Britain.
We left Jerusalem and breakfasted in Jericho!
The Middle East is like that.
Bible stories of Sunday-school days become reality.
The ‘Land of Milk and Honey’ shimmers on the far side of the Dead Sea, when seen from Mount Nebo; from ‘the Place of Sacrifice’in Petra, the white tomb of Aaron is a gazelle's leap away.
Such sightings prove that those ancient wanderers actually lived.
And what hardships they endured!
For this is a land without water in the desert.
Only around Jerash and Amman in the north is there the year-long green of vegetation.
But when rain does fall, then the desert blooms and the parched earth sings, as the shepherd-boys sang in the Psalms.
On my first visit Amman was an overgrown, untidy Arab village, surrounded by seven hills.
The palace of ‘Black Ab’, the grandfather of King Hussein, overlooked the mosque, the bazaar and the huddle of insanitary buildings that made up the capital.
Only the musty Hotel Philadelphia was considered fit for Europeans.
Opposite the Philadelphia was an almost perfect Roman amphitheatre; other Roman ruins lay scattered on the hills, barely investigated by the experts.
Camels, goats, pye-dogs and donkeys scavenged the verges of the dusty, rough roads.
The British officers of the crack Arab Legion entertained us for our weekend.
Off-duty, the subalterns took to their jeeps and accelerated into the desert to shoot antelope.
Their Arab legionnaires galloped behind, firing their rifles exuberantly into the sky like extras in a Beau Geste film.
Today, that ‘sport’ is banned.
Conservation is ‘in’ and wildlife protected by order of the King.
Oryx and ibex are scarce, but they are there.
Rare blue lizards scurry among the rocks of Petra; clumps of black lilies grow beside the King's Highway; the few oases teem with birds.
Now the old Philadelphia is to become a Museum for Antiquities and Amman has superb hotels offering all the amenities of our TV culture — but, beware the muezzin at 4am.
I flung open my double-glazed windows before I went to sleep and the first call to prayer of the Muslim day was a strident awakening.
The hills are built over with Royal Palaces, villas and apartment-blocks.
The civic services work, the new trees and flowers are well tended, the Greek and Roman remains are catalogued and cared for.
Jordan's airline is reliable, the medical services are efficient and the government rest-houses are clean.
Within five years, it is claimed, every house in Jordan will have electricity.
And the nomads are not overlooked — Jordanian army officers try to bring a smattering of schooling to the children who live in the goat-hair tents.
Jordan is catching up with the Western world.
The Crusaders also left a legacy to the Arabs, as did those other invaders who came and went.
Crusader castles cling to jagged crests or rise up from barren plains.
The bones of Christian soldiers who did not return home lie beneath the stones of the desert, sometimes disturbed by the foraging goats.
T. E. Lawrence was a hero to my generation — a hero who is debunked today.
A railway line, built by the Turks to link Muslim pilgrims with Mecca, parallels the asphalt of the Desert Highway.
As the Turks cut down the oak-trees to fuel the trains, so Lawrence blew up the track.
This line is to be reopened soon for tourists and again the steam-trains will chug to Aqaba on the coast.
Shanty-towns of refugee Palestinian Arabs keep the King's Army on the alert.
‘Peace’ is a fragile word, but the King has said —‘I want to hear the tracks of bulldozers, not tanks…the footsteps of travellers, not troops.’
He is a man of vision, whose Bedouin roots give him respect for tradition and the belief that the pursuit of peace must come through diplomacy.
His countrymen show a natural courtesy.
Their hospitality is genuine.
Their food is good, their coffee, spiced with cardamom, is delicious.
And they laugh, so that you laugh too.
See for yourselves, and when you leave Jordan it will be with the words —‘Go in Peace, with God's protection’ following after you.
Jordanians mean it.
Mani
Richard Ward
Five hundred drachmas for the room: the matter was soon settled.
Just over £3 for a generous bed, a vine-clad balcony with a splash of bougainvillea, two lemon trees in the garden below, and a view over olives to the sea — not a bad deal.
Then the old lady took me firmly by the arm and led me into the bathroom.
She pointed to a large hole in the ceiling.
The sight of it seemed to provoke in her a torrent of recrimination.
She spoke fast, too fast for my rudimentary Greek.
What was she trying to convey?
‘You can't get a plumber these days, not for love nor money.’
‘You simply can't trust the workmen any more, can you?’
Together we contemplated a knotted cord dangling from the black hole.
‘Ipárhi neró zestó ?’
I persisted tiresomely, ‘Is the water hot?’
‘Zestó, zestó,’she echoed shrilly, irritated by a fatuous question, and launched into another dramatic monologue with a wealth of expressive gestures.
Then suddenly she was gone, leaving me to ponder along the unpredictable and intractable nature of language as a medium of communication.
Well, the water wasn't hot, then or at any time.
And indeed, who cared?
Outside were the mountains of southern Greece, and in the days that followed there were more important considerations than hot water.
I was in Kardamíli in the Mani.
A year ago the name Mani meant nothing to me.
Then I read Patrick Leigh Fermor's classic and felt an overriding desire to follow in his footsteps.
The Blue Guide too was encouraging: ‘The predominantly mountainous region south of Sparta is seldom visited by foreign tourists…superb scenery and unexpected traces of the past.’
How much had the Mani changed since Leigh Fermor, that most distinguished of scholar gypsies, explored it in the late 1950s?
I intended to find out.
Kardamíli seemed a good base, since the author himself writes of it with such affection.
Arriving on a hot afternoon in October this year I found a pleasant but unremarkable village spread along a bay.
What sets it apart is its situation, with the massive range of the Taygetus mountains towering above.
It is reached by bus from Kalamata through scenery of Arcadian gentleness.
Then, for the last twenty minutes, the road snakes down the mountainside.
Mountain, plain, sea and sky — the scale has grown suddenly grander.
Yet there is nothing gentle about these scorched mountains.
The traveller is moving now through terra incognita.
You enter Kardamíli full of expectation.
The first thing you hear on leaving the bus is German:hochdeutsch, plattdeutsch, schwitzerdeutsch .
There are German speakers everywhere, of all ages, from strident young back-packers to the discreet elderly, all deeply tanned, moving with the assurance of long-standing expatriates.
These German tourists pervade the Peloponnese and the islands.
There seems to be a seasonal mass migration from the Rhineland and the Ruhr, extending well into October.
No corner of southern Greece is immune — not even, alas, the Mani.
There is one escape: take to the hills.
This never fails.
During five weeks in Greece I met four other walkers, all British, two of them women.
The hills above Kardamíli are a good place in which to loosen up.
I followed the main road up the mountain leading west, then struck off along an old mule track.
The goat bells receded and I seemed to be moving through even deeper layers of peace.
There was stillness, an immense blue sky and only the olive trees for company.
These olives — their trunks warped, gouged, carbuncled, abrasive to the touch — seem indestructible, as if they could survive even a nuclear winter.
The trees gave way to scrub and there was little shade.
I was sorry I hadn't brought more water.
Even in an October sun one can get quickly dehydrated on these exposed slopes.
I headed for the white gleam of a village in the distance and was grateful to find that the one and only store sold iced drinks.
The storekeeper asked if I was German.
When I said ‘English’ he started on some obscure anecdote in which I could make out little except the name ‘Margaret’and the repetition of ‘kato, kato’, ‘down, down ’.
Days later I realised he was trying to tell me about the Brighton bombing; it had occurred the same morning.
Another memorable walk was the nine kilometres from Yeroliména to Vátheia.
This is the deep Mani, almost as far south as one can go on mainland Greece.
The road passes through a landscape dotted with crumbling towers, those ‘brooding castellations’ which are the most striking feature of the region.
It was from their gaunt tower houses that the feuding Maniot families of the eighteenth century bombarded each other with musket, cannon and rock, while a cowed population of serfs crept from their semi-troglodyte hovels between the fusillades.
From a distance Vátheia looks like a stricken Camelot.
The towers seem grey at first, but grow golden as you approach.
Most of them are in a ruinous state with their upper storeys missing shattered by earthquake, war, neglect.
The Government is restoring several of them as holiday flats, a slow process but tastefully done.
An odd experience it will be to sleep among these spooky and decapitated towers.
In fact, as I soon discovered, these ruins are inhabited.
I met the old lady as I was walking down a steep path out of the village.
She was struggling up, bent under a heavy sack.
We greeted each other.
The skin of her face hung in purple folds and the old eyes were blurred with cataract.
When I offered to carry her sack she waved me aside.
Who was this impertinent stranger eyeing her baggage?
We moved on up to her tumbledown tower on the last crag of the village.
At the base was a terrace with one stool on it.
Before us stretched an enormous view of mountain, promontory and shimmering sea.
From my pack I offered her an apple, the only food I had.
She dismissed it with a regal gesture.
Then I saw her toothless gums.
I left her in peace with her bundle, her stool and her majestic view.
Like so many villages in the Mani, Vátheia is a ghostly relic.
Life has receded from it.
When Leigh Fermor passed this way and was quizzed and befriended by the fair-haired girl Vasilio with the lamb slung round her neck, it was still a living community.
No longer.
If renaissance comes it will be in a new form: foreign tourists in holiday flats.
The road continues south, though not much further.
The enterprising walker could reach Cape Matapan and look for the cave entrance to Hades.
For those like me who fail to make it to the banks of the Styx, there is compensation at Vlykhada to the north, near Areopolis.
Here is one of the finest cave systems in Europe.
It is in fact an underground river so extensive that the trip in a flat-bottomed boat lasts twenty-five minutes.
You glide through endless caverns of gleaming stalactites and stalagmites and all this time the boatman, dour Charon, speaks only once: ‘Mind your heads.’
The passengers first whisper, then fall silent.
And still you glide.
The Mani, which offers many curious experiences, has none more bizarre than this.
Yet the Mani is not for all tastes.
It is a place apart, the last bastion.
To this bleak peninsula the Spartans came as refugees.
The Maniots, who trace descent from them, boast of never having been subdued by Slav or Turk.
The ruggedness of the terrain was its safeguard: an arid mountain region peopled by warring clans in a perpetual state of anarchy.
No-one coveted it.
Where the Ottomans failed, the travel agencies are succeeding.
Coastal towns with beaches are succumbing to the fat profits of the tourist trade, while the hill villages become ever more depopulated.
Greece has changed immeasurably in recent years.
Many of these changes are for the better: accommodation is much improved, the roads now are good.
Even Greek food — previously lumps of meat and veg afloat in an oil slick — has acquired an unexpected finesse.
But the impact of six million tourists on small vulnerable communities has been profound.
The human landscape so lovingly evoked by Leigh Fermor, Lawrence Durrell and others is now a wistful memory.
But the hills remain, for these mountain ranges of southern Greece do not lend themselves to the blandishments of the travel brochure.
The Mani above all is not cosy; this is no man's dream of Arcadia.
It is harsh and scarred and full of ghosts.
Yet as you walk these hills you feel that nothing has changed.
Goat bells, the smell of thyme, a path winding among olive trees, and the hot sun on your back: this is the Greece that endures.
It is enough.
Gypsy Serenade
Nick Mander
By the time the train arrived in Madrid the Arabs had stolen my coat.
I had not been long in the restaurant car: ten minutes, the length of a cognac.
I was coming south from England; they were returning home from a factory in Germany.
On the way to the hotel I stopped the taxi to have a drink in a bar.
Outside it was winter and raining.
He was standing inside, an old brown overcoat and a white shirt buttoned without a tie, around forty.
One of his sons was dancing in worn-out boots, the other singing for him, to the clapping of hands without a guitar.
They looked about ten, with long hair, both so brown and handsome I could have hugged them; if I were a woman I would have made a date with them for ten years' time.
The hair of the third son was cropped almost to the skin.
He neither sang nor danced, but with his six or seven years could already dominate both the public and his brothers.
When they had finished he ran round with a hat and allowed none of the audience to escape, saying: ‘Gentlemen, for our art.’
Afterwards he brought the hat to his father, who counted the contents then placed it empty among the shrimp and peanut shells on the floor.
‘And the rest,’ he said.
His son swore there was no more.
‘And the rest.’
The boy remained silent.
After a moment he dropped some coins from his pocket into the hat and stepped back.
‘Now the other pocket,’ said his father.
He hesitated, then did the same and withdrew into a corner.
The father looked stern for a while, but soon went to him and, whispering something into his ear in gypsy, gave him a kiss.
I too had put money into the hat.
The father drew me aside and we exchanged names, Nicholas and Gonzalo.
He discovered to his surprise that I was English, not American.
Then he invited me to a gypsy baptism which was to be held that night in the suburb of Vallecas.
When I accepted he suggested I might like to give him a certain sum to help the wine flow.
I hesitated.
He turned to his sons demanding to know whether there was or was not to be a baptism party that night, and whether or not I would be the only white present.
They told him.
The sum changed hands, but underneath the table because it embarrassed him to receive money in public.
On our arrival the bar was full of hopeful faces, most of them gypsy ones.
Gonzalo introduced me.
When I inquired after the baptism he said he had been mistaken, it had been yesterday, but that there would be another in a few days and, anyway, who needed a baptism to enjoy themselves?
We ordered Jerez wine and he presented me to his wife.
She was the only woman there.
She looked forty but must have been younger, and was dressed entirely in black — for her brother who had died three years ago, they said.
She held a sleeping baby in her arms.
When I asked how many there were in her family she said seven, but that the young ones were at home, and did not mention her pregnant abdomen.
She was very polite and, like the rest of her people, never laughed if an outsider said something coarse.
When her husband began to sing a little, snapping his fingers in rhythm, she smiled and for a moment looked like a young girl again; but the barman came immediately and reminded them that singing was not permitted.
Then he said the father ought to be ashamed of himself, using children who should be in school to make money, and that one day the police would find him.
So we moved to another bar, remarking how times had changed.
There in a tiled room in the basement the pleasure began: Gonzalo's daughter danced for us.
She was fifteen, lithe, conscious of her own body and beautiful in her art, and all the while as the spectators' enthusiasm grew her father watched her, drinking Jerez, nodding his head and smiling.
Presently he drew me aside to suggest that if I would like to give him a certain sum his wife and daughter would go immediately and prepare a gypsy supper.
He explained that their house down under the railway by the Bridge of Three Eyes had only one room, but his own eyes shone as he described the delights of a gypsy supper.
When I said I did not have the sum he drew me even further into a corner.
From somewhere upstairs came the sound of a group of people singing songs from their own province.
He cleared his throat and laid his finger along his nose.
It seemed as if the world had stopped to listen.
‘You,’ he said, ‘…that is, you…are my friend.
I…that is I, my wife and my children…we, I, do not like to invite a friend to a party and not give him the best.
Do you understand?
Like this I can't treat you as I wish to.’
But I said it was impossible.
I could not afford more of his hospitality.
We returned to the centre of the room.
Gonzalo poured more Jerez, coughed and examined his throat in the mirror.
Then he turned to his son and told him to sing fandangos in the way he had been shown.
The guitarist began the familiar descending cascades and the boy entered.
But after a while his father stopped him to say he was not singing what he had been taught.
The boy looked at the ceiling.
He had big eyes.
His father told him to listen now to the way he himself was going to sing them.
We all listened.
Afterwards the boy tried again but was stopped once more.
Suddenly a fat gypsy stood up.
A few years ago he had been one of the best-paid dancers in Flamenco.
There were several rings on his fingers and his shoes were still beautifully polished.
‘Listen,’ he said to the boy.
‘I am only a dancer, and I'm too old now even for that.
But I know more about singing than your father will ever know.
You go on as you yourself are and one day you'll be good.’
‘And you,’ he said, turning to the father, ‘should talk less.
The kid isn't singing badly.
He's just singing a style you don't know.’
The guitar was playing again, this time in slow rhythm, and after a while a voice broke in.
It was an elderly gypsy who had been sitting silently all evening, and the voice was as rough as the open road but when it sang the room became quiet.
The singer loosened the collar of his shirt and let his voice flow out as turbulently and tranquilly as he desired.
That night he had reached a moment of feeling no-one else had, and his cigarette burned unnoticed in the fingers of his hands which stretched out parallel like mute ghosts.
He did not sing for long because he was old, but it was enough.
After that we went up.
As we passed out of the bar it was raining again and all Madrid's lights were swimming before my eyes, reflected on the street.
Stepping carefully over the gutter, Gonzalo remarked that I ought to wear a coat like he did.
When I explained what had happened on the train he shook his head and said one should never trust the Moors.
It was midnight.
As we were giving our hands he looked up at me intently and told me that in two days there would be a gypsy wedding.
When I told him I could not come he turned up the collar of his coat and walked away, looking at the pavement beside the unlit shop windows, hands deep in his pockets, and passed into the night going towards the Bridge of Three Eyes.
By now the Arab with my coat would be in Malaga waiting for the boat across to Africa.
Twenty-four hours earlier, we had both been in Paris.
Women and Socks
Fabian Acker
Once Europeans had become accustomed to flip-flops, it wasn't all that difficult to get used to mitten shaped socks, each holding the big toe in its own little pocket and letting the other four doss down together.
But the very first visitors to Japan assumed, from the local socks, that the Japanese had only two toes.
And the Japanese, on the basis of the visitors' socks, thought that Europeans had none.
Well, that's the essence of Japan: mystery and misunderstanding.
You can't understand what people are saying, you can't read the street signs, and you can't find out where the buses are going to.
Nor can you read the Tokyo tube map.
Even if the trains are coloured according to the line they run on, the map itself is like an action painting by a hyperactive centipede.
But the compensations for being unable to read or carry on a casual conversation are overwhelming.
The sight, for instance, of a fat wrestler dressed in a bright open kimono and what appears to be a black chastity belt sitting on the train reading a comic book.
Or the children from primary school on an outing, dressed in sailor suits like Victorian children on their way to the seaside, snaking behind their teacher in twos, each round head and pair of button eyes topped by an identical pudding basin of black hair and blue sailor hat.
The cafés provide a nice easy introduction to the delights and puzzles of Japan.
Avoid the hotel restaurants, and beware of Colonel Sanders.
His larger-than-life statue with its slightly oriental cast of features serves as a warning that you are approaching the junk food area.
The most intriguing cafés have steamy windows filled with plastic replicas of the real food inside.
It is certainly a better way of choosing food than trying to read the menu.
The displays clearly represent food.
The question is: what food?
You can't go wrong with anything shaped like a noodle.
It is almost certainly a noodle.
But look out for those exquisite confections that look like liquorice allsorts.
About the size of matchboxes, they are perfectly symmetrical — some tubular, some round, and some square, with black and white patterns relieved by little buttons of green or red.
They are not liquorice allsorts.
They are fish; that is, they are made from fish.
There's nothing wrong with the taste, but it's a culinary shock if you order one or two for dessert under the impression that you are about to eat some oriental sweetmeat.
If you see something that tickles your fancy you'll have to force yourself to bring the waiter outside and use sign language.
But it's less risky than pointing to totally unknown items on a menu.
Sign language is almost essential in shops too, but it's a little less embarrassing because you can be more discreet.
A tiny gesture towards a desired item and a slight flick of the eyebrows is almost enough to complete most transactions.
Not like dragging a waiter out of a warm café into a cold street while you point at plastic puddings.
Paying for your goods will lead to further mysteries.
In this country of robots, minuscule calculators and pocket TV, they use little wooden abacuses to add up your bill.
You can, for instance, buy a computer, a digital watch and a transistorised tennis game, and the shopkeeper will reach for his abacus (called a soroban in Japan) to calculate the cost.
In the upmarket shops they'll use a calculator to start with and then check the answer with a soroban .
It's obvious that in their heart of hearts the Japanese don't really trust calculators.
The same uneasy juxtaposition of man and technology is evident if you take the lift in a department store.
Two uniformed girls will bow you in and another two will bow you out.
They will also say something to you.
Could it be: ‘Did you have a nice trip?’, or: ‘You're looking well today’?
Whatever it is, they say it hundreds of times an hour with endless patience and cheerfulness.
The lifts of course are automatic and run without attendants.
Another way to get the flavour of Japan, but requiring a little more courage than merely eating in a local café, is to stay in a Japanese-style hotel.
There are five or six in Tokyo and many more throughout the country.
You can get a list from the Japanese Tourist Board in London, which for some inscrutable reason gives only half of them.
You can get a full list in Tokyo.
In this kind of hotel you will sleep on the floor, wear a kimono (provided by the management) instead of pyjamas and share a bath with strangers.
You'll also be given a new toothbrush every evening.
Of course, if you're more comfortable in a lounge suit or twin-set and pearls, prefer eggs and bacon for breakfast, insist on using the same boring toothbrush day and night, and like to take baths alone, then you can go to the Hilton.
There's one in London too.
In the Japanese hotel your bed is a comfortable mattress on the floor.
In the mornings the chambermaid will roll it up leaving the floor space free.
This is covered in rush mats which is why they ask you to wear slippers, not shoes, when you go into your bedroom.
The surface is quite delicate.
Whatever breakfast consists of, it is brought to your table arranged so exquisitely, and with each dish packaged so cunningly, that you cannot refrain from tasting.
You'll discover mussel soup and pickled plums among other unknown delicacies, and you can find out what those liquorice allsorts taste like.
You can always fall back on good old rice and tea if the aesthetic qualities of the food are not enough to overcome your apprehension.
But persist!
After a while you'll find yourself beginning to enjoy breakfast.
As for the communal bath: it's not really for washing.
This is Japan after all; part of the mystery, and so on.
If you want to wash yourself you can go to the real bathroom, usually en suite.
In there you'll find a sink on the floor, just large enough to stand in, and you can have a good long soak up to your knees.
You'll have to wash the rest in air, as it were.
Then, when you're really clean, put on your kimono, drape a bathtowel over your shoulders and join the other guests in the big bath.
There are Western-style concerts in Tokyo; if you're brave about food and hotels, I reckon you can treat yourself to a bit of Bach or Mozart, usually played with maturity and feeling by six- or seven-year-olds.
Don't forget: this is where Suzuki started.
At a recital I attended, when an elderly twenty-one-year-old was performing, the first two rows were taken up by tiny children watching the performer's every move like little sparrows watching their mothers bring in the worms.
And God help the little sparrow that dares to close its eyes or shuffle its tiny feet during a performance.
Mums and dads in the rows behind will soon give a practised twist to its ear.
I saw so many of these earnest young hopefuls that one day, I'm sure, we will be invaded by battalions of these wunderkinder descending by parachutes above the Royal Festival Hall, violins strapped to their backs.
The nice thing is that, at least in music, the girls are on par with the boys.
Not anywhere else.
The Japanese male seems to think that women have only recently developed skills and abilities they never had before.
‘Women and socks,’ the men say, ‘have greatly improved since the war.’
In North Bihar
Diana Phillips
We knew the train would take at least four hours to cover the sixty kilometres from Raxaul to Dhang.
The journey was meant to last three hours, but the train always left at least an hour late.
We knew it would be late but we still hurried through the waking village, across the fields, past the hospital and along the railway track to Raxaul station.
One morning, after heavy rain, the field by the hospital was full of giant yellow frogs; no-one paid them any attention.
Although it was one of the train's first stops and there were never many passengers on board, the people waiting at Raxaul always crammed around the doors, clambering up and forcing themselves in.
Why didn't they wait for the passengers to get off first, instead of squeezing themselves, their sacks of wheat and bicycles on at the same time that others were dragging their possessions off?
They pushed and shoved, reaching through the carriage windows to reserve places by laying their scarves along the bench.
At stations all was noise: bells ringing; people clamouring to get on and off; men walking up and down beside the train shouting mysterious cries, selling food and cigarettes from trays around their necks or from baskets on their heads.
As we prepared to get off, our fellow passengers tried to tell us we were making a mistake.
There was nothing for white people in Dhang: just a cluster of shops and shacks; stalls at the side of the road leading from the station; a bicycle repair shop; little wooden shops on stilts which sold biscuits, cigarettes and sweets.
And lots of lean-to teashops with their sticky mud floors, mud walls with greasy pictures of gods and film stars; the hole in the ground at the back where plates and glasses were washed and mouths swilled out; grimy tables with uneven legs; ants and wasps crawling around on the food displayed in front of the shop.
Hardly a tourist trap.
It takes forty minutes to walk from Dhang station to the farm along a road which starts as a stony track then turns to mud.
There is a short cut across the fields, zigzagging along the boundary banks.
There are always people on this land: a boy sitting on a grazing buffalo, a girl cutting short, dusty grass with a sharp hand-held hoe, filling a basket to take home for the oxen.
They are there; they have been there for years.
For hundreds of years it has all been exactly the same.
Walking along the tracks and paths between the fields, it feels as if thousands have walked there before you.
A security in the ground felt through bare feet: warm, hard ground, smooth and dusty.
Guidebooks say the Bihar plain is barren.
For them it is: there are no temples or museums, only people living by and for the land.
Every scrap is owned, small banks separating each field.
On the map it is divided up into feet.
Every inch looks well used, whether by a girl foraging grass for oxen or by people resting at the side of the road.
The farm has nine acres of land, including the ruins of an old British indigo factory — a long redbrick wall with trees and bushes growing on the old factory floor, weeds climbing along the bricks.
Children played there instead of minding their animals which would then wander out on to planted fields.
A road runs in front of the farm, its tracks worn deep into the ground.
Three crops a year are grown and the earth looks pale and tired in the hot sun.
Buffalo dung is the only thing put back into the soil.
We started at five and worked until eight when we had breakfast, saved from the previous evening's meal.
After breakfast we continued working until eleven, then returned to the long hut.
Each of the men had his own lunchtime routine.
Some washed under the pump before cooking rice and vegetables, while others seated by the heat of the cooking fire then washed before eating.
When there was water in the pond behind the hut, Goshai used to go fishing, damming the pond in the middle and scooping the water over to one side, leaving little fishes panting on their sides in the mud.
He liked fish.
Work started again at three; we rested until then.
At one time the big tree was where we all lay on our scarves and mats.
Then the men took to lying under the mango tree, away across the fields at the crossroads of several paths.
There must have been a better breeze there.
The sun should have paled slightly by three.
But, carrying baskets of buffalo dung from the pit by the cattle shed, along the road and down towards the mango tree to put it on the furthest field, my nose was burnt before I'd walked twenty yards.
I remember the hottest day.
One of the fields had been ploughed and our job was to weed out the wiry roots and tufts of grass that the wooden ploughshare had failed to dislodge so that the field could be smoothed out ready for flooding.
That morning it was hot by six.
After breakfast one of the men returned with an umbrella; everyone else worked with scarves draped over heads and necks against the sun.
It grew hotter all the time.
At eleven the earth was dry and thirsty, the field baking: it was like being fired in a kiln.
At three it was no cooler.
Moving from the shade to the middle of the field seemed sheer madness.
The weeds that we'd uprooted in the morning were shrivelled and brown; the earth looked as if nothing had ever lived in it.
It was still too hot so we all left the field for the shade of the big tree.
This tree is holy.
There is a platform around it, natural on one side, made from the tree's roots, and built round by brick on the other.
Where the roots stick out the bank gives way to a hollow where the buffaloes are tethered during the day.
At the time of weddings, a group of women and children came across the fields with baskets and scarves full of sweets and rice which they touched down under the holy tree to be blessed, before going back the same way they'd come.
The men didn't like us to sit on the platform.
Evenings were beautiful when work was finished and the sun had gone.
The land became active at dusk: oxen appeared in their fields, and buffaloes having their last feed before being led home after the day's grazing.
All day long, boys and girls sat on the buffaloes' backs, lounging in expertly comfortable positions.
I remember one evening when we were returning home from Sitanarhi in the bullock cart.
At dusk, passing through the countryside, everything was slowing down for the night.
Everywhere there were children, crouching by the roadside, minding goats in the fields, cutting a last shaving of grass.
In the dimming light the men were sitting together outside their hut, small children playing between the crouching forms.
Away across the fields was the train, steam drifting out from the engine, people spilling out from inside and on top.
The bullock carts were empty, the oxen eating from huge shallow dishes raised up from the ground on stands made of branches.
The threshing floors lay bare, pale, trodden and packed down in a circle around the post where the oxen had circled.
As the cart passed, frogs jumped into pools made under pumps, women with bundles of twigs and leaves on their heads stepped to the side.
Oncoming carts appeared in the gloom, the drivers calling to each other, one moving over for the other.
The bamboo leaves bending low over the road whisked us as we passed and birds called in the mango groves.
When we got back, some of the men were asleep and some were finishing their supper.
Each slept in a special place: one group in the shed where the chaff for the cattle was stored, some in the main room of the hut beside the cooking fires and others outside under the porch.
The nightwatchman sat on the bamboo bench at the side of the road as everyone else went to bed.
He made rounds throughout the night, checking on the oxen and buffaloes tethered in the field.
After the wheat harvest, there were two nightwatchmen.
The men told us that the area was dangerous, that robbers used to hide in the mango tree at the crossroads and jump down on people returning home to their villages.
After the wheat had been harvested and the rice transplanted we were no longer needed, and took the same train back to Raxaul, leaving the buffalo grazing, Goshai fishing and villagers making their offerings under the holy tree.
Flying Horses
Rolf Johnson
Whenever I've been asked to take a sponsored parachute jump I've declined, giving the excuse ‘fear of flying’.
Of free will I chose to fly to India, taking as my travelling companions a stallion and two mares, in the back of a decrepit Boeing 707 on its third time round the clock.
The interior was like a dingier station on the Northern Line, complete with peeling, dripping walls.
Outside, the Flying Carrot, as this airline's cargo planes are affectionately known to the handlers at Heathrow, has peeling orange and green livery.
She'll be all right when she's finished, said one.
Finished what?
The first leg of the first occasion I had flown horses from Heathrow was made bearable by a bottle of whisky and a regular itinerant groom.
His responsibilities were for a single grey pony bound for a Kuwaiti Sheikh.
They said au revoir at Beirut, the first port of call, having given me a crash course in survival.
We were jammed unceremoniously among sinister-looking unmarked packing cases, obviously best left alone.
Compared with our own disembarkation, when the all-change was announced at Beirut they were unloaded with a certain amount of deference.
Beirut!
What could they do with more weapons that hadn't already been done?
Rising columns of smoke from the ruined city, shell craters and baggage handlers with machine guns gave the airport the appearance of M6 Bank Holiday roadworks.
After five hours (feeling a bit over-exposed) parked on the tarmac, flying off towards the Gulf was an appealing prospect.
The experience of travelling with horses need not be unpleasant.
Horses won't be airsick all over your lap; they don't drone on about overbooked hotels, or insist on playing Scrabble to pass the time.
Ideally a canopy should separate the beasts, and ideally a stallion should not accompany two mares on a pallet the size of a diving board.
They should be let down properly before the flight and not, as in the case of one of the mares, introduced to racing a week previously in a Windsor selling hurdle.
No-one accompanying thoroughbreds expects to glide along aisles adjusting headphones, providing pillows and dispensing drinks, other than the odd bucket of water.
Then again the most beleaguered hostess would not swap a cantankerous granny on a Poundstretcher for a panicking mare trying to lie down in her stall at 30,000 feet.
The mare alongside the stallion rubbed her hip to the bone attempting to do just that, while we took turns swinging from her head and tail as a preventive measure as turbulence upset the flight across Europe.
A hay net can be improvised as a seat belt, especially if there is nothing else (no seats either).
Meanwhile the stallion's attentions were diverted by his own terror, and mine.
The other mare obligingly took little interest in the proceedings — until the Beirut-Sharjah leg.
By this time the new cargo of contraband televisions for India was tumbling about our ears.
This threat posed less of a distraction to the horses than I would have hoped.
When both mares began aiding and abetting one another to increase the confusion and alarm, somewhere high over the Gulf I made for the cabin to solicit help.
There I found an Australian pilot, German co-pilot and Lebanese navigator arguing above the noise of the engines, which sounded as if their exhausts had blown.
These cargo planes are the modern equivalents of the tramp steamer.
They flip from one airport to another collecting and dumping in remote corners, removed from passenger terminals.
The aviators who fly them, while not (generally) sporting eye-patches, are particularly hard-baked salts.
The exchange which I began, ‘Could one of you give me a hand with these lunatics?’ went as follows: ‘Sorry sport, international regulations; can't leave the flight deck.’
‘If you don't leave the flight deck at least one of these horses is going to be joining you on it.’
‘You know what to do — shoot the buggers.’
‘Where's the humane killer then?’
‘Under the coffee pot.’
‘There's only an old fire extinguisher here.’
‘Use that then.’
When I got back to England, someone commented on my bravery in the crisis.
What else could I do, I replied — bale out on the Iraqi trenches?
Fire the extinguisher?
Pray?
Well, as I explained to the Almighty, at 30,000 feet I was much nearer to him than ever before and, shouting to make myself heard above those damned engines, perhaps there was an even money chance of being heard.
I was certainly sincere.
When we landed at Bombay (for the story has a happy ending) I asked to be shown the piece of tarmac pasteurised for the Pope to kiss on his recent visit, so I could bless it too (poojahs is the Hindi word) and give thanks for deliverance.
That's when I noticed oil dripping from the fuselage.
Whether or not horses understand landing procedure (they don't smoke or have to cope with seat-belts), it occurred to me that we had taken a couple of bites at the cherry on our approach — I could only guess how near we came to dismantling the gateway to India, for there are no windows in those vehicles.
There is a sweet old chestnut about the JAL jumbo mistakenly landing on a tiny nearby private airfield in smog.
On that occasion three miles of slums were levelled as a pathway along which the stranded plane could be dragged back to the International Airport runway.
Only from here could it be reasonably expected to take off.
Our problem had been landing at all.
The hydraulic lines had burst and the wheels had to be lowered manually.
The crew hadn't been able to knock in (‘locate’, for the purposes of the Captain's log) the nose-wheel pin.
They took near-disaster as an everyday occurrence, which it probably is.
In fact, the Captain, miffed that there was no hotel taxi waiting, was preparing to return to Abu Dhabi with his leaking plane when I left.
I'm sure he did.
Deposited on the runway, horribly close to the fast lane, we must have been an unusual sight for incoming international passengers, gazing at a three-horse traffic island.
The horses oggled back, equally bemused — especially the stallion, who would have failed dope tests for the next six months.
At Heathrow I'd been asked specifically not to tranquillise him in case of the possibility of side-effects which could have seriously affected his future stud career.
As he reared and kicked all those miles above the earth, the decision narrowed down to him or me.
He had three syringes administered to him.
The last one I saved, just in case, for myself.
To be brave, or blasé, was not my ambition.
Having worked in racing stables for a number of years, I went to India with every prospect of enjoying racing despite the absence of luxuries like The Sporting Life .
When we landed, the problems weren't nearly over.
All the paperwork seemed correct, except that most important paperwork of all — the baksheesh.
There weren't enough rupees to oil the wheels for those ‘whose hands are greased not from honest toil’, as an Indian newspaper euphemistically described sticky palms.
Two pretexts were given for the failure to release us from the airport: that one of the mares wore a head-collar with an obviously masculine name embossed, and that one of the fillies’ passports was stamped GONE TO STUD.
India has a number of diseases all her own, but if there is any suggestion that a foreign filly has been on the loose in a British stud she is rejected as unclean.
So my first act on Indian soil was to telex a friend at Weatherbys, the British racing bureaucrats, to get them to explain the facts of life to the Bombay Turf Club.
After three days — as Indian delays go, lightning — the caravan moved to one of the best-run studs in India, in the grounds of the Maharajah of Mysore's Palace in Bangalore.
Here I encountered some of the problems indefatigable Indian breeders deal with.
In the middle of Bangalore, as you thread through a jungle of exotic trees and overgrown ornamental gardens, cross long neglected croquet lawns, tennis courts and disused summer houses, you are confronted with Windsor Castle, or at least a very passable facsimile locked up and in pawn to the Government to pay Royal debts.
This is the Palace.
There was no water, though, for an artificial Thames; and the whole relic, presently used as a backdrop for the film of A Passage to India , is patrolled by a pensioner who served the last war in South Shields.
The stud occupies the old cavalry stables and, imaginatively, the elephant houses.
Nowadays it is run by an Englishman who arrived in India forty years ago with his billiard cue and eight shillings.
He went on to become leading trainer in Madras for eighteen years and is set to retire to his property in Cheshire, which is fenced by the running rail from Castle Irwell, Manchester's racecourse.
The traditions of the British Turf, like the last Englishman, are safely enshrined in Indian racing centres like Bangalore, where scribes still describe jockeys as ‘knights of the pigskin’.
Horses with names meaningful to English ears have passed this way: Lance Corporal, Red Indian, King Midas and now the stallion I had delivered, Pink Tank.
An effort was made to set up the stud in a more favoured, not to say more conventional, site in the foothills of the Nilgiris.
This was defeated by panthers who ate the foals, and by wild elephants on whose walk the buildings were sited.
Now the Palace Stud lives on borrowed time as Indian racing moves up a gear.
Apart from delivering Pink Tank and the two mares, and six foals in the stud season, my contribution to the future of Indian breeding was almost certainly sacrilegious.
Snakes abounded in the palace grounds, as did ants.
They, and all of life in India in its own way, are sacred, but the holes bored by the former and the mounds erected by the latter in the paddocks were a threat to the horses, Occidental logic demanded that the one could best be filled by the deposition of the other.
This was achieved but the worst was feared.
In my book, more danger would come from the vet, whose tetanus syringes were kept in his bicycle puncture outfit.
But he meant well, and the place and his practice thrived in the way that life tends to in India.
Fecundity and infinity make happy bedfellows: there are probably 1,000 million Indians and — who knows?— the only impossibilities in this country are finding a size-three horseshoe nail and a bath plug that fits.
Given the chance, I suppose I'd take the Flying Carrot to Bombay again, though by that time I'd have taken parachute lessons.
To the Middle of Nowhere
Carel Toms
The train from the Back of Beyond is about to arrive at the Middle of Nowhere.
A week out of Moscow across Siberia and five time zones later you somehow land up in landlocked Mongolia.
Galloping horses, endless deserts and grassland steppes.
People with faces like unworked mahogany stand around in their tunic-like costume and ill-fitting boots with turned up toes.
All are heavily wrapped against searing Siberian winds which bear the ghosts of Genghis Khan, Marco Polo and ‘living’ Buddhas.
A flat-faced, slit-eyed courier smiles from her yellow moon face and says the baggage will follow on a lorry.
It did and was dumped outside Hotel B, one of only two in Ulan Bator, capital of this People's Republic.
Built just a few years ago it looks battle-scarred by usage and needs a good smartening up.
The bedroom lock is insecure and only one hot tap on a swivel trickles into both bath and basin.
Mongolia is remote, not easy to reach and feels like it.
Everyone is out to please and eager to show off their millions of desert acres.
They have not long entered the twentieth century and in many ways still live in the past.
Remnants of their old ways still abound.
When you have shown your disguised appreciation of the country's monuments to the 1921 revolution and to the Great Patriotic War against Fascism and seen the palace where the last king lived, you will be taken to a Buddhist lamasery.
There you are advised to hold your nose as you egg your way through groups of shuffling, shaven-headed and saffron-robed monks amid a stifling mixture of stale incense and body odour.
This is the country's one remaining lamasery and its last vestige of Buddhist splendour.
There are sounds of tinkling bells and subdued, mumbling voices as the monks, sitting in the lotus position on wooden benches, turn the pages of their scripture books.
Outside they prostrate themselves on wooden prayer beds.
They call this enlightenment.
Sixty miles east of the capital is Terelj.
It's a village of felt and canvas tents called yurts.
There are also some wooden huts and everything is fenced in to keep out the wolves and curious locals.
It's a kind of health farm and you go there to sample a simple lifestyle which Mongolians have been enduring for about 3,000 years and you are going to put up with for twenty-four hours.
To reach this desolate spot you set off at sun-up and head toward mountain ranges which scarcely ever get closer.
The coach driver weaves his way through washed-out bits of road.
The countryside is deserted but for groups of distant yurts which resemble pickable mushrooms.
The rows of white tents are numbered like a council estate.
A gravel path wanders between them.
Here and there a duckboard keeps your feet off the mud.
If yurt accommodation runs out, then there are the chalets.
In the compound centre stands a model of a Buddhist temple and a prayer bed.
It's fun but utterly phoney.
They say 40 per cent of the population of about one-and-a-quarter million Mongolians still live in yurts.
None has any sanitation.
They are designed to be portable and enable herdsmen and hunters to move around the countryside in search of new pastures for their camels, sheep and yak.
A rickety building called a ‘hotel’ is where you eat on the site.
The washroom is outside, where there is a smell of scented Russian soap and bad drains.
Mongolians, of course, use the steppe.
We share our yurt with an Australian couple.
He snores and she complains about the lack of a good cup of tea.
Because of our ‘unexpected’ arrival the restaurant can summon up only tinned salami, half cold packet soup and some dry cake.
Americans in the group flee for their vitamin pills and demand hot water to make coffee.
A yurt is comfortable and a wooden floor raises it from the ground.
Lino and thick carpets cover the floor.
Exposed woodwork of the roof struts and main pole are beautifully decorated.
It's all rather like an old-fashioned gypsy caravan.
But six-foot Aussies and Englishmen have to jack-knife their bodies at the four-foot door which leaks substantial amounts of air — as does the roof where the stovepipe pokes through.
A ‘chambermaid’ who looks about eighty goes from tent to tent with a wheelbarrow full of logs and lays all the fires in the dustbin-like metal stoves.
We put a match to ours and it goes up with a rocket-like roar, heating the yurt in a flash.
The reconditioned air attracts the flies so we wander round like lost nomads thinking about the next meal.
There is not even a postcard to buy, let alone a stamp.
If you follow the electricity poles over the steppe to the next village, the people there are partially settled inside bricks and mortar.
Down by the river the boys fish with rods cut straight from the surrounding forest and grill their catches on an open fire.
No-one asks for a re-run of this one night stand.
‘Scenery great, food awful’ is the consensus.
The traditional beverage here is kumiss , a thick curdly drink made from mare's milk which has been allowed to ferment.
They say it contains eight per cent alcohol, and the locals down it by the gallon.
You need an iron stomach as it tastes like some awful medicine.
We return to civilisation after a wash in cold water, a breakfast of buns and sour cream and a ride through knife-sharp mountain air.
This is the stuff of travel.
Not on the Itinerary
J. W. Acton
Although my churchgoing is confined usually to weddings and funerals, there are times when I am certain that one guardian angel at least has been detailed to watch over my welfare.
Such an occasion occurred half-way through my holiday in Russia.
I had taken a package tour to Moscow and Leningrad primarily for the White Nights Festival of the Arts in June — an annual event of Soviet cultural life when the sun hardly sets for a fortnight and old men sit in the public gardens for half the night playing speed-chess.
One normally expects to see all the best opera, ballet and musical talent on this tour, but our group had arrived at the tail-end of a meeting of Comecon heads of state, the National Gymnastics Championships were in full swing and quite unexpectedly, a British delegation led by Sir Geoffrey Howe had arrived for peace talks.
The net result of having so many favoured people around was that tickets for the Kirov and Bolshoi ballets were obviously rationed, and we had to be content with second league fixtures of circus and puppet shows to fill any gaps in the programme.
Five days of sightseeing in and around Moscow passed quickly enough.
One marvelled at the two-mile-long queue for Lenin's tomb, and the loving care with which the Russians have restored the winter and summer palaces of the Czars after the destruction of World War Two.
But Leningrad is far more artistic in every way, and there is the strange experience of emerging from a theatre at eleven o'clock at night to find the sun still shining brightly.
Now, on the Tuesday evening, I had obtained a ticket to the small Philharmonia Hall, where two of Russia's most distinguished musicians were to give a recital of classical favourites for violin and piano.
I left the hotel early and in pleasant sunshine, wearing a light jacket and bow tie, but alas did not bargain for a sudden change in the weather.
After fifteen minutes on the Metro to Nevski Prospect I was met by a teeming downpour, heavy enough to keep me holed up under cover until ten minutes before the performance was due to start, and with the hall some hundreds of yards away along a back-street.
At five to eight, the deadline, I decided to make a run for it, and was within sight of the doors when, without any warning at all, my stomach muscles suddenly began to roll up like a shop blind and I was violently and horribly sick.
Doubled up with pain, I found support between two Lada cars (what else?) and emptied my insides with great gasping spouts.
I was carrying a good supply of handkerchiefs and managed to keep myself clean, but it was ten past eight before I had recovered sufficiently to move, with attendance at the concert now out of the question.
My next problem was how to get back to the hotel before my stomach gave a repeat performance.
Public transport was definitely out.
In Leningrad's crowded streets a tram or bus ride is a virtual eyeball-to-eyeball body massage with the natives, while on the Metro, with the escalators descending at breakneck speed, there is little chance of a retreat and no toilets.
Bleary-eyed, I staggered back to Nevski Prospect, and there I spotted a dejected-looking husband sitting in his car outside a supermarket, obviously waiting for his wife to emerge with the shopping.
It's the same the whole world over.
Taking a one rouble note from my wallet, I tapped on his window.
He looked me over before winding it down.
‘Taxi?’
I enquired, hopefully.
‘You wish to ride?’ he countered.
‘Hotel Moskva,’ I said.
‘And quick!’
He snapped up the rouble and with a few deft movements had me seated, safety-belted and away.
The drive would have done credit to a New York Yellow cab, and in no time at all I was being dumped at my hotel — on the blind side but within reach of my room and some assistance.
A young white-coated medico was called in, with an even younger sidekick to carry his bag, and a lady interpreter.
Between them they took my pulse rate, temperature, and a decision that I was not, nor had been, blind drunk on vodka.
There were other suspicions, though.
‘You must come to hospital for correct medicines,’ announced the lady.
‘What have you eatings today?’
‘Nothing but hotel food, nothing,’ I replied most emphatically.
‘Der best fodder iss domestic fodder,’ said the medico darkly, as we descended in the lift.
There was a red-crossed Land Rover waiting, and nothing more was said until we reached the hospital.
On the outside it looked like something left over from the siege of Leningrad in 1944, but inside everything was in immaculate white, including a large wrinkled matron who proceeded to give the medico a verbal roasting, followed by expulsion from the premises.
I learned later that, in the presence of a superior officer, he had wrongly suggested that I might be returned to the hotel after treatment.
‘You cannot return,’ said this matriarch.
‘The 'otel has got thousands people.
I must find what is your illness first, yes?’
The cross-examination which followed was alarming, and interspersed with words sounding like hepatitis and malaria as she filled in a long questionnaire with a series of Niets and Das .
By this time I was sorely in need of a toilet, and it was her turn to be alarmed when she suddenly grasped the meaning of my frantic gestures.
We rushed along the corridor to a small private room with a bathroom en suite, and as the door slammed shut behind me a virtual volcanic eruption shook the other end of my torso…
Now I felt well under par.
Lying on the bed, which was very old-fashioned but deliciously comfortable, I thought of my home, my Queen and my country.
The time was now about nine-thirty, and I must have looked ghastly, for a young nurse who popped in with a set of pyjamas sized up the situation in a second and popped out again, running down the corridor calling for help.
Alarm bells rang.
A kindly looking lady doctor arrived, followed by a porter towing a saline drip apparatus.
After listening to my heart and extracting a syringe-full of blood from an artery, they connected my right arm to the drip-feed.
A bustling staff-nurse washed my face and hands.
A little ward-maid appeared at the bedside with an enormous vacuum flask of Georgian tea, refusing to leave until I had downed every drop.
They fussed around until the doctor left, when everything went deathly quiet, and I slept like a log until morning.
I had come from the hotel expecting to return, and was quite unprepared.
I had no razor or toiletries, but made the most of the bathroom shower and hot water and began to feel better.
As I was about to get dressed, however, the doctor reappeared and began to administer the most thorough medical check-up I have ever experienced.
Apart from being pressed, prodded, tapped and manipulated whilst lying on the bed, I was cardiographed, x-rayed, blood-tested and biologically examined in a series of walkabouts and strip consultations.
I was to be incarcerated for another two days and nights on a diet of three assorted pills and a curious fizzy powder in a paper wrapper, presented every few hours with instructions in mime.
The room was spartan and the furniture basic, but to my surprise there was a large colour television in perfect working order.
So, as my whiskers grew, I settled down to watch France beat Brazil in an exciting football match, and enjoy one channel entirely devoted to children, where understanding was universal despite the language.
But I was to discover another facet of Soviet hospital life when, after the last meal of the day at six o'clock, I became aware of a plaintive female voice outside my window.
‘Andrea!
Andrea!’ she called.
I crept behind the curtains and looked out.
The woman was middle-aged and handsome.
She was scanning the windows of the ward above, and holding up a plastic shopping bag, through which I could discern two bottles of wine and several cartons of cakes and other goodies.
Presently, her worried look changed to a broad smile as a hook on the end of a fishing line was lowered past my window.
She attached the bag and it was swiftly hoisted aloft.
After a brief conversation she said goodbye, blowing kisses, and immediately her place was taken by another hard-working housewife calling ‘Victor!
Victor!’
I began to think that I was in an isolation hospital, until I realised that nothing at all happens after six o ‘clock until breakfast next morning — not even a hot drink except in emergencies.
And with hospital food also being the same the whole world over, I could have done with my own wife appearing outside with a food parcel.
But she was not on the tour, so I had to grin and bear it.
As a final gesture of international goodwill, I was given a massive injection into my rump, before being released on Friday morning.
Vitamins, they said it was, to build me up for the flight home on Saturday.
Those kindly people also provided a full written report on my state of health, with a diagnosis of gastro-enteritis, the tests and the treatment.
‘You will present this to your doctor in England, please,’ said the Matron at the door.
‘It is something unfortunate on the table, goodbye.’
‘Do svidaniya,’I answered, and kissed her on the cheek.
She was built like a javelin thrower, but she blushed and I knew I had been in good hands.
The medical report is written in Russian, with even my name translated into Cyrillic, so I've had it framed to save my local GP from having a brainstorm.
Yet my fate could have been infinitely worse.
Much, much worse.
For had it not been raining so hard on that Tuesday evening I would have arrived at the Philharmonia Hall in good time.
Seated in the midst of an elegant and well-informed audience, my stomach would have erupted during the opening bars of Dvorak's Humoresque …
A Slice of the Big Apple
Emma Brooker
Six gritty months of fumbling with biros and over-read text books in A level tedium were wiped nut.
Wiped out by a five-hour flight to a city where riding the subway is an act of hedonism, and where the pollution on the streets works on the brain like speed, driving people scrambling to the summits of New York City's towers of granite and power.
‘The movies are true,’ screamed my eyes from the back of the yellow can which I took from the airport.
I rattled in the corner of the great plastic sofa of a back seat.
Monster cars sharked past, the cluster of Wall Street skyscrapers loomed; an elite of big names at a very mixed party Freeway became mapled streets, buildings flattened into the four-storeyed Victorian Brownstones of Brooklyn.
The cab driver dumped me outside my home for the next three months.
I dragged a bloated suitcase into the basement flat.
Fans were purring; it smelt of mouldering heat on city rain.
So, I was going to be living in a district with a Wholeperson's Clinic, and a Funeral Home up the street.
Around the corner was a Hardware Store selling Croak-a-Roach and Roach Motels.
Next door to that I could buy carrot cake ice-cream.
Compliments took the form of, ‘Hello Mommy, I've got hurting in my bollocks.’
yelled from a passing Oldsmobile as I trod the sidewalk.
TV told me about the victim of child molestation who claimed, ‘I owe my analyst my life’.
It showed sport in Super Slo-Mo, and got ‘Close Up and Personal’ with the stars.
I was mesmerised by the prime-time show,Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous , One episode of this told the story of the bus boy from Ohio who bought an Italian baronetcy, owns three islands in the Canaries and is now the world underwater backgammon champion.
Equipped with such information, I decided it was time to hit the streets.
First I went under.
Dark, damp, noisy and stifling, the subway is an assault on each of the senses.
It has an all-pervading stench of goat and rotting peaches.
Even for the natives it is a point of pride to understand the system.
Seeing me in a state of bewildered angst, they would come up and intone directions in a rhythmical and mysterious language.
‘You take a D train down to De Kalb, Switch to a Double R, QB, or four…’
Surfacing from this Kafkaesque dungeon you can be sure only of confronting the unexpected.
Nothing specific epitomises New York; its essence is extremity, and diversity, packed into the highest possible density.
My first shot of Manhattan was on emerging from the subway on to Fifth Avenue.
I looked up at a sheer sheet of glass and steel, one of the 1930s  Rockerfeller buildings.
Indifferently magnificent, it sneered back at my eager camera lens, which could only fit in a pitiful few floors.
The scale was intoxicating.
Everything big.
Fifth Avenue, sliced right down the centre of the island, felt liberatingly airy because of the gigantic proportions of every shape and space.
Brash and confident as an arrogant all-American jowl.
Looking down one of the Avenues is like looking at the inversion of a sunset.
The outsized buildings march into infinity in shades of grey to mauve, blurred by a haze of fumes.
Pick a different subway stop.
Washington Square; Greenwich Village, the part of New York which stays up all night and starts waking up around midday.
A couple of middle-aged men with bluish legs were roller skating along the middle of the road.
In the square a Quaker choir was performing, and old men in heavy overcoats were in uproar over a game of chess.
Some man came up to me and asked, ‘You wanna smoke?’
He proceeded to roll a joint, smoke it, produce juggling equipment and give a dazzling, impromptu performance.
I walked East to Astor Place, where the streets are paved with people sitting next to, and selling, their household rubbish.
Perfectly safe, until I strayed a few blocks in the wrong direction and found myself, the only female, in a street lined with male prostitutes.
‘Sexss lady?’ hissed one through a gold tooth.
The nearest subway entrance was blocked with trash.
The place stank of violence.
Take an Uptown train to Columbus Circle; Central Park.
I dodged herds of joggers, cyclists, people playing croquet, baseball, and walked into the theatrical bustle of an operatic cast preparing for an open air performance of Madam Butterfly.
Back Downtown, to Canal Street, where I found Chinatown, with the second largest Chinese community in the West, 30,000.
I wandered into dusty, pungent shops selling live chickens, and dried snakes for rubbing into bruises.
Pagoda-topped callboxes melted into the Mafioso restaurants of Little Italy, and the warehouses-turned-art-galleries of Soho.
Carry on down to the tip of the island; Wall Street.
I bounced off fat people in double-breasted pinstriped suits, and strode beside young execs and briefcase-bearing, silked women, into the World Trade Centre.
From floor 110, the highest point on the island, I gazed back at the midtown outbreak of skyscrapers, the Chrysler and the Empire State in their midst.
With the edge of the island visible on either side, Manhattan sits in murky river, an absurd chunk of metropolis looking like a Gothic spaceship working up to an explosive departure from the planet.
New York is criss-crossed all over with fine dividing lines.
As well as the grid system of streets, there is a territorial grid which is equally apparent.
Starting exactly two blocks down from where I was living, there is a Hispanic neighbourhood, run down and emptying out.
Ten years ago it was full of Italians, who, when the Hispanics moved in, drove through and shot from car windows.
It was obvious when I missed my local subway stop.
The line went on into a big Jamaican area, and I was the only white left in a full carriage.
Feeling ridiculous, I took the next train straight back.
‘This is a city full of alienated people,’ my landlord told me.
The blacks and Hispanics who live on the poverty line, in slum ghettos, feel alienated; so do the predominantly white middle classes in their ‘good’ districts, he explained.
Not surprisingly, one common feature New Yorkers share is paranoia.
I soon developed their reflexive habit of checking behind whenever someone walked towards me in a fairly empty street.
Some people carry a ten dollar bill, to keep the potential mugger happy and stave off an angry attack.
Rent is high, accommodation scarce, and the chances of getting a knife in the stomach far from slim.
The rats in this race bite back harder, and hungrier.
Compensating for its disadvantages, New Yorkers live the city for all it's worth.
The energy gets to you like a wire spring inside, being wound tighter and tighter the longer you're there.
Once revved up to the standard, frenetic pitch of activity, one day becomes a limitless bank account with which you can do everything…and anything.
I met a boy in his mid-twenties, from Kentucky, who had come to New York to set up as a dentist.
Down in Kentucky they call NY the nation's brain drain.
He gave me two good reasons for moving to the city.
He told me, ‘I like to party.’
And then later, ‘I like nice things.’
This is the reason why he chose to do dentistry rather than Art Restoration, despite the fact that, ‘I lurv Russian icons.’
Doing it his way, he can make lots of money as a New York dentist, and buy a few nice icon things for himself.
Such candid consumerism made a refreshing change after the squeamish English double stand over money.
Money is the law of life there, which has to be lived by.
No use in nobly pretending it doesn't happen.
Rather than remarking on seasonal changes in the surrounding foliage, the majority of New Yorkers whom I met would relish a detailed discussion about the subtle fluctuations in Real Estate Value.
New York is a city of dreams.
The dreams rely in part on the dreamer sustaining a faith in the American ‘ethos’ of freedom and liberty.
Liberty, that is, to be like the bus boy from Ohio, liberty to realise any dream, be it at the expense of others, which, in this land-of-the-free, it inevitably has to be.
Lack of adequate welfare services — health, housing, education — demonstrates the lack of sympathy for casualties.
After all, they started out from the same nest of opportunities as the rats who are now fatter.
At the mouth of New York city harbour stands Liberty.
She has welcomed the oppressed and disowned of the world to this paranoiac dreamscape for nearly a hundred years.
This summer she was torchless, covered in scaffolding and swathed in white canvas.
At night, lit from within, she looked like a stricken ghost, fleeing the city of glittering towers.
The Road out of Pinjarra
John Wilkinson
I am sitting in the shade of a gum tree, by the side of a dusty road in Pinjarra, Western Australia.
It has taken me fifty lifts to reach Pinjarra; a name on the map you do not notice until fate holds you there.
After three months' travelling in Australia, hitch-hiking has become an addiction; the stimulation of a new acquaintance, a frank exchange of views, and then back on to the roadside — a self-contained experience without any repercussions.
I have been waiting for a lift for four hours.
I seem to be a permanent figure in this small town, loitering under the shade of a eucalyptus, with my blue sunhat pulled over my eyes.
On the other side of the road, two old aboriginal women, one with a grey beard, stumble away from the local park after their afternoon drinking session.
The road back towards the shops and bars melts into water, thanks to the oppressive dry heat.
The beardless aboriginal, who is wearing a black polka-dot dress, collapses on the pavement.
Her friend squats by her side, looking into the sun.
I notice that she is squatting in the shade cast by a telegraph pole.
I have visited Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Kalgoorlie and Perth thanks to the goodwill of timber-workers, fruit-pickers, farmers, sheep-shearers, pensioners, housewives, drunks, fishermen, truckies, a postman, a policeman, a ferryman and an inebriated, middle-aged Englishman who looked suspiciously like Ronnie Biggs.
My duty was to supply conversation to break up the monotony of the heat-haze on the straight roads through the bush.
What will I discuss with my next host?
How many snakes and kangaroos he has killed in his car, English as opposed to Australian beer, a possible Test successor to fast bowler Dennis Lillee, or Conservation.
The latter can be a dangerous word for hitch-hikers in Australia, particularly with farmers and timber-workers.
Most farmers I travelled with regarded National Parks as scrub full of snakes.
One farmer was livid that he could not go into his local National Park and chop wood for his barbecue.
Unless you like being marooned in out-of-the-way places with a half-empty water bottle, it is not a subject a hitch-hiker should get drawn into.
I fell into the conservation trap again with a Sydney chiropractor concerning native, and non-native, birds in Australia.
After tea, if he was in the mood, the chiropractor would go out and shoot starlings in his garden, because they had been introduced from Europe.
I suggested that starlings had probably been in Australia longer than his family, and if his argument was translated into human terms then an aboriginal would have a justifiable right in hoisting a spear into his chest.
‘Do you mind being called a Pommie Bastard?’ inquired the chiropractor.
‘I hear that England is in a bad way.
A lot of people out of work.
Most of our trade union problems are caused by infiltrating Poms.’
Only a foolish hitch-hiker makes this mistake twice.
It is not only individuals who get ravelled up in this native/non-native business.
In Western Australia it is an offence to cultivate blackberries in your garden, and it is also your duty as a citizen to report to the authorities any sightings of sparrows or starlings.
The information board outside the Freemantle Police Station displayed a poster which offered a reward for information leading to the conviction of a person who had murdered a High Court judge.
Next to it was a picture of a rogue starling with the caption, ‘Have you seen this bird?’
Back in Pinjarra the old, semi-conscious aboriginal groans, and then lapses back into sleep; another fringe dweller out for the count.
A white Australian boy appears, and proceeds to do ‘wheelies’ around the two old women on his racing bike.
Could this scene be acted out every day at 4.45pm on the road out of Pinjarra?
Sweat pours from beneath my hat, and my shorts are going raggy at the hem.
My peeling, sunburnt nose resembles a small bundle of rags.
Australian flies must be the most persistent in the world.
I wonder if the British introduced them?
The heat is getting to me.
I drink the last few drops of water from my flask.
‘Want a tinny, son?’ inquires a voice from behind me.
I turn around and see a small, fat man leaning on his garden fence.
He is wearing white shorts, and laughter lines run in deep creases by the sides of his eyes.
‘Oh, thanks very much.’
He delves into his portable coolbox and fishes out an ice cool can of lager.
The beer slips down my throat.
No sooner have I got excited about the cool sensation in my throat than the can is empty.
‘Those two old abos look like they've had a skinful,’ observed my benefactor.
‘My son works for the housing dept around here.
You know that when a black fella dies the whole family moves out of the house and goes walkabout.
They'll not return for love nor money, because of the bad spirits.
Now where's the logic in that?’
‘I suppose it's tribal superstition,’ I reply.
‘They were more nomadic before the whites colonised the country, and their tribal huts would be more temporary structures than council housing.
I wonder if they would sooner live in a tribal hut than the white man's three-bedroomed house with fully-fitted kitchen?’
‘I'd like to see them get the plans through the government housing regulations.
Besides, what sort of life would that be?’
‘What sort of life is hitch-hiking?’
‘Your choice, son.’
‘Exactly.’
‘I see your angle.
The whites repress the aborigines.
Don't forget, son, that a lot of Australian people's ancestors did not ask to be deported from jolly Old England!
You know we were the Poms, not you lot.
We were the Prisoners of Mother England.’
‘Fair dinkum,’ I replied.
‘Honours about even, son.’
We both laughed.
At that moment the blue flash of an estate car passes my field of vision.
The brakes are applied and the passenger door opens.
I turn to say cheerio to the old man, but he is digging under a pair of stringy barks, with his back turned towards me.
Vince and Fred are part of an Italian rock band called Casablanca.
They are going as far as Collie.
‘Where are you from?’ asked Vince.
‘England,’ I replied.
‘Someday I would like to travel abroad.
Travel broadens the mind,’ confirmed Vince.
It certainly does when it is hot in Pinjarra and you cannot get a lift.
The Gulf of Finland on Ice
David Green
Perhaps, they're penguins, I thought.
But they were too far away for me to be certain, and the blinding light could have been playing tricks on the two of us.
It doesn't help your orientation one bit when the land is indistinguishable from the sky, nor indeed when you're not quite sure whether you've left the land yet.
Very soon we would not be able to see the line of tall evergreens that parted beach from cloud.
Our penguins remained elusively in the distance, though motionless.
Underfoot the ice creaked and groaned dubiously: we were over the sea.
An earlier wind had whipped up the surface snow into rivulets like tiny mountain ranges, and whirled spirals like ice cream from a machine.
Beneath this the layer of ice was almost perfectly smooth, though occasionally an unseen force had pushed its plates together and upwards forming huge mountains amongst the hills and valleys.
Every detail was spectacular, yet the whole formed a nothingness of intense light and cold (about twenty degrees below zero).
We could only lock our vision onto those distant penguins and attempt to get that far.
In places the ice seemed to be frighteningly thin, and our boots turned it mushy as seeping salt water formed lakes in the snow-vales.
The air, heavy with silent, still flakes, closed in behind us making our isolation almost absolute.
The quietness seemed somehow to be incredibly loud, perhaps because wherever else I have been I could at the very least, listening hard, pick out some distant sounds of life, or even the wind in the trees.
But here we were truly in a void; our footsteps had a booming, dull thud to them, and standing still with breath held left our ears desperately searching for something, anything, to catch hold of.
My senses were confused by this new experience, having previously associated sightseeing with sights to see, not to mention hear and smell.
To keep my mind in check I decided to remember the journey here (a cavernous train with wooden seats) or the flight to Riga (alarmingly, the roof leaked), but I couldn't help falling into the mental free-form that this placed allowed.
Here was somewhere in a meditative limbo between earthly chaos and spiritual ecstasy; we could have been on the crystal lake of the Apocalypse, half-way to paradise…
If only it wasn't for the cold that nagged at us constantly.
My feet had ceased diplomatic relations with the rest of me.
Our penguins held fishing rods and wore hats and coats of thick fur: they were humans — nay, Russians.
I expect we were about three miles out to sea by now, though I could not smell any salt, hear any gulls or see any boats.
The over-swaddled Russians had built curved walls of ice around themselves and drilled small holes through to the sea, over which they crouched with their fishing tackle, perfectly still.
Some of them had faces: red-raw and wrinkled, with tiny eyes and pursed lips.
Their breath hung about them indecisively.
They looked — and there's no getting away from this — infinitely bored.
One of them gesticulated to us and, using harsh, staccato Russian (which neither of us understood) and rather violent stabs into the air, made it very clear that we had taken a dangerous route over the ice and that we were very stupid indeed.
We noticed now a trail of well-trodden snow winding back towards the shore, obviously a route known to be safe by the experienced locals.
We smiled feebly and refrained from attempting any further communication with these introspective folk.
They eyed us with vague curiosity and then returned to their (apparently fruitless) fishing.
My friend and I settled ourselves onto the snow and uncorked a well-chilled bottle of wine in the hope of getting merry.
In a most oblique way this place was very exciting; the searing blanket whiteness was stunning and the sheer starkness ultimately beautiful.
But it was not merry.
We had to get up and gingerly stamp around to recirculate the blood.
For an hour or two we trudged about trying to find something more (or something at all) to see, and even photograph.
Finally, frozen stiff, we made our way back along the relative safety of the fisherman's path, with a cursory wave back to the huddled forms.
Ahead of us the tall pines that stretch out across the frozen plain of Estonia distinguished themselves from the snow-coated sky and earth.
It seemed that the all-pervading light was weakening: it must have been late afternoon.
This presented a thought that made me shudder with fright: this awesome, eerie world-apart in the dead of night, unbearably cold, no moon or stars, merely the moan of the mysterious gods beneath the ice…
We hurried on.
What spirits lurked within the murkiness of the intertwined creepers of the forest?
Such a dense blackness, and unreal noises…
Oh, it wasn't like this at all, I'm sure, yet the shape silhouetted in the snow where the ice met the beach turned into our worst fears.
He was dead, there's no doubt about that.
He was lying, clothed, on his back, legs apart, elbows resting in the snow with his arms inexplicably pointing straight upwards ending with contorted, blue fingers, like a pair of old, gnarled trees.
My heart gave me an unforgettable jolt when I thought him to be headless; yet there was no blood staining the fresh, even snow.
Perhaps it was tucked under his collar.
We were speechless, but we morbidly crept towards him when a sudden snap from the forest warned that someone was approaching and we ran along the beach then through the trees, hearts pounding, and gasping for breath.
Never has fear gripped me so tightly, yet it was exhilarating, fantastic even.
There was a schoolboy excitement about it, but weighed down by the heavy, weird atmosphere of the frozen Gulf.
During the terrible siege of Leningrad in the last war supplies were eventually conveyed to the starving thousands on carts from Finland across the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of Finland (it was fortunately an exceptionally cold winter)— what must have been a fearsome journey.
Now history is swathed in an inscrutable silence.
At the comparative safety of a deserted road we collected ourselves a little and then headed for the station, trying hard to chuckle about it all, though obviously we had both been deeply affected.
The final straw, as it were, came when we were back home: none of the photographs we had taken on that day came out.
The Pharaoh's Curse
Ruth Anders
The blast furnace heat at Aswan jumps off the tarmac and hits us like a blow as I lead my group towards the terminal building.
‘Keeping the rest to clean your teeth?’ nudges Doctor Whistler, pointing to my depleted bottle of mineral water.
‘Aha, that's right!’
I smile, through gritted teeth.
My head's pounding like a sledgehammer, and my stomach feels frail.
I touch my pocket for the reassuring packet of Diocalm.
Tour Directors aren't allowed the luxury of being ill.
Away from Cairo HQ I'm in sole charge of ninety physicians and their wives on a pre-congress beano — four days of cruising the Nile and doing the sites.
A trio of rickety buses takes us to our floating hotel, the Hatshepsut .
Once settled in gracious colonial-style comfort, I relax a little.
The air of excited anticipation builds as doctors dive into their Welcome glasses of Ribena-like Karkade and their Baedekers with equal enthusiasm, like kids out of school.
At sunset our dining-room view of the shadowy river is spell-binding.
Less prepossessing are the three bluebottles on the table decoration poised to divebomb my fried chicken.
Doctor Rawlings from Bradford, having warned me long and loud on the flight about the perils of raw food, cold food and ice, passes beaming, with a mountainous plate from the buffet.
‘Iris is having terrible trouble remembering the name of this ship!’
‘Tell her to try thinking of a hat and a cheap suit!’
I suggest, pleased with my ingenuity, and blissfully ignorant of how much I shall shortly be needing it.
During the night I wake to dash the two yards from bunk to bathroom.
Taking one of every sort of pill I've brought with me, I convince myself I'm just overtired.
TUESDAY
Trouble strikes.
I'm sneaking a moment on deck before breakfast, feeling limp and watching a heron gliding around like a poker with a crick in its neck, when there's a North country whisper behind me.
‘Iris is very poorly this morning.
I'm afraid she won't manage the temple.’
Why does my heart sink?
After all, one case of the trots hardly spells disaster.
But I have this nagging suspicion that my luck as a first-timer tour group leader cannot hold.
Sure enough, there is only forty per cent attendance at breakfast.
One after another physician approaches my table conspiratorially, to complain of feeling unwell, or tell hair-raising tales of a companion's sleepless night.
As the boat's engines thrum into startling life, mild apprehension gives way to serious foreboding.
Doctor McRae bounces up like Tigger, smiling fit to bust.
‘Well, at least if we're catching Egyptian bugs, we can all treat each other!’
Quite.
Aswan town front, reminiscent of Worthing in terms of Thirties-style decay, slides slowly from view behind us.
An hour later we tie up, and a small party departs stoically up the bank for Kom Ombo temple.
I remain nervously aboard, to hear doctors exchanging advice on every deck: Doctor McRae recommends a diet of rice and yoghurt.
(He has been addressing the problem rather more seriously since his wife succumbed after breakfast on her way down the gangplank.)
Doctor Turner swears by a universal prophylactic of gin and guava juice, offering me a swig from his thermos.
Imodium changes hands like cocaine on Eighth Avenue.
Reeling somewhat from the gin concoction, and making for the captain's office, I console myself with the thought that if I need anything from an appendectomy to open heart surgery, there is no shortage of equipment or expertise to hand.
But Something must be Done, and I collar our captain, who is not in his office but enjoying a cigar on the pool deck with the purser.
A previously helpful fellow, he seems reluctant to discuss the matter, dismissing the whole thing with a wave of his bejewelled hand as just the usual English gippy tummy.
Neither his English nor my Arabic is good enough to argue, and anyway, perhaps I'm over-dramatising.
Later, sitting weakly on a disquietingly depopulated sun deck as we drift downriver towards Edfu, I put the worries of tropical viruses aside and watch the river banks roll lazily by, parallel fringes of lush greenery backed abruptly by the yellow hills of the desert.
Donkeys graze by fields of breezy sugar cane, and minarets rise phoenix-like from seas of palm trees, their fronds swaying together like a corps-de-ballet.
The river, serene and still for long dreamy stretches, bursts with occasional scenes of activity where bunches of noisy children play in the shallows alongside gleaming water buffalo, or groups of chattering women pound the weekly wash.
A pair of feluccas drifts across our bows like lovebirds, their sails throwing long shadows across the tranquil water.
Mesmerised by this biblical travelogue, and deliciously warmed by the late afternoon sun, I wonder if my lightheadedness is caused by the euphoric sensation of time-travelling or by imminent physical collapse.
Dinner is an even more depleted affair than breakfast.
WEDNESDAY
Kom Ombo and Edfu, like the fitness of my charges, have been and gone, and now at Esna a few determined explorers rattle by horse-drawn carriage towards the town centre at 6am.
Esna, a series of dusty streets and alleys, is still asleep, apart from the odd scavenging tat-eared dog.
The temple sits some fifty feet down in its own huge sandpit, buried for centuries until someone tripped over what turned out to be the top of a pillar.
High above, in abrupt contrast, sit the comparatively recent buildings of the town, their roofs and turrets catching the early morning sun.
Back on board, the senior consultants, having had a council of war, open up with a full frontal attack of heavy verbal artillery, ending with a chilling final volley: ‘Most of us will be taking samples home for analysis.’
And sending each other massive consultancy bills, I think to myself, while my well practised straight face almost lets me down with both this thought and that of the possible scenario in the Heathrow customs hall.
I assure the grim-faced surgeons in front of me that representations will be made to the shipping line on our return to Cairo, and that, meanwhile, the Captain and I will, after appropriate consultation, revamp the menus.
‘Revamp to rice and yoghurt!’ trills Doctor McRae,en passant .
‘I'm still fine!’
I give him what I hope is a suitably withering look.
Late that afternoon Plague Ship Hatshepsut reaches her final mooring in ancient Thebes, and there is a chorus of clicking camera shutters as we pass the unexpected splendour of a silhouetted Luxor temple.
Doctor Turner takes me aside to acquaint me in funereal tones with the details of a colleague's latest symptoms.
I wish he hadn't.
THURSDAY
The decks are a little more lively, with the genuinely and partially recovered sitting about in little groups, eyeing me accusingly whenever I pass.
(I'm sure the Ancient Mariner had an easier time.)
At least the numbers on the shore excursions are slowly swelling, although the collective preoccupation is not so much with details of what site we are about to visit, but how many ‘comfort stops’ there will be.
Magnificent Karnak, with its corridors of stone rams, sky-embracing pillars and gigantic inscrutable statues, stretching apparently as far as the eye can see, is breathtaking.
Ozymandias, whose famous admonishment has been haunting me from Day One, seems to lurk round every corner, laughing up his sleeve.
The captain, possibly in an effort to make some amends for our problems, offered today's trippers airline paper bags, just in case.
Several who declined this gesture now regret it, and I'm thankful for the sandy ground which provides the perfect means literally to kick over the traces.
Back on board, the hoped-for but unexpected sight of a deus-ex-machina in the form of our travel agency chief is immensely reassuring.
Gratefully, I enlist his help; he confers with the various spokesmen with charm, patience and a magic defusing device called being The Boss.
Relieved, I turn my exhausted attention to the details of tomorrow's expedition to the Valley of the Kings, and our return flight to Cairo.
FRIDAY
Finally back at base, it's amazing what a five-star hotel can do to revive the spirits.
The difficulties of the cruise are all but forgotten by most.
‘We've had a marvellous time,’ they beam, ‘really marvellous.’
Before I retire to bed, one small item appears for the stop press.
Doctor McRae, the only one to have survived the cruise unscathed, has tripped on a kerbstone and broken his foot.
Aboard the Trans-Siberian Express
Stephen Lawson
She started sobbing three hours before the border.
The conductress tried to console her with a glass of sweet, strong tea but without much success.
She remained in the long druggeted corridor, a crumpled figure in a pink dressing gown watching the forests spinning madly by.
The tankard holding the glass depicted a Slavic swordsman defending a child and she held it tight as a keepsake.
It certainly was a crying matter.
The birch forests of Siberia, so upright, so elegant in autumn, had been broken by this winter campaign.
Brought into perfect arcs by wind and snow, the younger birches littered the track-side like ribs and tusks while the old and brittle, unable to bow before the onslaught, rose into the air like splintered spines.
Even the express was beginning to show signs of vulnerability to the elements.
The sinks and toilets were blocked with ice and the narrow cubicles connecting the carriages were thick with snow, their door handles stinging.
Each cubicle was a treacherous no man's land, now braved by only a few passengers seeking out the dozing heat of the restaurant car which, nearing the end of its journey, had little to offer.
She was, of course, crying for none of these reasons.
Her daughter loved the stations.
She was usually dressed and waiting half-an-hour before the express pulled in.
Arm-in-arm with the day-conductress, she would walk the length of the train, watching the ice being tapped off the water inlets and the track-hoppers getting a warning from the new MCK engine elbowing its way backwards.
When the conductress and the girl turned and began their precarious stiff-armed run along the platform back to the wrought-iron steps of carriage No 3, it was the signal for a dozen others to do likewise.
Feet were wiped, the steps were brought in, the samovar was stoked and nostrils which had stuck together like prickly gauze snuffled back to life.
At one station they had cut short their promenade and dived back to get a thermometer.
A huddle of passengers gathered round the steps of the carriage to get a look at the reading and, lest their breathing distort the figure, Nadia held it aloft like a fish between finger and thumb.
Thirty below.
Several minutes before the express was due to pull out, the platform was empty.
The station master was in retreat and only the ever-watchful V.I.
Lenin peered down the track in the direction of the heroes who had to work on.
They stood up from their points-cleaning to watch the express pass when, to the delight of her comrades, one of them bellowed ‘Mishka!’ to the train driver through a rolled-up magazine.
A brief and warming thigh-slapping routine ensued before headscarves bound tight as bandages were again bowed before the task in hand.
It was around Lake Baikal that the woman in pink had been able to share in her daughter's delight with the journey.
She explained to us that she had spent her childhood in a village near Irkutsk.
She pointed beyond a wooden pier to the place where she used to sit on a crate beside her father as he fished through the ice.
At the age often, her talents had taken her away to Moscow where she had studied, married and made her home.
As we watched the train's shadows turn and fold on the snowy shore, it became clear that she had not forgotten the stories which made this much more than a stark inland sea stretching as far as the eye can follow.
Once, before she was born, her father had found a curious bloated and boggle-eyed fish on the shore.
He had made a meticulous drawing of his find and had insisted that she take his handiwork with her to Moscow where it adorned, in turn, dormitory, flat and office.
She was now taking it to Peking.
She could imagine what was going on in the lugubrious depths of Baikal.
These strange survivals from pre-history the golomianka , were no doubt nosing around the wreck of Old Prince Khilkov's locomotive which had plunged through the ice eighty years ago.
‘Don't worry,’ she reassured us.
‘That was in the days when they were laying tracks on the ice; in the days, too, when you could get married out there.’
She swept her hand towards the endless expanse of ice and water.
‘And on a boat made in England.’
Her face became as bright as an icon as if she had momentarily glimpsed the old customs of Irkutsk: a bridal party bearing skates of bone and bodices of the finest needle-point standing on the southern shore and looking across Baikal; a sallow-faced groom from Chita smoothing his first moustache and pacing the deck of an ice-locked paddle-steamer.
By the time the express clattered into Zabajjkal'sk, on the Russian side of the border, the attentions of the conductress coupled with her own resolve had prepared the woman for the formalities.
All that remained was paperwork and a passage to Peking.
She had taken her last look at this obscure outpost of the Soviet Union and now stood with her back to the low sun.
‘We will be here for some time.
The wheels need to be changed for China and the officials…’— she indicated a rank of grey-coated youths further up the platform —‘they will expect you to stand in the corridor while they search your room.
So please,’ she started off towards her own compartment, ‘no reds under the bed.’
It is indeed the room which interests them — the room, the space, into which a Trans-Siberian stowaway may be fitted.
There is room for a couple: one here behind the luggage (hunched like a cosmonaut hurtling into the unknown) and another there beneath the bottom bunk (blankets burying a crouched figure waiting for rebirth).
All the lights are up and cold air has come in with the officials.
Young men with pale, waxy skins, they are straight out of some Moscow academy.
Old hands wear leather gloves, old heads wear fur hats, as if they are badges of office: we hunt, we trap, we tame.
These are reluctant hunters, ill at ease and inexperienced, wary lest a nervous glance could give flesh to fear — the fear of coming face to face with a cowering countryman, the fear of finding the loaded chamber in a game of Russian roulette.
In this compartment, in this carriage, on this train, it does not happen and they move on to check the papers of the woman and her daughter.
Even as the guards are ushering them into the corridor, the carriage rolls into an immense echoing workshop.
A tankard on the compartment table sits as a reminder of the glories of Soviet technology — sputniks and rockets spin out of a world inhabited by the Spassky Tower and an olive branch — and, as if to demonstrate that the mundane is as attainable as the sublime, not a spoon rattles, not a single drop of sweet Georgian tea is spilt, as the carriage is smoothly elevated and the task of fitting a Chinese-gauge undercarriage is taken in hand.
The mechanics wink and whistle and smoke aromatic cigars.
They look as though they should be on horseback flying towards the sun.
Now they swing beneath the iron horse, a race apart from the officials pacing the corridor.
Ruddy mortals, crouching and crawling around the under-carriage, they can look up for inspiration to the immaculate lives portrayed high on the walls of the workshop, to those models of determination and robust heroism familiar to all Soviet citizens: Riveters and Liberators, Welders and Flag-bearers, beaming Foundry-women with goggles thrown back on their brows like aviators from the Great Patriotic War.
‘We all have to do something for the good of our country.’
She had returned to the window and was watching me photograph the posters.
I will be spending three years in Peking, at our Embassy, so perhaps we will meet again when you collect your return visa.’
One month later I did visit the Embassy, a little Russia behind a wrought-iron gate and walls once used to confine Cossack prisoners.
There, in a small panelled office, was the drawing of a queer fish waiting like a fabulous train with headlamps ablaze in a Siberian night.
Dolmens and Blarney
David Shanahan
It was a bright clear spring morning when the boat docked in Rosslare and I disembarked in Eire.
Finding the roads almost traffic free, I decided to push on as quickly as possible towards the harsh and romantic west coast.
I was making good time when my eye was caught by a small, wooden sign, on which was written, ‘Harristown Dolmen’.
I pulled up opposite, wound down the window and stared.
At this point I might as well confess to being what is called in the trade a ‘megalithomaniac’.
Any stone, no matter how small, if it has the tag ‘megalithic’, then I'm hooked.
The sign pointed down a small lane running off the main road.
Had I got time?
It was still early, so why not?
Turning into the lane, I was overwhelmed by a feeling of plunging underwater.
Dense masses of vivid green vegetation swayed and lapped in slow motion.
The shifting surfaces scattered and diffused the light, so that it fell down, dappling the already dappled cattle browsing under the trees like schools of fish.
The road became narrower and ran ahead of me like a twisting silver elver.
I saw no signs and had gone a few miles before I saw my first human being.
A tall, thin man stood staring at a stone wall, as if waiting for an answer to a question he had put to it.
I wound down the window and asked him if he knew where the dolmen was.
‘The dolmen?
Sure, of course I know where the dolmen is.
Isn't it just over dere, behind dem hills?’
He gave me an armful of left and rights, and off I went.
Half an hour later I stopped the car, got out, sat down on a bank in an empty green world and admitted to myself that I was lost.
After a while, the feeling that I was completely alone in the world became less frightening.
I sat watching with passive pleasure an unending variety of greens weave and dance in the breeze.
Above the shuddering tree-tops, swallows darted like pond skaters across a thin, blue film of sky.
The approach of an old woman disturbed my nature watch.
As she came level, I got to my feet and said hello.
She gave me a great, gummy grin which almost split her face in two.
She was small with coarse, wire-wool hair and bright bird's eyes that missed nothing.
Her hands, resting on the pram she was pushing, were those of a giant.
The pram was full of what appeared to be nettles.
In the middle of these, nestling like an egg, was a bottle of milk.
Nervously, I asked her if she knew of Barney's Dolmen.
As I heard the words I knew they were wrong, but couldn't for the life of me remember the dolmen's proper name.
She gave me another cavernous smile and said: ‘Barry's Dolmen?
Sure, of course I know it.
Follow me an' I'll lead yeh right to it.’
The thought of creeping along in a car behind an old woman pushing a pram full of nettles didn't appeal so, mentioning a pressing engagement, I got a garbled set of directions and bade her good day.
I must have passed in and out of several counties that morning, looking for that dolmen.
People cheerfully pointed me in the direction of Barry's, Harry's, Carry's and, in one case, even the Black Dolmen.
Sometimes, if they didn't know the one I was after, they sent me off in search of one or two they had of their own.
So, when at last I came to a small village with a large church, I decided that perhaps the priest might be the best person to tell me where these prehistoric pagans buried their dead.
A woman arranging flowers around an anaemic statue told me that Father Burne was, ‘even now, in the sacristy’.
I passed an old man cutting back the undergrowth with a rusty scythe.
He said hello, so I thought I'd give him a try first.
He was the first person I'd met that day who didn't know what a dolmen was.
When in the course of my explanation I mentioned the word pagan, he jerked as if he were on the end of a wire.
Looking nervously over his shoulder in case the priest should hear, he scratched his head and rolled his eyes, all the time muttering that terrible word.
Then suddenly he clicked his fingers and spat the word out.
‘Pagans!
Dere's an old Protestant graveyard, overgrown now, you understand, up dere, by de old crossroads, as used to be dere.’
I waited patiently while he told me forty different ways to get there.
Then, thanking him, I beat a hasty retreat to the sacristy door and knocked.
The door was opened by a tall, bulky man in his late sixties.
His stern, bloated red face overflowed the shining white barricade of his dog collar.
Profuse amounts of grey and ginger hair sprouted from nose and ears.
Above his eyes a thick, prickly hedgerow jutted at right-angles to the bone.
He listened with a terrible look of disdain on his face.
Then he thundered:
‘What in God's name do ye wantta be looking at tings like that for?
Are ye a Catholic?’
I shifted uncomfortably and confessed that I was.
‘A lapsed one, I suppose.’
He sniffed, and oceans of hair swayed in his nose.
Ignoring my mumbled apologies, he turned and conversed with a shadowy figure which had spread like a silent stain over the carpet as we talked.
The shadow appeared to have an extensive knowledge of dolmens and their whereabouts.
It passed this information on in a terrible hushed whine that seemed to creep in and fill the head.
The priest relayed the directions, spitting out the words as if they were poison.
I thanked him and his shadow, and hurried back to the car.
The shadow's information proved to be correct; fifteen minutes later, I found my dolmen.
It stood in the corner of a small field, larger and more impressive than any I'd yet seen.
The great, grey stones seemed to be heaving themselves up out of the earth like pieces of ancient bone, to squat in the alien flesh of the present.
These majestic stones, flecked with orange and white lichen, are the last of thousands that once littered the prehistoric landscape.
Most have long disappeared; many of those left have been pressed into service as gateposts on farms, or blacken slowly as lintels over fireplaces.
Late bluebells grew in profusion on the tumbled remains of the great mound.
In a stream nearby, two stones from the cairn circles still stood upright.
Over a hedge I could see a large stone sitting in the middle of the field, basking in the sun like a great toad.
I took some photographs; then, tired and happy, lay on the mound and watched some large, white clouds with grey bellies drift like giant manta rays through the swirling air.
High above them, thin wispy cloud lay like plankton on the endless surface of the sky.
The search had taken it out of me and I must have dozed off.
I was woken by voices and saw two elderly ladies seated at a nearby bench, which had almost disappeared in the undergrowth.
Feeling curious, I went over to say hello.
They were an odd couple; dressed in old-fashioned summer frocks, blue with white spots, their hair cut level with their chins, pudding-bowl style.
Odd hairs straggled out of various warts, and the brown freckles of age gave them a strange resemblance to the stones.
‘We're sisters and spinsters,’ they told me with a laugh; but, more importantly, members of The Waterford and District Friends of Ancient Monuments Society.
This august body had been responsible for placing the bench we were now sitting on.
It was there in order that people might have a picnic by a monument, on just such a day as this.
We talked of dolmens and stone circles.
They shared their tea and sandwiches with me as the day slid away behind us.
They laughed like a couple of schoolgirls, hands fluttering to their mouths like butterflies when I told them of my encounter with the priest.
‘We're Quakers, you know,’ one told me, and, ‘Oh, we do find the antics of the natives so terribly funny!’
This statement, from two ladies as eccentric and charmingly Irish as anyone I'd met that day, just about summed up my own feelings.
Towards evening I went in search of bed and breakfast; the mad rush to the west could wait.
The Sky Burial
Niema Ash
Six AM.
I wake before the alarm, filled with apprehension.
I had resisted attending the sky burial.
However, I know that experiencing such a unique, ancient ritual is the essence of travelling.
If I avoid it, I might as well be on a tourist bus, shielded from Tibet and from myself.
Pascal, Doune and I begin the hour-long walk out of L'hassa.
We pick our way through a rubbish dump and climb to the burial site, a stubbly patch on top of a rocky hill, surrounded by desolate bare mountains, looking like wrinkled old elephants' hide.
Five Tibetan men and a boy of about ten, dressed in worn jackets and trousers, are seated around a fire, drinking tea, talking and laughing.
They smile welcome.
Nearby is the altar rock where the burial is to take place, a large flat rock with bowl-like depressions, separated by a gully which is strewn with discarded clothing and hanks of hair.
We sit by the edge of the gully facing the altar rock.
Pascal gestures toward the mountains.
I look up.
Rows of large silent birds are perched on the mountain ledges — vultures.
Their colours blend with the mountains.
Ravens swoop in the gully and gather nervously in black clumps on the altar rock.
A white square bundle, tied with rope, sits among the ravens.
A small dog struggles up the rock and chases them.
The rising sun slowly turns the drab greys and dull browns of the mountains to patches of pale gold and dusty pinks.
It becomes warmer.
About fifteen Westerners trickle in.
No Chinese.
In the past some have jeered at the burial procedure.
Now Tibetans stone them.
Westerners still seem welcome, though they too have created ‘incidents’.
Several days ago an Australian, desperate to capture the sky burial on film, although Tibetans forbid photographing, hid behind some rocks.
He was discovered and chased.
Next day Westerners were stoned.
Yesterday several filtered back.
Today we are greeted with smiles.
Tibetans are wonderfully tolerant and forgiving.
Still, I feel certain our days at the burial site are numbered.
A little after eight o'clock the sun touches the altar rock, the signal for the burial to begin.
One of the men dons a grubby white coat and a surgical-type cap.
He says something in Tibetan.
Someone translates: ‘While we work, no pictures.’
The man in white, two other men and the boy, climb onto the rock.
The remaining two Tibetans, relatives of the deceased, sit by the fire.
The man in white is thin and wiry with flashing black eyes and black hair sticking out from under the cap, wild looking.
He unties the bundle.
A woman, naked except for an unbuttoned faded red blouse, tumbles out.
She looks pregnant, youngish, with long black hair.
(Later we learn that her body was carried a long distance on someone's back, for there are only a few places in Tibet where sky burials are performed.)
The man in white drags her body over the rock and lays it face down in the centre.
He begins without ceremony by pulling off the blouse and flinging it in the gully.
He pulls a large knife from his belt, and with surgical precision cuts a slit down her spine.
Starting from the shoulder blade he strips the flesh down the left side of her back, using swastika-patterned cuts.
(For Tibetans the swastika is the symbol of the wheel of life.)
This done, he neatly hacks off her left arm and tosses it to the young boy, who, squatting on his haunches, pounds it to a pulp with the back of an axe.
He grunts and groans with the effort.
The man in white continues to hack the left side of the body, panting loudly like someone chopping wood.
The two men, also squatting, are thrown flesh and bones which they pound in the bowl-like depressions.
The sounds of panting and puffing combine with those of flesh being pulverised and bones being smashed.
Tzampa , a mixture of barley flour, tea and yak butter, is added to the flesh and bones to make a paste.
Everything happens quickly.
The men work with practised skill, pausing only to sharpen their axes or for a short cigarette break.
The woman's right side is begun, the flesh sliced expertly from the ribs.
The man's white coat becomes splattered with blood.
By now the rock looks like a butcher's shop, bloody with tattered flesh and strewn limbs, and the woman like a butchered carcass.
I turn away many times, unable to watch, then am drawn back, unable not to watch.
The butcher flips over what remains of the body, a torso with no back or limbs.
He chops hard through the chest cavity and reaches inside to pull out the heart.
Holding it up, he shouts something to the two Tibetans by the fire.
They nod.
He chops the heart to bits.
Then the stomach is slit open and the organs removed.
These are cut up and kept separately.
The work is easier now.
While they work, the men talk and joke.
The Westerners are silent.
Lastly, the head is separated from the neck with one precise blow.
The butcher holds the head by the hair and deftly scalps it, then, tying the long black hair into a knot, he tosses it into the gully.
Next he picks up a large flat stone and, holding it overhead, mutters a prayer and smashes the skull, twice.
One of the seated men brings tea to the rock.
An old man dressed in traditional clothes appears and, facing the rock, says a prayer and prostrates himself.
At this point the butcher, turning to the vultures, calls: ‘Shoo…
Tzshoo …’
At the signal about a dozen vultures, the vanguard, leave the mountains and swoop onto the rock.
The butcher throws them bits of flesh as they gather around him.
They are huge beautiful birds with white necks and legs, and speckled tan and white bodies.
Their wings flutter and spread to reveal white undersides and dark brown tips.
Some are so close that we can see their bright blue eyes.
The boy bundles the chopped organs into a cloth.
Several vultures try to steal bits of flesh from the boy.
The butcher chases them off the rock with kicks and abusive shouts, as though punishing them for bad behaviour.
The boy carries the bundle off the rock, the two men accompany him.
Then the butcher, facing the mountains, addresses the vultures in a shrill sing-song voice, calling, ‘Tria…soya …tria…’
Suddenly hundreds of birds fill the sky, hover in a quivering cloud above our heads, their wings beating a nervous fluttering sound, and descend on the rock, completely covering it.
As the vultures vie for space, the ravens cling to the edges.
The butcher serves the preparation of flesh, bones and tzampa , The tzampa has been added to make the mixture more palatable, for it is a bad omen if anything is left uneaten.
The vultures eat greedily, fighting over scraps, slipping off the rock in their haste to consume.
The ravens, uninvited guests, must be content to scramble at the outer edges, snapping up any morsels the vultures accidentally drop.
At this point several Westerners attempt to photograph the vultures.
The butcher becomes incensed.
Leaping off the rock, he rushes at two German girls, brandishing his knife and shouting.
He points the knife at the heart of one of the girls.
Livid with rage, he grabs their cameras and rips the film from them, tearing it to shreds and throwing it in the fire.
The other cameras are quickly hidden.
The birds finish eating but do not leave the rock.
They flutter about nervously in staccato hops.
I wonder why they linger.
The answer comes quickly.
The bundle of organs is returned to the rock.
They have been waiting for these choice morsels — dessert.
They voraciously consume every last bit.
Finally the feast is over.
The vultures take to the sky bearing the deceased with them, upwards to the heavens.
The rock is empty.
An hour ago there was a body on the rock; now there is nothing.
The butcher sits with the other Tibetans around the fire in animated discussion.
There is no sign of mourning, no tears, no wailing, no prayers.
Except for the two men, there are no family or friends present.
Attending a sky burial for a Tibetan must be the equivalent of going to the morgue for a Westerner.
Two men climb the rock to check that all has been eaten and to clean it for the next burial.
I sit too stunned to move.
This has been the strangest, the most bizarre thing I have ever witnessed.
Powerful images rage through my brain.
What amazes me is that, in spite of the horrific nature of what I have seen, I feel neither repulsion nor revulsion.
One reason must be the inevitable distancing of oneself from the intensity and nearness of the experience.
But more important is a feeling that the sky burial fits in with the isolation and strangeness of the setting.
In that alien environment, somehow it all makes sense.
I am the last one to leave.
Please to Make a Reservation
A. H. Cooper
‘Oh yes, certainly.’
‘I want to reserve three seats on a train from Calcutta to Patna.’
‘Please?’
‘I want to reserve…’
‘Where are you wanting to go?’
‘Patna.’
‘Have you a reservation?’
‘No.
That is what I want.’
‘Please you wait over there.’
‘I want to go during the day so that we can all see the countryside.’
‘Certainly.
Over there.’
A long queue shaped like a cobra waits ‘over there’.
Everybody pushes in front.
The clerk behind the screen works with only half a mind functioning.
From time to time he wanders off and chats to someone.
At every transaction he writes copiously and painstakingly slowly in a book.
The lazy punkas overhead do little to ease the discomfort of the temperature and humidity.
I count fifteen frustrating moments before I reach the counter.
‘I want three tickets for the train to Patna — on Friday — the day train.’
‘Where do you want to go?’
‘Patna.’
I speak as if to a child, and add, ‘On Friday.’
‘No train Friday.’
‘Is there a train on Thursday?’
‘Of course.’
‘At what time?’
‘It leaves Howrah station at seven o'clock.’
‘Good.
Can I reserve three tickets?’
‘Where is your reservation form?’
‘I was sent here to get it.’
‘Oh no.
You must get it at the end counter.’
I can feel the perspiration trickling down my back.
I must keep my temper under control, Remember you are in India.
Don't get impatient.
I wait yet again.
A white form is handed to me.
‘Please fill it in and come back here.’
‘Can't I do it here and now?’
‘No, sir.
Please to come back.’
The form seems as complicated as a tax return.
Date, time, destination all seem obvious.
Age?
Here we go again.
Yet again I have to write down passport numbers, visa numbers, when and where issued.
Just my luck to have left the passports in the hotel.
Back to the hotel, fill in the details, another fifteen more minutes (seems like an hour) in the queue.
‘Ah but you are British tourist.’
‘So?’
‘There is special allocation of places for tourists.’
‘Splendid.’
‘You must take this form to the office round the corner.’
‘Not here?’
‘Not here.
Round the corner.’
My knees are sagging.
This wretched heat and humidity.
Out into the sun yet again, into the noise, the crowd.
Two beggars hold out their hands.
I am too hot to bother with them.
Round the corner.
In here?
A dingy doorway.
No, try the next one.
Yes, this must be it.
Eastern Railway.
I queue.
‘Not here.
Round the corner.’
‘Round the corner?’
‘Yes, sir.
This for second class only.’
‘But I want second-class tickets.’
‘Tourists in first-class office.’
The logic of all this is beyond me.
Temper is beyond me.
I stumble out again.
Another entrance to Eastern Railway.
Another queue.
‘Can I buy my tickets here?’
I plead.
I produce my reservation form.
‘Where are you wanting to go?’
‘Patna.’
I point to the form, then add, ‘What time does the day train go on Thursday?’
‘Ten to nine.’
‘But the man in the other office said seven o'clock.’
‘No, sir.
Ten to nine.’
I wonder if anyone knows what is going on.
I get my money out ready to pay.
The reservation form comes back across the counter.
‘Please to take this upstairs.’
I look through the crowd at the steep stairs to the upper office.
Will I get these tickets in time for Thursday?
Up and into a small office.
At least it is quiet here.
Four clerks sit at a long desk, chatting.
Another lies peacefully asleep in the corner.
I approach.
I am directed to the man at the end.
He is a polite little man with a worried expression.
He collects the reservation form, writes something on it, the third person to do so.
Words and figures seem to cover it.
‘Please to sit down.’
After ten minutes, I get up.
‘Please.
just one moment.’
Patience.
just remember.
The other clerks chat.
The sleeper sleeps.
I am beckoned, ‘You must take this down to desk number twenty-three.
They will give you your tickets.
‘I am beyond thought.
My shirt is soaked through, my head is spinning.
I am back in the hubbub, back in the queue.
At last I am holding six beautiful tickets, three for reservations, all meticulously written on.
I turn to walk out.
‘Please take this with the tickets upstairs.’
I thought I'd got rid of that wretched reservation form.
The stairs seem like the north face of the Eiger, the temperature sheer hell.
I sit while the worried little man examines the tickets.
He writes in a book.
He talks over a telephone.
With a broad smile he comes over.
‘Here are your tickets.’
‘Good.’
I refrain from sarcasm.
‘The train leaves Howrah station at nine-thirty…’ he pauses.
I hold out my hand.
‘…PM.’
‘Night, but…’
‘Certainly.
Very good train.
Sleeper reserved too.
You like it.’
River Journey up the Zaire
Janie Hampton
‘Into the eighth day and I really feel I've had enough.
I'd like to be transported to a bathroom in the Ritz and then to a dry Martini in the bar.’
Graham Green,Congo Journal, 1959 .
Eighth day, Zaire River, 1985.
We often lost each other on the seven barges being pushed a thousand miles up the Zaire River, once Conrad's Congo.
I found my son Joseph, aged seven, in one of the five bars with Sammy, a young soldier.
Sammy was concentrating on Joseph's dot-to-dot puzzle.
‘He's very good at them,’ said Joseph.
‘He never misses a dot.’
‘Where's Daddy?’
‘Gone for a pee at the back.’
It was all right for men, they could go over the side.
Women had to cope with the dark, smelly ‘cabinets’ and first invite the rats to leave through the crumbling rusty holes.
These were the boats left at the Belgian Congo's independence in 1960.
The bar is a scattering of upturned beer crates around a fridge with music pounding out of an oil drum.
Only two feet above the glassy water a dozen dug-out canoes are lashed to the side and more join us all the time.
A man leaps from his canoe as it hurtles towards us.
His chest reads, ‘My Mom and Dad went to Canada and all they brought me was this lousy T-shirt’.
He hangs onto the bark rope as his wives clamber out carrying flat baskets of headless smoked monkeys.
Their faces are split by blue scars down the forehead and nose.
The man has come to barter hippo ivory earrings for cigarettes and a Chinese fishing net.
In the flat bottom of his canoe a fire smoulders under a clay pot full of red palm oil.
Orlando appears on the next barge and leaps the gap, plugged with water hyacinth, refuse and a dead pig.
‘What's the joke, Joe?’
‘Smiling keeps me cool,’ says Joseph nonchalantly, sweat dripping from his chin.
‘I've given Oscar a nice wash and mended his tail with Elastoplast.’
Oscar was Orlando's tenth birthday present, a crocodile bought for £3.
He died the next day and became stew.
‘As it's Orlando's birthday, I need another beer,’ exclaims André, the resident nurse.
Any excuse to cadge a drink.
The barman tosses the notes into a pile in his fridge.
Inflation has made them worth as little as 1/2p.
André has just delivered the third baby this week.
He says he loves me.
Well, not just me: he loves all white women.
If I won't divorce Charlie, can he marry Daisy?
‘But she is only eleven years old.’
‘Never mind.
How much is she?’
To emphasise her beauty and intelligence, I quote a ridiculous price.
‘O, she is expensive, but I will pay in instalments.’
‘She won't be ready for ten years.’
‘I can wait.
But she must be a virgin.
Is she?’
Charlie rejoins the shouted conversation in pidgin French and Lingala.
We glide past islands with huts on stilts and waving people.
Each island bears a white arrow to show the way, but the riverbed changes continuously and new channels have to be navigated each trip.
Talk turns to the night before when we were woken as the convoy hit a sandbank with such force that the steel cables holding it together were torn loose.
The leading barge was tilted at right angles and the rest floated gently apart.
Bollards, decks and railings were ripped up.
By morning we were on our way again.
‘C'mon, let's get food,’ says Orlando.
In single file we push past traders ranged along the narrow decks.
They sell everything from expired penicillin injections, pirated cassettes and old clothes to skin lightening creams —‘As Used by Top American Society’.
It had taken three days for the anarchy of two thousand Zaïrois to transform themselves into an organised travelling market.
Eliki, a disabled dwarf, sells old copies of Jane's Defense Weekly and Merseyside Trade Annual .
His wide chest tapers to a minuscule waist and spindly useless legs.
Every morning he runs along the deck upside down on his hands.
We climb the slippery metal stairs to our cabin on the upper deck.
On the roof of the next barge is a group huddled round a radio, cheering a football match in Kinshasa, five hundred miles downstream.
It reminds us that today is a Sunday.
Daisy is having her long golden hair plaited by giggling young women.
They are fascinated by it and she is picking up French fast, compensating for five months out of school.
I step over tiny children drawing with their fingers in spit on the rusty floor outside our cabin.
They are not allowed out of this dark passage, in case they fall overboard.
No light and little ventilation penetrate our tiny cabin.
The aroma of drying fish hangs heavily and it is stifling.
Cockroaches scuttle under the narrow bunks.
I grope for the saucepans and our meal tickets.
The £40 fare includes one meal a day for fourteen days, regardless of when we arrive at Kisangani.
The last trip took forty days, by which time a dozen people had died of hunger.
Across the passage Titi is cooking sliced green lizard with chillies.
It tastes like chicken.
Her fine features recall the Arab slave trade, long before the Belgians came.
President Mobutu's face nods on her behind as she pounds plantain in an ebony mortar and then slices the yellow dough with cotton thread.
Kofi, her husband, has done well in four years of selling plastic shoes on the river.
Their cabin is a shining example of conspicuous consumption — fridge, light, fans and two ghetto-blasters.
Beautiful Titi is his prize possession.
In the next candlelit cabin four men sit round a trunk of loose pills, carefully arranging coloured antibiotics in tubes of cellophane.
One has a withered leg from polio.
The meal queue winds its way around the upper deck between trunks, sacks of salt and dozing traders.
Many people have succumbed to torpor after a week's heavy drinking.
They sit staring at the sunlight reflected off the monotonous river.
Pinching our children gives rise to brief entertainment, especially when the children yell abuse in retaliation.
An enormous old woman spills over a fold-up chair.
Her water-melon breasts rest heavily on her lap and her cleavage starts where other women have a navel.
‘Do you think the crane lifted her on at Kinshasa?’ whispers Joseph.
She returns his toothless smile and waves as graciously as the Queen.
Four boys pose for a polaroid wearing eye-shades advertising Mercedes-Benz.
One enhances his image with the photographer's watch.
A fisherman passes, dragging a child-sized fish.
Its blue eyes swivel sadly and its red gills flap in terminal gasps.
Rust, mud and bottle-tops cling to its gleaming grey scales.
It, too, is hauled into the picture while the fisherman is bargaining with the ‘chef du barge ’.
The camera flashes and everyone applauds.
A price is settled and the fish is pushed back down the stairs, flumpity, flump, bump.
The photo appears, the boys standing drunkenly at an angle, inert and bleached, the fish in darkness.
I hand our saucepans and tickets through a hatch and shout ‘Cinq!’ into the cavernous kitchen, manned by ten Brueghel-fat women.
The giant pots rest on wheel-rims glowing with charcoal.
At another hatch an arm appears holding up bright enamel bowls and someone dashes forward to claim the grey cassava and fishheads.
We can afford to supplement our diet with pineapples and crunchy caterpillar kebabs from the fishermen, tinned milk and plenty of beer — cheap and cold.
The bread on sale is hard and green, though the same price as a week ago.
Tied to the railings are crocodiles of all lengths, turtles craning their long necks towards the water and two thieves — their heads shaved in asymmetrical patterns.
They will be handed over at the next town in two days.
We eat our meal watching a hundred canoes drift downstream into a blue and gold sunset, to their villages five miles across the river.
Young men leap past us from the roof above, splashing into the water to catch up with their canoes, beer bottles held aloft.
Standing to paddle, the fishermen are extended by their reflections and appear to be walking on the water on wavering stilts, their long paddles a second leg.
Strings of paraffin lamps gleam along the upper decks and dance in the inky water.
Ahead of us lightning flashes in the navy clouds.
Yes, you were right, Mr Greene, and there are another eight days until we reach the ‘Bend in the River’ and the centre of the African equatorial rain forest.
Springtime for Czechoslovakia
Paul Harvey
Irena lived in a late-Seventies block of flats on the edge of town, half a mile from the Russian barracks, part of an ugly outer-urban sprawl.
After buying me lunch in a new concrete hotel called, romantically, The Interflora, she drove me back at high Skoda speed through the centre of town — choke full out, engine howling in second gear as we skidded across wet cobblestones, clipping kerbs and narrowly avoiding the numerous potholes and dug-up sections where slow attempts were being made to repair the water mains, shattered by the minus-twenty-five February temperatures.
The only vehicles Irena took any notice of were the thin double trams, locked inscrutably into their own system, clanging their way up and down the narrow streets making unmistakable tram noises.
Saturday afternoon shoppers shared the pavements with soldiers in iron-grey over-coats wandering about in twos and threes.
‘You can tell the difference by their boots,’ Irena told me before I'd had a chance to ask the question.
Some of the Russian soldiers (pull-on boots, no laces) looked Mongolian and very young.
We hate them, she remarked casually.
Olomouc, former capital of Moravia and reputed to be Czechoslovakia's second most interesting city, doesn't look its best in mid-March.
The botanical gardens are bare and there are few signs of the famous flower festival exhibitions in the cold grey wet transition between winter and spring: on the four days I was there it rained every day, finally removing the last traces of soot-encrusted snow from the pavements but leaving everything streaked with a post-winter dampness.
Even the drainpipes, clinging half-heartedly to cracked walls and rusty gutters, looked as if they'd had enough.
The Gothic and Baroque buildings in the centre of town seemed somehow to reflect the gloom with their peeling plaster and crumbling façades: a once-proud city of towers and spires, balconies, alleys and doorways, with the university — a jumbled collection of yellow buildings and small courtyards — standing on a rock above the River Morava gazing severely down on a gold-domed Russian Orthodox church, now boarded up, its green roof tiles slipped and broken.
Everyone I met kept apologising for the shabby state of the buildings and I had the feeling that if I went back in ten years' time it would look like the set for some grand-scale horror film, all broken banging shutters and cobwebbed windows.
I tried to explain to Irena that I didn't mind, that this was how I felt it should be — the real Central Europe — and anyway I preferred that kind of place to ordered museums and shining monuments.
She gazed at me with ice-blue eyes and murmured, ‘I see.’
Olomouc is full of churches, huge and chillingly ornate, freezing inside and as far as I could see deserted during the week.
Our Lady of the Snows was full of gilded pouting angels, but despite the heavy rain I was the only visitor, devout or otherwise.
St Michael's Church —‘a gem of Baroque Moravian architecture’— was firmly shut and St Wenceslas Cathedral, founded in 1109 and rebuilt at the end of the last century on a vast neo-Gothic scale, was dark, impressive and so cold inside it made your head ache.
In front of the church of St Maurice I met Lenka, a music student who had promised to show me what she described as ‘the biggest organ in Central Europe’, all 2,311 pipes of it, the largest more than thirty feet tall, the smallest eight millimetres of solid silver.
Built in the 1740s and housed in the only remaining Gothic interior in the city, it's now electronically operated and can imitate anything from bagpipes to a brass band.
Lenka adjusted her fur coat, blew on her hands, opened it up and let rip: the noise nearly blew me off the balcony, a stupendous megalomaniac combination of centuries of Bach fugues and the Incredible Dr Phibes.
She said it had taken her seven years to learn to play it, and the only problem was when there was a power cut.
That and the temperature during the winter.
Irena took an unofficial day off work and we wandered through the damp streets while she told me about being a student at Palacky University in 1968 (and what happened afterwards: ‘It is strange how the history books of a country can change, isn't it?’).
Two soldiers (lace-up boots) were taking photos of their girlfriends in Peace Square, also known — at various times in its turbulent career — as Lenin Square and Hitler Square.
Hiding from the rain in a smoky bar we missed the twelve o'clock chiming of the Town Hall clock.
The original sixteenth-century clock was badly damaged in 1945 and has been restored, somewhat incongruously, with mosaic figures of model socialist workers.
‘I am glad we are late,’ Irena growled.
‘Look at them, they are ridiculous.’
Opposite the clock, angels and bishops stare moodily down from the Holy Trinity Column in what is now the middle of Red Army Square.
As a change from wet feet and sightseeing I was smuggled into an English-language class where we drank home-made slivovitz and one of the students, a lugubrious-looking individual called Miroslav who played the bassoon in the Moravia Philharmonic Orchestra, invited me to a concert the following evening.
Irena produced a suit from somewhere — I had nothing appropriate to wear and the Czechs dress up to go out — and on a cold wet evening Miroslav, who once behind his bassoon couldn't stop smiling, dragged me in off Red Army Square where I'd been waiting under an umbrella watching a group of Czech soldiers trying to stand up, and escorted me up to the balcony of the Fucik Hall to watch the performance.
He was wearing immaculate white tie and tails and the cloakroom lady kept shaking my hand and shouting ‘Welcome!’.
Irena arrived looking stunning, and the entire audience spent the interval walking about studying each others' clothes.
Olomouc has a population of about a hundred thousand but it's a small town: I kept bumping into people I'd already met, and Irena appeared to know everybody.
‘It is necessary to have connections, you do not understand,’ she told me when I remarked on the fact, though even the normally impassive Czechs leapt to their feet and gallantly opened doors for her at every available opportunity.
In the Post Office while I was trying to phone Prague, Irena was getting free phone calls in exchange for correcting a German text for the manager, and when we went to a bookshop she had a friend who sold her books at half price.
The morning I was due to leave — the day Chernenko died — I woke up to the sound of Russian troops singing marching songs from the nearby barracks.
On the radio the Voice of Moscow was retelling their fifty per cent of the story of the Vietnam war, and every half-hour or so large green helicopters flew overhead as they did every day.
Nobody I saw in the streets ever looked up.
Irena drove me to the station, past the monastery that is now a military hospital, along the main road north where tanks rumble across at night.
We flew round corners and bounced over cobbled junctions, ignoring traffic lights and scattering innocent pedestrians, speeding through puddles and swerving to avoid the steaming manhole covers.
As we parked outside the station Irena reversed into a 1964 Mark One Cortina, crushing a wing.
‘Never mind,’ she purred, ‘it is not important.
I know the director of the insurance company.
They are all bastards.’
She kissed me and wouldn't let me pay for the ticket.
It was still raining.
The train going west to Prague was empty and unheated, and arrived two hours late at a different station; but the weather in Bohemia was a few days ahead of Olomouc and the capital was clear and bright.
Springtime for Czechoslovakia…