

ORIGINS
My secondary education began in Cardiff in September 1939, a few days after listening to Neville Chamberlain's broadcast.
England was now at war with Hitler's Germany, and would be so for the next six years.
Three days after my sixteenth birthday, in August 1944, Butler's Education Act received the royal assent.
The face of secondary education had been permanently changed.
On the Sunday after the beginning of the War, with his son wearing the embarrassingly new cap and blazer that were then the proud symbols of recruitment to the grammar-school élite, my father drove my grandmother back to her home village of Kidlington in Oxfordshire.
The journey in a Morris Ten-Four around the Bristol Channel, with no Severn Bridge and no motorway, was never rapid.
Nor was there usually any reason why it needed to be.
On this particular occasion it was doubled in time by the long army convoys crawling up the hills out of Lydney and Chepstow as the machine for war was ponderously assembled.
Kidlington was the village in which my father had been born in November 1886.
His sisters had curtsied to the vicar; his brothers had gone to war in 1914, and one of them had died at Vimy Ridge; his father had been a farm bailiff and died in 1911 after being bitten by a horse (misnamed Lucky).
My father, the one scholar in a large family, had caught the eye of the village schoolmaster and been coached by oil-lamp in the evening for an examination offering access to that rare privilege for the children of the poor, a secondary-school education.
For the villagers of Kidlington in the 1890s that privilege was not only rare, it was also a startling novelty.
The better-off farmers could send their sons as fee-payers to endowed grammar schools (in Thame or in Oxford itself); the gentry could take advantage of the railways and dispatch their sons to boarding-schools further afield.
But for the vast majority, in the towns but especially in the countryside, no such opportunities existed.
But in 1888, two years after my father was born, the newly constituted county councils were created and Oxfordshire was systematically governed for the first time.
Within ten years those youthful county councils had been empowered by Parliament to levy a rate in order to provide scholarships for pupils in elementary school to attend secondary schools.
A door had been prised open.
On 5 February 1900 Mr Thomas Box, then headmaster of Kidlington School, made this entry in his log-book:
Severe weather and a poor school.
George Arthur Judge a VI Standard boy in this school has gained an Oxford County Council Junior Scholarship of £30 per annum for four years tenable at Thame Grammar School.
The Governors of that institution have, owing to the favourable report of Rev. A. E. Shaw, the Headmaster, awarded him a further exhibition of 25 shillings per annum for books.
In 1902, when my father was at Thame, only 9 per cent of his contemporaries were receiving full-time education of any kind.
He, busy with Euclid and Latin, did not notice the passage through Parliament of Balfour's Education Act of 1902 — which had a profound effect on the shape of secondary education throughout Britain, and therefore in Oxfordshire.
But he did notice the growing financial difficulty of his parents — unlike his son in 1939, he was required to be furnished with a top hat for use on Sundays.
His career at Thame had been full of promise, attested by the Oxford University Local Examinations certificate framed on the walls of the terraced house in Cardiff in which I grew up.
In later and easier days he would certainly have studied mathematics at university, but instead left school when he was seventeen.
He had passed the examination to join the clerical staff of the Great Western Railway.
Social historians would note that between 1889 and 1911 the number of clerks employed in Britain increased by 37.5 per cent.
That is why, a few years later, he settled in Cardiff and married into the Welsh.
But every year, and often more than once, he made the pilgrimage to Kidlington in Oxfordshire and on one of those visits (I cannot have been more than eight years old) took me to Thame and showed me his name on the board as head boy.
On another occasion, walking across the water-meadows away from Kidlington church towards Hampton Poyle, he told me how (during one of the school holidays) he had read Thomas Hardy's Jude the Obscure and, at the end of the day, had climbed a haystack.
In the distance, five miles to the south, a glow in the sky represented Oxford.
But it was to be Cardiff and not Oxford, railways and not mathematics.
In Cardiff I went to the local elementary school and in 1939, in the competitive scholarship examination, won a special place at Cardiff High School.
Much had changed since 1900 in the world of secondary education.
The most obvious, but not the most superficial, of those changes related to the multiplication of opportunities for access to secondary education.
In 1902 the county councils were given responsibility for the planning and provision of secondary education.
They could already, of course, provide scholarships and other forms of support, but they had hitherto enjoyed neither the right nor the duty to provide secondary schools of their own.
It was not, save by a few visionaries, supposed that these secondary schools should be provided for everybody, nor that they should be free.
Entry should be selective and competitive and the curriculum of the secondary school followed closely those successfully established lines of the traditional Public and endowed grammar schools.
A secondary school would, however, not be eligible for grant support unless (after 1907) at least 25 per cent of its places were free and available in open competition.
Although these rules were constantly adjusted under pressure, it was not until 1932 (when I was four years old) that the principle of free places in selective secondary academic schools — grammar schools,— for short — was directly challenged.
Free places were to be replaced by special places: still open to competition, but with the added requirement that parents should nevertheless pay an approved fee, to be adjusted according to the means of the family.
That was the kind of ‘special place’ I secured at Cardiff High School, and my parents paid ten guineas per annum.
Guineas always sounded more genteel than pounds.
These restrictive measures, sponsored by Ramsay MacDonald, which are never to be forgotten or forgiven by the Labour party, were defended as the inevitable product of the continuing economic crises of the 1930s.
Underlying them, of course, were attitudes and principles still visible and audible half a century later.
Not only should parents pay when and what they could, and so inhibit the assumption of paternal responsibility by the State.
It was also important to restrict access to secondary education.
Stanley Baldwin had argued in 1923 that it was not ‘wise, as some suggest, to give everybody a secondary education.
It is no good forcing every kind of ability into one form of education if the result is going to lower the standard which it is in the interests of the country to maintain.’
The measure of 1932, which marked profoundly the discussions leading up to the Act of 1944, was bitterly resisted (especially in Wales) and led the president of the Board of Education to argue in the Commons that secondary education should be reserved for ‘selected children, the gifted and the intellectual’ from whom ‘we expect leaders of industry and commerce in the coming generation’.
Seven years later, I was presumably one of those.
I was also part of a problem (although it was no problem then) of falling rolls.
In 1928, 620,627 live births were recorded, compared with 950,782 in 1920.
Such a dramatic decline made possible an improvement in the opportunity index, the measure of the percentage of all eleven-year-old children going on to secondary education.
In 1920, it had been 9.5 per cent.
By 1938, my last complete year in a city elementary school, it was 14.34 per cent for England and Wales, but 25.89 per cent in Wales alone.
(Wales, in this respect like Scotland, has always taken education more seriously than England.
Moreover, the Welsh Intermediate Education Act of 1889 gave authorities a flying start in establishing publicly provided secondary schools.)
By 1938 98,280 eleven-year-olds in England and Wales could be admitted to secondary schools.
Nearly half of them had ‘special’ places, and in many schools (like Cardiff High School) there were only special places.
In others, however, fee-payers (who may or may not have been among ‘the gifted and the intellectual’) existed alongside those who had won places in the eleven-plus competition.
It followed that some schools were more competitive and selective academically than others: those which had no fee-payers (in the pre-1932 sense) were startlingly similar in character and purpose to the type of post-war grammar school of which, very much later, I became a head.
I went, therefore, to one of the country's 1,398 secondary schools in September 1939.
In the deceptive lull of the Phoney War, Cardiff High School was very much as Goronwy Rees remembered it:
The High School at Cardiff, at the time when I attended it, between 1923 and 1928, was indeed an excellent one…
In the classics, in mathematics, in history and in English we were taught by men of quite exceptional ability and qualifications: my history master later held a university chair and became a Welsh historian of the greatest distinction…
Most of all they were marvellously responsive to any sign of talent or ability and were wonderfully generous in the pains they took to foster it…
I do not know what kind of verdict would be passed on the school if it were judged by modern educational standards.
I imagine it might be said that it was too insistent on formal academic instruction, that it took things like examinations very seriously and prided itself on its academic record; yet in fact the education it gave was surprisingly wide and varied…
Even to-day I am still surprised that our history master should have thought it worth while to include in his course a class in Plato's Republic…or that our English master should take me to his home to show me his excellent library and especially his fine editions of Blake and Donne.
If that is how Cardiff High School was when Goronwy Rees knew it in the year of my birth, then it was not very different eleven years later.
W. Dyfed Parry dignified the teaching of English, Walter Jones enlivened history (which should be, but is not always, the brightest of subjects), S. S. Michaels brought to the classics a massive learning and a sharp yet generous wit.
The headmaster, Cliff Diamond, universally known as ‘The Boss’, was youthful, with a background of Cambridge and Public Schools.
He always wore a gown, he beat boys whenever he thought it necessary, he did not need to assert that his was the best school in Wales, if not Britain.
Everybody knew it.
Rugby was played vigorously, music flourished, the school plays were of high quality.
I recall those things because of their typicality: this is what the English and Welsh grammar schools were like, and (more surprisingly) were still like when I began to teach in them ten years after the 1944 Act.
They represented what T. S. Eliot was to call ‘the happy combination of privilege and opportunity’, and it is hardly surprising if many older people now look back on them with gratitude (which is justified) and a regretful nostalgia (which, I shall argue, is not).
Like my contemporaries I first attended an elementary school, about which I remember only three things.
An attempt was made to teach me Welsh, mostly by the reading aloud of stories from The Mabinogion — in English.
I suspect this, like compulsory religious education, gave me a lifelong scepticism about obligatory elements in any curriculum.
Second, I remember the frisson when my Welsh (and therefore maternal) grandfather extracted me from a class in order to take me home early for tea.
He, a bearded evangelical with a taste for rhetoric, was an Attendance Officer — or ‘whipper-in’.
He was therefore paid to oblige others to do something which my Oxfordshire grandfather, living in Hornton north of Banbury, had no opportunity of doing.
He had no choice but to work on the land, and to live the life described by Flora Thompson in Lark Rise to Candleford .
But third, and most powerfully, I remember working for ‘the scholarship exam’, direct predecessor of the eleven-plus.
We worked in a special class and at a cracking pace — with a man called Harris, who had none of the contemporary difficulties about aims and objectives.
Everything seemed to depend, although I don't suppose it did, upon activities called mental arithmetic and spelling.
It was important to pass the examination — and not only that, but to be near the top of the list in order to be assured of getting through the door of the right secondary school.
Boys who did not, remained in the elementary-school system (in, as will appear, most cases) to linger on like dispossessed giants until the system and my grandfather let go of them at the age of fourteen.
Indeed, on 1 September 1939 (by the Act passed in 1936) the school-leaving age would have been raised to fifteen — without much preparation, it seems.
But at 4.45 a.m. on that Sunday morning German tanks crossed the Polish border.
That event (apart from the lines of groaning trucks on the hills of Chepstow and Lydney) made surprisingly little difference to the 100,000 of us who began their secondary education, in England and Wales, in that month.
Masters must have disappeared to the War, sixth-formers had their carefully laid plans disrupted overnight, and yet…
For as long as Chamberlain was there with his umbrella and the Phoney War lasted the surprisingly robust life of schools continued.
Dunkirk in the early summer of 1940 meant the arrival of an exhausted Belgian soldier, who was a teacher and helped me with my French.
He was called, inappropriately, Victor.
The hot summer of 1940 I spent in Kidlington, listening during those suspended August days to the radio bulletins on the Battle of Britain.
The raids on the British cities were another matter.
I cycled to school one morning through streets littered with glass, and past a little Nonconformist chapel, in which everything had been destroyed except the far wall with its multi-coloured and scrolled message ‘God is Love’.
I stood one night outside the air-raid shelter which we shared with neighbours, looking towards a great glow in the sky.
Bristol was burning, and these were not the lights of Oxford with a message of unattainable ambition.
Cardiff High School lost most of its windows, but Latin grammar went on.
Another secondary school was destroyed, and the buildings were shared — one school in the morning, another in the afternoon.
There is nothing heroic, but something reassuring, in the perpetuation of routine.
The grammar-school pulse kept beating, pumping up (a selection of)‘the gifted and the intellectual’ into the universities and desirable occupations.
I was placed in an express stream, specialized in arts subjects, after four years took nine subjects in the School Certificate, and then specialized still further to take English, history, and French for two years in the sixth form.
It would be a long time before all of this changed very much — and certainly it had not by the time of the Crowther Report in 1959 (see Chapter 8).
In some senses, indeed, the great Act of 1944 did not fundamentally modify some of the basic assumptions about the nature of a ‘good’ secondary education.
I took my School Certificate, immediate ancestor of the O levels, in the summer of 1943 — one of the papers being interrupted by an air raid, with interesting problems for invigilators and examiners.
For our part, we all sat in a cellar and talked about other things (I think).
Early in 1944 the Russians advanced into Poland, opening another chapter in the history of that tortured country.
On 6 June, in a year when I had no public examinations and (like so many others) was busily occupied ruining floral wallpaper by sticking pin-flags into maps of Europe, the Allied forces landed in France.
On 1 August, Warsaw rose in rebellion against the Germans, hoping for an early relief by the Russians — who had their own plans.
Two days later the Education Act of 1944 received the royal assent.
In May, the McNair Committee had reported on the future of teacher training; late in July the Fleming Report suggested some of the ways in which the Public Schools might be integrated into the national educational system.
These three themes — the legislative and organizational structure of education (and especially secondary schooling), the ‘problem’ of the Public Schools and the underlying dilemmas of comprehensive education, the nature and purpose of teacher training — are central to the narrative of this book.
Why in 1944, when there was so much else to think about and to do, did those three key documents appear?
(I need hardly add that, at the time, I noticed none of them.)
Attempts to reform the education service in the 1930s had been frustrated by financial stringencies (of the kind, for example, that led to the substitution of special for free places in secondary schools), by the conservative indifference towards education that marked the National Governments of the decade, and, perhaps most decisively, by the persistence of religious difficulties.
These, although complex in their manifestations, are relatively simple to explain.
The village school attended by my father was a Church school: it had been founded and was originally funded by the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church (was there ever a more eloquent title?).
Since the 1830s, these schools, and other denominational schools, had received government grants.
In 1870 school-boards were established with the right to levy rates to support secular elementary schools, where the provision for denominational schools was inadequate.
In 1902, when my father was at Thame, Balfour's Education Act transferred these board schools to the county councils (with some exceptions) and to the county boroughs.
Balfour's Act moreover transferred to those same county councils the duty to provide rate support for the denominational schools, which nevertheless kept a considerable degree of autonomy and their particular religious character.
The cry ‘Rome on the Rates’ contributed to the defeat of the Conservatives in 1906 — which Churchill for one never forgot.
Any attempt, in the period between the two World Wars, to raise the school-leaving age or to provide secondary education on a more generous scale was for these reasons bound to encounter sustained political opposition.
More secondary education must mean more provision by the Churches as well as by the State.
If the Churches were given further subsidies, their political critics would protest.
If they were not, then the voluntary bodies would be unable to match State provision and must therefore oppose any substantial alteration to the status quo.
The unlocking of this particular problem owed much to the skill of R. A. Butler and William Temple, the Archbishop of Canterbury.
But it is doubtful whether they would have had any opportunity even to attempt that massive task if the years of the War had not profoundly changed public attitudes, and even softened the mind if not the heart of that great enemy of education and old boy of Harrow, Winston Churchill.
Historians lack the skills, or the evidence cannot exist, to settle in any precise way the question of why and how conditions of war seem propitious for social reform.
Yet the evidence of such changes in the period 1914–18 are clear enough and have been well documented.
They issued in, among many other reforms, the Education Act of 1918, introduced by Lloyd George's Minister of Education, H. A. L. Fisher (who was knocked down and killed in the black-out in April 1940).
The tasks of reconstruction were perceived as equally urgent in the period 1939–45, even if the rhetoric of building a land fit for heroes could not be plausibly employed for a second time.
Labour members of Churchill's coalition would be particularly, but not exclusively, concerned to redress some of the injustices of the Dark Ages and to earn a reputation as determined and competent reformers.
The clearest evidence of such a change is proclaimed, of course, in the general election of 1945.
Behind that lie the less easily quantifiable facts of the effects of war service in mingling classes and breaking attitudes, the powerful if vague sense that sacrifice and austerity required a matching improvement in the quality of life in a free society, and the experience of life under siege as contributing to a stronger sense of community and fraternity.
It is surprising that the Government should have failed to understand the public enthusiasm for the Beveridge Report, when it was published in December 1942.
Even a schoolboy, preoccupied with his own small affairs conducted against a background of global danger, registered the importance and appeal of a plan which would offer security and dignity ‘from the cradle to the grave'.
As for the future of schools themselves, one effect of a report requiring a massive expenditure of public funds was to turn political attention (by those to the right of centre) away from threatening plans for universal social security towards the milder, and less expensive, alternative of educational reform.
The Act of 1944 remains the one substantial legislative achievement of the wartime coalition.
The conduct of the War required fiscal policies sufficiently egalitarian to appease the conscience of even the most austere socialist.
Food rationing generally, and especially the ‘points’ system operated as a supplementary — and unambiguously ‘egalitarian’— currency.
The notion that money alone could or should buy things — like privilege, or secondary-school places (whether at Public School or not), or priority of treatment correspondingly diluted.
T. O. Lloyd points to the queue as a symbol of wartime Britain ‘and its implicit values — fair shares, peaceful and patient waiting and no advantage for the rich — were part of what the country was fighting for’.
It could certainly be argued that those values and attitudes — fairness, change without violence, deference for order — marked the discussions both preceding and following the 1944 Act.
The girls no longer curtsied to the vicar in an Oxfordshire village, but the grammar school powerfully survived as the symbol of ‘the happy combination of privilege and opportunity’.
Other voices could be heard, of course, but they were attended to only later — when I had returned to Oxfordshire as a headmaster.
National service, imposed sacrifice and sharing, points and queues, idealism in the face of a pernicious enemy, the dynamics of coalition — all contributed to the sense that, in education as elsewhere, something could and must be done.
So did the evacuation of schoolchildren.
In September 1939, 764,900 school-children were evacuated from vulnerable into safe areas.
Immediate bombing attacks were expected, and when these did not take place the evacuees began to trickle back.
Numbers were down to 420,000 by January 1940 and, although there were fluctuations as bombing began in earnest, by the end of 1942 only 220,000 remained.
But a great impact had been made.
Parents and families in the reception areas were shocked by what they saw and heard, incredulous that they could until then have been ignorant of the deprivation within a society which they thought they knew well enough.
I had an uncle who, like my father, had become a railway official and lived a quiet and decent middle-class life.
Among the three-quarters of a million evacuees was one, whom I remember only as Ron, and who was drafted to my uncle's home.
He lacked many of the plainer necessities of life, and of ambition he was totally innocent.
I remember my uncle pointing towards plain and simple opportunities — through education — of attaining a (slightly) better life.
He, while happy to be of some use, was not content that inequality on this scale should persist — inequality of opportunity, of course, for as a station-master he was a hierarchical man.
Ron and his peers were not the only ones to be obliged to move by the War.
Most of the senior officials of the Board of Education were evacuated to a Bournemouth hotel, leaving as their man in London, R. S. Wood.
He had, from the beginning, no doubts of the direction in which it would be necessary and right to move: the War, he argued, ‘is moving us more and more in the direction of Labour's ideas and ideals’.
Central to those ideals had been — at least since 1922 when Tawney published his Secondary Education for All — the extension of secondary schooling (although, less precisely, not all of it of the grammar-school variety) to the whole of the population.
Embedded in that plain proposition were problems of administrative structure, with anomalies surviving from the Acts of 1902 and 1918, and of religion.
The latter proved crucial in the wartime debates, with the Churches unwilling to see their influence diminished but unable to finance its support, and their critics unwilling to direct public money to denominational ends.
R. S. Wood and his colleagues saw a further advantage in a firm initiative by the Board: they looked wistfully back to the days of central power as exercised by Morant in the shadow of the 1902 Act, and believed that the Local Education Authorities created by that Act had become too powerful.
The spirit of mobilization as well as of equality (or, at least, fraternity) was in the air.
R. S. Wood himself, occupying a central position in more senses than one, wished to see a transfer of all pupils at the age of eleven to a common secondary school, followed by transfer for a selected minority at the age of thirteen to either a grammar or a technical school.
At one extreme, within the committee of officials charged with reshaping the national educational system, was the isolated Cleary who saw the common school at the age of eleven gradually extending itself across the whole of the secondary age range.
Standing in determined opposition to him was G. G. Williams who, anticipating many of the protests of the 1960s (and later), objected that ‘the parity of esteem is purchased at the expense of the grammar school’.
He was entirely comfortable with the predictable opinion of the Senior Chief Inspector of Schools who confessed that ‘I am not much moved by what appears to sacrifice the interests of the few in favour of the many when one result is certain to be that the quality of the person required to fill posts of great importance and of a highly specialized nature is likely to be degraded.’
The Permanent Secretary himself, Maurice Holmes, came down closer to Williams than to R. S. Wood (and nowhere near Cleary) by ruling that there should be selection and transfer for all at the age of eleven, to schools of various types, with a review at the age of thirteen of all pupils who might have been initially misplaced.
So the matter was settled on the sea front at Bournemouth.
Most of the work was completed by February 1941, and the Green Book was prepared in June as a basis of discussion.
Butler became President of the Board of Education in July and saw the purpose of a discussion on the Book as being ‘to sound for shoals, as it were’.
He soon discovered where they were, lifting the curious secrecy in which the Book (to the annoyance of the Times Educational Supplement)had been shrouded in the hope of achieving a ‘reform representing the whole English character’.
R. A. Butler was no warm friend of Churchill, the Prime Minister, whose politics on India he had stoutly opposed in the 1930s.
Churchill was contemptuous of Butler for occupying so marginal a Cabinet post —‘wiping the children's noses and smacking their bottoms during war-time’— and exhorted him to steer well clear of the Public School question and, even more, of the religious settlement.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer was a little more friendly since he ‘would rather give money for Education than throw it down the sink with Sir William Beveridge’.
Especially if it was much less money, too.
The Chief Whip was prepared, when it became necessary, to make parliamentary time available on the delightful ground that ‘We have got to occupy the parliamentary members somehow during the war.’
It was as well that Ernest Bevin was a strong ally, and that the president could rely upon his (Labour) Parliamentary Secretary, Chuter Ede.
The Conservative party was not yet the party of Edward Boyle — nor was it long to remain so.
At the centre of the web of religious issues lay the problem of the ‘single-school district’.
If, as was proposed, denominational schools should have a choice of status — effectively inside or outside the fully provided and supported system — what should happen in those districts where the only school was a Church school?
Should parents and children there have no choice whatever?
The so-called White Memorandum (March 1942) proposed that in such districts the Churches (in practice, the Church of England) must give up their schools.
The scale of the problem was imposing.
In 1939, of 20,906 schools 10,553 were ‘non-provided’, that is under some form of Church or voluntary control and yet receiving considerable sums of public money.
12 per cent of these schools were Roman Catholic, and presented a further range of problems.
There were 4,000 single-school areas.
A fiery dispute here might consume energy and inhibit the reform to which Butler was so committed — strengthened by his walks in the woods with Winant, the US Ambassador, and convinced (alone, he says) that Churchill would be succeeded by the socialists and that educational reform should be completed now.
He persuaded senior ministers that only the unusual conditions of a wartime coalition could permit the religious question to be solved.
Churchill was increasingly restive —‘it was a case of Rome on the rates and Rome on the taxes’— and, what was more, he was in favour of fee-paying by parents.
The Conservatives were critical of the appointment of William Temple as Archbishop of Canterbury in April 1942.
Temple had opposed Baldwin's Act in 1936 — on the grounds that it permitted exemptions to the raising of the school-leaving age, planned for 1939 — and had been deeply influenced by his undergraduate friends, Tawney and Beveridge.
His commitment to the reform of secondary education was unrelenting; his position as Archbishop placed him at the heart of the religious problem; his alliance with Butler — for whom he was ‘all bulge and brain’— eventually tamed the opposition of the Churches.
But not without difficulty and not until Butler had assembled a complicated financial package which included generous loans to enable the voluntary bodies to build or convert schools for secondary purposes.
(Whereas 62 per cent of council elementary schools had been reorganized into a junior/senior pattern, only 16 per cent of the voluntary provision had been so reshaped).
The Roman Catholics were particularly vulnerable, yet impossible to dislodge or ignore, and when Cardinal Hinsley wrote a letter to The Times in November 1942, Churchill cut it out, pasted it to a piece of cardboard and sent it to Butler with the cheerful note: ‘There you are, fixed, old cock.’
But Butler had already made up his mind.
‘Basing myself on long experience of Churchill over the India Bill, I decided to disregard what he said and go straight ahead.’
In July 1943 he publicly accepted the commitment to legislate by publishing the White Paper,Educational Reconstruction .
Ten days later the so-called Norwood Report was published (for which see Chapters 2 and 7).
The prophet Tawney, now writing for the Manchester Guardian and still committed to an extension of grammar-school opportunities could, on the twenty-first anniversary of Secondary Education for All , write: ‘Now, at last, the reign of organised torpor masquerading as statesmanship shows signs of ending.’
The Bill was published in December 1943, and its slow progress through Parliament alarmed Chuter Ede.
The end of the War was at last in sight, and with it breaking of the electoral truce.
Anything might happen if the Bill was lost.
Religious grumbles continued, but the Government's only serious defeat was over equal pay for women teachers.
The defeat was reversed on a motion of confidence; and the Bill became an Act on 3 August 1944.
What, in its final form, did it prescribe?
The ambitions of the civil servants were realized.
The president became the Minister of Education with the duty to secure the effective execution by local authorities, under his control and direction, of the national policy for providing a varied and comprehensive educational service in every area.
169 authorities (147 boroughs and 22 urban district councils) having responsibility within counties for elementary education were abolished, leaving 63 county councils and 83 county boroughs with a unified responsibility for all the stages of education within their boundaries.
Without that elimination of the anomaly created in 1902 the necessary reconstruction could not have been accomplished.
The principle of ‘dual control’(by the public authority and by a voluntary body) was extended for the first time to secondary schools.
The non-provided schools, unless they were absorbed totally into the public system, had a choice of status.
Some became voluntary aided, preserving a considerable measure of autonomy, receiving full support for all their annual running costs and a generous subsidy (at first 50 per cent, but in later decades rising to 80 per cent ) towards the capital costs of building.
Many became voluntary controlled, with more carefully circumscribed independence and total support from public funds.
The category of ‘elementary’ was abolished, and all schools should be separately organized as successively primary and secondary.
Each authority should within a year produce a development plan showing how these changes would be achieved — some laggards took until 1951.
All fees were abolished — they had gone from elementary schools in 1918, at the end of the First World War, and now parents in Cardiff would not have to pay ten guineas per annum for access to Blake and Donne.
More important, fee-paying parents in other areas (and in schools like Thame) would no longer be able to buy a grammar-school place for children who had not ‘passed the scholarship’.
The ‘Points’ system had indeed triumphed, only it was IQ points that could now be accumulated.
The school-leaving age — without the exceptions opposed in 1936 by the Local Education Authorities, the National Union of Teachers, Harold Macmillan, Walter Citrine of the TUC, and (of course) William Temple — was to be raised to fifteen on 1 April 1947, and to sixteen as soon as it became practicable (which, in the event, was not until I had completed my teaching career in secondary schools).
300,000 school places had been destroyed during the War, and 350,000 additional ones would now be needed.
Nor was the Act the only important educational publication of the year.
The McNair Report on teacher training (see Chapter 9) appeared in May, but both it and the Act were apparently overshadowed in public interest by the Fleming Report on that subject of endless fascination to the English, the Public Schools.
Their place did not, however, become central to disputes about the essential nature of secondary education until the secondary schools themselves established under the Act were subjected to dramatic change (see Chapter 6).
Later in the month of August 1944, Paris was liberated.
I caught the sense of victory in seeing the film of Henry V — just as I had supposed that all schools were like that of Goodbye Mr Chips , which I was taken to see in 1939.
William Temple, to whom the Act owed so much, died on 24 October 1944.
In 1945 I worked hard at my Higher School Certificate subjects of English, French, and history — the Tudors and Stuarts, of course— and tried to decide whether I should have preferred to be Thomas Wolsey or Thomas More.
I celebrated VE Day with my friends on 8 May, and VJ Day in September.
Every street in Cardiff had a party, and no traffic moved.
My father said, for the second time in his life, that it could not all happen again.
Between the two days of carnival, on 26 July 1945, the results of the general election — delayed by the counting of servicemen's votes — were announced.
It was a landslide: 393 seats for Labour, 213 Conservative, 12 Liberals, and 22 others.
It would be a Labour government that would put into effect the Act of 1944, and much else besides.
Was the first and outgoing Minister of Education tempted to return to Churchill's piece of cardboard —‘There you are, fixed, old cock’?
PEACE
From 1945 until 1951 the Labour party was in power in Britain.
It carried through, under Clement Attlee as Prime Minister, a wide range of reforms and established a framework of government and welfare which survived unchallenged until the 1980s.
Even its controversial plans for the nationalization of major industries came to be accepted as part of a world built upon consensus.
The leaders of the party, although idealists and orators flourished among them, were perceived as sober statesmen dedicated to parliamentary procedures and seasoned by their years of experience within the wartime coalition.
Most of them would be unlikely to sponsor a wholesale reconstruction of the educational system and were content to work strenuously within the generous limits of the new Act of 1944.
In any case, there was more than enough to do in repairing the faults of the existing system and correcting the injustices which they and their predecessors had been denouncing since the 1920s.
Moreover, the reforms had to be achieved with resources severely diminished by the efforts of war and with the pound at an uncomfortably high rate against the dollar ($4.03 until the devaluation of September 1949).
The Bank of England was nationalized, as were the coal-mines (unhappily for public relations, in the cripplingly cold winter of 1946–7), the railways, electricity, gas, and — with much more contention — steel.
In 1946 general effect was given to the recommendations of the Beveridge Report, Aneurin Bevan tamed the recalcitrant self-interest of the doctors, and the main outlines of the Welfare State were definitively drawn.
Bread rationing continued until July 1948, and clothes rationing until 1949 (when the University of Keele was founded and Orwell's 1984 published).
These were at-home years of high purpose, tough conditions, and not very much humour — marked by the austere image of Stafford Cripps, of whom Churchill observed ‘There but for the Grace of God, goes God.’
Ellen Wilkinson, for two tragically short years until her death in the frozen February of 1947, sat in the place which Butler had created at the Ministry of Education.
‘Red Ellen’ had long been in the public eye — notably as the figure at the head of the Jarrow March in 1936 bearing down upon London to protest against the enormity of unemployment.
A grammar-school pupil going on to Manchester University through the sacrifices of an elder brother, she fought the cause of Labour through the trade-union movement and into the House of Commons.
She supported her ungenerous lover Herbert Morrison against the rival claims of Attlee, and spent the war as a junior minister.
By 1945 she was already ill and exhausted.
By 1947, when she was succeeded by George Tomlinson, the mould of secondary education had been set.
The Left in British politics had never had, nor needed to have, any single clear view about the structure of secondary education: the imperative was to provide it for all, and to provide it free.
That had been the central claim of Tawney's Secondary Education for All , made in 1922 and constantly reaffirmed since.
The Hadow Report of 1926, and its successor the Spens Report of 1938, had envisaged that not all children would want or could profit from the kind of schooling which was available in Cardiff in the 1930s or in Thame in the 1890s, and that different kinds of pupils deserved not only various curricula but also distinctive types of school.
When the White Paper on Educational Reconstruction was published in 1943 it contained references to three possible ‘types’ of secondary schools — grammar, technical, and modern.
The Norwood Report which was published ten days later, and (somewhat improperly) enjoyed the status of an official document, elaborated a justification of this manner of classification in terms of distinct styles of mind and temperament.
Sir Cyril Norwood was the head of an Oxford college who had been the head of a Public School and written about leadership.
Groups like the National Association of Labour Teachers had, even before the War, urged the importance of the common or unified secondary school.
But the Labour party was emotionally more committed to the plain principle that the workers should have access to the good things which in the past could be bought for money — health, security, places in grammar schools.
The more radical critics within the party did nevertheless ensure that the reference to three types of school did not appear in the 1944 Act (or, indeed, the 1943 Bill).
Butler, as Minister in Churchill's caretaker government, authorized the publication of ‘The Nation's Schools’, and Ellen Wilkinson followed this later in the same year with The Organisation of Secondary Education .
Grammar-school places should be provided for not more than 25 or 30 per cent of the age group: the new orthodoxy was canonized.
She brushed aside criticism at the Party Conference of 1946 by asserting of the different types of school: If the teachers get the same pay, if the holidays are the same and if, as far as possible, the buildings are as good in each case, then you get in practice the parity for which the teachers are quite rightly asking.
Holidays had symbolic importance: then, as now, the more prestigious an educational establishment then the shorter its terms.
Criticism was effectively silenced for the rest of the Government's life, but a buried ambivalence persisted in Labour attitudes.
Things may have been different under another Minister, or under the same one in happier and healthier days, but it seems doubtful.
The post-war years were marked by a dislike, even a hatred and fear, of novelty — as was amply demonstrated in the reception of the Picasso — Matisse exhibition in 1945.
Novelties such as comprehensive schools for all would certainly have been distrusted by the civil servants who had drafted the Green Book.
They were now joined by John Maud as permanent Secretary, who soon found that his Minister — not particularly well on educational matters, although still capable of righteous passion in the face of wrong — was content to learn rather than There was plenty to keep them busy.
Bombing during the war, the inadequacy of school provision as it had existed in 1939, evacuation and the neglect of repairs, intense pressure upon the resources and materials available — all these combined to face Red Ellen and her permanent Secretary with a formidable task.
The school-leaving age was raised, and the birth-rate remained high throughout the period 1944 to 1949.
Small wonder that there was little time or taste for theorizing about ideal forms of secondary education.
A great deal of deep and genuine idealism nevertheless dignified the effort to provide quickly an adequate and free form of secondary education, as an alternative to the existing and enlarged grammar-school provision.
These were the golden years of the secondary modern school — a school which was to be free, so it was thought, from the cramping effects of competitive examination.
Valiant attempts were made to develop a humane and worthwhile schooling for the majority who were not selected into grammar schools by the sophisticated operation of an eleven-plus examination.
The danger, of course, was that the new schools would be little more than half-hearted extensions of the former senior elementary schools — by 1938, 63.3 per cent of pupils beyond the age of eleven were in separate senior elementary schools and all that was at first formally required was that such schools should change their labels.
A few shillings sufficed to repaint the notice-boards.
To give body to the reforms new building was needed on a massive scale.
Priority was given over grammar-school building.
Yet even by 1961, when there were 3,872 secondary modern schools, there were still 1,026 unreorganized schools — schools, that is, which (although not secondary schools) included many pupils of secondary-school age.
The Burnham Committee, which had since the First World War been responsible for determining the salaries of teachers, now produced a unified scheme, making no formal distinction between the remuneration of teachers in Primary, secondary modern, or grammar schools.
Serious attempts were made to level up the resources for secondary modem schools, in order to make them comparable with grammar schools, and so achieve that parity to which Ellen Wilkinson was openly committed.
In the county of Kent, for example, in 1938 the expenditure per pupil in central schools (in effect, senior elementary schools attempting to provide a serious alternative to the grammar schools) was only one-half of that for each grammar-school pupil.
By 1948, in the same county, the proportion for secondary moderns had risen to three-quarters.
Nevertheless, the gap remained wide.
It was calculated that 170 per cent more on books and other educational materials was spent on grammar than on secondary-modern pupils.
Even when the reorganization of schools was complete the 29 per cent of pupils who were in grammar schools absorbed 49 per cent of the costs for all secondary pupils.
Staffing ratios were generally better in grammar schools than elsewhere, and even the Burnham system favoured (as it was meant to do) schools with a larger proportion of older pupils, especially if they were in those sixth forms which continued to stand at the peak of a meritocratic secondary system.
Twenty years later, when the divided system was beginning to crumble under public and political pressure, 73.9 per cent of grammar-school teachers were graduates, and therefore receiving extra pay and were (although by no means in every sense) better qualified.
The corresponding figure for modern schools was 15.7 per cent.
Such harsh realities made the dream of parity, and still more of equality, seem remote, and allowed later critics to denounce it as a sham.
Inevitably, the great majority of pupils left at the age of fifteen and without any formal qualifications.
The very nature of such schools placed a ceiling upon ambition and aspiration.
Small wonder, then, that A. J. P. Taylor's advice was to ‘run away to sea rather than go to a secondary modern’.
That advice was given in 1957, and captured a reality described more soberly six years later by William Taylor: ‘The ideals of the period (after 1945) involved not only a concept of the Modern school, but also a concept of society, in which the strains and stresses of occupational and social competition would be considerably reduced, and motives higher than those of profit and personal gain would direct human endeavour.’
Butler was, perhaps, not saying anything so very different when he observed that ‘equal educational opportunity is not identical educational opportunity’.
But what kind of an opportunity, then, should the secondary modern school offer?
First, it was assumed, the opportunity of a transfer for the more able to grammar school at the age of thirteen (or, very much later in the story, at the age of sixteen).
But that, of course, is an answer which bites its own tail — the ‘opportunity, in the secondary modern school is the chance to get out of it into something better, namely a grammar school.
The New Secondary Education , the pamphlet approved by Ellen Wilkinson and issued in 1947, observed somewhat unhelpfully: ‘The Modern School will be given parity of conditions with other types of secondary school; parity of esteem it must earn by its own efforts.’
The first promise was, of course, never fulfilled.
What was done to achieve this elusive parity of esteem which was required if the new schools were to be acceptable to parents and pupils?
It was always easier to say what such a school should not be, rather than what it should be.
The Nation's Schools , Butler's official pamphlet of 1945, gestured vaguely towards freedom and liveliness, but not much else: ‘Free from the pressure of any external examination these schools can work out the best and liveliest forms of secondary education suited to their pupils.’
A headmistress in 1946 said that same thing at greater length, but in doing so collapsed into meaninglessness: In my opinion, such a school should not be an imitation of the old Secondary School (that is, of the grammar school)…
Exterior examinations have no place in the modem school…
Highly intelligent and academically minded children should not be in this school…
The modern school must, to my mind, stand or full by what it does for the worst-equipped children.
Our aim must be to turn out a fully developed person to the limits of his or her personality.
We are not concerned to turn out good workmen or even good citizens, but a complete individual.
Education should make Mary Smith more Mary Smith.
But how?
Brave attempts were made to give some of the schools a particular flavour by linking them to particular emphases, or even particular careers.
Could area schemes be developed on this kind of a basis?
Might farm schools have a part to play?
Could schools be built around the project method, in which the tyranny of traditional subjects was loosened?
But it was not long before the harsh facts of economic and social life exerted their pressure.
Central government and received opinion were powerless against that pressure, which expressed itself most clearly in the urge to enter secondary-modern pupils for public examinations.
The introduction, in 1951, of the General Certificate of Education made it easier to enrol secondary-modern pupils for such examinations, since at ordinary level (O level) the more able among them could now take one subject or a few subjects, without having to take a whole group of subjects at the same time.
Her Majesty's Inspectors frowned upon this distortion of the purposes of the new school, but proved powerless and in 1955 a Government Circular gave modified approval to the introduction of examination courses in the schools.
In 1953 there had been 4,068 subject entries from secondary modern schools; by 1966 there were 22,000, the floodgates were open, and alternative public examinations were being developed nationally.
At the same time, the schools developed a whole series of vocational courses.
The secondary technical schools anticipated in 1944 had not been created in significant numbers, and the modern schools were required to fill the gap.
These schools therefore, and inevitably, developed within themselves quite different curricular packages — some of a grammar-school type, some of a technical or vocational variety, some designed to fill in time in the least troublesome way for growing adolescents.
The ideal of the secondary modern school was disintegrating, and the lack of a clear mission contributed to a steadily growing disenchantment with some of the consequences of the 1944 Act.
It was, doubtless, agreeable for Mary Smith to become more Mary Smith, but that process did not enable her to find a job or make a living.
Government, in carrying through into the late 1940s the orthodoxies of the 1920s, had trapped itself into what was to prove an untenable position.
The years 1945–5 I were not a period for new ideas, but for remedial action.
Nor were new ideas produced by the Labour government for the general elections of 1950 and 1951.
After all, the leading ministers had been continuously in office for the past ten years, and had achieved many of their declared objectives.
Their parliamentary majority was reduced to a handful in February 1950 and eliminated in October 1951.
The underlying shift in public opinion should not be exaggerated.
As a result of the well-publicized vagaries of the British electoral system the Conservatives did indeed have more seats than Labour (321 to 295) although Labour had more votes in the country as a whole (13.9 million to 13.7 million).
The Labour share of the popular vote had fallen from 50.4 per cent in 1945 to 49.2 per cent, but the party had lost nearly 100 seats.
The Conservatives were to rule for thirteen years, with Churchill as Prime Minister for the first three and a half.
Churchill made Butler his Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Florence Horsburgh became Minister of Education.
She was still in that office when, in January 1954, I became a secondary-school teacher.
The world of secondary schools was one from which I had been absent for eight years and it had in the mean time greatly expanded, so that the new secondary modern schools now occupied most — although not necessarily the most strategically important — territory.
When Clement Attlee became Prime Minister in 1945 I had just completed my Higher School Certificate in the traditional three subjects, with a year to spare before being called up for National Service.
It had always, I think, been assumed that I might try to get to Oxford, and history (by an equally mysterious process) became the subject of my choice.
It was quite unclear where the money would come from, but the first necessity was to secure a place and preferably an award.
Oxford admissions were even more complicated then than now, and the preferred route was by taking scholarship examinations after completing Higher School Certificate.
It was possible to make two, or even three, attempts in any one year — in December, January, and March.
The colleges, then as now, were arranged in groups for these purposes.
Autumn 1945 in Cardiff High School was a season of intensive preparation for a small group of us who were to make that attempt.
We worked very hard, and most of us that season appeared in Oxford at least twice.
We travelled, of course, by train and behind a steam-engine, and ate very sticky cakes in a café in the High Street.
Most of my friends stayed in colleges, but I stayed with an aunt in Victoria Road and was very much warmer in consequence.
Several three-hour papers were answered in large, cold halls smelling of kippers: the open fires were large, decorative and ineffective.
All I can now remember of questions and answers is writing a three-hour essay on ‘Security’, and I cannot think that it was very good.
In December I was interviewed on a dark evening at Trinity by a group of Fellows, one of whom wore enormous boots and all of them seemed amused by my belief that there were no good books on eighteenth-century English history.
They offered me, in due course, a commonership — that is a place.
That was something to cheer Christmas 1945, but not quite enough and in the new year I was back again, once more taking the No. 2 bus from Summertown to Carfax.
This time Brasenose College was to decipher my handwriting, and I was interviewed by the Principal and Fellows in the Tower Bursary.
A dozen of them sat there and terrified me, although several were later to become my friends.
They raised the offer to a college exhibition, and much of my future — more than I could have guessed — was then determined.
Back in Cardiff, my name went up on the Honours Board and my father, in the last year before his retirement, quietly enjoyed the thought that I was to spend at least part of my life in the county in which his father had been born.
For the first half of 1946 I remained at school, where the privileged handful of us who had won our places at Oxford and Cambridge did no work, read widely, cycled to the seaside.
I wrote to my tutor at Brasenose asking for advice on what to read, and he suggested some ‘shorter essays’ such as Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (in six volumes).
There was not much time for that after the summer of 1946, for in September I travelled north along the Welsh borders to join the RAF.
During my two years of national service I became first a radar mechanic and then an Education Sergeant, leaving in 1948 to start reading History at Brasenose.
There I remained for five years, going on to Theology after History.
Oxford, after the War and after national service and in spite of the minor irritation of having to carry into Hall private rations of butter and sugar, was a place of freedom.
It was a curious mixture of determined work, for many undergraduates had lost five years or more, and of equally certain enjoyment, for the lost years had to be made up in other ways too.
I was lucky in my tutors and my college, and like so many young men before and since fell in love with the place.
Know ye her secret none can utter,
Hers of the Book the Triple Crown?
Still from the tower the pigeons flutter,
Still by the gateway flits the gown.
And on Sunday afternoon I often went to Kidlington, to eat large teas and remember another world.
They were, of course, not comfortable years for the world.
In June 1948, just before I bought a gown, the Berlin Airlift began and continued until the autumn of 1949.
Visions of the future were often black and in 1949 Orwell published 1984.
In 1951 Burgess and Maclean fled to Moscow; Aneurin Bevan and Harold Wilson resigned from the Labour government in protest at the imposition of charges within the National Health Service, which they saw as an attack on the principles of the Welfare State.
Many of us read C. P. Snow's The Masters and snatched an intriguing glimpse of what the old universities were really like.
The Festival of Britain sought to persuade us of the imminence of a better and less contorted world.
In February 1952 King George VI died, and an Old Testament lecture I was attending stopped in the middle.
In Oxford the new Queen was proclaimed with due ceremony, several times.
The last London tram ran, and The Mousetrap began its record-breaking run in London theatres.
Stalin died in 1953, and Hillary climbed Everest ‘because it was there’.
Intending to be a priest of the Church of England, I lost my faith, slowly but painfully, and at the end of the summer left Oxford and the house in Norham Gardens in which I had been living for two years and in which, by a curious turn of fortune, my office now is.
My puzzled parents welcomed me home and, after a reassuring three months tearing up confidential papers for the Civil Service, I joined the staff of Emanuel School, London, in January 1954.
It was, predictably, a grammar school but of course by then part of a system in the capital in which secondary modern schools (With some novel comprehensives) predominated.
Yet, like so many others brought up through an older tradition, I was only indirectly aware of their nature, or even of their existence.
Emanuel and the London school scene of which it was part illustrate well the unsteady evolution of the system through and beyond the 1944 Act.
The remote origins of Emanuel School lay in the sixteenth century and a small charitable foundation for the elderly and the young.
Emanuel Hospital, as it was called for two and a half centuries, lived quietly in Westminster into the nineteenth century and until a more elaborate scheme was developed by the Endowed Schools Commission.
In 1882 a larger and at that time healthier site was purchased on Wandsworth Common, and the new school opened with 271 boys — most of them boarders, but 80 day-boys.
Very few stayed beyond the age of fifteen.
After the Education Act of 1902 the London County Council made available each year a number of scholarships for brighter boys from its own elementary schools, but the school (like Lord Williams's School at Thame) remained formally independent.
Scholarship boys replaced the boarders and the school became steadily more successful as a grammar school of the Public School type.
Traditions were cultivated and invented.
The headmaster from 1927 to 1953 (from the year before I was born to the year before I joined the staff) was C. G. M. Broom: a scholar of Brasenose and, like all his predecessors, a classic in the old manner.
During his headmastership eighty-five open scholarships to Oxford and Cambridge were won by boys at the school: the spirit of the place in the 1930s, however different the forms of independence, was very close to that of Cardiff High School at the same time.
In 1932 Broom was elected to the Headmasters' Conference and the school therefore became officially a Public School — albeit in a somewhat special sense.
In 1938 the ordinary fees were twenty-one guineas a year, and for those who paid fees this made Emanuel rather more expensive than the general run of London County Council secondary schools.
There were 550 boys in the school, of whom 40 per cent had free places.
During the War the whole school was evacuated to the green safety of Hampshire, and celebrated its return to London and normality with a commemoration service in Westminster Abbey and a luncheon at the Dorchester Hotel.
R. A. Butler, as president of the Board of Education, was the principal guest.
The Act which he had just steered through Parliament faced Emanuel with difficult choices: should it remain fully independent and operate outside the State system, or should it be incorporated within the local provision of schooling and become a voluntary-aided school?
The response of the London County Council to the 1944 Act had been to propose ‘a system of comprehensive high schools’.
The London County Council, for long a stronghold of the Labour party, was one of the relatively few authorities to press firmly in this direction in the immediate post-war years.
Its plans were, however, for long inhibited by the existence of fifty-five voluntary-aided grammar schools, of which Emanuel now prudently decided to become one.
Fees were abolished for all pupils, entry to the school was by the competitive eleven-plus examination.
In London as a whole the grammar schools (twenty-one of which were directly maintained by the London County Council) were for many years to admit 17–20 per cent of each age group, and the movement towards comprehensive schools was painfully slow.
Meanwhile, Emanuel School and the other grammar schools continued to dominate the peaks of the academic market.
Most of them, protected by their voluntary-aided status, resisted for twenty years and more all attempts to change their fiercely academic character or to entangle them in vague schemes of amalgamation or co-operation with secondary modern schools.
The new headmaster of Emanuel in 1954 had himself taught at Harrow, where the strains of ‘Forty Years On’ stirred his memory and his loyalties, and was an old boy of Emanuel: nothing would be deliberately done to loosen the ties with the past.
Moreover, the liberals on the staff were sensibly content that the reforms of 1944 had eliminated all fee-paying from the school, and that they could deliver first-rate academic education to the brighter boys of Battersea.
It was, in these years, a good place in which to work.
I had the good fortune to work with a brilliant head of department, and paid £10 for a 1927 Austin 7 in which I drove uncertainly every day from Wimbledon.
After five terms I moved into Surrey to become head of the history department in Wallington County Grammar School for Boys and to work away for five years at doing what grammar schools were most proud of: helping boys to win awards at Oxford or Cambridge, urging ever-growing numbers of them successfully through public examinations, encouraging that sense of discipline and order which characterized the traditional Public and grammar school, wearing a gown, sustaining the prefect system.
These tasks ruled my life at Emanuel and Wallington, from 1954 to 1959.
My faith in grammar schools remained robustly intact.
In October 1954 David Eccles succeeded Florence Horsburgh as Minister of Education.
In November Churchill paid his annual visit to his old school at Harrow, where the boys sang for him a special verse:
Sixty years on—though in time growing older,
Younger at heart you return to the Hill:
You who in days of defeat ever bolder,
Led us to Victory, serve Britain still.
Still there are bases to guard or beleaguer,
Still must the battle for Freedom be won:
Long may you fight, Sir, who fearless and eager
Look back to-day more than sixty years on.
The bases were, in the event, guarded by Eden, who succeeded Churchill as Prime Minister in April 1955.
A mood of relaxed and optimistic nostalgia was abroad, and gentler songs were sung by those who flocked to see Salad Days :
So, if I start looking behind me, and begin retracing my track, I'll remind you to remind
me we said we wouldn't look back.
And if you should happen to find me, with an outlook
dreary and black, I'll remind you to remind me we said we wouldn't look back.
In 1956 Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal.
The House of Commons debated the crisis on 2 August, and on the same day I was married to Mary Patrick in Southport, formally recording my profession as ‘Schoolmaster (Grammar)’.
These distinctions were still, it seems, important to the Registrar General.
In the autumn, the Hungarian crisis broke and British and French troops landed in Egypt.
They were obliged to withdraw from one of the last (but not quite the last) imperial adventures, and Eden resigned.
Harold Macmillan became Prime Minister, with Butler as Home Secretary.
Lord Hailsham was appointed Minister of Education.
Edward Boyle, who had resigned from the previous Government over its management of the Suez crisis, became his Parliamentary Secretary.
John Osborne's Look Back in Anger set a new style for the London theatre, and introduced a new harshness into the contemporary idiom: ‘There aren't any good, brave causes left.’
Boyle, of course, did not agree.
Galbraith's The Affluent Society was published in 1958, shortly after Macmillan had reminded his fellow countrymen that they had ‘never had it so good’.
1958 and 1959 were boom years, and my pupils got into Oxford and Cambridge.
Wallington flourished under a headmaster who had been there before the War, who grew roses under the class-room windows, and trees around the playing-field.
One Friday afternoon, I looked steadily at one of those great green trees for ten minutes, and knew then I would not want to teach in grammar schools for ever.
Thame, Cardiff, Emanuel, and Wallington all flourished within the grammar-school tradition and 1959 is a good moment — before the critical voices drown the subtleties of that tradition — to try to define it, to place it in its historical and social context, and to prepare the scene for the massive reorganization of secondary schooling which marked the 1960s.
The English grammar school — like the Public School (of which more will be written in Chapter 6) and unlike the secondary modern or the comprehensive school — was the product of adaptation rather than invention.
Much about its character after 1944 is explained by its previous history.
In its origins, it was indistinguishable from the institutions which became the independent Public Schools.
Its name referred to its function in teaching the elements, or grammar, of learning and the typical medieval or Elizabethan grammar school was often the fruit of private beneficence or testamentary endowment.
The will of Laurence Sheriffe, for example, who died in 1567, allowed for the support of ‘a free grammar school chiefly for the children of Rugby and Brownsover’.
The three hundred or so grammar schools which existed in the late Middle Ages were mostly local and small.
Eton and Winchester, foundations designed to be of national significance and high quality and therefore directly linked with sister foundations at Cambridge and Oxford, were the exceptions.
Harrow was the first of the ‘local’ grammar schools to approach these great national schools in reputation.
Thomas Arnold, although the significance and peculiarity of his personal achievement at Rugby may have been exaggerated, typified the attempt to meet the demands of a rising middle class by moving the local grammar schools into the national, or ‘public’, category.
The Clarendon Commission (1861–4) examined the larger Public Schools.
The Taunton Commission (1864–8) was critical of the impoverished inefficiency of Thame and led to the reform of Emanuel.
But the distinction between Public and grammar remained unclear, although the lines were sharpened by the creation in 1869 of the Headmasters' Conference and the consequent definition of an inner circle of boys' Public Schools, properly so called.
Public Schools and grammar schools provided, or sought to provide, the same curriculum: it was traditional, and innovations (like science, modern languages, or geography) were stoutly resisted over many years.
An association with middle-class aspirations and a dedication to classics and mathematics were the mark of such schools.
It was the kind of secondary schooling that the Local Education Authorities wanted for their new secondary schools created or adopted after the Act of 1902, and by 1944 the image of the grammar school as the path to success was finally embedded in popular imagination, and in the practical politics of the Labour party.
By 1939, nearly 80 per cent of pupils going on to secondary schools came from public elementary schools and the balance from private schools of various kinds.
Of that total 46.2 per cent were paying full fees, 45.0 per cent no fees, and 8.8 per cent part fees.
From one fairly typical grammar school, studied by Colin Lacey, the fee-payers had almost disappeared as early as 1925.
That school, like many of its contemporaries, was essentially a ‘professionalizing’ school preparing its better students for the more dignified occupations, rather than for higher education (a development that was not to be fully realized until after 1945 and the expansion of the universities).
The award of the first State scholarship, providing access to a university, was celebrated with a day's holiday for the whole school in the 1930s.
Fees were abolished in 1944 in secondary schools within the national system, but (even then) not in the direct-grant schools.
Many of these schools — Bristol and Manchester Grammar Schools, for example— epitomized the virtues of the grammar schools, were not formally controlled or financed by LEAs, yet were often an important part of local provision and had fee-payers in them.
Their anomalous position illustrates the danger of reading back (even into the 1950s, let alone the 1930s) the more precisely defined contemporary categories, and eventually exposed them to abolition.
They were left on an indefensible island where the main streams of the Public School — independent and fee-paying — and the grammar school — maintained and free — diverged.
Nobody had, it appears, intended to create a category of direct-grant school: they owed their origin to an attempt to secure administrative and financial tidiness.
Before 1902, no general grants were paid, either by central or by local government, to support secondary grammar schools.
After 1902 such grants could be paid to schools which were formally independent (i.e. not ‘county’ schools) either by the Local Education Authority, or by central government, or by both.
Many schools preferred at that time to have two paymasters rather than one, but in 1926 they were obliged to choose: those which thereafter received grants from the Board of Education in London, and not through the Local Education Authority, were reasonably enough known as direct-grant schools.
Most of them did not differ greatly from most other grammar schools, which also (of course) enrolled fee-payers.
The arrangements needed to be further refined after 1944, and the number of direct-grant schools fell from 232 in 1943 to 164 in 1952.
By 1968, that total was 178.
Regulations required the direct-grant schools to set aside, without fees, 25 per cent of their places for pupils who had completed two years in an elementary school.
The Local Education Authority had the right to take up another 25 per cent of the places (the so-called ‘reserved’ places).
If the governors of the school agreed, yet more places (the ‘residuary’ places) could be brought into the same category.
For the remainder, the governors could admit whom they chose and charge fees on an approved scale.
They received a capitation fee for every pupil — in whatever category — in the school.
Even fee-paying pupils could, if parental circumstances entitled them, receive full or partial remission of fees at the public expense.
Friends of these schools rejoiced in this subtle mixture of independence, fee-paying, support for deserving pupils with poor parents, academic excellence, and adequate support from the tax-payer.
Their critics (but not yet) disliked them as examples of heavily subsidized privilege.
Eighty-one of the schools were for boys, ninety-five for girls, and two were mixed.
They varied in size from 200 to 1,400 pupils.
Two-thirds of the schools had no boarders, and most were situated in the towns — especially in the North of England, where many were Roman Catholic and so represented a useful variant of the religious settlement which Butler incorporated in the 1944 Act.
Although they contained only 30 per cent of the whole secondary-school population, they marshalled 10 per cent of all sixth formers — pupils, that is, voluntarily staying on to the age of eighteen.
They were academically impressive and saw themselves as belonging, in many cases, to the Public School sector yet setting the pace for grammar schools as a whole.
Grammar schools separated themselves from Public Schools (although, more accurately, it was of course the other way round) by embedding themselves in the local provision for secondary education.
They were the schools attended by the children of parents able to pay a modest but not negligible fee, together with the boys and girls who had by their own ability won a free or subsidized place.
The abolition of fees, in all except the direct-grant schools, by the Act of 1944, sharpened the competitive and selective character of the schools.
It also, of course, diminished their social selectiveness.
Nevertheless, the schools remained conscious of their semi-independent-past, of the closeness of their cultural alliance with the Public Schools, and (in consequence) attentive to traditional and ceremonious standards and to the preservation of an austerely academic curriculum.
For fifteen years after the 1944 Act the processes of selection for secondary education were refined.
The assumption was that, with sufficient care, pupils could be selected at the age of eleven on the basis of a prediction of their success in pursuing an academic education.
There was, in spite of the rhetoric, no attempt to identify aptitudes of a ‘modern’ or ‘technical’character.
The more able went to the grammar schools, and the rest did not: it was as simple as that.
The proportions of each age group selected into grammar schools varied from as little as 15 per cent in some parts of the country to as much as 40 per cent in others.
Selection was based upon written tests in English and mathematics, a report from a primary school, in some cases an interview, and — most important of all during the heyday of mental testing — an IQ score.
Measurement of intelligence, relative to that of a pupil's contemporaries, promised the fairest and the simplest and (apparently) the most appropriate means for effecting selection of this kind.
Most grammar schools were single sex; mixed schools were usually provided only where the sparseness of the population made it impracticable to provide separate schools for boys and girls.
Most of the teachers in grammar schools were graduates of universities: many, but by no means all of them, had also taken a one-year course of teacher training after completing their undergraduate studies.
The exceptions were the teachers in such subjects as physical education, art, and the crafts.
The domination of the curriculum by subjects classically defined was, indeed, the most obvious feature of the grammar-school curriculum.
That curriculum needed relatively little adjustment across the pre- and post-War years.
The contrast for the eleven-year-old with the more informal and less specialist work of the primary school was sharp and abrupt.
English, mathematics, a foreign language (usually French), Latin (often but not always), the sciences, history, geography, some art and crafts, but not too much, PE and games, the compulsory religious education: these were the invariable components of the first two or three years of a grammar-school education.
In the 1950s, the decade on which this analysis is focused, timetables could have been translated from one county grammar school to another almost as readily as architects' plans.
There was, and perhaps needed to be, very little variation from an understood pattern — which nobody needed to prescribe, simply because everybody agreed on what it should be.
After the second or third year the principle of choice, concentration, and specialization began to bite into the curriculum.
The linguists were allowed to diminish or extinguish their study of the sciences: the scientists, if they were to maintain a full programme in three separate sciences, had no time to waste on languages.
Those placed in an ‘express’ stream had even less reason for preserving a broad curriculum: like myself and my contemporaries in Cardiff High School they rattled along to their first public examination (O level after 1951) at the age of fifteen, and so secured the privilege of early entry — together with the possibility of some extra time — in the sixth form.
The concentration and academic character of that sixth form did not come under serious pressure before the 1960s, and even then remained a powerful influence upon those who taught and studied in grammar schools.
A later chapter will examine the changes that had been introduced in the examination system, but for the dominant minority in grammar-school sixth forms very little had changed.
Labels were shifted about, the Higher School Certificate became the General Certificate of Education at Advanced Level, but it was many years before new pressures distorted the ancient simplicities.
Three subjects were taken at A level and they were usually taken as packages of closely related studies: physics, chemistry, and mathematics; French, German, and English; history, geography, and economics.
Although the reality was, and always had been, very different the intention was to design and teach courses of study as a preliminary to an even more specialized university undergraduate course.
Some space was made, but never very much and rarely very seriously, or general or liberal studies.
The decade closed with the publication in 1959 of the Crowther Report: the work of the Central Advisory Council established by the 1944 Act which endorsed the principle of specialization within the sixth form and related it to a high vision of what should be represented by that most English of institutions.
Specialization of this kind was not, of course, the practice elsewhere in the civilized world ‘but it is worth noting that the broad curriculum of Europe and America is almost equally under fire’.
Specialization as an educational principle was, moreover, indissolubly linked with particular relationships between teacher and taught, characterized as discipleship, and a special responsibility towards younger and less mature pupils, epitomized in the prefect system.
This was, indeed, a powerful and heady mixture.
Although there were some large and important exceptions, the population of most grammar schools fell within the range 550–750.
Their organizational pattern was simple.
Teaching by subject led naturally to organization by subjects, and to the almost baronial power of heads of department within the system.
Given that membership of the school was universally perceived as a privilege, social and disciplinary problems were minimal and few special arrangements for pastoral care or counselling were thought to be necessary.
For such happy negligence a price was paid, and especially by pupils from less-favoured backgrounds.
Nevertheless, the prevalent mood was one of justified optimism.
The grammar school paid little or no formal attention to the social origins of their pupils, and parents paid no fees.
They offered a free and national alternative to the expensive Public School, yet occupied a confident place within the Establishment and in general esteem.
They cultivated the virtues of hard work, celebrated the advantages of competition and the accessibility of success for any able and determined pupil, and efficiently pursued victory in the examination system.
The vision of Tawney and the conservatism of Red Ellen had, it seemed, both been justified.
The Crowther Report demonstrated that two-thirds of grammar-school pupils in the 1950s had parents both of whom had left school at the age of fourteen.
The next decade should be one of consolidation a d steady improvement.
But it was not.
DIVISION
While I was teaching in London and Surrey, from 1954 to 1959, I completed a thesis for the degree of Ph.D.
My subject was French history, and although my focus was on a relatively obscure piece of ecclesiastical history I had the good fortune to work with the most genial and scholarly of humanists, Professor Alfred Cobban of the University of London.
At a time when it would have been altogether too easy to disappear into the exacting but ultimately limiting routine of grammar-school teaching, Alfred Cobban enlivened and enlarged my interest in scholarly work.
Although that interest has been, in the course of my career, swept aside more than once by the demands of administration and politics, it will, I hope, never be finally submerged and killed.
Late one evening in 1958 Alfred Cobban telephoned me to see if I would consider going to Cumberland Lodge, in Windsor Great Park, to work there for three years as Director of Studies.
Cumberland Lodge was and is a remarkable foundation: a grace and favour house belonging to the sovereign which, in the years after the War, had been set aside to serve as a meeting-place for university teachers and students.
It was committed to the beliefs that specialization in higher education had been corrupted into narrowness, that scholars and students in sealed disciplines no longer communicated with one another, that values were neglected in a world of facts, that the lack of residence in many contemporary universities removed a deeply significant part of their traditional culture as institutions.
These were the principles underlying the creation of the University of Keele (as it later became), whose founding Vice-Chancellor, A. D. Lindsay, had been Master of Balliol College, Oxford, and closely associated with the powerful group that promoted Cumberland Lodge.
Another had been William Temple, Butler's necessary ally in the passing of his Act.
The original model of the place had been one of an unintrusive liberal Christianity, and the first Principal was Sir Walter Moberly — a don and Vice-Chancellor who came from one of the great dynasties of bishops, scholars, and headmasters (of Public Schools, of course).
His Crisis in the University , published during the Attlee government, was an influential analysis of the failures of the contemporary university.
He was also Chairman of the University Grants Committee.
The late fifties and early sixties, when I lived in Windsor Great Park, were creative and critical in manner: the established order was questioned (sometimes cynically), but it was assumed that well-directed idealism could change human society.
In 1959 the Manchester Guardian became the Guardian and C. P. Snow published his lecture on ‘The Two Cultures’.
His enemies attacked its vulgar over-simplification, but the lecture did bring near the centre of popular debate many of the problems which Moberly had analysed a decade before.
What was new, of course, was the emphasis on the centrality of a scientific culture.
What was mocked was the arrogant superiority of the traditionally educated arts man who knew nothing of the second law of thermodynamics.
The Russian Sputnik had been launched two years before, and produced in the United States a feverish alarm lest their Communist competitors should outstrip them in a world increasingly penetrated by science and technology.
The consequences for education and schooling in the United States were dramatic.
In September 1959, at Woods Hole on Cape Cod in Massachusetts, Professor Jerome Bruner presided over a meeting of influential scientists and afterwards wrote The Process of Education .
Curriculum reform gathered momentum, and with it the confidence that — with the right intellectual and political support — teaching and learning could be revolutionized.
In 1960 J. F. Kennedy became President of the United States, and in the following year the Peace Corps was established.
In the world of education and in the year of the Woods Hole conference, Britain had to content itself with the Crowther Report, which, even at the time of its publication and even more plainly in retrospect, reads more like an epitaph than a prophecy.
Harold Macmillan spoke in Cape Town, in February 1960, of the ‘wind of change’ and directed the unwilling attention of his countrymen towards an Empire on which the sun was at last setting.
In the following months he defeated Lord Franks in the election of a Chancellor for Oxford University: he was still in office in 1983, and still using in public ceremonies the Latin pronunciation he had learned at Eton in the last Edwardian days.
The Labour party was changing too: Aneurin Bevan died at the age of 62 in July 1960, and with him much of the reforming passion which had created the Welfare State.
In October, at the annual party Conference, Harold Wilson unsuccessfully challenged Hugh Gaitskell for the leadership of the party.
The trial of the publishers of Lady Chatterley's Lover registered and accelerated a new tolerance in sexual behaviour and in published accounts of it.
The innovation of Private Eye ensured that deference, if not quite dead, would henceforth have a hard time.
Headmasters could take less for granted.
Sussex University was born, with more glitter and publicity than had attended the more earnest first days of Keele, and with a declared mission to redraw the map of knowledge, to challenge the hegemony of the traditional subject, to celebrate a new scientific culture.
The structure of DNA was determined by Sydney S. Bremner and Francis Crick, who came to Cumberland Lodge to talk about his work and to attack organized religion.
Innovatory places are, perhaps, never comfortable and the Lodge was never free from tensions.
But there were always the acres of parkland, garden, and water, and always friends happy to come and stay.
We lived in a house at the end of an eighteenth-century mews, and my son Simon was born in November 1959, within a few months of our moving to Windsor.
Koestler, Tillich, Montefiore passed by.
So did many whose professional and intellectual concerns were with education, and who obliged me to reflect more on schools and on what, whether by intention or not, they did.
Lord James of Rusholme (Eric James) irrupted, and I read in his Education for Leadership (1951) a robustly confident statement of what was best in grammar schools.
At least three future members of the Public Schools Commission of the 1960s came to talk and walk — Bernard Williams, David Donnison, John Vaizey — and to challenge the assumptions of 1944 upon which British schooling reposed.
These particular circumstances, and the weekly necessity to define and defend rational positions, no doubt sharpened my own sense of the imminence of major educational change.
But the growing pressure for such change can, of course, be illustrated more objectively by recalling some of the new evidence and arguments about education and social policy marshalled during these fruitful years.
Even the Crowther Report was not wholly free from doubts and worries: it documented the waste of talent in the system, with only 12 per cent of each age group remaining in full-time education to the age of seventeen, and a meagre 6 per cent for a further year beyond that.
Moreover, many of the more able pupils were leaking out of the system: even of the most able 10 per cent, two out of five had left before attaining their sixteenth birthday.
Crowther looked back to the previous and deeply influential report, also by the Central Advisory Council, on Early Leaving (1954).
This showed that of 16,000 children entering grammar schools in 1946 (the year when I left one), more than half failed to secure even three passes at O level, and almost a third left even before the end of their fifth year.
As for the children of the unskilled workers, relatively few of them secured entry in the first place, and even those tended to do badly: only one in twenty survived to enter for two subjects at A level.
After 1954, and however virtuously reassuring it had been to teach bright Battersea boys, it was impossible to ignore the influence of social class on educational achievement.
In the few years after 1958 a new word (and, underlying it, a new fear) took root: the meritocracy.
Michael Young (now Lord Young of Dartington) published The Rise of the Meritocracy , a sparkling and satirical commentary on the ways in which secondary schools had developed and the futures to which they pointed.
The form of the book, written from the imagined perspective of the year 2034, is a review of developments since 1870 and an analysis of the surprising troubles of 2033 provoked by the populist movement — a ‘strange blend of women in the lead and men in the rank and file’.
‘Until the Butler Act began to take effect in the 70's and 80's, Britain was outstanding among industrial countries as the home and fount of nepotism in a hundred subtle forms.’
International competition was the pace-maker for reform: reports like Early Leaving demonstrated the extent of academic waste, and this the country simply could not afford.
Quality and not equality was the dominant value propelling reform.
Indeed, the proper development of the system — to make it more selective and more efficient — required the defeat of the Labour party's sentimental plans for comprehensive schools.
Britain, which had been the workshop of the world now had to become the grammar school of the world.
Michael Young, in his paradoxically assumed role, quotes approvingly the strictures of Lord James on misguided attempts to generalize an élite education:
The demand fur such a common culture rests either on an altogether over-optimistic belief in the educability of the majority that is certainly not justified by experience or on a willingness to surrender the highest standards of taste and judgement to the incessant demands of mediocrity.
Attention to the proper development of the grammar schools required some surprising changes: the payment of pupils to defeat the rival attractions of early employment, extra investment for able pupils in primary schools, the conversion of Public Schools into boarding grammar schools, more efficient testing and selecting, and (since some talent would still be missed at the age of eleven, or developed later) continuous and lifelong selection.
Problems arise, of course, because every selection is a rejection of many.
The members of the new lower class, of those who are not chosen for the meritocracy, not only are at the bottom but are there because they both deserve to be and know it.
This experience is even more painful to those children of members of the meritocracy who are not bright and so move down the social and economic scale.
There is something, at least, to be said for the old order: ‘Educational injustice enabled people to preserve their illusions, inequality of opportunity fostered the myth of human equality.’
The roots of the current (AD 2033) discontents are complex.
The feminists pursue a romantic attempt to disconnect schooling from economic competition, and to resist the ‘intelligenic marriage’, designed to ensure that the clever marry the clever to produce the clever.
Now that, at last , in the twenty-first century, all selection can be accomplished before the child is three years old, later testing and reallocation can be discontinued: the escape routes from low status are blocked, and frustrated envy is nourished.
The ‘new conservatives’ have made it worse by arguing, incorrectly as it happens, that since the children of the élite for the most part(and for both genetic and environmental reasons) become the élite, then the elaborate process of selection may as well be shortened and a plain hereditary principle reintroduced.
The wheel has turned full circle.
The Rise of the Meritocracy was a brilliant fable, which offered no solutions.
Its author was to have that opportunity later.
Meanwhile, the probable and longer-term human consequences of a growing emphasis upon the efficient competitive selection and of a commitment to the formula (IQ + Effort = Merit) disconcerted those who had been content to march under the banners of equal educational opportunity, free access to grammar schools, and the end of nepotism.
Four years later, in 1962, Brian Jackson (who died while I was writing this book) and Dennis Marsden added their persuasive voices to the growing chorus of those who were aware of the weaknesses rather than the strengths of the grammar school.
In Education and the Working Class they studied the attitudes and careers of eighty-eight working-class pupils in Huddersfield grammar schools: most of these had taken their A levels in the period 1949–52, and belonged therefore to the earliest generations of those who had been liberated from the payment of fees.
They belonged without doubt to the successful minority, but a heavy price had been paid by most of them.
Most of their working-class contemporaries, of course, did not even have the opportunity.
For the middle-class child ‘the prevailing grammar school tone was a natural extension of his home life’.
When he did encounter problems, remedies were easily to hand.
The successful working-class children — that is, those who stayed the full seven-year course to Higher School Certificate or A levels — usually came from small families and often lived near to a primary school serving a predominantly middle-class area.
They were, all in all, subject to considerable pressure to do well.
For most of them the beginning of grammar school represented a sharp break from the familiarities of the neighbourhood primary school.
Most of them adapted by distancing themselves from their homes, from the attitudes and habits of their parents.
In adult life they were confident that the eleven-plus had separated them from ‘the dim ones’ and saw no reason to be troubled about the ‘intellectually inferior’working-class boys and girls who had left school at the age of fifteen or sixteen.
Education and the Working Class , rooted in direct observation and rich reporting, raised ‘the old dilemma: working class life — listen to the voices — has strengths we cannot afford to lose; middle class life transmits within it the high culture of one society, that must be opened freely to all.
That is the problem the planners must solve.’
It still is.
Behind such analyses lay Richard Hoggart's extensive and sensitive work in The Uses of Literacy , published in 1957 and documenting the assumptions, attitudes, and morals of working-class people in Northern England, together with the influence upon them of the magazines, books, and films which had been produced for a mass market.
His theme is the exposition of the cultural dangers accompanying such valuable social changes as the achievement of literacy or the freeing of access to secondary education.
Against such a background he perceives, in terms echoed a year later by Michael Young, that the eleven-plus is ‘likely to cause the working-classes now to lose many of the critical tentacles which they would have retained years ago and that a new caste system might prove to be at least as rigid as the old’.
The working-class boy who passes the eleven-plus is likely to come from an elementary or primary, school from which only a few pupils each year penetrate the grammar-school world.
He will do his homework in a cold and inhospitable bedroom, within a home marked by warm conviviality and sharing.
The men and the boys have other and different interests, many of them outside the home, and he is a boy in a woman's world.
perceiving life as a series of hurdle jumps, ‘he seems set to make an adequate, reliable and unjoyous type of clerk’.
He sits, unhappy and proud, on the ladder of social promotion having lost the hold on one type of life, but failing to reach the one to which he aspires.
This for the majority.
A few, of exceptional talent, will be able to make the great leap upward and outward in order to join the steadily growing group of ‘declassed experts’.
For the rest, there is alienation and loss.
Much of this argument, even a quarter of a century later, remains powerful yet inconclusive, and provoked some irritable responses.
Why should not ‘middle-class values’— loosely articulated as industry, honesty, thrift, ambition, prudence, civility — be encouraged or even imposed more widely?
And what, in any case, did these radical critics of social change in fact propose to offer?
They were (like Tawney and Webb before them) clear about the injustices and the distortions in the contemporary system, but what kind of programme could be derived from their aching nostalgia for a working-class world that was slipping away?
But, without doubt, the inheritors of the grammar-school tradition were steadily pressed on to the defensive in the early sixties.
A typical apologia was that offered in 1960 by Frances Stevens in The Living Tradition :
I believe that the maintained grammar school offers the best hope at present of making accessible to a larger population than ever before the best of the qualities and habits of which it somewhat accidentally finds itself the custodian: respect for learning, the encouragement of deep and strenuous thought, a regard for style, and the tacit assumption of contracts of mutual responsibility between individuals and between an individual and his society.
The grammar school has its defects.
But the petty snobbery and priggishness of which it is sometimes accused are in my view much less serious (and in any case demonstrably declining) than are two tendencies: the first, to make the curriculum and the public examination system a closed circuit; the second, to be increasingly concerned with training — in other words, to think of its pupil-product more and more as an instrument rather than as an end.
Despite these defects, at its best it is a place of civilized relaxation, as well as hard work, and an unrivalled solvent of social prejudices and preparation for democratic living.
Perhaps.
But to write as though the problem were one simply of petty snobbery and priggishness is, wilfully or not, to trivialize the argument, and not to hear the voices.
The defence is still stout, but the manner less confident than that of Lord James ten years before, or of Goronwy Rees writing in 1971 about the 1920s.
Moreover, the social scientists now began to draw up alongside the social critics in throwing doubt upon the value and achievement of the grammar schools.
(Nobody could find a good word to say for the secondary moderns, and that silence was eloquent and effective.)
The alleged inadequacies would not just be described; they would be counted, as well.
In 1957 Jean Floud, A. H. Halsey, and F. M. Martin in their Social Class and Educational Opportunity gave a new impetus both to the study of these themes and to action upon them.
Their work returned afresh to the problem of social waste in education, and especially to its manifestation in the selective and divided system of secondary education.
Two contrasting parts of the country — south-west Hertfordshire and  Middlesborough — yielded proof that if IQ was very reasonably taken as the key criterion, then there was no ‘problem’ associated with the access of bright working-class boys to grammar schools.
The indignation of Tawney, confronting the massive injustices of 1922, was no longer appropriate.
‘If by ‘ability’ we mean ‘measured intelligence’and by ‘opportunity’access to grammar schools, then opportunity may be said to stand in close relationship with ability in both these areas to-day.’
But, at the end of the 1950s, it was awkwardly clear that those were two big ‘Ifs’.
The number of working-class boys admitted to grammar schools was disproportionately small, and ‘measured intelligence’ could not — as had been conveniently assumed — be treated as though it were clearly independent of genetic endowment, or of environment.
Equally, class was a powerful determinant of the progress and success of those boys who were admitted to grammar schools.
In south-west Hertfordshire one in seven of the working-class boys secured entry to a grammar school, compared with one in two of the sons of clerks; the corresponding proportions in  Middlesborough were one in eight and one in three.
During those same years J. W. B. Douglas was carrying forward into the secondary-school stage his massive study of a sample of 5,000 children born in 1946.
The Home and the School , published in 1964, hammered home the message about selection at eleven-plus.
Moreover, 70 per cent of those who had been admitted to grammar schools left school at the minimum permitted age, namely fifteen.
There was only a thin trickle of transfers from secondary modern to grammar schools at the age of thirteen, but even this simply exaggerated the class differentials, giving an added advantage to the children of middle-class parents.
It was clear that the honest promises of 1944 had not been fulfilled: the secondary moderns had not secured parity of esteem, and never would.
Parental and public anxiety grew, and especially as the size of the eleven-plus group expanded without any corresponding increase in grammar-school provision.
The eleven-plus bulge was at its peak in the second half of the fifties.
The system was, perhaps irreversibly, biased towards the selection of middle-class children.
The accuracy of selection, if the system was to be maintained more or less intact, was of the highest importance.
Unfortunately, a detailed and thorough piece of work (also undertaken in the 1950s) sapped confidence in the accuracy of that central process.
Alfred Yates and D. A. Pidgeon in Admission to Grammar Schools (1957) reviewed all the available evidence with scrupulous and objective care and concluded that the existing processes of selection could indeed be improved to yield more accurate results.
Even then, of course, a problem would remain if Local Education Authorities continued to vary from one another in the proportion of all secondary-school places they reserved for grammar schools — from 10 to 45 per cent in this study.
Moreover, there was considerable variation in the grammar-school provision in different areas within each Local Education Authority.
Rut, when all had been done to make provision more level and selection more scientific, a stubborn error of 10 per cent would remain.
‘Whether a 10% error for all the country at large’, as Professor Ben Morris quietly observed in his preface, ‘involving 60,000 children per annum , is to be regarded as reasonable or intolerable of course depends upon what particular educational values are regarded as most important.’
The authors contented themselves with noting that things might be improved by more flexible and continuous transfer (and not only at age thirteen), by the introduction of General Certificate of Education courses in the secondary modern schools, and by the creation of comprehensive schools.
After all, more than half the Local Education Authorities were initiating significant changes of one kind and another in the forms of secondary education.
The doubts and the arguments of critics undermined confidence in the system.
They did so by highlighting the unlovely features of a meritocracy, by celebrating the virtues of a robust working-class culture now being absorbed into an imitative and shallow middle-class orthodoxy, by demonstrating that the eleven-plus examination unintentionally favoured children from the better-off families, by proving that measures of intelligence were not independent of social class or cultural background, by eroding confidence in the scientific accuracy of what needed to be an objective and reliable measure.
Some of these arguments were presented with quiet, scientific calm, and others with prophetic zeal.
They echoed and amplified the anxieties of parents, and not least middle-class parents, as their children approached the stage of selection for secondary schools.
These anxieties were mercilessly sharpened by the popular press.
The grammar school still had many powerful and eloquent friends; by 1960 the secondary moderns had none.
Nevertheless, the bipartite system remained in place and would be fundamentally modified only if a powerful political will to do so could be mobilized.
Changes by either national or local government required the commitment of a major political party to the cause of wholesale reform.
A later chapter will explore the process of conversion and persuasion which led to those structural changes which gathered momentum in the later 1960s.
But the 1950s did see the publication and extensive discussion of a key statement of political faith —The future of Socialism (1956) by Anthony Crosland, who ten years later moved into the very centre of the educational stage.
Tony Crosland had been a don at Oxford during my undergraduate years, and then spent five years in the House of Commons, to which he was to return in 1959.
Meanwhile, reflecting upon the record of the Labour government of 1945–51 and on the policies which its successor should pursue, he argued for a coherent socialist policy which would be freshly committed to ideals and be capable of realization.
On education his mind was severely clear.
The 1944 Act had, indeed, formally made secondary education universal and free.
And yet proportionately more middle-class children enter grammar schools.
Those from professional and managerial families account for 15 per cent of the total population, 25 per cent of the grammar-school population, and 44 per cent of the sixth-form population.
Children in secondary modern schools are disadvantaged by working in bad and overcrowded buildings, and with not enough teachers.
There is no particular logic in the tripartite system, and the eleven-plus is feared.
Socialists must incline towards a comprehensive system of education ‘under which all children would ideally share the same broad experience at least up to the school leaving age’.
This is a condition of creating an equal and classless society.
Moreover, we should concentrate less on the education of an élite, and more on the average standards of attainment.
And yet a comprehensive system could not be rapidly imposed on the whole country.
Only fourteen comprehensive schools existed at the time when Tony Crosland was writing: good grammar schools could not simply be swept away, nor the rights and duties of Local Education Authorities brushed aside.
A Labour government, when it comes again, should explicitly state a preference for the comprehensive principle, and should actively encourage bold experiments by local authorities.
Meanwhile, the very best must be made of the existing stem by providing new secondary modern schools and adding grammar-school streams to those which already exist, by encouraging late transfers, by improving standards in the State sector, and raising to sixteen the school-leaving age.
Two other points, given their importance in later developments, must be abstracted from the argument.
First, the independent schools.
They must not be allowed to train a new and superior élite, and free places in them (when and where they are introduced) should go not only to the cleverest but to those who need a boarding education.
Some of the schools will be converted to new uses: adult education centres, for example.
In any case, for as long as they remain as powerful as they are and until the country is ready for a proper comprehensive system the grammar school should be preserved: ‘It would, moreover, be absurd from a socialist point of view to close down the grammar school, while leaving the public schools still holding their present commanding position.
This would simply intensify the class cleavage by removing the middle tier which now spans the gulf between top and bottom.’
That was to read oddly ten years later when Crosland was Secretary of State for Education and Science.
The second point on which Tony Crosland gives a rare hostage to the future relates to streaming and setting within the comprehensive school.
On this matter he is surprisingly moderate, even conservative.
Comprehensive schools should, in effect, preserve grammar-school streams, with (of course) easy transfer into and from them.
The grading of pupils within a school is entirely justifiable, even necessary.
That was to read oddly twenty years later.
These, then, were the books that became required reading for those who came to Cumberland Lodge to debate such issues.
Three years passed, and I had not lost my ambition to become the headmaster of a grammar school.
I knew that informed public opinion might be shifting, but also that the school to which I hoped to return as head would not yet be very different from the one which I had left as a history teacher.
That was still the kind of work that I wanted to do, and if I thought very much a comprehensive schools it was in a spirit of mild disquiet.
I was, as Crosland knew well, too much to lose.
In July 1961 I was summoned to Banbury Grammar School for an interview for the headmastership.
The interviewing panel was civil and included a peer of the realm, a major-General, and a gentleman farmer.
This was very much the old Oxfordshire, in which the Earl of Macclesfield of Shirburn Castle was uninterrupted as chairman of the county council from 1937 until 1967.
It was the month before my thirty-third birthday, and I was offered the appointment.
The Director of Education for the county walked down the stairs with me after the decision had been made, and told me that (of course) I would be expected to pay early attention to the reorganization of the whole of secondary education in Banbury.
Nothing had been said of such matters during the interview: that, too, was the old Oxfordshire.
The first section of the M1 had been opened in 1959, but the M4 did not yet exist.
So I drove back across the whole of the county, from Banbury to Henley to return to Windsor, where my parents were spending the summer with us, and looked forward to telling them the news.
My father's mother had been born in 1862 in Wroxton, three miles north of Banbury.
For me, a century later, it was to be Oxfordshire again, and for a long time to come.
Expansion
In January 1962 I drove to Banbury in the snow, a few days in advance of my family and the general removal.
That gave me some time to take my new bearings, and I enjoyed sitting late in the evening in the warmth of the Headmaster's study thumbing through papers and timetables.
One of these papers was a recent statement by the county education committee that no change in the status of the grammar school was contemplated: on that basis, I was able to reassure my anxious colleagues, when I met them on the first day of term, that abrupt change was not imminent.
The school had certainly not experienced any such dislocation over the past three-quarters of a century.
Secondary, or higher, education in that corner of Oxfordshire had enjoyed an interesting but not untypical history.
There had been a medieval hospital (in nature and purpose not unlike Emanuel in  Westminister ) from which had grown a grammar school.
This school had enjoyed a brief period of success and national distinction in the first decade of the sixteenth century under the Mastership of John Stanbridge, who was well known when he migrated north from Oxford and whose Grammar was prescribed in the statutes of Manchester Grammar School.
I later enjoyed reminding Eric James, who had been High Master of that school, of this proper dependence of Manchester upon Banbury.
The school owed much at this time to the support of William Smyth, Bishop of Lincoln, who was one of the founders of Brasenose College in 1509.
More threads were being drawn together.
The school disappeared in the predatory years of the Reformation: otherwise, it might well have, arrived to offer an unbroken grammar-school education into the twentieth century.
In the nearby town of Thame, Lord Williams (who did well from the pickings to be had in that century) founded his own grammar school: Oxfordshire lost one and gained one.
The provision of schools in Banbury remained patchy until the late nineteenth century.
Some elementary provision was made, notably by the Church and the nonconformists early in the century, but of any more ambitious schooling there was none.
A Mechanics Institute, mostly for adult education was provided in 1835, and — as public grants from London became available — alongside it grew the Banbury School of Science and Art.
Banbury had long been a market town of importance, and acquired a modest industrial capacity in the nineteenth century.
Many developments owed a great deal to the vigorous encouragement of the ironmaster and local MP, Sir Bernhard Samuelson, who was a patron of technical education and chairman of the Royal Commission on this subject appointed in 1882.
Eleven years later, Banbury Municipal School opened in Marlborough Road (where its buildings still stand) with forty-six boys on its books; the girls were added in 1900.
Its history thereafter is even and steady, and part of the familiar national story.
A fine example of local enterprise with modest financial support from direct government grants, it was drawn more fully into local provision by the Act of 1902.
Thereafter, it received support not only from government grants, but also from the youthful Oxfordshire County Council.
In 1923 (three years before the 1926 Circular) it passed into the control of that council, and became Banbury County School.
It moved to new buildings in 1930 in Ruskin Road, where there was provision for 360 pupils.
Shortly after that a headmaster's house was built, and that was where I lived with my family.
The school had no boarders, but a resident headmaster somehow (I suppose) conferred upon the school something of the status of the independent boarding-school.
We certainly enjoyed living there.
Two daughters grew up there alongside Simon: Hilary was born in 1962 and Emma in 1966.
At the outbreak of the War in 1939 this was, then, a highly typical English grammar school.
Fee-payers and scholarship holders existed happily together.
Most, in both categories, left after taking the School Certificate (if not sooner), but a trickle went on into the sixth form and even to the universities.
But not very many.
Banbury in the 1960s was still full of professional and trades people who had been at the school before or immediately after the Second World War.
In 1940, the school was badly damaged by fire — not by enemy action, but (it seems) by the carelessness of fire-watchers installed at night to forestall such action.
This was in the year when, as a youthful and helmeted fire-watcher, I patrolled the streets at home in Cardiff.
The 1944 Act changed much for the school, but not everything and not all at once.
Its name was changed, to make things clear to the outside world, from Banbury County School to Banbury Grammar School: in Surrey they had not bothered with such fine adjustments, although Wallington County School was unambiguously a grammar school.
The fee-payers disappeared, and some of the older men were still lamenting this in 1962.
A consequence had been the loss of some of the not-so-bright children of local tradespeople or farmers (who now looked to the independent schools), and some alleged decline in the social standing of the school within the town.
Equally, it had made entry to the place academically more competitive.
My predecessor, who played the double-bass, had been appointed in 1935, and I was only the third headmaster to hold office since the death of Queen Victoria.
(This is perhaps why those who appointed me enquired rather anxiously whether I, too, meant to enjoy the kingdom for thirty years.)
When a colleague, or a former pupil, or a governor, wished to correct my waywardness he would refer approvingly to ‘the old Headmaster’.
They did not mean my predecessor, but his.
Oxfordshire, after 1944, was faced with a massive programme of building and reorganization, and (as its Development Plan makes clear) it would all take time.
Secondary education had been provided only for a minority.
Now, as Government Circulars from the hand of Ellen Wilkinson and John Maud insisted, it had to be provided for everybody — and that meant in the new secondary modern schools.
Banbury was in one sense fortunate.
When the County School had moved to the Oxford side of the town in 1930, generous provision of land had been made and that was prudently added to over the years.
The Headmaster's House had stood in the middle of fields, but it was now to be surrounded by educational plant.
First, Easington Secondary Modern School for Boys was opened in 1952; the former elementary schools in and around Banbury gave up to the new campus their boys over the age of eleven.
It was five years, and thirteen full years after the passing of the Act, before the same opportunity could be extended to the girls.
In 1957 a girls' secondary modern was opened, sharing a large site but not much else either with the boys' secondary modern or (still less) with the Grammar School.
The Roman Catholics had to wait another five years again, and I was already in Banbury when the Roman Catholic voluntary-aided secondary modern school was opened, in an odour of incense and the presence of an Archbishop.
The last secondary modern school in Banbury, nearly twenty years after the Act, had been established just in time to be reorganized.
All these schools were in Easington, and that left only a small but delightful anomaly on the other side of the town.
There, a well-established elementary school was rapidly turned into a small secondary modern school under the same head (an old boy of Banbury County School, of course) and with three forms of entry for pupils at the age of eleven.
My predecessor viewed all these developments with some gloom.
The Grammar School was, indubitably, still the best school in the town but all this change on his doorstep was unsettling.
The view had been spoilt, and the drains became complicated.
The latter (in which I took a great personal interest) required the installation of a special engine to pump up the Secondary Modern sewage into a tank, at the Grammar School level, from which it could then flow gently eastwards towards the Oxford Road.
This machine would leap spontaneously and noisily into life at all hours of the day and night.
My predecessor took me carefully aside to explain that this device was part of a plot by the Director of Education either to drive him from his place or to impose comprehensives on the whole campus.
If it was, then it failed.
He retired only after his sixty-fifth birthday, and it proved quite simple to reduce the engine to efficient silence.
Oxfordshire in 1962 still had ten years to wait before the reorganization of local government which followed the Royal Commission on that subject chaired by Lord Redcliffe-Maud (John Maud).
This meant that, as a county, it was significantly smaller than it later became, and that (in particular) it did not include for local-government purposes the city of Oxford.
It was a rural county with towns of modest size — Banbury (the largest, and growing), Bicester, Chipping Norton, Burford, Witney, Thame, and Henley.
Each of these had its own grammar school, but (by a fine piece of local and ingenious conservatism) those at Chipping Norton and Burford were more or less comprehensive.
This meant that in each case a secondary modern school which would have been too small to survive was absorbed quietly and without fuss into the grammar school, which did not bother to change its name.
Comprehensive reorganization in the 1950s was therefore in Oxfordshire a pragmatic and local, and not yet a political, issue.
Nevertheless, the grammar schools existing separately from secondary modern schools edgily defended their difference and their rights — even if one of them had only six pupils in the upper sixth.
Their heads met regularly with the Director of Education and separately from the secondary-modern heads; they also belonged to their own professional association.
things would not move much further until they were given a determined push, and MT Crosland was to do just that.
R. H. Tawney died in January 1962, and admirers of the grammar school (like myself) reflected on the contrasts between Secondary Education for All (1922) and The future of Socialism (1957), and on the deep, underlying tensions in the growing debate on secondary education.
David Eccles, the Minister of Education since 1959, registered a growing public concern with the content of education — what was to be taught, and how, and to whom — and a spreading belief that such questions could no longer be left to the professionals.
In the debate on the Crowther Report he spoke critically of ‘the secret garden of the curriculum’, and in February 1962 established the Curriculum Steering Group.
This was to be a body of experts — drawn from within the Ministry, HMI, the universities, and the schools — to advise the Minister, the examining bodies, and others concerned with curriculum change.
Such changes, it was agreed, could not be allowed to run forward in an uncoordinated way.
The orthodoxies honoured by my headmasterly predecessors in Banbury were no longer universally accepted.
But what was to take their place?
The asking of that question in 1962 brought problems about teaching and the curriculum into a sharper national focus, and into a context of Government and politics from which they have never since been dislodged.
An unquestioning acceptance of the traditional academic curriculum, and vague aspirations about Mary Smith, would no longer do.
The Minister's initiative was deeply and immediately resented by those who saw it as an attack upon vested interests and professional autonomies: the teachers (and especially their unions), the Local Education Authorities (and especially the Association of Education Committees under its powerful Secretary, Sir William Alexander).
The task of reconciling them to a diminution of their unexamined power fell to Sir Edward Boyle who became Minister in July 1962.
Nobody could have been better qualified to construct a consensus, even if it had to be temporary, from the new and angular alternatives that were now being proposed for the future of secondary schooling.
Edward Boyle, whose thoughts and manner are finely captured in Maurice Kogan's Politics of Education , was educated at Eton and Christ Church and belonged to that distinguished generation of Oxford men who dominated so much of post-war politics: Dick Crossman, Tony Crosland, Denis Healey, Harold Wilson, Roy Jenkins, Reginald Maudling, Michael Stewart, Tony Benn, Patrick Gordon Walker.
He represented Handsworth in the House of Commons from 1950 until 1970.
After occupying junior ministerial office from his first year in Parliament, he became Economic Secretary to the Treasury in 1955.
He resigned, on principle, over Eden's mismanagement of the Suez crisis, but quietly returned to office under Macmillan as Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Education (first Lord Hailsham, and then Geoffrey Lloyd).
After three years as Financial Secretary to the Treasury he entered the Cabinet as Minister of Education, in July 1962.
This was on ‘the night of the long knives’, when Macmillan dismissed seven of his Cabinet (including Eccles) and provoked the remark from Jeremy Thorpe: ‘Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his friends for his life.’
Boyle had been, with one short break, continuously in Government office for eleven years and was to be the last Minister of Education, as Butler had been the first.
In 1962 expenditure on education rose, for the first time, above one thousand million pounds.
In 1963 he called together a representative meeting to discuss plans to move forward from the Curriculum Steering Group and create a new and (of course) co-operative body which would assume responsibility for the national examination system, for giving advice on the school curriculum, and for relating the two.
At a meeting in July a working party was appointed, with Sir John Lockwood as chairman.
It was agreed that the growing diversity of pressures upon schools made it difficult for them to adapt intelligently and consistently.
A worsening shortage of places in higher education, and especially the universities, generated greater competition and more rigorous demands mediated through the examination system.
Employers, similarly, had expectations of schools and school-leavers but no national forum in which these could be articulated and discussed.
These were the tasks which the School Council, when it was finally constituted by Edward Boyle, was to assume.
It was to be a ‘free association of equal partners’— Local Education Authorities, teachers, employers, higher education — offering advice not only to Ministers but to all its member interests.
It was to be autonomous, and to direct its own programme of work.
Its dynamism and success in its early stages owed much to Derek Morrell, a civil servant in the effective reforming tradition of Morant, who died in 1969 with his life's work sadly incomplete.
The Council was financed jointly by the Ministry and the Local Education Authorities and respected the principle that each school should be responsible for determining its own curricula and teaching methods.
The early hope was that the Council would help this process by encouraging and disseminating good practice, and by providing a broad framework within which diversity would flourish.
The early opposition of teachers was muted by the agreement that they should be in a majority on the Governing Council, and on all the many committees of the Council.
During the years of its active life (its decline and fall will be related later) it gave thrust and direction to the necessary attempts to develop curricula that would be appropriate to the diverse aptitudes and abilities now present in all secondary schools.
Its fifteen subject committees usually met three times a year and contributed to the development of a long series of projects.
Most of these were based upon university Departments of Education or Colleges of Education (as the teacher-training colleges were about to become).
By the early 1970s, well over a hundred such projects had been completed or were in progress: the largest single number in the sciences, but with mathematics, English, and the humanities also scoring high.
The Council became increasingly concerned with problems of dissemination and publication, as it became clear that much of its best work was unnoticed in schools.
It had been too easily assumed that strong representation by teachers through their unions (which usually meant representation by powerful and semi-professional members who spent little time in class-rooms) would somehow guarantee the active interest and participation of large numbers of ordinary teachers.
It did not.
One of the earliest preoccupations of the Council was with the implications, for the curriculum and for teaching, of the raising of the school-leaving age to sixteen, urged powerfully in the Crowther Report and now by its successor, the Newsom Report, published in 1963.
After producing the Crowther Report, the Central Advisory Council was reconstituted under the chairmanship of John Newsom and set to work.
It was obvious and natural that as the last report had dealt mostly with the more able pupils so its successor should focus upon the needs of the pupils of average and below-average ability — that 50 per cent of all pupils, in other words, who gave the Report its title,Half Our future .
J. H. Newsom (later Sir John) was born in 1910 and educated at the Imperial Services College and Queen's College, Oxford.
After an unorthodox early career — involving various forms of school work, including (so he was fond of saying) running a pub — he became in 1940 Chief Education Officer for Hertfordshire, where he remained for seventeen fruitful years.
He therefore presided over the extension of secondary education throughout the county, and established new standards of school architecture and of taste.
Around him clustered lively and innovatory young administrators, many of whom went on to be Directors of Education themselves — including Alan Chorlton, who spoke to me on the stairs after being totally silent throughout my Banbury interview.
John Newsom, who later became my friend, endeared himself to headmasters by asserting the principle that as much freedom as possible in the running of schools should be delegated to heads — even although, or perhaps because, he well knew that many of them were rogues.
The Newsom Report provides a rich archive of information on the ways in which, by the early 1960s, the secondary modems had developed.
There were then 3,688 such schools in England alone, and their record was one of considerable achievement: the staying-on rate had doubled since 1958, and clear improvement could be noted — for example, in raising standards of reading.
Nevertheless, lying beneath the humane optimism of the Report was a pattern of wasted opportunity.
There was a deep reserve of ability to be tapped, and (whatever the improvement) only 45 per cent of all fifteen-year-olds — including, of course, those in grammar schools — stayed on at school for a fifth year or more.
The Report, echoing the research of the previous decade and the confidence of Crowther, asserted that the ‘Newsom Children’(as they were conveniently but inelegantly called) were held back more by social than by genetic factors.
Links between home and school should be improved and narrow streaming by ability avoided.
Pupils should be given as much choice as possible in the fourth and fifth years, with many courses marked by a vocational emphasis and a deliberate relevance to the world outside school.
The school day should be extended for older pupils, with many activities currently classed as voluntary or extra-curricular brought within the normal working framework of the school timetable.
The Report, to the surprise of some, was silent on the subject of secondary-school organization and on the strong differences of opinion then developing on whether secondary modern schools reserved by design for the less able could ever succeed.
It made no reference to the possibility that schools for the less able might depress expectations and discourage the pupils in them, or make it difficult for such schools to attract an adequate share of available resources.
It concentrated on the obvious truth that children of lower ability would have needs that should be met, whatever the organizational forms of schooling.
The refusal of the members to commit themselves in controversial matters certainly made it possible to achieve uniformity, and to make a powerful contribution to the debate on curricular diversity.
More resources would, in any case, be needed.
There were not enough teachers, and those who were in the schools moved too quickly from one to another.
80 per cent of the buildings were more or less seriously inadequate.
Above all, the school-leaving age should be raised to sixteen, and this, if an early decision were taken by the Minister, could be achieved in the year 1969/70.
The Minister (Sir Edward Boyle) announced that this would take place in 1970/1 and wrote a remarkable preface to the published text in which he stated that ‘the essential point is that all children should have an equal opportunity of acquiring intelligence, and developing their talents and abilities to the full’.
Ministerial blessing had been conveyed to the notion of ‘acquiring’ intelligence: the new sociology had triumphed.
The surge of expansion and commitment to equality (in some of its many forms) which underlay this conviction sat uncomfortably with notions of selection at eleven-plus, but reinforced the rising demand for a huge expansion of higher education.
The force of this demand had already been recognized by Macmillan by the appointment at the end of 1960 of a Prime Minister's committee under the chairmanship of Lord Robbins.
Within twenty-four hours of the publication of its report, also in 1963, the Government in a White Paper accepted all the basic recommendations on the enlargement of opportunities in higher education.
My rose-growing Surrey headmaster (by now retired) came to Banbury for a weekend, and as we drove off to the Cotswolds he tried to persuade me that the implication of all this was that secondary schools would no longer be a worthwhile place for teachers with academic interests: all the good work would hereafter be done within an inflated system of higher education.
He was not alone in his scepticism about the size of the pool of ability, the optimism of 1963, or the soundness of a Conservative Minister with whom the Labour party found it difficult to quarrel.
Numbers and commentaries upon them lay at the heart of the Robbins Report, although there was much else besides: the scale of research undertaken for the Report and the quality of the statistical analyses were unprecedented.
Arguments about the untapped pool of ability were not only restated, this time with impressive statistical tables, but enlarged with a new confidence.
Not only was there unrealized potential, but it would become (so to speak) self-accelerating.
‘If there is to be talk of a pool of ability, it must be a pool which surpasses the widow's cruse in the Old Testament, in that when more is taken for higher education in one generation more will tend to be available in the next.’
Girls were, at the time, seriously underrepresented in higher education as, yet again, were the children of the working classes: only 4 per cent of the skilled manual classes, against 45 per cent of the higher professional.
There was, too, some interesting evidence affecting secondary education and consolidating the probability that a restrictive eleven-plus throttled back talent.
Given that(irrationally and indefensibly, the reader must conclude) Local Education Authorities varied wildly among themselves and within themselves in the scale of grammar-school provision, that variation had a powerful effect upon the preparation of the whole age group staying on at school to the age of seventeen.
The staying-on rate varied from 7 per cent, in the authorities with low grammar-school provision, to 12 per cent .
Even without assumptions about the scale of future demand, the pressure on places in higher education was already severe.
The post-war bulge, which had exacerbated discontent with the procedure for allocation to secondary schools in the late fifties, had now arrived at the gates of higher education.
The Robbins ‘principle’, not to be seriously challenged for twenty years, was a simple one: every qualified school-leaver (qualified, that is, in terms of his A-level passes) who wished to enter higher education was entitled to a place.
Moreover, and although certain persuasive remarks were made about the desirability of shifting the balance towards science and technology, no sustained attempt at manpower planning was to be made.
The place was, again in principle, to be provided in the subject of the candidate, s choice.
National provision would therefore represent a reflection of such cumulative choices, and not a theoretical view of what the needs of the economy or of society might be.
The implications of applying such broad principles were breathtaking in their scale.
The 216,000 places already available should be enlarged to 560,000 in 1980/1, which would in turn require 390,000 by 1973/4.
These places would be divided, within a better co-ordinated system, among universities, Colleges of Education (the proposed new title for the teacher-training colleges), and the Colleges of Further Education.
The Colleges of Education should be drawn fully into university Schools of Education and receive their funds from them.
The Colleges of Advanced Technology should become technological universities — so becoming, like the former teacher-training colleges, free of the Local Education Authorities — and a new Grants Commission should be established to distribute funds within this enlarged ‘autonomous’ field of higher education.
With one exception, no new categories of institution were to be created: the Regional Colleges of Education would provide opportunities for higher education and provide ‘the seedbed for some further growth of institutions to university status’.
Degree courses were also to be provided in some Area Colleges, to ensure a fair geographical distribution of opportunities.
The Council for National Academic Awards was to be established to validate degrees in this rich variety of institutions within the public (that is, the Local Education Authority-controlled) sector.
The university share of higher-education students should rise from 55 per cent to 60 per cent; existing universities should therefore be enlarged, six new universities created, and ten existing institutions (or federations) within the public sector promoted to university status.
The age participation rate (roughly, the proportion of eighteen-year-olds going on into full-time higher education) would advance from 8 to 17 per cent.
Five new high-powered centres of scientific and technological education and research (on the model of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) should be created.
There should be more graduate work generally, and an increase in the number of undergraduate courses covering wider fields of study.
A new Ministry of Arts and Sciences should be created to superintend this new empire, separated from the Ministry of Education and assuming that Ministry's current responsibilities for the research councils, the Arts Council, and similar bodies.
Many, but by no means all, of these proposals were accepted.
Within twenty-four hours of the publication of the Report, Boyle rose in the House of Commons to announce that its recommendations on the scale of necessary expansion were accepted by the Government, that funds were being made available to cover the next ten years, including £650,000,000 for capital expenditure on building by universities.
These dramatic proposals and responses threw the Newsom Report into an undeserved shadow.
Even a brief recital of them does, however, illustrate well the confident expansionism of 1963 and makes it, in my view, the pivotal year in an examination of the development of secondary schools since the war.
It gave them a new sense of opening opportunity, a new reason for raising standards and expectations, new cause to doubt the wisdom of a system which excluded many children from the chance of a full academic education from the age of eleven, and a new hope.
A few miles north of Banbury, in the village of Cropredy, Prescote Manor dominates the meadows of the Cherwell River.
R. H. S. Crossman lived there with his family, combining an interest in farming and neighbours with a passion for politics and contention.
He enjoyed finding people to argue with and, recently arrived as the headmaster of the local grammar school, I was one of them.
In January 1963 Hugh Gaitskell, the leader of the Labour party, died at the age of fifty-six and within a month was succeeded by Harold Wilson.
Dick Crossman had been kept out of office or the expectation of it by both Attlee, who could not forgive him for resisting Bevin's policy towards Palestine, and his successor.
In 1963, everything changed and Crossman became the Shadow Minister for Higher Education.
Even a man dedicated to constructive yet volatile disagreement could find little wrong, as he turned his mind towards the probability of power in the near future, with the proposed reforms.
The year 1963 was eventful in other ways, and the Great Train Robbery filled the newspapers and the media in August.
A month later, as the conventional headmaster of a county grammar school I put on my gown and hood to play the appointed part in the annual school prize-giving.
The guest of honour was Lord Denning, who had just completed his report into the Profumo scandal of that year.
The report was due for publication and the text was placed in the school safe.
The words of the, hardly original, school song filled the Hall:
And when the trumpet-call in after years,
‘Lift up your hearts' rings pealing in our ears
Still may our hearts respond with one accord —
We lift them up, we lift them to the Lord.
‘That Was The Week That Was’ moved into its second year, and nothing was safe.
Comprehension
In 1963 the Peerage Bill became law and members of the House of Lords could now renounce their titles and preserve their political careers in the Commons.
In October Macmillan went into hospital and resigned as Prime Minister; the implausible Lord Home, incorporating the highest virtues of the traditional Tory, succeeded him (becoming plain Sir Alec in the process) but no changes were made at the Ministry of Education.
The Tories had been in power for twelve years already, and a general election could not be more than a year away.
President J. F. Kennedy was assassinated on 22 November, when he was forty-six years old, and the world was numb.
But it continued.
I was busy trying to set a grammar school on a new course, meeting the heads of the other secondary schools for a long and sticky evening in the north Oxfordshire village of Adderbury, and experiencing some of the excitements and discomforts involved in shuffling and reorganization: it was the year in which C. P. Snow published his Corridors of Power .
The first imperative was, nevertheless, to strengthen the Grammar School itself.
Bright pupils should be encouraged towards Oxford (or Cambridge) and a steady stream began to flow.
If maintained schools failed (and fail) to scale those commanding heights it is because they have not wished to.
The sixth form grew, and deserved more stimulus.
In May 1964 I travelled by coach with a couple of willing colleagues and a score or more of sixth-formers to spend a week reading, arguing, and welcoming visitors to a refreshing house on the Gower Peninsular in Wales.
The coach drove back through Cardiff, and past the High School — which looked, and was, much as it had been.
We did not stop, and when I got home to Banbury it was to hear that my mother had died that day in Cardiff.
She had been ill for some time and, driving back again to Cardiff to join my father, I reflected on the sadness that parents can never know what their children owe them.
The balancing truth is that children can never know what parents owe to them.
Simon started to go to school in the same year.
Hilary was too young for that, and sat instead on a swing in the front garden of the Headmaster's House, watching the secondary-modern-school pupils flock by to their separate schools.
On 27 July Churchill made his last appearance in the House of Commons (his first had been when my father was head boy at Thame), and after the summer the country accelerated into a general-election campaign.
This time, the Labour party had smoothed most of the inconsistencies and hesitations from its policies for secondary schools: thirteen years of loyal opposition had given them plenty of time and motivation to do that.
The essence of pristine Labour policy had of course, and largely through the influence of Tawney, found its way into the official Hadow Report of 1926: ‘Selection by differentiation takes the place of selection by elimination.’
The attack on free and special places in the 1930s had driven the party into an inflexible defence of grammar schools and access to them.
This, as has been shown, was the background to the development of policy under Attlee, although critical voices and advocates of a more unified form of secondary education began to be heard.
After all, the National Association of Labour Teachers had been pressing for Common Schools since 1930.
The spectre of comprehensive schools nevertheless remained an alarming one, and not least to those who taught in the secure and effective world of grammar schools.
The buildings of these vast new schools will ‘dwarf the countryside and be visible for miles around…
It will have its own aerodrome and pupils will arrive by commercial transport plane…
From an eyrie in its control tower the supreme headmaster will be able to tune in by television and telephone to any classroom’(AMA, Annual Conference, 1945).
There would be no place there for a rose-growing headmaster.
Secondary-school organization was not an issue in the general election of 1950 or 1951.
But the defeat of Labour in the latter year led, as usual, to a critical examination of conscience and record.
Henceforth, the Labour party (or some parts of it) would be less concerned with nationalization and more preoccupied with the reshaping of society and the improvement of the quality of life.
The future of Socialism made, of course, a significant contribution to this shift of emphasis.
By 1953 there was a general but vague commitment to comprehensive schools — sometimes, in some places, and provided the grammar schools could be kept as well!
Ellen Wilkinson's old ally, Herbert Morrison, was not prepared to ‘say that the comprehensive schools should wipe the other schools out of existence’.
Omelettes were to be made without the breaking of eggs.
Emanuel Shinwell, who has never changed his mind on this issue, was clear in 1918 about the wrong-headedness of destroying the people's grammar schools while leaving unscathed the privileged Public Schools: ‘We were afraid to tackle the public schools to which the wealthy people send their sons, but at the same time are ready to throw overboard the grammar schools which are for many working-class boys the stepping-stone to the universities and a useful career.
I would rather abandon Eton, Winchester, Harrow and all the rest of them than sacrifice the advantage of the grammar school.’
By 1963, under the pressure of opinion already analysed and the genial leadership of Boyle, the rationale of any rigorous Conservative case for selection at eleven-plus had been fatally undermined.
Moreover, the proportion of the secondary-school population staying on beyond the minimum school-leaving age was steadily rising from 29.2 per cent in 1959 to 51.3 per cent in 1964, and by 1969 it would be 61.5 per cent.
In the election campaign of 1964 Harold Wilson, the new leader of the Labour party, adroitly integrated two themes: the surge towards equality (and, more specifically, the end of the eleven-plus) represented by comprehensive schools, and the national need to embark upon a ‘white hot technological revolution’.
Both presupposed open policies in secondary education and the active pursuit of talents.
This was a skilful vulgarization of the statistics of Robbins and the persuasiveness of Crowther and Newsom.
Wilson was, as ever, careful to hedge his bets: grammar schools would disappear, he asserted, over his dead body and the fundamental purpose of the reform was represented as the extension to all of the opportunities of a grammar-school education.
The Labour party might be looking to a new future, but it was not going to forget its ancient roots.
Education was probably a larger issue in the 1964 general election than ever before (or, it need hardly be added, since): the national opinion polls placed it second only to the cost of living.
317 Labour candidates were elected, against 304 Conservative and 9 Liberals.
For eighteen months the Government lived on a wafer-thin majority which was shaved down to two seats, and in economic circumstances of exceptional difficulty.
There was no reference to the key educational issue in the Queen's speech, and Michael Stewart (the new Secretary of State) was obviously playing for time: ‘I would rather wait a bit for a good comprehensive system than try to push a sham version in its place.’
But others were pushing — notably such local authorities as Liverpool and Bristol who wanted from London a strong lead (and money) in pressing forward their plans for comprehensives.
The Opposition was also anxious to embarrass the Government, and to trap it within its own latent inconsistencies.
They secured a debate, which led to the adoption on 21 January 1965 of a Resolution noting ‘with approval the efforts of local authorities to reorganise secondary education on comprehensive lines which will preserve all that is valuable in grammar school education for those children who now receive it and make it available to more children’.
It also agreed that the time was ripe for a declaration of national policy.
On the following day, and to his surprise, Tony Crosland succeeded Michael Stewart as Secretary of State for Education and Science.
Michael Stewart moved to take the place of Patrick Gordon Walker, Wilson's choice as Foreign Secretary, who had twice failed to secure the necessary seat in the House of Commons.
Crosland, born in 19l8, was educated at Highgate School and Trinity College, Oxford.
After the War, he was Fellow and Tutor in Economics at that college, deserting Oxford for a political career when he became an MP in 1950.
‘I wanted to be involved in the actual process of taking decisions and making policies.
This seemed to me, and still seems to me, more satisfactory than writing books from an Oxford chair.’
He lost his seat in the election of 1955, and then completed his The Future of Socialism , which I read at Windsor.
He returned to the Commons in 1959 as MP for Grimsby, a seat which he held until his death.
Unlike Dick Crossman, he was a close ally and friend of Hugh Gaitskell, and worked unsuccessfully against Wilson in the dispute over the succession to the leadership in 1963.
After the Labour victory of October 1964, he held a ministerial post under the ebullient George Brown at the newly created Department of Economic Affairs until his abrupt transfer to Education and Science at the beginning of 1964.
Like Edward Boyle, but for very different reasons, he refused to take the oath but chose simply to affirm on being admitted to the Privy Council.
Boyle was one of the few Tories for whom Crosland had any time.
Both of them were successful in squeezing money for Education out of the Treasury, although Crosland was forced to do so in a very much more bleak economic climate.
The balance-of-payments deficit rose to £278,000,000 in 1965, and pressure on the pound hardened.
The Prime Minister and his immediate allies had rejected the possibility of devaluation — the ‘unmentionable’ solution to which Crosland was committed, but which was not faced until 1967.
By that time he had left the Department of Education and Science for the Board of Trade.
But also by 1967, expenditure on education had for the first time in history equalled that on defence.
His first task was to drive forward the strong but uncertain movement towards comprehensive schools.
Toby Weaver, Deputy Secretary at the Department of Education and Science and a merciless private critic of successive Ministers, found in him ‘the first person to stop talking about comprehensive reorganisation and to do something about it’.
A Circular on this subject (to appear in July 1965 as 10/65, probably the best known of a long series of Ministry and Department of Education and Science circulars) was already in draft, but Tony Crosland was anxious to improve it.
Its central purpose was to ensure that all Local Education Authorities should prepare and submit, within twelve months, plans for comprehensive reorganization throughout the territory for which they were responsible.
Some Labour politicians, including Reg Prentice as a junior minister, wished them to be ‘required’ to do this; Crosland preferred that they should be ‘requested’, determined that empty threats should not be issued or implied and to go forward as fast as he could by agreement and persuasion.
After all, most Local Education Authorities were Labour controlled, and remained so until the landslide local elections of 1968 and 1969.
But the Secretary of State was not prepared to wait until research demonstrated, if it could, that common schools were better than a divided system; such divisions were, in his view, matters of value rather than of fact and related to a vision of the nature of a social democracy.
It is in some ways surprising that, even in 1965, the idea of a comprehensive school should still seem novel, and in many ways startling.
When such a school was opened by the Queen in November, the Sun could observe sententiously and without intended humour that, naturally, ‘the word ‘comprehensive’ was not mentioned in Her Majesty's presence’.
Part of the difficulty with the image came from the noisy fears of the critics, especially those who insisted that comprehensive schools would, if they were to be as good as grammar schools, have to be huge.
But part of it arose from some of the exaggerated enthusiasms of their advocates.
The growth of comprehensive schools had been firm but gentle since the 1944 Act and, provided that no abolition of a grammar school was involved, relatively uncontroversial.
In 1950 there were ten such schools, embracing 0.3 per cent of the secondary-school population; in 1960, there were 130 with 4.7 per cent of the pupils; by 1965, there were 262 with 8.5 per cent.
The impetus of 10/65 brought 35 per cent of pupils into them by 1971, and within ten years that was to become 85 per cent.
There is no clear, positive, and agreed definition of what a comprehensive school is.
Some wish it to be, and therefore are disposed to describe it as being, a school which serves the neighbourhood, and acts as a focus for its life.
In a properly shape world, all the pupils could walk there and home again.
But others (or, paradoxically, the same people deploying a different argument) wish it to be perceived as a microcosm for the whole of society — a school, therefore, in which all groups and classes mingle freely and naturally, whatever their economic position or home background.
In a world in which, for the most part, neighbourhood and class are largely coincident, the two definitions are of course at war with another.
The only safe definition is negative: it is a school which admits pupils of all academic standards and without a test or assessment of ability (save in so far as that may be used to secure what came to be known as ‘a balanced intake’).
Certainly there was no hint of dogmatism in Circular 10/65.
Local Education Authorities were jealous of the autonomy that they had enjoyed since 1902, and which had been consolidated in 1944: they would not take kindly to being told precisely what to do, and even a persuasive circular about the organization of secondary education was too much for some of them.
Moreover, an attempt to require (or even request) a uniform organizational pattern throughout England and Wales would certainly fail.
School buildings, built for other purposes, existed, and the best possible use must be made of them: money for replacements did not exist.
The Circular therefore offered six possible patterns of reorganization ‘on comprehensive lines’, and Local Education Authorities were free to choose from them and (of course) to make different choices in different places.
Two of the schemes were paraded somewhat grudgingly, and only on an interim basis, because they involved preserving a measure of selection at the age of thirteen or fourteen.
They never in any case became a significant part of the newly emerging pattern, whereas the other four did.
The first, and most orthodox, of these was the 11–18 comprehensive school.
Where at least six forms of entry (i.e. 180 pupils a year) could be secured, and where the right buildings were available, this solution was the ‘simplest and best’.
But the Circular also approved two-tier systems, where all pupils would transfer without selection or choice from a junior to a senior comprehensive school at the age of thirteen or fourteen.
Middle schools (for pupils from eight to twelve, or nine to thirteen) would also be acceptable, but only in ‘a very small number’ of cases.
The Plowden Report on primary schools was awaited, and a wholesale tinkering with the age of transfer from primary to secondary school would obviously be unwelcome.
Sixth-form colleges did not arouse enthusiasm in the Department of Education and Science of 1965.
Such a college would admit students at about the age of sixteen, but there are risks attendant upon such a scheme and only ‘a limited number of experiments’ would be approved.
No uniform pattern could or did emerge, and by the 1980s the diversity had grown.
But in 1968, Brian Simon and Caroline Benn (in Half-Way There , first published in 1970) were able to review the changes which had taken place, and to raise important questions about the pace and nature of that change.
Most children were, of course, still in grammar or secondary modern schools, and in most cases the comprehensive schools (new or old) were in competition with local grammar schools for the ‘better’ pupils at the age of eleven-plus.
Without these pupils, the new schools could not of course demonstrate whether or not they could provide for them as well as the grammar schools had.
This simple fact was studiously ignored by ill-disposed critics, then and since.
The comprehensive schools, in a perfectly adjusted system, should have had 20 per cent of their pupils in the top 20 per cent of the ability range: in fact, they had only 15 per cent and one-quarter of the schools had less than 5 per cent.
More than half of the comprehensive schools in existence by 1968 were of the orthodox 11–18 variety, and most arrangements were crystallizing around the approved versions of 10/65.
The number of 11–16 schools (without sixth forms in them, that is) was growing — from 9 per cent in 1965 to 21 per cent in 1968.
This means that a growing number of pupils would transfer from their comprehensive secondary schools at the age of sixteen: the implications of this change will be explored when the whole question of the changing education of the 16–19 age group is raised in Chapter 8.
Schools, in many cases with little preparation or warning, now had to redesign their curricula for the 11–16 age group.
For some, it was simply a case of combining the orthodox grammar-school curriculum with the much less precise curriculum of the secondary modern school, and hoping for the best.
If, however, the unpopular rigidities of the eleven-plus selection system were to be avoided then it was plainly necessary to avoid too much differentiation (at least on the surface) in the early years of secondary schooling.
By the end of the 1960s, most comprehensive schools were offering at least the core of a common curriculum to most of the pupils in Year One.
About half the schools surveyed in 1968 succeeded in maintaining this policy for three full years.
There was, however, disturbing evidence that in a large number of cases — almost half — the teaching of a foreign language was not included in the programme open to all.
From the beginning of the fourth year, and especially for as long as pupils were legally free to leave school at the end of that year, very much more definite choices were made: ‘Newsom’ courses for those who were to leave, examination courses for most of the rest, with many decisions then to be taken about which subjects to drop, and which to pursue.
The tendency of the later 1960s was to move away from packaged courses towards ‘options’ in the hope that many pupils would be able to choose from a wide range of subjects and so assemble a programme best fitted to their own interests and abilities.
This was to be preferred to the more rigid prescriptions of schools like the large 11–18 Welsh comprehensive which allocated young pupils to sharply divided courses within the school: one group advancing fast to O level in four years, four groups in five years, the next four to CSE (for which see Chapter 7) in five years, four groups following special technical courses, two following general technical courses, two or three on commercial courses, and finally two groups for ‘low ability’ pupils.
Such arrangements tended, and tend, to perpetuate grammar schools within comprehensive schools.
They were disliked by those whose ideal was a more flexible school, even if they were unclear about the means of attaining it, and that dislike extended to arrangements which classified children by ability, placing he more and the less able in separate streams.
There never has en one simple view of what a comprehensive school is or should be, nor was there any single ideological thrust behind even the rapid development of the 1960s.
Even Crosland took it for granted, in trying to disarm those critics who argued that comprehensives would damage standards, that pupils who would have gone to grammar schools would of course still be taught with those of their contemporaries who would also have gone to grammar schools.
Similar assumptions were made by those authorities, like the London County Council, which had for some years been committed to the development of comprehension.
There were at least three overlapping sets of arguments underlying the drive away from segregation at eleven-plus: each represents an advance upon its predecessor and towards some pure ideal of comprehensiveness.
The first, simplest, and strongest argument was that it was wrong and unnecessary to place eleven-year-olds in separate schools.
They should all be ‘under one roof’: that was what mattered, and what they did when they got there was an issue of relative indifference.
The second position was that (as in the Welsh school cited above) simply changing the name and use of buildings altered very little: a common curriculum was what mattered and all pupils should be given the same opportunities of learning the same subjects.
They might still, for their own sakes, be taught in groups segregated according to ability, and that did not matter.
Those who adopted the third and final position — although the arguments were rarely in practice as clear as this — went further still to argue that pupils should be brought together not only under one roof, not only studying one curriculum, but also within mixed-ability groups.
Separating sheep from goats within a school was little better than separating them into different schools.
More will be said later about the development of this argument.
It is, in some ways, unfortunate that the massive structural reorganization that was required could not have been completed before being complicated by even more difficult and contentious issues.
A price was certainly to be paid later, when criticisms that grammar-school standards had been destroyed gained momentum and credibility.
Some of those arguing for mixed-ability teaching did so on the narrowest professional grounds that it would improve teaching and learning, obliging teachers to treat pupils as individuals each proceeding at a different pace and in a different manner.
But some of the more outspoken advocates — like Brian Jackson and Albert Rowe — implied that the real priority lay in the pursuit of a society in which classes and divisions would fade away.
Most practising teachers tried to effect compromises, and developed no small ingenuity in doing so.
‘Fine streaming’— the allocation of pupils, according to their general ability, to classes in which they remained for all subjects — declined in favour.
This had been the method of Cardiff, Emanuel, Wallington — and, I suspect, most places besides.
It made the life of the timetabler blissfully simple.
‘Setting’ now became more popular — the allocation of pupils to subject sets, having regard to their ability in each subject.
So did ‘broad banding’— the division of a whole year-group into broad bands of ability (sometimes unsuccessfully disguised with implausible labels), often with subject setting within them.
Full mixed-ability teaching, especially if it reached into the middle and later years of secondary schooling, was comparatively rare.
It probably still is.
The volatile nature of teaching groups, and the associated difficulties of teachers getting to know their pupils, emphasized a new problem within the enlarging schools.
The schools, because of their size and because of the problems presented by pupils of all abilities coming from all kinds of backgrounds, needed to pay attention to problems of ‘pastoral care’.
They could not assume, as most grammar schools and some secondary modern schools complacently had, that the problems of pupils and the needs of counselling would be met by teachers in the normal course of their teaching responsibilities.
Existing comprehensive schools in Coventry, for example, had successfully developed forms of organization based upon the ‘house’— a unit in which a pupil would remain throughout his school career, and to which also belonged a group of teachers.
Between 1965 and 1968 there was a shift away from this system, to some extent because its success depended in part upon the availability of purpose-built accommodation.
Alongside, it grew other patterns of pastoral care and supervision, based upon organization by years, with year-tutors often moving up through the school with the pupils, at least some of whom they could teach on a regular basis.
The growing complexity of the tasks undertaken by the schools produced a new emphasis on careers guidance and upon counselling, for both of which staffing provision now had to be made.
Nor could the academic organization of the schools remain as rudimentary as it had been: communication and management would not just ‘happen’ in schools of a thousand pupils or more, and the stream of curriculum innovation needed to be carefully channelled — especially in a system where each school enjoyed considerable freedom in choosing patterns of study and teaching methods.
Heads of department acquired heavier responsibilities, but were at the same time often grouped in wider partnerships — often known, somewhat grandly, as faculties — to encourage more interdisciplinary work and greater flexibility in the use of resources.
The development, not always as carefully planned as it might have been, of two sets of responsibilities — pastoral and academic — obviously needed to be integrated if confusion and conflict were to be avoided.
Methods of co-ordination and formal consultation were needed; deputy heads acquired a new significance, and their number increased; headship itself changed in character, more rapidly than in any of the last four centuries, and the language of management science supplanted simpler models of leadership or autonomy.
In the early summer of 1965, in the short lull between the Commons debate and the issuing of Circular 10/65, I enjoyed an hour in the early evening drinking a pint of beer alongside the Thames with one of the senior educational administrators of Oxfordshire, who later became a Chief Education Officer himself.
We outlined the various alternatives that were emerging in Banbury.
Discussion of them since 1962 had been frequent but hesitant: teachers, governors, parents in the various schools were apprehensive of large-scale and unpredictable change, and no firm decision was emerging.
Successful efforts had been made to bring the work of the schools for pupils aged between eleven and thirteen closer together, and to encourage co-operation among the various subject specialists — most of whom eyed one another warily, hedging their bets until decisions were taken.
There had been inconclusive talk of establishing middle schools, or a peculiar 11–13 school with a chain of upper schools thereafter, but nothing was settled.
My companion put it to me that an initiative must now be taken, and reminded me of the unrecorded conversation at the time of my appointment.
I had been hesitant.
Without the authority to initiate change, more harm than good would be done by reforms which may get stuck half-way, and which would be resented by heads and teachers in all the schools.
Moreover, I was (and am) conscious of the strengths of a grammar-school tradition, and was enjoying the work of building on these foundations within a relatively secure system.
But when I got home, I spent an hour simply looking out of the window of my home at the campus, and speculating on its future.
I was convinced, and did not afterwards look back, that the only solution would be a bold one.
Unless one school was created as rapidly as it honestly could be, then the corrosive uncertainty would spread, tentative plans would proliferate but never come to fruition.
Since one certainty had already been destroyed, another would have to be built.
A few months later the Oxfordshire Education Committee responded to 10/65 by appointing me as co-ordinator for the Banbury reorganization, and commissioned me to submit plans: the noisy sewage pump had done its work.
The general election of 31 March 1966 gave the Labour party a comfortable working majority and removed any uncertainty about the movement towards comprehensive education.
On the following day, I formally became co-ordinator, although a good deal of preliminary negotiation had been completed.
A month later, our daughter Emma was born.
By September, I had been joined by a director of studies and in November the first draft of a Development Plan for Banbury was published.
It proved to be a surprisingly accurate account of what in the event did happen, and is outlined here to illustrate the way in which, in one corner of Oxfordshire, changes which had been argued over for a decade could be effected in a relatively short time.
The campus, it may be remembered, was the setting for three schools: Banbury Grammar School (with 634 pupils in 1966), Easington Boys (with 547), and Easington Girls (with 517).
Moreover, and as a result of growing numbers in the town and in the school, a building programme had been approved to provide about 600 new places: no decision had been taken about how or where they should be deployed.
Grimsbury Secondary Modern was on the other side of the town, and had to be accommodated — I believe it was, successfully — within the plans, but only for a transitional period.
The following months were very busy, and included extensive individual consultations with all members of staff.
Parents were anxious, especially those with present or hopeful grammar-school children, and public meetings were packed.
What emerged was a scheme which struggled to combine the advantages of size with the effective intimacy of small communities, in which each pupil would be known and would count.
Each of the three existing sets of buildings was renamed a Hall, and every year each would admit 120 pupils of all abilities.
They remained as members of that Hall for four years, taking no public examinations, and being taught predominantly but not exclusively by teachers attached to the Hall.
Each of these communities had its own head, who assumed most of the duties and rights of the head of an orthodox and separate school.
At the end of the fourth year, pupils moved to the Upper School — provided out of the building programme, and having associated with it certain specific areas (science and mathematics, for example, or modern languages), which were also available for planned uses by some of the pupils in the Halls.
The Upper School also had its own head — the former deputy head of the Grammar School, who by his quality and determination guaranteed that nothing of value was lost in this elaborate and dangerous transition.
The Upper School was linked closely with the Technical College, one mile away: common programmes and a common timetable were developed.
At the other end of the school, in the first year of the Halls, close links were established with the many primary schools (some of them tiny) which sent eleven-year-olds to the school, and the style of teaching for that first year was aligned as closely as possible with the more effective primary-school practices.
Heads of department, and (most important) of subject groups, exercised their responsibilities throughout all four parts of the school; a teacher therefore belonged to two professional teams — Hall, and department.
The centralizing pressures of the whole school were kept at the lowest level compatible with the necessary coherence of the enterprise.
There was, I thought then and believe now, much to be learnt in secondary schools from some of the more flexible forms of collegiate organization to be found in higher education.
I have cast this account in the past tense in order to relate it to the developments of the late 1960s, although I know that much of this shape and many of these assumptions have survived.
I have also made the exercise sound blissfully simple and free of controversy: it was not.
But my strongest surviving impression is of a large team of teachers, several of them coming specifically to Banbury to undertake this work and now scattered in headships across the country, determined to carry change through — not because it was imposed by politicians or bureaucrats, but because they believed it to be right and wanted it to work well.
In 1967 I was appointed as Principal of the new school, which was to open in September.
On the coast of North Cornwall, tucked into the estuary of the Camel River, is the old fishing port of Padstow.
At Easter we went there for a holiday, and often have since.
It is one of those places in which perspectives are restored, and anxieties erased.
It is also a fine place for walking along the cliff-tops, inventing stories for your children (or yourself), and watching the changing moods of an ocean.
One of those walks stretches alongside the estuary, and at one point it is possible to look back to the solidity and placidity of the harbour and out, across Doom Bar, to an unpredictable sea.
The change through which schools moved in those years was no less dramatic than that.
Banbury School opened its doors on 1 September 1967, but not very much changed on that day.
The two youngest classes in the single-sex secondary moderns were mixed, and for many that was the most disturbing change of all.
In the following year, all the Halls admitted pupils comprehensively and the planned movement began in earnest.
The builders marshalled their machinery, but it was l970 before the Upper School was genuinely open.
Already, in that year, there were 1,145 comprehensive schools, and 32 per cent of all secondary pupils were in such schools.
The tide would not stop there.
Privilege
Banbury offered a bright and clear window through which to view national developments across the 1960s, and into the 1970s.
Neil Marten (now Sir Neil Marten) was an active local MP, and a Conservative who took a characteristically independent and critical line in the apparently endless debates about Britain's entry to the Common Market.
The farmers listened to him, and he was no great admirer of Edward Heath, who replaced Home as leader of the Conservatives in the summer of 1965.
Angus Maude, who had written about The Middle Classes and in 1983 was to become a life peer, lived in a nearby village, sent his children (or at least his daughters) to Banbury Grammar School and was an incisive critic of the contemporary changes in educational policy.
He had succeeded Profumo as MP for Stratford-upon-Avon in 1963.
But, most of all, there was Dick Crossman.
R. H. S. Crossman was born in 1907, and was the ambivalent recipient of the best education that could then be provided for the son of a professional family: Winchester and New College.
He was a Fellow of New College from 1930 to 1937, when the Warden was H. A. L. Fisher who had been President of the Board of Education under Lloyd George during and after the First World War (and who deserves a book to himself).
He deserted the safe cloisters of that college in order to teach for the Workers' Educational Association: he had been leader of the Labour group on Oxford City Council since 1934.
During the war he worked in psychological warfare, and doubtless learnt many of his more infuriating tricks of debating and persuasion.
He rarely seemed happier than when intolerantly defending propositions in which he did not believe.
In 1945 he became MP for Coventry East, and nine years later married Anne McDougall, the daughter of a senior manager of the aluminium company whose arrival in Banbury had brought a measure of prosperity to the town in the years of the Depression.
He therefore settled in her family house at Cropredy, where his children, Patrick and Virginia, grew up.
It lay conveniently between London and his Coventry constituency.
Dick had been assistant editor of the New Statesman from 1938 to 1955 and, as has already been explained, was no friend of the leading men of the Labour party in the years after the War.
His support of Wilson in 1963, and the Labour victory of 1964, brought him in one leap to the Cabinet and to the summit of his career.
When we first began to meet and talk in 1963, he was expecting to be offered a Cabinet post in education if Labour won and he could keep in step for long enough.
Instead, and to his surprise, he was in October 1964 given the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, in which both Chamberlain and Macmillan had made their considerable reputations.
Two years later he became Leader of the House of Commons, and for the last two years of the Labour government presided over the empire of the Department of Health and Social Services.
He became passionate about pensions.
His Diary , one of the most incisive and entertaining accounts of the workings of government and the foibles of politicians, is a rich illumination of national history and institutions.
But, as he always found room in his life for north Oxfordshire and his family, he also enjoyed setting down some of his local preoccupations and irritations.
Like many socialists and intellectuals educated in the traditions of the high establishment, he fussed about the education of his own children and about the schools to which they might go.
The primary schools of Oxfordshire, with their occasionally romantic commitments to open learning and creativity, more than once felt the lash of his tongue.
He certainly had no patience with the teaching of italic handwriting.
As a Cabinet minister, taking an impish pleasure in his red boxes, he was entitled to a specially reserved first-class compartment on the London train.
He enjoyed the fury, not always speechless, of the good Conservatives who occasionally had to stand in the corridor, popping their eyes at this spectacle of enthroned privilege.
He would, as the Diary records, sometimes enliven the journey by opening the door for the local MP, or for the headmaster of the Grammar School.
There were often sharp exchanges.
On other occasions, we would spend time together at the weekends.
Before 10/65 was published there was a sequence of proposals for secondary-school reorganization in Banbury.
Dick had persuaded himself (and so had I) that a good solution would be a middle school for 9–13-year-olds, and an informed choice of a variety of upper schools thereafter: this would open up a rigid system and preserve the best in the grammar-school tradition, as a counterpoise to the strengths of the Public Schools.
Dick was very annoyed when his own party ruled out this solution as being insufficiently comprehensive.
The 1960s were marked by a strong interest in the relationship between primary and secondary education, and in possible changes in the age of transfer from one to the other.
After completing its work on the Newsom Report, the Central Advisory Council was reconstituted under the chairmanship of Lady Plowden, and turned its attention to primary schools.
The question of the proper age of transfer was referred to it, as the West Riding was making plans for a series of middle schools spanning the age range nine to thirteen.
Under the 1944 and 1948 Education Acts such schools would have been illegal: pupils must be transferred from primary to secondary between the ages of ten and a half and twelve.
Edward Boyle had secured the passage of the 1964 Education Act in a characteristic effort to introduce more flexibility and loosen the grip of selection at eleven-plus.
The first middle schools were opened in 1968, and by 1980 there were 1,700 of them.
The categories of ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’were not, however, abolished, and a Local Education Authority had to decide whether it wished a middle school to be ‘deemed’to be primary or secondary.
The middle-school initiative, as it gathered momentum in the 1960s, was concerned with a great deal more than legalistic terminology.
Those who argued its virtues saw in this new kind of school an opportunity to blend the best in primary and secondary habits and, in particular, to extend for two extra years some of the freedom associated with good primary-school practice.
Subject specialization and formal teaching would be undermined.
The Plowden Report, which was published in January 1967, took a cheerful view of good primary-school practice, and many of its paragraphs are a celebration of liberal ideals of teaching and learning.
‘Finding out’ was better than ‘being told’.
For this reason, and at a time of less genial moods, the Report was to come under severe criticism.
In the event, it recommended that the age of transfer should be raised to twelve, with the first school (5–8) followed by middle schools (8–12).
It also urged a move away from the practice of streaming — which, given the importance after 1944 of the universal competitive examination at eleven-plus, had tended to increase in the years after the War.
The Plowden Report was a national corollary to contemporary changes in assumptions about secondary education and the structures which embody those assumptions.
The Report was not, however, flattering in its description of the material basis for primary education, which was marked by deficiencies common to many secondary schools as well.
It is only through the most tinted of retrospective spectacles that the 1960s can appear as a golden age, and least of all in the deprived areas to which the Report correctly gave so much attention:
We noted the grim approaches; incessant traffic noise in narrow streets; parked vehicles hemming in the pavement; rubbish dumps on waste land nearby; the absence of green playing spaces on or near the school sites; tiny playgrounds; gaunt looking buildings; often poor decorative conditions inside; narrow passages; dark rooms; unheated and cramped cloakrooms; unroofed outside lavatories; tiny staff rooms; inadequate storage space with consequent restrictions on teaching materials and therefore methods; inadequate space for movement and P.E.; meals in classroom; art on desks; music only to the discomfort of others in an echoing building; non-soundproof partitions between classes; lack of smaller rooms for group work; lack of spare room for tuition of small groups; insufficient display space; attractive books kept unseen in cupboards for lack of space to lay them out; no privacy for parents wishing to see the head; sometimes the head and his secretary sharing the same room; and, sometimes all around, the ingrained grime of generations.
You can almost smell them now.
John Newsom was vice-chairman of the Council, and David Donnison and Michael Young among its members.
Michael Young came specially to Banbury to talk about the age of transfer, and many things besides.
I was able to try out on the author of The Rise of the Meritocracy some local antidotes to the disease he had diagnosed a decade before.
The influence of such men assured that the Report would be tough, as well as humane, and that it would apply sociological insights to the analysis of the conditions of schooling.
Most striking of all, and having relevance far beyond primary schools themselves, was the emphasis on the correlation of social disadvantage and educational achievement.
It also made respectable the unfamiliar doctrine of ‘positive discrimination’— going beyond weak doctrines of equality (perceived as the removal of artificial obstacles), to strong doctrines (based on the conviction that the socially disadvantaged should receive more than, not the same as, their more fortunate contemporaries).
This, however, must be achieved by an increase in total resources and not simply by a redistribution of those already available.
More provision should be made for the under-fives; teachers' aides should be recruited and trained; problem areas should get extra teachers; home-school relations should be improved, and a triangular partnership of home-school-child established.
Most children simply did not have a fair chance: two-thirds of the homes in the unskilled-worker category had five or fewer books in them, compared with one-twentieth of the professional homes.
Most important of all, educational priority areas should be formally designated, and teachers paid more for working in them.
Crosland's response to Plowden was as positive as that of Boyle to Robbins.
By the summer of 1967, when he left the Department of Education and Science for the Board of Trade, £16m. had been made available for a building programme over the next two years, with a further £18m. to follow in 1971/2.
The Educational priority Areas were, indeed, constituted and Crosland agreed with Maurice Kogan that he had ‘legitimised the radical sociology of the 1950's and 1960's’.
Moreover, the impetus had been given t the establishment — under the direction, for England, of A. H. Halsey — of five action research programmes, to be initiated in 1968 and completed within three years.
Halsey wrote the first volume of the Report on these programmes, published in 1972.
It pointed towards the possibility of achievements that have not yet been actively pursued.
The creation of the Educational Priority Areas was one of the last things which Tony Crosland accomplished at the Department of Education and Science, and one of those that gave him the greatest pleasure.
It was, of course, far from being his only achievement.
He had already, in April 1965, made a speech in Woolwich on plans for the development of higher education.
It was, as he readily acknowledged, in many ways an unfortunate statement into which he had been pushed by his officials before he had fully mastered the intricacies of the problem.
The Robbins Report, and its acceptance in broad terms by the Conservative government of the day, marked the beginning of a period of rapid expansion.
Not all its proposals were, however, given effect: after a debate in 1964, in which Lord James was particularly influential, it was decided to have one overall Minister for Education, and not two.
The Department of Education and Science therefore took over the enlarged responsibilities of the Ministry created by Butler in 1944, and Quintin Hogg (who had divested himself of his peerage in the hope of succeeding Macmillan as Prime Minister) became the first Secretary of State.
Robbins had seen the universities as dominant within higher education: they were to have most of the extra numbers and to provide the model of perfection.
Other institutions which grew in stature might aspire, one day and if they behaved, to become universities themselves.
Some were critical of this orthodoxy and — behind the scenes — nobody more effectively so than Toby Weaver, the most powerful civil servant of his generation in the formulation of educational policies.
He has not concealed — still, in retirement, does not conceal — his scepticism about a worship of universities marked by prejudices about the superiority of the academic over the practical, of the pure over the applied, of the traditional over the innovatory.
In Tony Crosland he found a ready listener, and the Woolwich speech marked a sharp redirection of policy in higher education.
It was to have considerable effects upon the earlier stages of education.
Crosland told his audience that whereas higher education must indeed be developed systematically, it should not be represented as a unitary or hierarchical system, with the universities sitting at the top.
On the contrary, it should be a dual system based upon the twin tradition of universities (the so-called autonomous sector) and of the public sector (further education and other colleges maintained by Local Education Authorities).
The one should not imitate the other, and the public sector should be ‘under social control, directly responsive to social needs’.
For that reason, it should remain in the hands of local government.
It should emphasize the value of professional, vocational, and technical courses and of links with industry.
‘Let us move away’, he appealed, ‘from our snobbish caste-ridden hierarchical obsessions with university status.’
the colleges should not be the poor relations of the universities, trying to become more like them.
Teacher training should be expanded, but the Colleges of Education should not (as Robbins proposed) become part of the university system.
No more universities would be created, either as new foundations or as promotions from the public sector.
The technological universities, as the former Colleges of Advanced Technology, would be the last such redesignations, so there would be no point in joining the queue.
The ‘binary policy’ had taken shape, and in 1966 the White Paper A Plan for Polytechnics and Other Colleges filled in the details.
A new category of institution, the polytechnic, would be created — mostly by mergers of existing colleges — to serve as the flagship of the public-sector fleet and in which would be concentrated most of the advanced work of that sector.
Their degrees would be validated by the Council for National Academic Awards.
By 1973, all thirty polytechnics had been established.
Critics have since commented on the paradox offered by a Secretary of State sharply defining two categories of higher education — the one more theoretical and academic than the other — in the same year as he was energetically destroying similar categories in secondary education.
But he had good reasons.
The most urgent need of the mid-1960s was for teachers, and the Secretary of State in a speech to the annual conference of the National Union of Teachers earlier in April 1965, outlined new policies.
He made fourteen suggestions related to the recruitment and deployment of teachers.
Colleges were encouraged to introduce a four-term year, to make full use of their accommodation and to establish ‘outposts’.
Four or five more day-colleges were to be established.
There was to be a drive to recruit married women who had left teaching, and to make part-time teaching more attractive.
This, observed Crosland, ‘was perhaps the greatest achievement of those years — to bring the problem of teacher supply within sight of solution.’
Crosland, like Boyle, was a Minister with a policy.
He gave himself time to think, and to argue with his friends.
A. H. Halsey, David Donnison, John Vaizey, Noel Annan, and Michael Young were among those whom he invited to his home to argue about the strategies and, but only after they had worked, to enjoy his hospitality: ‘People become much too talkative if you give them something to drink.’
He was certainly talkative enough over the November weekend which he spent with the Crossmans in north Oxfordshire.
The Diary for 7 November 1965 reads:
A perfect day out on the hills behind Boddington watching the hunt career around us while we were exploring Hobbit country with Patrick.
Anthony Crosland and his wife Susan arrived at 5.30 and we gave a dinner party for them with Harry and Mary Judge from Banbury Grammar School and Richard and Ann Hartree…
[The]Headmaster and the Secretary of State got on very well, and I was impressed by Tony's proficiency in explaining his plans.
The plans in which he was most interested were those for teacher supply and (even more) comprehensive reorganization.
But, late in the evening, he enquired without ceremony ‘What am I going to do about the direct-grant schools?’
This problem overlapped with that of the Public Schools generally, and he had already in the summer secured Cabinet approval for setting up a Public Schools Commission.
A few weeks after our meeting I accepted his invitation to become a member of that Commission, which also included David Donnison, Noel Annan (Lord Annan), John Vaizey (now Lord Vaizey), and Bernard Williams (then married to Shirley Williams).
John Dancy, the Master of Marlborough, represented the reformers among the Public School headmasters, and Tom Howarth, the High Master of St Paul's, did not.
The secretary of the Commission was Geoffrey Cockerill, who had been Private Secretary to Boyle and, for a short while, Crosland.
The chairman was Sir John Newsom, and in 1966 we set to work.
John Newsom brought to that task an intimate knowledge of the workings of the Establishment, a rich store of anecdote (much of it scurrilous), a delight in getting to know his fellow members and in entertaining them in princely style, and a huge sense of fun.
I learnt more from him that I can ever acknowledge.
the Public Schools, as the Secretary of State well knew, represented an intricate puzzle and their power seriously undermined national efforts to generate a comprehensive system.
More particularly, those who owed their careers and their satisfactions to grammar schools, or were headmasters of them, feared that the progressive elimination of those schools might make it more difficult for the maintained sector to compete effectively with the independent schools.
Emanuel Shinwell's rhetoric, and the arguments which Crosland himself had developed in his writing, could not be brushed aside.
In the event, of course, nothing was or could be done.
Nor had any effective measures been taken after the Fleming Report was submitted to Butler in 1944.
The Fleming committee had been set up in response to pressure from the independent schools themselves: their heads and governors had been worried by the drop in enrolments and income in the 1930s, and many hoped to share in the growing national investment that would follow the War.
Some of them, like Sir Robert Birley, the headmaster of Eton and a member of the Fleming Committee, disliked the social selectiveness of the schools and the dependence of admission upon the ability to pay fees, and hoped to see the schools brought fully into the mainstream of national life.
Butler was anxious that the implications of the abolition of fees in maintained secondary schools should be studied and, ever prudent, hoped to ‘avoid polemics by keeping ‘the public school question’ out of the Act and out of debates.
The Committee noted that ‘the trend of social development is leaving the public schools out of alignment with the world in which they exist’.
They proposed a scheme to replace the existing direct-grant scheme, but the Ministry preferred plans of its own and, as has already been explained, gave effect to them.
They survived until 1976.
Proposals for the future of the Public Schools, mostly boarding, were made in 1944, against a background of assumptions no longer valid in 1966.
It was known that fees in secondary schools would shortly be abolished, that grammar-school education would be developed for about 20 per cent of the population, and assumed that secondary modern schools would be provided for the rest.
The Committee recommended that bursaries should be provided for pupils who had attended maintained primary schools and that any independent schools participating in the scheme should admit at least 25 per cent of its pupils in this way.
Interviewing for places would be conducted on a regional basis, and fees paid by the LEAs (who would receive government grants).
What, then, should be the principles of such selection?
Obviously, the pupils would want or need a boarding education, and the reasons for that preference would have to be stated — on all this, the Report was embarrassingly vague.
But, more important, the participating schools should not take only the very clever.
Nevertheless, there is an unquestioned assumption that the pupils selected would have no difficulty in following a grammar-school course.
The affinity between Public School and grammar school was still very close.
‘It can never be satisfactory for a child to be educated in a school in which the standard of work is above his powers, or the curriculum not suited to his particular aptitudes.’
Underlying the 1944 Report are assumptions both about the moral advantages of boarding and about the centrality of the grammar school and its curriculum.
Those assumptions could no longer be made by Mr Crosland's Commission, although one or two members of it plainly wished that they could.
As a result of Circular 10/65, and the more general movement of opinion and policy associated with it, the two sectors of secondary education were diverging.
The Public Schools which we visited and enjoyed had already changed a great deal since the War.
just as, in the previous century, they had modified their style from that of the Christian gentleman into that of the muscular Christian, so now they were completing a transition towards becoming highly competitive academic schools.
Royston Lambert, who undertook a great deal of research for the Commission, recorded the prayer of a twelve-year-old boy:
Dear Lord You know that I have not worked as hard as I ought.
I have shirked my work.
And now, during this exam I deserve to fail.
But forgive me and let me succeed.
Amen.
Although the size of the independent sector had been shrinking, its reputation and power had not.
In 1947 it accounted for 9 per cent of the secondary-school population, but in 1967 for only 5.5 per cent— made up by 1.4 per cent in Public Schools narrowly defined, and 3.9 per cent in other independent schools.
Direct-grant schools, formally independent but associated with the maintained system, accounted for a further 1.5 per cent.
But higher staying-on rates amplified these figures: 3 per cent of boys in Public Schools at age 14, but 12 per cent at age 17.
It is not surprising that a high proportion of A level candidates came and come from such schools.
The Commission reported that although 9.3 per cent of all seventeen-year-olds (boys and girls) were in independent schools of all kinds, boys from boarding Public Schools were statistically overrepresented in many careers: 49.3 per cent among the heads of colleges and professors at Oxford and Cambridge, 42 per cent in the Labour Cabinet of the day and 90.9 per cent in its Conservative predecessor (things are no different now), 75 per cent among Church of England bishops, 79.2 per cent among judges and QCs, and 43 per cent among successful applicants to the Administrative Civil Service (in the years l963–7).
Doubtless, given the backgrounds from which they came and the support they received, many of these distinguished citizens would have done well, whatever school they had attended.
But the Commission concluded that this measure of institutional concentration was unhealthy, and related it in part to the surviving power of snobbery in English society.
But it was even more clear that the Public Schools had adapted themselves rapidly and skilfully to the demands for a meritocracy as identified by Michael Young.
John Newsom knew that, in his two Reports, he was moving nimbly between two worlds that had nothing in common.
As, on many visits to the schools, we argued far into the evening, several Commissioners and their hosts became unclear as to whether Public Schools should be abolished because they were very good or because they were very bad.
Of the fathers of the boarders in these schools, 92 per cent were in the Registrar-General's Class I or II, and 52 per cent had been to Public Schools themselves.
This kind of concentration could still produce a narrowness of horizon, or a confident self-satisfaction.
Royston Lambert captured this mood in a seventeen-year-old boy talking about his family and school: ‘They have been coming here since the seventeenth century, I think, although what they did before that I can't imagine, had Tutors I suppose.
You even used to be able to bring them here with you.
Everyone I know at home is either here, or has been here.
Yorkshire is such a small place really.’
The quality of the staff was impressive, and many of them in those days were among the most adventurous of professionals in introducing new teaching methods and new curricula.
The teacher/ pupil ratio was 1:11.6, compared with 1:16.8 in contemporary grammar schools.
Graduates of Oxford and Cambridge predominated, and over 70 per cent of all masters had themselves attended HMC (Headmasters' Conference) schools.
Most HMC schools covered the age range 13–18 (although the education offered in preparatory schools for pupils to the age of thirteen would not have won the approval of the Plowden Committee).
Very few pupils left before completing a full five-year course, and 40 per cent of the total pupil population of all the schools were in the sixth form.
The standards and ideals of the sixth form, as the Crowther Report had epitomized them, dominated the school.
The pace of work was always high, and sometimes ferocious.
Many sixth-formers, of course, left a maintained school to go on to universities, but only 10 per cent of these went to Oxford or Cambridge, compared with nearly half of the university-bound sixth-formers from the Public Schools.
Of all pupils 9 per cent had an IQ of 130 or more, compared with 4.5 per cent in the population as a whole.
Very few had an IQ below 100: the lower half of the ability range was simply not represented in these schools.
Some three-quarters of all the pupils in them had the necessary ability for admission to grammar schools.
Although the classics were still important, their grip was slackening in a competitive and utilitarian age.
The most popular A level subjects today in such schools are engineering, law, economics.
All these comments apply to boys' schools: the girls' schools represented a much wider variation in style, and in many cases offered (deliberately) only a modestly academic education.
The endowments of the schools were rarely lavish, and they depended on fees which necessarily remained high.
42,000 pupils in independent schools were assisted from public funds, amounting in all to some £11m. each year.
Rate relief came to another £1 m., and various forms of tax relief to a considerable sum, which could not be accurately assessed.
The schools were expensive, and necessarily exclusive, in part because of the considerable burdens of providing boarding education.
It was boarding that gave solidity to the schools, turning them into total societies — often in rural and inaccessible surroundings — and reinforcing both achievement and a potent sense of cohesion.
If they are somewhat more relaxed today, it would be a mistake to exaggerate the contrasts.
They certainly preserve a dominance within the system generally.
The Labour party had an unsurprising and intuitive dislike of the Public School, but very few ideas about what might be done.
Even members of the Commission who, like myself, were not members of the Labour party, hoped that their social exclusiveness could be softened, and that they would follow the lines of development then visible in Oxford and Cambridge.
But those universities moved very largely into the public domain without sacrificing too much of their independence, and by improving the standard of their entry.
How could relatively small and expensive boarding-schools move in a similar direction within a system explicitly dedicated to comprehensiveness?
They could not, and many of them regretted it.
It would have been wrong to propose that subsidized admission to such schools should he offered to very bright pupils, at the same time that comprehension was being commended (sometimes forcefully so) to grammar schools.
It would have been wrong to propose abolition, and in any case no member of the Commission in fact believed that it should be illegal for a parent to spend money on a child's education.
History, in the shape of the tardiness of public authorities in setting up a proper system of secondary schooling, was responsible for the ‘Public School problem’— which is, in my view, both real and insoluble.
But the Commission did assemble a mass of fact and opinion about the schools and, with little confidence in the outcome, proposed a compromise solution.
This turned upon the provision of boarding.
The schools were rightly proud of the contribution made by boarding to the lives of pupils, and especially those from homes which could not provide a stable background.
At the same time, it was clear there was a substantial need for boarding education throughout the country, and that this need was not being met.
A limited number of boarding-schools should therefore be drawn into a partnership with the State, by agreeing to give at least 50 per cent of their places to pupils formally assessed as having a boarding need.
The presence of a significant number of such pupils in the ‘integrated’ schools would ensure that the manner and style of those places would change: there would be no risk of new pupils simply being absorbed into the mores of the upper classes, or of a repetition of the kind of conflict from which a working-class minority had suffered in grammar schools.
The academic range of the schools would become wider, to include some three-quarters of the full ability range.
A minority of us thought that some schools should be integrated as sixth-form colleges, or centres, to which entry might properly be academically competitive.
We signed the Report in April, and I went away to Padstow.
It was published on 22 July, and it soon became clear that the schools were not interested.
Neither, to be fair, was the Government.
Things might have been a little different if Tony Crosland had still been at the Department of Education and Science, but I doubt it.
In any case, the Government was in trouble.
It had done very badly in the 1967 local elections, and in November Wilson at last devalued the pound — assuring a somewhat puzzled nation that ‘the pound in your pocket’ would somehow not be affected.
Integrating some of the Public Schools in the way proposed would eventually cost about £12m. each year, and £6.1m. in the short term: these plans would now be in open competition with the proposals of the Newsom and Plowden Reports, at a time when severe economies were being applied to public expenditure.
In 1968, the raising to sixteen of the school-leaving age was postponed.
Crosland opposed this, and thought Crossman ‘crazy’ for not doing so as well.
For my part, I welcomed the temporary relief from an added pressure of numbers and new problems at a time when Banbury School was in its infancy.
Expansion in education became suddenly less attractive, as well as being less affordable: in New York the Columbia University sit-in began in April, Paris flared into disorder in May, and in January 1969 trouble was to spread to the London School of Economics, where David Donnison had his chair.
Meanwhile, the Commission had been reconstituted under David Donnison and addressed the question of the direct-grant and independent day-schools.
Throughout 1969 I spent some time each month visiting schools, and attending yet more meetings in Curzon Street.
Dick Crossman was still on the train each day.
Crossman had, in May 1966, appointed a Commission under the chairmanship of Lord Redcliffe-Maud (formerly Sir John Maud) to report on the reorganization of local government.
It reported in June 1969 and it became clear that even Oxfordshire would change its size and shape.
On 1 July Prince Charles was invested the Prince of Wales at Caernarfon Castle and I bought a large Welsh flag to cheer the many Welsh, or half-Welsh, teachers in the school.
A small English patriot tried to haul it down, but was apprehended; I bought a St George's flag as well, to demonstrate impartiality.
The direct-grant schools, more than the independent schools, represented a real and local problem for the emerging comprehensive system.
For as long as the most able pupils were, with the support of public money, taken from the comprehensive schools, the development of comprehensives with high academic standards would be frustrated.
The main virtue of the Donnison Report (eventually published in 1970) lay in its cool and thorough analysis of the nature and pace of the movement towards more openness in secondary education.
It made it clear that, whatever their achievements in the past, the direct-grant schools could not look towards a stable future within the national system of education.
They were of course no different from good maintained grammar schools and owed their survival after 10/65 only to the anomaly created in 1926 and perpetuated in 1944.
They valued their independence, and one of the persuasive recommendations of the Report was that all schools should — as John Newsom had secured in Hertfordshire — be given as much freedom as possible in determining their priorities and policies.
It was not a coincidence that Tom Taylor, later to become a Labour peer and the principal author of another report, was one of the newly appointed members of the Commission.
The Report suggested two ways in which direct-grant and other schools might be drawn into patterns of local provision: either as full-grant schools (a new category), or as voluntary-aided or controlled schools along the well-established lines defined in 1944.
In either case, fees would be abolished along with the principle of selection.
A minority of the Commission argued for a small number of super-selective schools, for the most able 2 per cent of each age group.
I was not of that minority, but the argument sharpened my concern for the education of the most-talented pupils — a concern that was to run through my last years in Banbury and into my work in Oxford.
The direct-grant schools did not like these proposals, and had little to gain from them.
By the time action was taken, by the Labour government in 1975, school rolls were already falling and there was little interest in the forging of any new partnership.
What little opportunity there might have been for careful integration, had been lost.
When we signed the Report, on 29 January 1970, I was in my first few weeks of a sabbatical term at Merton College, Oxford, and in need of a short rest from the work and vocabulary of education.
I turned back to seventeenth-century France.
In January, too, the leading figures of the Conservative party met at Selsdon in order to hammer out new policies.
Margaret Thatcher had already replaced Edward Boyle as their Education spokesman, and the sixties had indeed finished.
The general election was held on 18 June, and election and examination fever coincided for the first time since 1945.
The Conservatives won 330 seats, against 287 for Labour, and an overall majority of 30.
Mr Heath moved into Number Ten, Sir Keith Joseph succeeded Dick Crossman at the Department of Health and Social Security (as Crossman had succeeded Joseph at Housing and Local Government in 1964), and Mrs Thatcher became the third woman since 1944 to assume responsibility for education.
She was to keep it for the next three and a half years.
The first ‘Black Paper’, attacking many recent trends in education, had been published the