

The official magazine of the Sub-Aqua Association SCUBA World No 24 COMPETITION WIN A BEAVER DRYSUIT CARTOON FUN WILL IVOR EVER GO DOWN WITH SALLY?
COMMERCIAL DIVING DIVER DEPLOYMENT THE SAFE WAY PLUS ALL THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE DIVING WORLD CAVE DIVING WORLD RECORD BROKEN IN YORKSHIRE'S BOWELS DIVING HOLIDAYS AUSTRALIA EXPENSIVE BUT WORTH EVERY PENNY LEARNING TO DIVE PUFFIN GOOD FUN FIONA CONACHER JUMPS IN EQUIPMENT FOUR DIVE COMPUTERS REVIEWED
CONTENTS
SCUBA WORLD OCTOBER 1991
COMMENT
Hans Hass on how the continents were formed.
LETTERS
Revealing what you, the readers, really think.
EQUIPMENT
Focusing on dive computers; their intricacies and usefulness.
CAVE DIVING
Gavin Newman was there when the record was broken.
COMMERCIAL DIVING
James Chapman looks at safe diver deployment.
TRADE GOSSIP
The latest news and events from the diving world.
COMPETITION
Send in your entry today and you could win a Beaver drysuit!
Qs & As
Improve your knowledge with Dave Thomas.
UK DIVING
Sampling Oban's pleasures; Fiona Conacher learns to dive.
AQUATIC LIFE
Andy Purcell focuses on three wrasse from the Mediterranean.
SAA NEWS
Keep up to date with the latest news and events from the SAA.
MARINE BIOLOGY
Alan Major on ‘sails’ and ‘swords’.
DIVING HOLIDAYS
Chris Howes spends a pretty penny, with no regrets.
CARTOON
‘Fool at the Pool’ Ivor Bend meets Sally down at the club.
Above: Drifting slowly up the reef wall, curious fish surround a diver.
Taken on the Great Barrier Reef by Chris Howes.
Cover: Fiona Conacher kits up helped by Duncan McKelvie from the Puffin Dive School.
Photograph by Andrew Mounter.
COMMENT
The Landlubber's World
The oceans provide us with much more than pleasure for the diver and beautiful photographs for the photographer; they also give us invaluable knowledge.
This issue, Hans Hass explains the origins and movements of the continents.
Along the coasts the ground falls gradually to about 100 fathoms.
These platforms stretching round the continents are called the continental shelf.
Then there is a much steeper drop up to 2,000 fathoms.
Soundings have shown that along these precipices are vertical-sided chasms which would often dwarf the Grand Canyon.
How did these chasms come about; what forces fashioned them?
Originally the ocean floor was thought of as one desolate plain.
There are such plains, but the typical profile of the seabed is one that contains gigantic mountain ranges, innumerable equally huge volcanoes, and gorges of a depth never dreamed of furrowing the deep-sea floor.
What is the meaning of these gorges, the oceanographers asked themselves.
And what in particular, is the meaning of a very remarkable gorge, well over a mile deep, running along the crest of the highest underwater range, the mid-Atlantic ridge?
This range is the mightiest geological formation on our planet.
Starting near Iceland, it ends near California.
It is about 48,000 miles long.
In the Atlantic its average breadth is nearly 100 miles, and many of its peaks tower 10,000 feet above the seabed.
At some places the peaks rise above water — for example as the Azores; known to us as islands.
Their highest summit, the Pico Alto, has an altitude of 30,000 feet when measured from the seabed.
And on the ridge of this endless mountain chain runs this strange chasm, for the most part almost 7,000 feet deep, which can be traced right along the backbone.
What can the significance be?
The explanation of this furrow was discovered in the 1960s and restored the reputation of a German geophysicist who proposed a hypothesis which most people disregarded.
Alfred Wegener was a keen thinker and a daring pioneer.
In 1915 he wrote: The Origin of Continents and Oceans.
The claims he made went directly against traditional thought.
His theory was ridiculed and dismissed.
However, several people before him — Francis Bacon even — had been struck by the amazing correspondence between the coastlines of the African and South American continents.
This, Wegener explained, was because the continents were not fixed, but drifted like ships on the earth's surface.
And that whereas the earth's actual mantle, which appears on the ocean floor, consists of heavy rocks — predominantly silicon and magnesium (sima)— the continents are made of lighter material: igneous rocks and crystalline schists (sial).
According to Wegener, the sial masses of the continents shifted on the earth's actual mantle, the sima foundation.
Originally a sial crust had enveloped the earth, but it then split on one side and compressed into the solid mass of the present-day continents.
This was surrounded by the Pacific Ocean.
Then about 200 million years ago, this gigantic earth-mass split into several parts.
South America separated from Africa, while  Antarctica and Australia — still joined together — drifted southwards.
On the eastern side another split opened up, giving birth to India, which drifted away from Africa.
Then  Antarctica and Australia became separate land-masses, drifting on independently, while North and South America moved farther and farther from Africa, Europe and Asia.
This produced the Atlantic on one side and the Indian Ocean and Red Sea on the other.
The Pacific became correspondingly smaller.
Wegener's main difficulty was how to explain this remarkable movement.
He based his explanation on a movement away from the poles and a westerly drift of the land-masses.
That such shifts did indeed take place, is shown by the geological and biological conformity at the edges which once joined together.
However, the clue to the forces which shift the continents, is provided by the chasm which stretches along the ridge of the gigantic submarine ranges.
Through this rift, lava from the earth's core constantly flows.
The whole mountain chain originated from this cleft as lava surged up and spilled down on both sides.
How does one know this so precisely today?
Oceanographers have found conclusive proof.
When lava solidifies, its tiny ferrous particles align themselves, like magnetic needles, with the earth's magnetic field.
They are a frozen compass.
It is now established that the North and South Poles exchange places about every 500,000 years.
If lava solidifies 500,000 years later, the congealed magnetic needles will point the opposite way.
A study of rock samples from the right and left of the chasm, has shown that its magnetisation switches round at regular intervals.
This has been used to prove that the seabed to the right and left of the rift was forced away by the outflow of lava, and set in motion.
The upper layer of the seabed is relatively thin (about 12 to 25 miles deep) compared to the viscous interior.
Hence, the continents, islands, and submarine ranges drift on these thinner plates, like conveyor belts.
There are then three possibilities: first, their edges may slide along against each other; second, they may move away from each other — then fresh lava emerges from the crack which is formed between them; third, they may move towards each other , one plate sliding under the other.
Wegener had already realised that the Himalayas originated due to the Indian continental table sliding under its Asiatic counterpart.
And it is now recognised that the great mountain chains are always found on the side of the continental plate facing the direction of its drift.
They arched up because they resisted further movement.
Sixty five years ago our continents were regarded as absolutely fixed.
This idea, deeply rooted in human consciousness, has now been discredited.
And it was not a diver, but our landlubbing friend the oceanographer, who discovered this.
What's more, he did it without getting his feet wet.
COMPETITION WINNER
After being swamped by people demanding that we give them the freebie SEAL course, we have, after long and difficult nights of deliberation, come to a decision.
The vast majority of you got all three questions right.
Those of you who didn't are guilty of not reading the questions properly.
But first, some of the more interesting entries.
We had to reject William Smith, from Warley, because we weren't entirely sure what prompted him to enter.
He said: ‘Pool nights would be  a lot more exciting after explosives training.’
Just what did you have in mind?
Stephen Brown, from Rochdale, reasoned: ‘Your help and advice is what I seek, to further my skills in diving technique.’
While Brian Cunningham, from Birmingham, made no bones about it: ‘I would like to learn from the best, not the rest.’
However, the winner of the SEALY competition is…
Eric Sutherland, from Coldstream in Berwickshire, for declaring: ‘For diving that's different — the choices are endless.
The skilful instruction ensures fun that's bendless!’
So, well done to Eric, and to all those who entered but weren't quite so lucky.
And many thanks to West Coast Diver Training School for sponsoring the competition.
SCUBA WORLD LETTERS
Sit down, get scribbling and send your letters and pictures to 18 Market Street, Poole, Dorset, BH15 1NF.
There's a prize for the best letter each month.
Letter of the month
Dear Scuba World
We recently returned from a holiday in Barbados where we  successfully completed the PADI certification for Open Water Diver.
Having enjoyed ourselves so much and being impressed by the professionalism shown by our instructor and other divers at the centre, we decided to pursue our new hobby when we returned home.
Despite being taken aback by the cost of kitting ourselves out, we went along to the local diving club, full of enthusiasm.
When we walked through the door, we were briefly acknowledged.
We were finally approached by a young man who turned out to be the club's diving instructor.
To our utter dismay and astonishment, he told us that our certificates meant nothing at all to him or BSAC and that ‘even if Jacques Cousteau were to come along with a PADI qualification, no notice would be taken of it.’
And although there may be equivalent grades between PADI and BSAC, they weren't recognised by him or the club.
We were at great pains to explain that we were novices and aware that diving in Barbados was unlike diving in the UK and were told that ‘courses taken on holiday mean nothing at all’ and that we should be prepared to snorkel around a pool for six months should he deem it necessary, and that even if we did dive to any standard we would be taken on a dive (presumably in a pool), and ‘ripped down’until we eventually failed a test.
Last, but not least, we were told that learning the theoretical side of diving might mean that we would be unable to dive in open water for anything between six and 18 months.
But we decided we would persevere and opted to try diving centres that advertised PADI.
It was a centre in Peterborough who immediately urged us to come down and have a look round.
When we got there, we were introduced to several divers who swapped telephone numbers with us and it was suggested that we have a dive with an instructor to re-orient us to diving in this country.
We were thrilled.
This centre is a prime example of diving professionalism and camaraderie, and echoes the attitude of the PADI instructor who taught us in Barbados.
We have made arrangements to dive, to hire the necessary equipment and spend as much time at the centre as we want.
We would like to point out that many people at the centre told us that the attitudes we had encountered were less prevalent now than they had been in the past, and would continue to diminish.
We were introduced to both PADI and BSAC divers who without exception, apologised on behalf of BSAC.
We have not yet come across anyone who has been able to offer a reasonable explanation for a rather disheartening introduction to diving.
Any comments from BSAC would be appreciated.
John Thompson & Katherine Lee, Hendon, London.
Unfortunately, BSAC have not replied, Ed.
Dear Scuba World
At present I am the ROV (remote operated vehicle) supervisor  on board the Ataawhai, working for Brunei Shell Petroleum, doing oil and gas offshore platform inspections.
My home in the States is located in the beautiful Florida Keys.
My wife and I both dive when I am at home and we have a number of friends who run dive charter operations in the Keys.
Plus my wife and I have surveyed several of the local pubs for congeniality and cleanliness in the bathrooms.
We would be quite happy to pass on this information to persons planning on visiting and/or diving in the Florida Keys.
Divers may write, phone or fax us, at no cost of course.
My wife and I are looking forward to contact from your readers and eventually meeting some of our diving cousins from the ‘Motherland’.
May all your bubbles be happy ones.
Respectfully,
Steve and Debra Heide.
This is a great offer, but unfortunately you didn't include your address, fax or telephone number.
Do you think that you could send it on?
Thanks, Ed.
Illegal practice
Dear Scuba World
I wish to notify other divers that while diving in Cornwall earlier this year, my buddy and I were charged £2 each for just walking down the slip for a shore dive.
The harbour master at Million Cove said we must pay the £2 each to the National Trust.
I would like to know if anyone else has had to pay for shore dives as I am told this is an illegal practice.
Ian Blake, Eastleigh, Hants.
Diving Prejudice
Dear Scuba World
I respond to your articles ‘Join Up’ and ‘Promoting the Sport’, Scuba World July 1991.
I have been a member of one of the organisations mentioned in ‘Join Up’ for some 12 years.
In which time I have been a victim of the clique set, if your face doesn't fit, your training can wait; also the ‘Hooray Henry’ brigade, the difference between the men and the boys is the price of their toys, types.
A great many divers will know what I'm driving at.
I feel, even now, there is too much prejudice and politics in diving.
These two factors alone may well be responsible for making would-be divers leave and go on to other things.
True, you have politics in all walks of life, however in diving, some seem to thrive off putting organisations and individuals down because of their allegiance or training methods.
It's about time that most of these types were out of diving.
Fortunately they are few in number, but I'm sorry to say they will always be around.
I would say to any prospective newcomer, choose your training organisation to suit your needs, and enjoy your training and future diving, but beware of those who would try and make you prejudiced against all others.
Yours in diving, AR, Cheshire.
Calorie-consuming
Dear Scuba World
I have only recently completed my open water diver training, so I am still a novice at the sport.
I use this to excuse the possible ignorance which my question may make apparent!
I am currently reading Horace Dobbs' ‘The Great Diving Adventure’, in which he states that diving is one of the most calorie-consuming sports there is.
I just don't understand why this should be the case.
Diving to me has never seemed particularly energetic, and certainly one doesn't swim at speed when sports diving.
Nevertheless, my appetite whenever I return from a dive, certainly supports the theory that a lot of calories have been consumed and need to be replaced!!!
I hope you can explain this mystery to me.
Yours faithfully, Jackie Wyn, Teddington, Middlesex.
Phil Bryson of the Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) replies:
‘As far as I am concerned diving is not an excessive calorie-consuming sport, and certainly from the numbers of divers that I see who are overweight, I do not actually believe that the statement in ‘The Great Diving Adventure’, by Horace Hobbs, is actually borne out.
It is true that a lot of divers drink a fair quantity of beer.
Several of the people that I have dived with have been grossly overweight, enjoyed being so, and are completely at home in the water swimming around like walruses.
I think that diving can be as calorie consuming as you would like it to be.’
Popular wrecks
Dear Scuba World
We are currently compiling material for a book which will illustrate plans and photographs of popular wrecks around the British Isles.
We would like suggestions from divers on wrecks they would like to see included.
RW Sellwood, CRS (Epsom) Ltd., Marine Draughting, 43 Delaporte Close, Epsom, Surrey KT17 4AF.
Tel:(0372) 728728.
Accidental Pick-up?
Dear Scuba World
During a training session on Sunday 4 August, at Dorothea quarry, an incident occurred.
Being in the vicinity, I helped remove the casualty's kit before ditching my own in order to phone the rescue services.
All items were dumped together (in such a position as they should not fall into the water).
When I returned, to my horror, I discovered a dive computer I had borrowed was missing.
My kit being near the casualty (by now conscious), I thought it may have been mistakenly picked up.
I notified the police on site and passed on my phone number to all diving parties present.
To date (15 August) nobody has contacted me.
I would appeal to anyone who may have found a Suunto-ML wrist computer on site to contact me or Caernarfon police station.
I sincerely hope that it has been picked up by accident and that I will be re-united with it soon, as I find it hard to believe that such an incident could lead to its deliberate theft.
Paul Wood, Tel: 0286 86304
Speaking from bitter experience
Dear Scuba World
I was interested to read your recent articles on commercial diver training, which were very good as far as they went.
But the plain truth of the matter is that there are just not enough jobs available for all the newly qualified divers pumped out by these companies.
I speak from bitter experience as I have worked as a diver for just five days since qualifying as a part 111 diver in December 1990, and the situation is not that much better, as far as I can tell, for part 1s.
I could not, in all conscience, advise anybody to embark on a commercial diving career at present, especially if that person has to borrow the money needed for the training.
Instead I would advise that person to wait until the economy picks up, and maybe then there will be an increase in demand.
Do not believe the optimistic write-ups in the training brochures.
I would urge anybody thinking of commercial diving to benefit not just from my experience, but also from the dozens of other commercial divers I know and have heard from.
Yours faithfully, Andrew Harrison, Solihull
Subscription Winner
John Brushwood from Hook End, has been hand-picked from this month's lucky dip, as the winner of a year's supply of Scuba World .
This means you get them at no cost at all .
Your cheque will be returned.
Expect it on your doormat in due course.
EQUIPMENT
Just an expensive toy?
Is the dive computer the result of a fiendish plot by manufacturers to relieve the diver of hard earned cash?
Or is it a viable substitute for the dive table?
Four dive computers were reviewed; read on — the results may surprise you.
The DataMax Sport Computer
reviewed by Nick Herbert
Oceanic are renowned for their innovative designs and precision building.
Now they've taken a plunge into the dive computer market and the outcome is the DataMax Sport.
First impressions are of a compact unit, encased in a heavy-duty rubber wrist pod, with clearly readable figures on its LCD display and one actuating button underneath the screen — at last a move away from water activated ‘touch-type’ buttons.
Strapping the DataMax onto one's wrist shows up one of its few faults.
The rubber strap is too short to fit around the bulky cuff of a membrane drysuit without either stretching the strap or wearing the computer over your wrist seal.
Not good for seal longevity or dry arms.
On the plus side though, this is a simple-to-use device that is far less bulky, thus less liable to snag in wreckage, than many of its rivals.
Activation is simple too.
At the start of your diving day, just press the face button once and watch the bar graph around the perimeter of the display countdown while the DataMax Sport zeroes itself to your current altitude, checks all internal functions and battery power.
After this self-diagnostic check, the screen normally reverts to surface mode.
If there is anything wrong internally, or insufficient battery power, the screen could stay lit, flash, or shut down, depending on the error.
Try activating again, or wait a little while before re-activation.
If the error still doesn't clear, return it to Oceanic.
With an expected life of three years for the lithium battery, there shouldn't be any problems with this unit, but Oceanic UK guarantee a three day turnround on battery changes, and service like this is good to hear about.
With all indications normal and the pre-dive planning sequence (scrolling) indicating sensible no-stop times for given depths in metres, you can begin your descent.
Once below five feet, the PDPS mode changes to dive mode and the depth indicator shows the depth to the nearest metre.
The dive time digits count down to time remaining before decompression, while the bar graph begins counting up — showing tissue loading.
Every 10 seconds the display changes to show elapsed bottom time on an otherwise clear screen, to avoid confusion.
This bottom time display remains on for three seconds, then reverts to normal dive display for 10 seconds, and so the sequence continues.
Once you have become mentally adjusted to the countdown display it becomes very logical and you will wonder why they don't all work this way!
At the end of a dive to 28 metres for 27 minutes total, the tissue loading bar graph had filled to within one segment/division of the caution zone.
This meant that a decompression stop was not required and that these parameters would be stored in the memory, to be compensated for on the next dive.
Had we stayed longer at that depth, necessitating a stop, it would have been shown on the bar graph (deco stop ceiling ) and the main display for the duration of that stop.
Dive number two that day was to 17 metres for 23 minutes, resulting in a tissue loading on the bar graph only halfway round the no decom zone.
Once again, no stops were required (other than the usual safety stop at three metres) and there was a feeling that this computer would have coped with far more strenuous dives with ease.
To sum it all up, the DataMax Sport monitors the depth and time, calculating and displaying remaining dive time based on 12 tissue compartments and a Haldanean model of your decompression status.
In essence, it tells you how much time you have left before reaching the no-decompression limit and also how to manage decompression stops if you inadvertently exceed that limit, or elect to enter decompression.
Pre-dive planning, ascent rate warning, logbook display and a choice of wrist or console mountings, are just a few of the many features offered by Oceanic.
However, the instruction manual, though extremely comprehensive, is written in that awful Americanese which makes similar pamphlets printed in Japan almost a pleasure to read!
One final point to consider is that this computer has a variable rate ascent warning.
This means you can ascend at 18 metres/minute from a (maximum) depth of 75 metres up to 18 metres.
From 18 metres up to six metres, the ascent rate warning will flash if you exceed 13 metres/minute, and from six metres to the surface you should not exceed a very safe nine metres per minute.
Many of the local scallop divers in the Poole area swear by these computers, if for no other reason than reliability and price — and this type of diver is notoriously difficult to please.
Worth a thought when you're contemplating which computer you'll cough up cash for.
For a recommended retail price of £218.00 (wrist-mounted models), this is excellent value for anyone's money.
The Ace Pro-File
reviewed by Brian Woodward
Manufactured by Quatek Ltd, the Ace Pro-File is a state of the art dive computer that is fully interactive with any IBM-compatible personal computer (PC).
As a dive computer it logs depth, temperature and cylinder pressure as functions of time, but by using different sensors it can also log up to eight other parameters simultaneously, and control 12 external devices like switches and relays.
During a dive, Pro-File measures the depth every half second and stores the digitised value.
The memory is dynamic, so that when it is full, after 500 minutes, it is overwritten to give one second precision after 1000 minutes, two second precision after 2000 minutes, and so on.
The memory's contents can be transferred post-dive to a PC by the electronic interface, Datalink.
Hence you can store dive profiles on print out copies for your log book.
For decompression sickness, your dive history is available in graphic detail for hyperbaric specialists to consult.
Pro-File is a convenient size (101×82×35mm) and displays essential information clearly and unambiguously.
Electroluminescent backlighting, lasting 10 hours between charges, gives a clear display even in total darkness, as I discovered on one dive to 36 metres.
This wrist model I tried was designed for air diving and programmed with the Bühlmann ZHL12 algorithm with automatic ranging from 3,500 metres above sea level to 100 metres depth.
I found it easy to use during both non-decompression and decompression dives.
A console model is also available and a mixed gas algorithm can be programmed.
Before diving, you can display information from a menu — in alphanumerics rather than symbols or graphics — by bridging a pair of metal contacts with moist fingers.
While diving, the menu is inaccessible and all functions are automatic.
For monitoring cylinder pressure, Pro-File has a socket connected by an electrical cable to a 340-bar transducer in the first stage of a demand valve; use of the cable is optional, but without it some of the features are lost.
The socket also allows connection to a PC via Datalink or to a mains charger.
Altogether there are some three dozen functions, alarms and information modes.
Some of these are selected by prompts on the set-up screen; for example, you can set novice or expert mode.
In novice mode, the screen shows current depth, no-stop time, dive time and cylinder contents.
In expert mode, the display toggles from the novice screen to a peripheral screen which shows dive time and air time in large digits, and current depth, no-stop time, maximum depth and temperature.
Vital information is therefore always displayed.
The dive planning screen is a look-ahead facility showing a selection of depths and no-stop times depending on your current decompression status.
The dive log screen displays maximum depth, dive time and surface interval for the last ten dives.
A dive simulator allows you to plan dives and predict stops.
On descent, below 1.5 metres the Pro-File starts its diving mode automatically and models the uptake and release of nitrogen for 16 tissue types.
Cylinder pressure, air time remaining at current depth, and remaining no-stop time are continuously updated.
If the remaining air time is less than the no-stop time required, the cylinder content display flashes air time .
An alarm sounds and a ‘1’ flashes if you are within one minute of a stop.
Pro-File calculates decompression requirements for any ascent rate.
Going up faster triggers a flashing rate indicator and an audible alarm.
During a decompression dive in novice mode, only the deepest stop depth and time are shown.
You must wait at that depth, within 0.5 metres, until a shallower depth or a new no-stop time is indicated.
During a decompression dive in expert mode, the ceiling is displayed at progressively increasing depths and times, together with a flashing ascend warning.
All stops and times are displayed so your ascent profile is known in advance.
In both modes, dive time reads in minutes and seconds, while the time left at a stop decrements in minutes.
After surfacing, Pro-File allows two minutes before the next descent is programmed as a separate dive.
During the surface interval, the fly time screen displays one of four sets of information:Warning/do not fly for…hrs…mins; safe to fly/time to tissue desat…hrs…mins; safe to fly/tissues desaturated ; and, should a decompression incident have occurred:Warning/do not fly .
Should you miss a decompression stop, an emergency screen shows missed decompression stop , including the ceiling and stop time of the missed stop and the numbers of the tissues affected.
Pro-File compensates automatically at the reduced atmospheric pressure for dives up to 3,500 metres altitude.
On ascent to altitude after diving at sea level, the display automatically comes on, warning of DCS risks.
A multi-user mode is available for recognised dive schools.
Up to four divers can use one computer since individual dive logs can be stored in separate areas of memory.
There is also a dual mode available for two divers.
A variety of features can be added by re-programming, including a redesigned display incorporating graphics, icons or almost any foreign language.
Pro-File's reprogrammability allows the decompression algorithm to be updated or changed, and personal information, like name and telephone number, displayed.
Every model has a pre-programmed serial number that identifies the purchaser.
It also makes possible a variety of display options.
So what is the Pro-File like to dive with?
Since Pro-File is a data logger it can log parameters other than those required for it to function as a dive computer (depth, temperature and air data as functions of time).
For example, I plan to use it (with Quatek's permission) for logging divers' heart rates and breathing rates, and also for underwater navigation as part of a research programme at Loughborough University.
I tried both novice mode and expert mode.
My main impressions are that it is easy to use and displays information clearly.
It is compatible with a personal computer; I found it simple to transfer Pro-File's stored data and to display any dive profile.
My criticisms are mostly minor and personal.
I would prefer an analogue contents display because it is more eye-catching and less likely to be misread.
The strap is a strong rubber one but I found I had to overtighten it at the surface, otherwise it became loose when my drysuit seal compressed at depth.
These criticisms apart, I found Pro-File an impressive computer whose potential versatility puts it, quite literally, in a class of its own.
Pro-File retails at £398 (including a hard case), Datalink at £95, the DV pressure sensor and cable at £77 and a 12-volt charger (an alternative to the mains charger supplied) at £20.
The Suunto Solution
reviewed by Martin Pritchard
The Finnish instrument maker Suunto, has produced a new unit called the Solution.
It is certainly a state of the art unit, offering an impressive 36 functions which range from three altitude settings, to an internal memory capable of storing up to eight hours of diving profiles, and if that's not enough, you can interface it with a personal computer and relive your dive profiles in your own home.
The solution displays all the essential information on depths, times and decompression requirements.
The computer's micro processor automatically models the absorption and release of nitrogen (it uses a modified Haldanian model based on nine tissue compartments) during all phases of diving, including ascents, surface intervals and repetitive diving.
The information is displayed in a simple and logical fashion.
When diving, the unit displays present and maximum depth, elapsed time, remaining no-decompression time, ascent rate and water temperature.
If the no-decompression time is exceeded, the Solution displays ascent time and the depth at which stops are needed.
After surfacing the Solution remains active and displays time elapsed since surfacing, time until complete desaturation, maximum depth and dive time of your last dive, and amount of available no-decompression time for planning the next dive.
The unit will automatically activate if submerged, but should be activated prior to diving, either by immersing it in water or placing moistened fingertips on the two on contacts.
After a short audible beep the start up display elements turn on.
Then the current altitude mode selected is displayed.
This is followed by the ready display, confirming that the Solution is ready to dive, which alternates approximately every 30 seconds with the dive planning display.
Once a depth of 1.5 metres is exceeded, the Solution enters into dive mode and displays the no-decompression time available, current depth, elapsed dive time and water temperature.
A bar graph shows present depth and maximum depth reached.
If your dive exceeds the no-decompression time, it flashes the notation asc time (ascent time) and the minimum amount of time, in minutes, needed to make the ascent.
A depth bar graph indicates the ceiling (shallowest depth) you can ascend to at any one time.
All depth bars shallower than the ceiling, constantly blink.
A good feature of the Solution is that it offers flexibility in the depth of the decompression range, so that for an indicated ceiling of three metres it will accept that you are in the correct range if you are between nine and three metres depth.
If you ascend above the decompression ceiling, the amount of ascent time will be replaced by a flashing error warning and flashing downward pointing arrow.
You have three minutes to descend to below the ceiling before the Solution goes into error mode.
Once asc time reaches zero and is replaced with no dec time , you can surface.
On ascent, the ascent speed monitor becomes visible.
If the ascent speed is exceeded, a flashing slow warning is given.
On ascending to 1.5 metres or shallower, the Solution enters surface mode.
It displays maximum depth and elapsed dive time.
The time elapsed since surfacing is shown with the notation surf time .
This alternates with the amount of time until desaturation is achieved (no flying time), signified by an image of an aeroplane.
The unit remains active until desaturation is achieved, then turns itself off.
If you dive within 10 minutes of surfacing, the Solution considers it a continuation of the first dive.
If you dive after a surface interval of more than 10 minutes, the Solution will consider it a second dive, and dive time will start again from zero.
Decompression times are scrolled through on the display for repetitive dive planning.
Should the battery run down, the notation bat will be displayed and it should not be used until serviced.
I have used the Solution for six dives, the majority of these required decompression and at all times it performed faultlessly.
The display was clear and easy to read, with decompression data well presented and easy to follow.
Computers in general have undoubtedly allowed us more dive time, but a consequence of this is that ascent speeds are now critical.
With that point in mind I particularly like the Solution's ascent speed monitor, which was very easy to use.
Another function of the Solution, is the ability to display dive profiles for the previous eight hours diving and for dive simulation.
This is almost as much fun as going diving and is the ability to interface the Solution with a desk top computer and record, organise and recall all normal logbook information and also any dive profiles from the Solution's internal memory.
The whole program works very well, I still seem to have problems in getting to grips with some areas.
It appears to be aimed squarely at what the Americans would call a ‘resort diver’, rather than someone like me who dives several times a week in more or less the same areas.
I thoroughly enjoyed using the program and if you are a PC and Solution owning diver, you won't be able to live without the interface.
Complaints?
None really, but a couple of points are worthy of mention.
The Solution is equipped with an audible alarm which is emitted when the ascent speed exceeds 10 metres per minute, when the dive becomes a decompression dive and when the decompression ceiling is reached.
In reality this is inaudible under water so don't rely on it to give you a reminder.
The unit I had for review was the wrist mounted version which had a rubber strap with a built in expander.
I never felt happy with it, and on two occasions found that it had worked its way down my arm and was loose around my wrist.
To be fair, Suunto recommend that it is worn just above the wrist joint and it would be unlikely to move from that position.
I could not wear it there because of my drysuit cuff, and had it just above the cuff to sleeve joint.
The recommended retail price of the Solution is £310 and the Interface is £149.95.
Both are inclusive of VAT.
All in all, I thought it was an excellent unit and ended up buying one myself.
The Aladin Pro
reviewed by Frank Pembridge
Since the introduction of dive computers onto the market, I have been reluctant to buy one.
Firstly because of the cost, and secondly because I was firm in my belief that there was no substitute for a reliable watch, an accurate depth gauge and a thorough working knowledge of a well proven set of decompression tables.
However, a few months ago, a friend showed me his latest  acquisition , the all-singing-all-dancing computer which did just about everything except dive for you.
After a demonstration of this bit of electronic wizardry called Aladin Pro, I was surprised to discover it used Professor Bühlmann's tables as its basis and, as well as an instruction manual, it also came with a set of Bühlmann tables.
Manufactured by UWATEC of Switzerland, the Aladin Pro is a robust, compact with a mounted dive computer.
It provides all the necessary information relating to actual depth, maximum depth time, no-stop time, decompression time, ascent rate warnings, surface interval, nitrogen clearance time, safe flying time and a recall for a scroll read out of the last nine dives.
Seeing my interest was now aroused, I was invited to try the unit myself on a day's diving.
I used the Aladin Pro on a series of shallow training dives.
After first working my times on my Bühlmann decompression work sheet, I found that the Aladin Pro complemented the SAA tables when diving defensively, though I must stress, I used the instrument as a backup to assist the previously worked out dive profiles.
After using the Aladin Pro, I was, to say the least, very impressed.
It fulfilled all functions and provided all the information that a diver needs in order to eliminate any possible problem areas encountered on a dive.
I especially liked the two stage, visual and audio, too fast ascent warnings.
Also, in the event of a decompression incident, it provides the chamber operator with an accurate record of dives done; something that the dive log does not always state in enough detail.
On handing back the computer I put aside any previous prejudices and purchased my own.
Now I would not like to be without it.
The Aladin Pro retails at £311 inclusive of VAT.
CAVE DIVING
5 Hours In Yorkshire's Bowels
The divers created artificial air bells in the roof of an alcove to swap valves from used tanks to fresh ones.
They were thousands of feet into the sump!
Gavin Newman was there to record a world record breaking cave dive.
The worst dive in the world?
Not an unreasonable way to describe a world record breaking dive just completed, not in the sunny Red Sea, or the idyllic Caribbean, but on our own doorstep — in the Yorkshire Dales.
The underwater connection of King Pot, in East Kingsdale, and Keld Head, in West Kingsdale, and the subsequent through dive, is a significant landmark in the history of underwater cave exploration in Britain and on a world scale.
It was Geoff Yeadon and Oliver Statham who made the first connection in the jigsaw, 12 years ago.
They dived from Kingsdale Master Cave to Keld Head, a distance of 1829 metres, setting Kingsdale firmly at the head of the world map.
Even at that time it was known, from dye tracing experiments, that the caves in East Kingsdale, particularly King Pot, were linked to Keld Head.
So the search for a route through was on.
While many people dabbled, it's a little known fact even in cave diving circles, that Geoff Yeadon, often diving alone, logged over 18,000 metres of diving looking for the King Pot inlet.
Back in 1980 Geoff Yeadon had told Geoff Crossley that it was his ambition to see King Pot and the East Kingsdale Master Cave, linked to West Kingsdale and Keld Head.
However he didn't think it would be done during his own diving career…
Very appropriate therefore, that 11 years later, it was to be Geoff Yeadon, at the age of 40, watched by Geoff Crossley, that linked the lines connecting the two caves.
A silent handshake across the joined lines, over 1.5 kilometres from base and at a depth of 30 metres, concluded over a decade of searching.
Yeadon had eventually found the King Pot inlet back in 1986.
But due to other commitments and the very constricted nature of the passage, it was not pursued at the time.
Towards the end of 1990, working from Kingsdale Master Cave, Crossley and Yeadon, joined by John Cordingley and Russell Carter, managed to force a route through into the King Pot main water.
The route was very tight and could only be passed using small cylinders.
Some sustained underwater excavation by Crossley and Yeadon, opened a route passable with big tanks, enabling exploration beyond.
While large enough, the new route, called Cobble Inlet, was still only 14–18 inches high, and comprised an intimidating series of squeezes for some 90 metres.
The two teams then ‘leapfrogged’ up the King Pot series, while Rupert Skorupka was doing some impressive dives downstream from the King Pot end.
The carry into this dive site was particularly tight, wet and nasty.
Once in the water the diving followed a tortuous corkscrewing route reaching a maximum depth of 34.5 metres.
Over a series of dives, Skorupka eventually reached a point some 420 metres from base at 30 metres depth.
So by June 1991, the two teams working from the West Kingsdale end, had pushed the end of the line to 1435 metres from base.
The surveys now indicated that the gap between the two lines should only be approximately 90 metres.
On 7 June it was Yeadon's and Crossley's day to dive.
After laying 95 metres of new line, Skorupka's line met and the connection was made.
As a fitting tribute to all his years of work towards this moment, it was to be Yeadon who finally tied the East and West Kingsdale lines together.
Because the connection was not made exactly half way between the two caves, this dive actually involved some 3.5 kilometres of diving.
It lasted six hours and five minutes and included two hours and 20 minutes of decompression!
So with the connection made, the through dive was on.
However the weather and other commitments meant this didn't take place until 3 August.
Starting at 6am, a team of 20 ‘sherpas’ carried tanks, valves, drysuits and other equipment, though the tortuous lower entrance to King Pot and on to the downstream sump.
Each diver kitted up with 470 cubic feet of air each in four tanks, two side mounted and two front mounted, breathing through Poseidon valves.
Northern Diver drysuits, five lamps, compasses, knives, depth gauges, watches, decompression tables, and Aladin Pro computers completed the equipment.
At 10.20am, Yeadon and Crossley disappeared into the King Pot sump pool.
They emerged, more than five hours later, into the sunlight at the Keld Head pool.
Because of the caves' varying depths, 25 minutes decompression was required before removing the two front mounted cylinders, and pushing them ahead through the 16 inch high Cobble Inlet passage.
Once rekitted, a long swim led to collecting a fifth tank, staged 900 metres from Keld Head the previous day.
Now wearing five tanks, the final distance to Keld Head took some two hours, including a one hour decompression stop, calculated by the Aladin computers 100 metres from the entrance!
At 3.1 kilometers, this dive is the longest underwater traverse of two cave systems in the world.
However it is not the distance, but the conditions under which it was achieved that set this dive apart.
On the through dive, visibility was never better than four feet and often zero; reading gauges, even with five lights, was impossible!
All other world class through dives have been made in places such as Florida, with crystal clear warm water and roomy passages, often using underwater scooters.
To swim a distance of 3.1 kilometres in five hours, with a solid roof and no air space above you, visibility often zero and only a thin nylon line to follow, must be most people's idea of the worst dive in the world…
With the Keld Head system now the longest underwater cave in Europe, at some 6.5 kilometres, what were Yeadon's and Crossley's thoughts on the dive:
‘Well if that's where the King Pot water was coming in, where's the Marble Steps Pot inlet…?
I suspect that time and a lot more work will tell.
Watch this space.
Looking calm and collected, Geoff Yeadon and Geoff Crossley appear from Keld Head after their world record breaking dive.
Sherpas ferry equipment to King Pot's lower entrance.
Above top: Geoff Yeadon counts up the empties.
Above: Yeadon and Crossley celebrate five hours in Yorkshire's bowels!
A major difficulty the divers faced was caused by a lack of valves.
Swapping valves from used tanks to fresh ones, thousands of feet into the sump, was neither easy nor desirable.
To stop muddy water getting into the valves, they had to find an alcove in the roof, and create an artificial air bell by opening a tank and filling the alcove with air.
Only then could the swop, from one tank to another, take place.
However UWI came to their rescue and provided enough extra valves to cover all tanks.
They also helped out with the Aladin Pro dive computers.
The divers would like to express their gratitude.
COMMERCIAL DIVING
For Safety's Sake
A diver jumped from a boat, landed on the anchor and fell into the sea.
Paralysed from the waist down, he was lucky to get out alive.
James Chapman looks at the advances that have since been made in diver deployment and recovery.
Diver deployment in the 90s, in the offshore oil and gas industry, has determined that divers should enter and leave the water in as safe and speedy a manner as possible.
This includes being able to recover an injured diver.
One particular incident occurred when an air diver jumped into the sea, and illustrates the need for these safety measures.
Instead of entering the water, he landed straddled on an anchor which was racked at the stern.
He then fell into the water, paralysed from the waist down.
The only way out was by climbing a ladder.
He had to pull himself up with help from other divers who pulled his umbilical, and anything else they could get hold of.
It was only after a considerable struggle that the diver was dragged to the deck.
This incident shows that diver deployment and recovery should be in a basket.
There are two distinct aspects to the offshore diving industry.
Diving up to 50 metres (165 feet) and diving in excess of that depth.
This is determined by the Diving Operations at Work Regulations 1981, which state that for diving operations below 50 metres, a diving bell will be used, and that divers shall breathe mixed gas.
This bell has to meet the requirements of schedule six of the DOWRs.
The configuration and deployment of diving bells is defined, but in the air range it is not clear cut and therefore controversial.
The most basic air diving deployment system is the open basket.
A box structure with steel mesh on three sides, it is lowered and lifted by a winch and ‘A’ frame.
It takes one or two divers with umbilicals that are paid out by tenders on the surface.
At depth, they leave the basket, swim to the work site and their umbilicals pass through the basket.
The length of these umbilicals means that, in most cases, the tender cannot tend the diver in the true sense, and may not be able to pull him back  in an emergency.
However, with two divers in the water at the same time, one can aid the other, and there is always the standby diver on the vessel, ready for immediate response.
But, because the umbilical goes through the basket, the diver can always find his way back.
And with divers on long bottom times, the supervisor needs them to return quickly to the basket, so that he can recover them for in-water decompression.
The basket also provides a limited safe haven since it carries one or two cylinders of compressed air.
If anything should happen to a diver's umbilical, mask or helmet, this air supply can be used, either through a demand valve, a hose connected by a quick connect, or a hose end fed up through the neck dam of the helmet.
The diver can then be recovered to the surface in a safe and controlled manner.
The wet bell, or open bell, is also common in the air range.
It is not a bell as described in schedule six, since it is open to the water.
But it does have a dome which holds a bubble of air giving a safe haven if needed.
This has proved itself with divers who have vomited in their mask or had mechanical failures and have had to remove their mask.
The bell is usually serviced by a main umbilical with individual diver umbilicals terminating in the bell.
It can carry three divers.
Two lock out and one stays inside to act as tender.
Alternatively, two divers can work from it while the standby diver remains on the surface.
When air divers are deployed from a dynamically positioned vessel (DP), either from a basket or wet bell, a tender will be inside to tend the umbilicals.
A DP vessel uses its main propellers and thrusters to remain on location, and a diver's umbilical must never be long enough to become fouled in them.
If this happens, it can be cut or drawn in, and the diver killed.
In most cases, divers working at those depths tend to reach the limits of maximum bottom time, and so a speedy assent to the surface is not desirable.
Divers in a bell are more easily controlled by the supervisor.
It gives a stable platform for in-water decompression, allowing accurate water stops.
As with the basket, divers are recovered from the water to the surface, where they transfer to the decompression chamber.
This surface interval between leaving the bell and entering the decompression chamber, became a point of contention within the medical profession.
Some believe that it is undesirable and that the diver should transfer under pressure.
To this end, the mini bell was designed.
It is neither a schedule six type bell, nor an open wet bell.
It is closer to the former but is restricted by dispensation to working in the 50 metre (165 feet) water depth.
It is lighter in weight and does not need the heavy winches and guide frame of the deep diving bells.
It also has an advantage in that it can be installed on the smaller air range diving support vessels.
The mini bell carries two divers, while the standby diver remains on the surface.
A main umbilical services the bell and the divers' individual umbilicals.
When the bell is deployed, the divers descend fully dressed.
At depth they feed out their umbilicals and swim to the work site.
They act as a standby for each other and can call the third diver if required.
After completing their dive, they re-enter the bell.
Once the inner door is closed and sealed, the bell is recovered to the surface and locked onto a decompression chamber.
The divers transfer under pressure to complete the decompression profile.
The bell can then be detached from the chamber and deployed with another pair of divers.
That the mini bell does not carry a tender, and the standby diver stays on the surface, caused a dispute among diving contractors.
So to improve safety, the umbili wheel was developed.
The divers' umbilicals are spooled on large wheels set vertically on either side of the bell.
These can be spooled in or out by the divers, from a control unit.
The supervisor has a similar control unit on the surface for emergencies.
All deep diving beyond 50 metres requires a schedule six diving bell which can carry two or three divers.
But one diver always remains in the bell to act as bellman and, in an emergency, lock out and go to the divers' aid.
Divers committed to saturation, enter the bell from the chambers and carry out checks.
This ensures everything works, valves are correctly positioned and that all the necessary equipment is carried.
When they are ready to be deployed, the doors of the bell and chamber are sealed.
The bell is then disconnected.
At depth, the inside pressure of the bell is equalised to the outside depth.
With the inner and outer doors open, the first diver dresses and locks out.
Once the first diver is stable, on a three man bell run the second diver does the same.
With the two umbilicals deployed, the bellman has the lonely task of remaining in the bell until the run is complete.
When the divers return, he coils up the umbilicals.
The inner door is closed and sealed, and the bell is lifted to the surface and locked onto the system.
The bell is serviced through a main umbilical, but carries gas cylinders on the outside for emergencies.
Its transponder means it can be located if it becomes detached from its lift wire and umbilical.
If the main communications fail, the divers return to the bell.
The supervisor can see from the depth gauge that they have made a seal, and contact between bell and supervisor would then be via a through water communications system.
All divers working in the North Sea use umbilicals.
They provide breathing gas to the helmet, communications wires, the hot water hose (this must not be used in air diving), a phunumofathometer (used to obtain the divers' depth), closed circuit television and light cables, and for mixed gas bell diving — a gas reclaim hose.
Now, diver deployment systems are accepted as normal offshore practise, and go a long way to making commercial diving safer.
Left: An air diver leaps into the water — now unacceptable as a method of diver deployment in the offshore oil and gas industry.
Inset: An air diver being deployed in a diving basket.
A schedule 6 mixed gas diving bell.
Note the emergency gas bottles on the side.
Trade Gossip
PC based chart plotter
PC Wayplanner, the innovative chart plotting and route planning software program from PC Maritime, is now in a new extended version.
Navigators can use PC Wayplanner for detailed route planning.
The program calculates route plans incorporating tidal stream, displays predicted ground track and indicates optimal departure, passage and rendezvous times.
It also calculates tidal heights for ports worldwide, and plots tidal height curves directly on screen.
The PC Wayplanner is economical and flexible since it runs on ordinary IBM-type personal computers.
The navigator can simply link his PC or laptop with an NMEA or Navstar 2000 series cable to a Decca, Loran, Satnav or GPS receiver, and the PC becomes a chart plotter.
The navigator can set waypoints by ‘pointing’ directly to positions on electronic charts on the PC's screen; no need for any key pressing.
He can also store waypoints with a descriptive name, not just a number, and transmit way points to the receiver when required.
This saves hours of time and greatly reduces errors caused by inaccurate key pressing.
Specialist users, such as divers, fishermen or charter skippers, can record and plot their own data on the Wayplanner electronic charts — for example, fishing ground information, wreck positions, seabed data — either onto the electronic charts supplied, or onto transparent overlay charts.
You can create your own large scale charts, with a geographic grid if desired, containing specialist detail not recorded on published charts.
This facility is especially useful where large scale charts are used with GPS for accurate position information.
PC Wayplanner costs £129.95.
Electronic charts are available in various area sets, and cost £80.
The NMEA interface cable costs £75; the Navstar 2000 interface costs £49.95.
Contact: PC Maritime Ltd., The Computer Complex, Somerset Place, Stoke, Plymouth, Devon PL3 4BB.
Tel:(0752) 550341.
Get Involved in Underwater Archaeology
The Nautical Archaeology Society are running a series of part 1 and part 11 courses at various places around the country.
Part 1 is a weekend course of illustrated lectures and a practical pool session that presents a broad-based introduction to the subject.
Part 11 consists of a series of more advanced lectures, building on the theory and techniques introduced in part 1.
They can be attended individually but are also offered as a weekend course.
In addition to the lectures, part 11 participants attend two days of conferences related to archaeology and undertake a short practical survey project.
Listed below are the courses that are already open for applicants.
More will be organised over the winter.
NAS course schedule 1991
An NAS part 1 course is an ideal way to become involved in underwater archaeology or simply satisfy your curiosity as to what it's all about.
All the principal tutors of NAS courses are actively engaged in fieldwork or research and many of the venues offer the opportunity to visit museums, historic monuments, ships, archaeological laboratories or maritime museums.
First Aid Kit
For those who participate in relatively high risk sports such as diving, a good first aid kit should be essential.
Although, too often people rely on out of date and inadequate equipment.
Specialist diving equipment distributor, Sea & Sea, has produced a purpose designed first aid box for divers and other water users.
The kit is housed in a tough, high impact polycarbonate polymer briefcase.
A silicone O-ring ensures the case is airtight and completely sealed.
There is a choice of seven sizes so it will fit any space.
Typically, each kit will include bandages, plasters, emergency survival blanket, burns kit and non-prescription drugs.
Prices start at £35 for the basic medical kit, and cases cost from £175.
For further details on specific first aid boxes contact: Vic Bonfante at Sea & Sea, on (0803) 663012.
Versatile Format
Photech Engineering Ltd. has produced an underwater housing system for format cameras which allows the user to start with a basic housing system and build on it, take full advantage of their camera system and even to change camera systems altogether at a relatively small cost.
Constructed in magnesium/aluminium alloy, the housing is linked to the camera via a processing unit which controls the camera functions.
Discrete servo motor units operate each camera control and linked into the system is an LED unit which displays present set shutter speed, present set aperture, present set focused distance and exposure count.
In addition, the LED display shows a battery state indicator and a warning light which indicates water ingress into the housing system.
The housing is designed to handle all major makes of medium format camera, although other camera systems can be accommodated to special order, and it can take lenses from 40mm to 120mm macro.
Additional items which make the system even more versatile include a flat port for normal and close-up photography, dome port for wide angle photography and extension sections which effectively lengthen the housing and allow the use of additional lenses, and lenses with extension tubes.
The standard housing comes with a flat viewing port giving a reversed viewfinder image looking vertically down into the housing.
A reflex prism finder is supplied as an add on extra.
Because all controls and control units are connected by flexible wires, controls can be grouped conveniently around the handles.
This enables smooth changing of controls.
Since full control state information is displayed in the viewfinder port of the housing, the photographer can keep both hands on the housing and the eyes on the viewfinder port, concentrating on picture taking rather than housing operation.
For more information contact: Photech Engineering Ltd., Bryn Arthur, Penisarwaun, Nr.
Caernarfon, Gwynedd LL55 3BT.
Black Box Recovered
More than 11 years after it mysteriously crashed with the loss of 81 lives, the black box flight recorder of an Italian DC9 airliner has been recovered from waters 3,400 metres deep off the Italian coast.
British offshore survey contractor, Wimpol, located the device in the Tyrrhenian sea, just north of the island of Ustica, during a wider search for wreckage from the aircraft.
Previous explorations, in 1987 and 1988, failed to discover anything that could help explain why the plane crashed on its routine flight from Bologna to Palermo in June 1980.
Since the project started, many pieces of DC9 wreckage have been discovered.
The flight recorder itself was positively identified on 13 July, partially buried on the seabed, and was successfully lifted onto the deck of the support vessel, Valiant Service, five days later.
The recorder is being transported inside a specially fabricated container to the Air Accident Investigation branch of the Department of Transport at Farnborough, where the data it contains will be processed.
Further photo-documentation of the wreckage is now under way, and the team expect that more evidence will be lifted on the cause of the crash.
Cylinder Protectors
Helios (Safety & Rescue Products) Ltd., announces the launch of a new generation of cylinder protectors.
Made in tough, impact absorbing braided netting, Helios cylinder protectors encompass a full range of cylinder sizes catering for the needs of all breathing apparatus and Scuba users — and in a range of colours including blue, red and yellow.
Theses cylinder protectors will stay tight on the cylinder, giving effective protection from impacts and scratches.
Yet they are quick to drain and dry.
They are resistant to cleaning agents and chemicals and allow cylinder markings to be easily read.
These protectors are compatible with most cylinder mounting kits, very robust and economic in service.
Helios cylinder nets are available from authorised dealers.
They retail at around £14 with a no quibble 12 month guarantee.
Helios protectors displace the need for a cylinder boot and other protective coverings.
Exclusive to Coral Marine Seapen Books
Coral Marine have been appointed exclusive distributors in the UK and Eire for Seapen books.
This includes Shlomo Cohen's Diver's Guides.
There are four titles in this range; the Red Sea, Cayman Islands, Bahamas, and the upper Florida Keys.
These guides ensure that divers travelling to these destinations do not miss any of the best dive sites.
The Red Sea guide is illustrated with full colour aerial photographs with overlays showing suggested underwater routes.
The other guides have detailed 3-D illustrations of the landscape and dive sites, giving suggested routes, as well as points of particular interest to note on the dive.
Each guide also includes full colour underwater photographs illustrating the marine life you could expect to see.
And they are useful reference books.
Each one gives a history of the area, a list of all the local dive operators and the services they offer, as well as many other useful names and addresses including photographic specialists.
The recommended retail price is £13.99.
Trade enquiries are welcome.
For further information contact: Coral Marine, Broadway House, 21 Broadway, Maidenhead, Berks SL6 1JK.
Tel:(0628) 810654.
Fax:(0628) 770892.
News in Brief 
Log-It Have Moved
Log-It Design and Marketing, manufacturers of diving logbooks, have moved to: 67 Avon Road, Devizes, Wiltshire SN10 1PS.
Tel:(0380) 724546.
Log-It wish to apologise to its customers for any inconvenience this move may have caused.
PADI — Expulsions
To help ensure diving community safety, PADI now publish the names of PADI divemasters, assistant instructors and instructors who have been suspended or expelled from PADI, and therefore may no longer teach PADI courses or issue PADI certifications.
The names are listed in PADI's member magazine, The Undersea Journal.
Divers wishing to verify whether an instructor is qualified to teach PADI courses, can call Karl Shreeves on:(714) 540 7234.
One Stop Shopping
69 Diving offers divers a showroom for the world's best diving equipment.
All items are kept in stock, plus necessary facilities and services are in-house.
After seven months in business, 69 Diving are now expanding to enlarge their range to cover everything the individual diver or club could require.
Phase one of this expansion is nearly complete and will increase the diving retail space to 2,500 square feet.
Phase two will expand this space still further and will take place this year.
Contact: 69 Diving, 59–61 High Street, Ewell, Surrey KT17 1RX.
Tel:(081) 786 7821.
Gill Net Phone-in
An investigation into the use and effects of synthetic gill nets around the coast of England and Wales is being undertaken by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
A previous study into gill net use and its effects in southwest England revealed a minimum of 1,800 birds had drowned between 1988 and 1991.
To help investigate gill net use and bird deaths elsewhere around the coast, the Society has set up a confidential phone line.
Dr Nancy Harrison, RSPB marine policy officer, said: ‘Any information about the use of gill nets and the effects they have on marine life, will help us to understand the true extent and nature of the problem, and to identify any trouble spots.’
Anyone who has any information should ring Sandy on:(0767) 680551 and ask for the Gill Net Hot-line, or write to Dr Nancy Harrison, RSPB Marine Policy Officer, RSPB, The Lodge, Sandy, Bedfordshire SG19 2DL.
COMPETITION
Get Beavering And Win A Drysuit!
Well, stone the beavers, it's another fabulous drysuit offer.
This month's prize has been donated by Beaver, one of Britain's foremost manufacturers of suits.
For those who want to get wet but stay dry, simply answer the three easy questions below, and then spot the fish to win Beaver's superb Iceberg drysuit.
Beaver claim that this is a top quality suit.
It is made from 8mm DAIWA neoprene.
This has a micro-cellular construction that gives great comfort and flexibility, yet won't tear or separate.
The suit comes complete with dimpled knee pads, thigh pocket, moulded sure grip soled boots, heel protectors, and a separate hood.
It also has a heavyweight dry back zip, and soft DAIWA neoprene wrist and neck seals.
There is a range of 12 sizes, meaning there's a suit to accurately fit almost everyone.
So why pay extra and wait longer for one that's made-to-measure?
It comes in black and blue, or black and red, as standard, but there is also a range of 225 colour combinations.
Options include a knife sheath, or an additional pocket, a dimpled seat patch and a front convenience zip.
Now you know the details, fill in the entry form and return it to Scuba World no later than 1 November 1991.
Winners will be notified by telephone,(if appropriate), so please include your work number if that's where you will be.
Entries on photocopies of this page will not be accepted.
The editor's decision is final in all matters relating to the competition.
Send to: Dry As A Beaver, 18 Market Street, Poole, Dorset BH15 1NF.
ENTRY FORM
Answer the three questions below and then look at the photograph on the right.
All you have to do is spot the fish.
In this case, it is a two foot pike.
So, is it lurking in the weeds or is it swimming behind the photographer?
It could be neither.
Put an X on the spot where you think its eye should be.
Scuba World in its magnanimity has given you five chances to get it right.
Who says we are not generous.
1.
When we say that Beaver is giving away an iceberg we do not mean a lettuce.
What do we mean?
2.
Name three features of Beaver's top quality competition prize.
3.
How many standard sizes do Beaver offer and why is this important?
Now put your five Xs on the photograph and spot that fish!
Name: Address: Daytime tel:
QUIZ
Questions &…
By Dave Thomas
You've got to be green today, it seems.
But how does the conservation, anti-pollution stance affect divers?
Are we delicate mistletoe, paying lip service to the green theme, or full-blown Lincoln green?
Once, fellow divers would be envious if you brought a nice-sized crab to the surface.
Now it's likely someone in the boat will say: ‘Put it back,’ or: ‘You should have left it alone.’
Spearfishing went out long ago, branded as cruelty (and one of our senior club members can testify not just for that reason.
He had a spear stuck in his face).
So how long is it before social pressure makes it a case of look — but don't touch?
There are plans to ban powerboats from their last refuge in the Lake District, Windermere, because of pollution, bank erosion and safety.
So is it ridiculous to predict a time when amateurs' dive boats are banned from some areas of our coastline under similar arguments?
Whenever crab and lobster pots produce a sparse harvest, fishermen don't blame themselves for looting the sea bed — it's those damned divers again.
And it is always us who are rowdies in the pub, who choke harbour fronts with gear, and are heard swearing and shouting among the seaside trippers — never the local yobs, is it.
So are restrictions about to tighten like a drysuit seal around our necks?
Will we forever be free to roam the underwater kingdom, to bring home our supper?
Or am I just a moaning old crone?
If that's not enough for you to think about, try these questions.
1.
What is the valsalva manoeuvre?
Is it
a:
The smearing of vaseline on drysuit cuffs to help get them on;
b:
Buddy breathing at depths below 30 metres or
c:
Clearing your ears to cope with pressure changes.
2.
Why is it important to vent the fuel tank before setting off on a boat dive?
3.
Feeling a bit nervous before a deep dive?
Caution is a good sign, but why shouldn't you have a fag to calm your nerves?
4.
It's hard work pumping up the inflatable with a foot pump, so why not use someone's drysuit inflator instead?
5.
It sounds like the most boring radio show, but the shipping forecast is vital to seagoers.
Do you know where the following areas are?
a:
Sole
b:
Trafalgar;
c:
Malin.
6.
You've hired a hard boat — at great cost — but the skipper insists the weather is too bad to reach your planned site.
He says he'll take you somewhere else.
Is he just being awkward?
7.
An easy way to impress novices is by quoting the latin names of various sea creatures.
But there's one which is a doddle to remember.
What is it?
8.
If asked to ‘zip me up’ by a drysuit diver, why is it a good idea to offer him the loop of the closed zip afterwards?
9.
There is no need to worry if someone asks you to ‘pull down the elephant's trunk’— why?
10.
Where will you find the following famous dives?
a:
The Hispania;
b:
Wolf Rock;
c:
The Green Holes.
Answers
1.
c. 2.
If you don't, the boat could stop suddenly as fuel dries up, owing to the vacuum created in the tank.
The sudden jerk could throw someone overboard.
The tank itself could split, spilling fuel over the boat and leaving none left to get home! 3.
Cigarettes increase the carbon monoxide level in the blood.
If your fill is also a bit dodgy you're more susceptible to CO poisoning, with the risk of blacking out underwater.
4.
Have you ever heard an inflatable go B-A-N-G!!!
Inflatables do not need great pressure to keep them hard enough for the sea.
They are just not built to take 232 bar and can be heard three miles away when they blow.
5. a: South West of Land's End; b: Off the coast of mid-South Portugal c: off Northern Ireland, West Scotland and Cumbria.
6.
No, he's perfectly right.
The skipper is legally responsible for your safety and has the final say over where you go.
He could be sued or even prosecuted if anything went wrong.
7.
The conger eel.
Latin name…conger conger! 8.
So he can give it a final tug to check it is closed.
If he then gets wet, he can't blame you! 9.
It's the name given to the bilge drain tube on inflatables. 10. a: The Sound of Mull; b: Seven miles southwest of Land's End; c: At Doolin on the west coast of Ireland.
UK DIVING
Obandoned to pleasure
This is the point of view of one novice who discovered that diving offers much more than a free lunch, but should never be taken without tissues.
Fiona Conacher dives Oban.
After a particularly strenuous session of mask clearing, we took off our masks.
Confronted by a vista of happy, smiling snot-encrusted faces, I took a deep breath, stuck my face under water and removed the hangovers.
I was not told that mask clearing displaces everything!
Neither was I told to examine in minute detail, every blade of grass that my kit was to come in contact with.
And Seil Island is memorable, partly for the vast piles of dog dirt banked against the dive site.
I learnt things that are neither discussed in manuals nor by hardened divers who have seen it all before.
For instance, if the person next to you in the pool starts frothing and fizzing, it means that his ‘O’ ring has probably broken.
Running away from him in fins is not only impossible, it is also rather unfair.
And kit.
Kit is very important.
To turn a compass bezel with fingers resembling a pound of pork sausages is not easy.
Men's gloves with short fingers do not equal women's gloves.
However, the one thing I was most emphatically told, was that learning to dive was going to be fun.
The people who said it were telling the truth.
But when I said I was doing it in Scotland, people just shivered.
On this point they were quite wrong.
Duncan and Avis McKelvie, who run the Puffin Dive School in Oban, have a very sensible attitude towards diver training.
They put all their divers in drysuits.
I cannot think of one argument against staying warm and dry.
Not even for novices.
Besides the Gulf Stream runs past Oban and the water is a good three degrees warmer than Scotland's east coast.
So fears of cutting the ice before diving in, should be cast aside.
I was to study the PADI five day open water course and two day advanced course.
Puffin itself, is right next door to at least two dive sites and within a short drive of many more.
This is ideal for novices who have to complete five open water dives plus a vast amount of in-school and confined water learning, in only five days.
Time was tight and none was wasted.
Designed by educational psychologists in America, PADI aims to present necessary information in an easily  digestible form.
Each point is clearly and simply made and reinforced seven times.
So by the time each chapter has been read, the questions after each section answered, the knowledge review after each module completed, the final quiz and the video and class lectures undertaken, you know it pretty well.
On the first morning we studied module one, and that afternoon did our first confined water dive in Gallanach Port, just a five minute drive from the school.
So, snug in woolly bear and dry suit, smirking with excitement, I attached my lung and all the other necessities to my BCD.
With weight belt, ankle weights and all the rest of the clobber, I struggled to remember the buddy checks.
Buoyancy, Weights, Air, Releases, Friend.
We all had problems remembering it.
Anyway, it became Big Willies Are Rarely Found.
The truth is always simpler.
Duncan briefed us on what was to take place and we staggered backwards into the harbour, barking like seals and standing on each others fins.
And of course with hoods on you can't hear the poor soul behind you squeaking indignantly as you work your way up their ankles.
We went through several of the basics, including regulator retrieval and buoyancy control.
And at the end of the session we were taken for a tow round the harbour.
Duncan is testament to the sturdiness of the Scots.
Dragging two novices with buoyancy problems looking excitedly at everything on the bottom, must have taken some stamina.
But that first dive gave me the taste.
And I wanted to do much more.
To actually see crabs scuttling across the floor and live sponges and even real live fish was astonishing.
I had only ever seen them in a tank or on a slab and this was totally different.
To see them within their realm, led me to understand why divers go on and on about fish and viz. And the viz was good.
Most of the dives that week had at least 10 metres.
One was 15.
But it was not to be a happy underwater sampling session.
I was there to learn to dive and it was not without its problems.
In particular— mask clearing.
I hated it then and I hate it now.
I think of it with loathing and dread; have visions of designing the no-need-to-clear-mask and then return to reality.
It was one of those unfortunate, ghastly necessities.
Every sport has one.
As soon as the cold water hit my sinuses, I started to gag and panic.
I finned madly for the surface, and was told off very severely for making an ascent like a pricked balloon.
But eventually I got it right, I had to — I couldn't do the advanced course without the basic one under my belt.
And besides, the diving was so spectacular.
There is so much life in this area.
I saw my first queenie, chomping through a loch, and discovered that laughing underwater is a bad idea.
There were huge crabs everywhere, starfish with thick meaty arms, forests of kelp — tall enough to swim through, plaice and gurnards.
There were sunstars, spotty pipefish, peacock worms shrinking into their tubes, orangy-yellow deadmans fingers and brittlestars.
But everywhere we dived there were jellyfish.
Either tiny and transparent with pretty violet rings, or lion's manes with long brown, stinging, tatty  tentacles ; a hazard, but through a novice's eyes, an exciting one.
Doing the advanced course directly after the basic was an excellent idea.
It compounded what had been learnt, and gave the opportunity to learn new skills through five different types of dive.
We had studied some navigation but now had the chance to try it out in more detail.
At Dunollie Point, where the bottom and the life varies considerably, we looked at natural navigation using the bottom, the current, the life, and at how you could use kick cycles, and time, to determine distance covered.
We searched for, and retrieved, an ancient, rotting tyre from the bottom of Gallanach Port, using various knots and a lifting bag.
We also did a deep dive, to 30 metres, at Easdale Quarry on Seil Island.
Actually the best bit was the giant stride in, which was about fifteen feet high.
There was a night dive in Loch Etive, and the phosphorescence was spectacular.
Duncan said it was the best that he had ever seen.
Every movement brought delicate, twitching sparks dancing from fingers, masks and fins.
This was most people's favourite dive.
But mine was the drift dive at Cregan Narrows.
We swam out perpendicular to the two to three knot current, until we were in its heart.
And then let go.
With perfect buoyancy we lay in the current, drifting at no mean speed through the long fronds of kelp, angling our bodies to follow the curves of the bottom.
We could turn, duck, stop, or simply lay back and enjoy.
It was armchair diving — so comfortable, so relaxed, so delightfully lazy.
It was also the fifth and last dive of the advanced course.
I fully intend to return.
The diving was beyond belief.
But what made it so was the school, and the way the courses were taught.
The classes were small.
There were seven of us on the basic course, but Duncan and Lachlan, a divemaster, took us out in two groups.
On the advanced course there were only three of us.
The information was presented clearly and concisely.
Safety was paramount.
It was constantly stressed that we are now only qualified to dive in the conditions in which we learnt, that we should always go out with people of greater experience, and that with recreational diving (which PADI stress this diving is), you never go deeper than 30 metres unless you have a specific reason, i.e. a wreck.
But never for the hell of it.
Besides, all the life is higher up.
These courses gave me enough enthusiasm for the sport to want to join a club.
I would have no hesitation in recommending either Puffin Dive School, or the dive sites to anyone.
Diving is great fun!
Putting into  practice what has been taught in the classroom, Fiona strides in.
Left: Back to school at the Puffin Dive Centre.
Three students are taken through the lectures that lead to certification.
Above: Confidence building exercises are mastered in the swimming pool.
Right: Discovering marine life in its natural setting; there was plenty to see in Oban's waters.
Photographs by Andrew Mounter.
identifying AQUATIC LIFE
The Ocellated, the Green & the Black-Tailed Wrasse
Wrasse labridae are an extremely common family of fish, with some 600 identified species worldwide.
Generally active by day, wrasse are some of the most colourful and strikingly marked fish.
We only have half a dozen species in our coastal waters, but the Mediterranean supports about twenty varieties.
However, it seems there are many, many more, because fish of different sex, age and emotional state often have completely different colourings and markings.
Most of these species of wrasse are commonly seen by divers in shallow coastal waters.
The Black-Tailed Wrasse
crenilabrus melanocercus
This is a small, oval shaped wrasse, with only the largest of male specimens growing up to 14 centimetres in length.
It has relatively large eyes and a small mouth, with small sharp teeth on both upper and lower jaws.
The adult male's back and flanks are azure blue, shading to yellowish on the belly.
But the characteristic marking of this fish is the broad vertical band covering the tail fin, which is edged with white.
Females and young are pinkish-brown, or chestnut above to rosy-yellow beneath.
It is found in the shallows in the sea grass meadows, at depths of only 1–6 metres.
And it feeds by day, mainly on small crustacea, worms and molluscs.
Some young act as ‘cleaners’, picking off fungus and animal parasites that infest the skin of the host fishes.
This cleaning takes place at a definite cleaning station, usually by a large rock or near some other bold feature on the sea bed.
The fish to be cleaned hang motionless in the water, gill covers open and fins spread, waiting for attention.
Breeding takes place from spring to mid summer.
The Ocellated Wrasse
crenilabrus ocellatus
Oval in shape, this is a small, deep bodies wrasse.
The average female specimen grows to about 10 centimetres in length, and the male 3–4 centimetres longer.
It has a pointed head, a medium sized eye, a small mouth with prominent lips, and the upper jaw is slightly longer than the lower.
The body scales are large and the front gill cover is finely toothed.
The male's basic coloration is chiefly moss green, with a bluish-violet spot outlined in red on the rear gill cover.
Horizontal rows of blue and green spots are on the flanks and belly.
The background coloration of females in breeding condition, is a greenish-brown with two brown stripes along the flanks, and a lighter off-white belly.
The spot on the gill cover is present, but not clearly defined and not edged in blue or red.
Both sexes have a small black spot in the midline at the base of the tail stalk.
In the late spring, the colourful male builds a nest of seaweed and entices a ripe female to lay her eggs in it.
He then stands guard until the eggs hatch and the fry disperse.
This wrasse is very common and is found in a variety of habitats — on sea grass meadows, amongst rocks on harbour walls or piers, or on rocky outcrops.
But usually in depths from 5–20 metres.
Like many species of wrasse, the ocellated wrasse is quite bold if approached with care.
When nest building, he will return to his nest with bits of weed to cement it into place, even when the diver is only a few inches away.
Inquisitive and trusting, it will often follow divers that disturb the sea bed with their fins, readily feeding on small animals or any other edible matter dislodged.
The Green Wrasse
labrus turdus
Large and secretive, this wrasse has a long body of up to 45 centimetres.
Like most wrasse, it is known to change sex (from female to male), but it is unlikely that any can function as male and female at the same time.
All green wrasse shorter than 28 centimetres are female, but above 38 centimetres they are exclusively male.
This wrasse has a large mouth, fleshy lips, a single row of conical shaped teeth, and a relatively small eye.
Coloration is very variable.
Sometimes it is completely green with emerald or white spots, or it can be yellowish-green with a white band running from eye to tail, or even orange or wine-red with white stripes and spots and no green at all.
It is thought to spawn in the winter and early spring.
Found on rocky coastal areas, younger wrasse live only a few metres deep, while larger specimens can be found deeper than 15 metres.
This is a very timid wrasse and only swims short distances in open water, between patches of seagrass or around the edges.
It will instantly vanish into cover if disturbed, but when resting, it has a habit of lying on its side on the bottom.
If found like this, it is usually easily approached.
Like most wrasse, the green wrasse is carnivorous and feeds by day on tiny edible morsels in the water, small crustacea, worms, molluscs and other small bottom living creatures.
Far left: The black-tailed wrasse.
Left and centre top: Male ocellated wrasse nest building.
Top right: The green wrasse.
SAA COMMUNICATIONS
NEWS UPDATE
Could you do the job?
Is there anybody brave enough to take on the post of SAA Executive Secretary?
At the time of going to press, not one person has been nominated for this post.
The SAA are looking for a secretary who preferably has the following skills: Typing, proven administrative ability, being able to take minutes of meetings and with good organisational skills.
It's  hard work ; you'll have to give up some of your weekends and you won't be paid, other than expenses!
Remember, two club committee signatures are required for the nomination of Executive Secretary.
Please contact the Electoral Secretary or Bill Baker on 0703 444308.
Drinking and Diving A Must!
With the end of the season in sight it is always worthwhile looking at the trends in diving accidents that have occurred.
The South West Region plays host to a vast number of divers all over the country.
I am pleased to announce that no decompression fatalities have been reported to DDRC this year.
However Dave Crockford tells me that a trend is becoming apparent!
Despite staying well within the limits and depths of recognised dive tables, divers are still getting bent.
This is a worrying trend particularly when one considers that the experts at DDRC cannot as yet offer an explanation.
An increasing number of bent divers this year have shown signs of dehydration.
The connection between dehydration and the bends is now quite clear.
Combating dehydration should be considered by all divers so have a good intake of fluid before each dive.
Accidents to date include:
Air Embolisms — 3
Type 2 Bend — 19
Type 1 Bend — 9
In addition, Dave tells me that the centre has also treated a number of carbon monoxide poisonings and gas gangrene injuries — fortunately, both from causes other than diving.
Vic Bonfante, SW Regional Rep.
Words of Warning
Remember to follow the code
Divers build up your experience before diving offshore, get fit, keep fit.
Make sure that your equipment functions correctly and that your craft, engine and trailer are maintained.
Carry the necessary ancillary equipment needed to make your visit to the offshore dive site pleasurable.
Before diving offshore, get local knowledge or join up with a club who has dived the site previously.
Ask at the local dive shop.
Know the state of the tide and strength of current; never dive for the sake of it.
Wait until conditions offer a safe enjoyable dive.
Cover boats can lose sight of divers — use surface marker buoys, carry in-water flares, make sure your whistle works and is loud enough to be heard by others.
Coxswains, keep a look out at all times, fly the A flag when divers are down.
You should have attended a boat-handling, oxygen admin. and a radio/telephone course/examination.
Contact the coastguard immediately if the situation warrants it.
Know the location of the nearest phone and doctor beforehand.
Milford Haven coastguards are very concerned with the way that some divers are pursuing their sport.
I met with the station officers at St Anne's Head in June of this year and informed them of the way that divers should be operating.
Unfortunately many are not.
Over the weekend of 10/11 August, I was involved in the search for the two divers who went missing because their club was not following the code of practice worded above.
They were lucky to be found!
Bill Burdett, DO Gwent Adventurers, RYA Examiner, Aux.
Coastguard .
MARINE BIOLOGY
Sail Ahoy
Alan Major concentrates on the closely related sailfish and swordfish families.
Read on to find out more about these appropriately named fish.
The sailfish is generally credited as the world's fastest fish.
It is built for speed.
The body is long and slender, with a pointed head and it has a long pointed snout that forms a ‘bill’.
Rounded in cross-section, this gives the impression of a tapering spear penetrating the water without resistance.
The tail, or caudal fin, is large and sickle-shaped, to give short, rapid bursts of speed.
The vertebrae of the vertebral column are tightly interlocked, creating a rigid foundation for the tail muscles.
These are powerfully developed and, with the caudal fin, achieve a swift forward thrust.
It gets its name from the very large, sail-like, first dorsal fin.
The middle rays of this spiny fin are longer than the depth of the fish's body.
The second dorsal fin, near the tail, is much smaller.
The ‘sail’ is important.
When speeding along it is folded and lies in a deep groove along the back.
The long, slender pelvic fins are drawn up flush with the underside of the body, while the pectoral fins lie flat against the sides.
Hence the uninhibited speed.
As the sailfish's quick burst ends, it erects its ‘sail’ to prevent it from rolling and yawing.
It seems its very high speeds are only achieved occasionally, when pursuing food or escaping, and it normally cruises at about a third or a half of its rapid dashes.
The sailfish can grow to 12 feet (3.6 metres) and weigh 275 pounds (125 kilogrammes), but the average is smaller, weighing around 70 pounds.
It is quite an attractively coloured species; dark blue on the upper parts, becoming paler until white or silver on the lower parts.
The sides frequently have vertical bars or spots.
The ‘sail’ or dorsal fin is a bright cobalt blue with black, round or oval spots.
The timing of these and other fast fish is full of difficulties.
One ingenious method was the fishometer; a gadget fitted to the rods of fishermen fishing for big game species such as marlin.
This recorded the speed at which the line went out.
Other methods have included timing the swimming fish from the known speed of the ship the fish is passing or circling, and filming the speeding fish and calculating its speed by comparing its position on each frame of the film.
Yet another method was to harness the fish, with a thin silk cord that unwound over a large pulley, actuating an electric relay once every revolution.
The snag is — first you must harness the fish.
However, using a method similar to this, a sailfish was timed on a thin, loose line.
It covered 100 yards in three seconds which means a speed of nearly 70 miles an hour!
There are ten species in the sailfish family.
These include spearfish, marlin, and swordfish.
The Pacific sailfish is the largest, up to 12 feet, closely followed by the American sailfish.
The sailfish is found worldwide in tropical oceans, at the edge of coastal waters and in the open sea.
It is migratory and follows the seasonal warming of the water.
It preys on squid and smaller fish which occur in surface waters.
The swordfish family has a much longer, slender snout than the sailfish.
This is flattened like a sword, hence the name.
Both have small, numerous teeth in their upper and lower jaws.
But in the swordfish these extend onto the lower surface of the ‘sword’.
There are two theories about this sword.
Either it is an unusual example of stream-lining or, it is what it looks like, a weapon.
The swordfish, like the sailfish, will follow a school of fish for a considerable distance before it decides to attack.
It then does so with tremendous activity, threshing with lateral movements of the sword among the fish.
Those that are wounded and stunned will be consumed by the swordfish at leisure, circling round any that start to sink.
Its diet consists of herring, mackerel, pilchard, rats-tails and argentines, also squid, and, as it will go down to 610 metres (334 fathoms) deepwater species.
The swordfish's dorsal fin is very different to the sailfish's, since it is high in front but much shorter as it curves towards the tail.
It has a wide space between it and the tiny, second dorsal fin.
The swordfish does not have pelvic fins.
It can reach 16 feet (4.9 metres) in length, but the average is between six and nine feet (two and three metres).
There is only one swordfish,xiphias gladius .
Its upper parts are a greyish-blue, turning paler blue lower down to whitish on the belly.
All the fins are dark grey.
The swordfish is usually found in tropical and subtropical areas.
It is not common in European waters, but since it is a migrant fish it has been seen.
It is usually solitary and occasionally found in pairs, except for the breeding season when schools are formed.
When it is caught in British waters, the event does not go unnoticed and there have been some large examples recorded.
In July 1893, one was caught as far north as the Firth of Forth.
It was eight feet and two inches long and the sword measured two feet and five inches.
What happens to British examples is unknown, but it has been consumed as a delicacy in Europe and North America for centuries.
The swordfish is also known to reach high speeds.
These have mostly been calculated from the speed and force needed to embed swords in wooden hulled ships and boats; a speed of 57.6 miles per hour (92.7 kilometres per hour) has been calculated from a penetration of 22 inches.
Both the British Museum and the Natural History Museum have sections of ship's timbers with swords embedded in them.
There is no doubt that swordfish have succeeded in piercing the bottom planking of boats, but if any were ever sunk in this way is unknown.
Even so, if you see the ‘sail’ of a sailfish, or the ‘sword’of a swordfish coming straight towards you, it might be wise to take avoiding action.
Just think what your insurers would say: ‘Sunk by a swordfish.
Pull the other one.’
DIVING HOLIDAYS
I Came, I Saw, I Conserved
Watching but not touching; Chris Howes' dream becomes reality at Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
Australia's Great Barrier Reef is a diver's Mecca, in everyone's dreams — and if not, then it should be.
Everything that Britain is, the reef is not.
In particular, it's not cold, not murky and not cold, cold or cold.
It is a diver's paradise, and while it might cost a lot of pennies to get there, good value for money can be waiting — if you know what to watch out for.
The Great Barrier Reef stretches from the extreme north-east of Australia, down past Queensland's Daintree forest and undeveloped coast, to peter out some 2,000 kilometres to the south.
It is not a continuous, unbroken strip of coral, but a series of some 3,000 reefs, interspersed with navigable openings leading shorewards.
The overall effect is that the main swell of the ocean is broken, leaving calmer water inside.
But this is no lagoon, and rough weather still has its effect.
After all, in places the main reef is 100 kilometres or more offshore.
A week before I was there, storms lashed the coastline — diving would have been miserable, even if possible.
The week after, there was a millpond under a vivid blue sky — with matching hammerhead shark cruising the northern limits.
My few days were intermediate — cloudy, rough, with the reef and turbid water yet to fully recover.
It happens!
The city of Cairns is the diving centre of the reef.
It's a small settlement, crouched before a fringing ring of cloud covered mountains.
Warm, wet Pacific air rolls landward and dumps its load of water here, maintaining the rain forest.
Folk I met said that Cairns was changing fast.
That is believable; modern shop fronts slot between older paint-peeling wood, newly paved shopping precincts delve between buildings that rise above the predominantly two storey surroundings.
Yet, there is still character — Cairns is likeable.
With the diving you've got a few decisions to make — some things to avoid, some personal choice — and it's worth getting it right.
First, book your diving before leaving Britain.
It is easy to walk through the Cairns doorway, hand over your money, and go diving a couple of days later.
But, you might find the trip you want is full, and you have to go for another.
However, choosing locally can allow you to top up with extra dives.
With time at your disposal, this is easy.
The choice is enormous and there are several very good training schools.
The sheer size of the reef needs consideration, though.
If you are land-based, diving by day you might get two dives in daylight hours for your money, both of these on relatively inshore coral heads.
A lot of boat time for a couple of dives, and you've also got overnight accommodation in Cairns to pay for.
Definitely to be avoided, are the general purpose, one day, cheap trips.
These take you, plus snorkellers and sightseers, on a very limited excursion which is unlikely to suit a serious diver.
You could go for a live-aboard holiday.
These cost more, but you get accommodation and food in with the price, plus around five dives a day.
That, and being taken further up the reef, for three to four days, is the real bonus — highly recommended.
The Takaroa, operated by Cairns Underwater Camera Centre, is one such operation.
The boat is 17 metres long, and was purpose built for diving in 1981.
She uses sail to supplement the engine, making a fine sight against an azure sky.
Small groups of divers, no more than twelve, are taken northwards by the Takaroa, to the ‘famous’ Cod Hole.
Only a few charter companies reach this, and a visit to Cod Hole on Ribbon Reef Ten is pushed heavily as a selling point of any trip.
Here, the potato cod congregate in one area, attracted by the possibility of food.
Swimming with these giant fish (some weigh 100 kilogrammes) is an experience to remember, as long as you don't waggle fingers enticingly.
Food is food, after all!
From there, a succession of dives fill you with awe.
The water is normally like crystal and, if you are used to British waters, it is strange to see bubbles from other divers, rising like plumes some 40 or 50 metres away.
The reefs rise, luxurious, from the deeper sandy bed where manta and white tipped shark roam.
You would be unlucky not to see shark, but these are no problem if you don't disturb them.
You have the choice; dive deep in search of these creatures, or shallow (and longer) in the dappled sunlight with the corals and fish.
You only feel the surge and turbulence of the ocean in about the top metre, so you can stay with the life and sunshine with ease.
There are over 1,500 species of fish here, and what must be many thousands of invertebrates.
These are part of the fascination of the reef; the sunlit upper portions are rich in life.
Colours are varied — there are the velvet blues and violent reds of sponges, contrasted with the whites, yellows and browns of the corals.
Giant clams, green-fringed with an extended mantle, tuck down between the rocks.
These are the shellfish of legend, capable of snapping shut on a diver's unwary foot, holding on until his air runs out.
The reality is a slow moving animal that you have to try hard to be trapped by.
Elsewhere, clownfish are numerous, hiding from your approach in the chlorophyll green of carpet anemones.
Daylight should allow about four dives, with a fifth one at night, and that should prove a revelation.
As standard, every diver carries a light stick, glowing colours moving around a pinnacle that was previously dived at dusk.
In the torchlight, banded coral shrimps and sun coral reflect vivid shades of red and pink, gorgonians sway, their feeding polyps drifting in the current.
Fish tucked into crevices peer out, while crabs scavenge over the reef and probe soft corals for food.
You could be an intruder, an interloper, but with only the sound of your bubbles escaping and wobbling upwards, you are merely a privileged observer, watching but not touching.
Which is how it should be, in this alien but beckoning realm.
Two divers swim through a natural arch at one of the reef's coral heads.
The Takaroa operates from Cairns, and allows the visiting diver to venture further afield.
Inside the Cairns U/W Camera Centre.
The centre also has a lecture theatre and processing lab.
Stag horn coral, acropora, covers vast areas of the reef with its jutting skeleton.
Travel Information
Conversation
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park was set-up following a government bill in 1975.
It is the largest protected marine park in the world, and has been zoned into areas for diving, fishing, research, and total ‘no-one enters’ sections.
It is managed by a division of the Queensland National Parks and Wildlife Service, who can be contacted at: PO Box 2066, Cairns.
They product five superb maps of the reef, free if you call at their offices near the quay.
For general tourist information on the area, write to the Queensland Tourist and Travel Corporation, Queensland House, 392 Strand, London WC2R 0LZ.
Dive Companies
Cairns Underwater Camera Centre (CUCC) is geared up for photography, with a full processing lab onshore.
You can take an underwater photography class before the cruise, hire cameras and flashguns.
The promised on-board processing did not exist, however.
CUCC are at; 21 Lake St., Cairns.
Tel;(070) 518662.
CUCC is hoping to use another boat in addition to the Takaroa in 1991, so check before deciding.
The Cairns Dive Centre,(135 Abbott St., Cairns.
Tel;(070) 510294), base their operation on the Challenger I, a sleek, spacious 34m boat.
Also consider the Coralita, smaller in size and operated by Barrier Reef Cruises, Box 6605, Cairns.
Tel;(070) 546398.
Lastly, there is the Nimrod III, a well-designed vessel which carries 16 people.
Contact; Down Under Dive, 155 Sheridan St., Cairns.
Tel;(070) 311288.
All offer trips of several days duration; check carefully what you get.
Most include all transfers from the boat and your residence, food, air and accommodation, but may charge extra for gear hire.
Some do discounts for ‘back to back’ courses, extending the three or four day holiday to a week.
Booking Your Holiday
You can save time and effort by using a British agent to book for you.
However, most travel agents do not deal directly with these companies.
The alternatives are letter, fax, or looking for the British agent in the ads.
Try Twicker's World; 081 892 7606, or Sure Dive Ltd on 07048 33098.
They can also help with booking accommodation.
Once in Cairns, if you wish to top up your diving, go direct to the dive boat companies.
What You Need
Consider travel to and from Cairns (book flights well in advance — few go direct), plus accommodation before and after the diving.
If you are on an organise-it-yourself holiday, there is a cheap airport shuttle bus which drops you wherever you wish in Cairns.
Hotels and motels are moderately priced, but book first.
There is also the cheap Backpacker's Inn, 255 Lake St, Cairns.
Tel;(070) 519166.
There are lock-up facilities for luggage not required during dives, although the charter company should let you leave things at their base.
Most instruction is PADI; you can take advanced courses on board, but only qualified divers (SAA, BSAC, PADI, etc) can take extended cruises.
Queensland set stringent rules concerning diving on the reef.
Prevailing regulations mean you must dive using an octopus and stab jacket (no ABLJs allowed).
Hire gear does not normally include personal items such as watches or masks.
Even if hiring, think about taking a thin wetsuit.
It's warm out there, but a bit of protection is useful; August is warm, but it is still Australia's winter.
A vest or shortie is fine.
Your own boots/socks should help avoid taking the skin off your feet with hired fins.
Your log book and C card (whatever school you follow) will be needed.
Insurance is a must.
‘Normal’ cover won't when it comes to diving!
Photography
Power supplies accept British 220/240v battery charging units, but your mains plug won't fit.
It is cheaper to purchase a plug in Cairns rather than buy a multi adaptor.
You don't have long between dives, so take spare batteries.
Watch out for smaller compact cameras.
Some fixed lens cameras have a maximum and minimum focus, and might restrict the maximum depth you can dive to.
Reckon on using a 36 frame film per dive.
Medium speed, 100ASA is fine.