

Happy Families
What about my mother?
Everything has always been referred back to mother.
When we were children, before we went to school,
The rule of conduct was simply pleasing mother;
Misconduct was simply being unkind to mother;
What was wrong was whatever made her suffer,
And whatever made her happy was what was virtuous —
Though never very happy, I remember.
That was why
We all felt like failures, before we had begun
I think that the things that are taken for granted
At home, make a deeper impression upon children
Than what they are told.
T. S. Eliot
This quotation is from T. S. Eliot's play,The Family Reunion .
The person speaking is Harry, the eldest son of a widowed mother.
Harry is supposed to be coming home to take up his inheritance of the family estate, but the emotional pressures of his family force him to escape instead to become a medical missionary.
Then Harry discovers that happiness does not consist ‘in getting what one wanted, or in getting rid of what can't be got rid of, but in a different vision.’
It is the vision of seeing  through the inheritance of family emotions, the release of burdens imposed by the past, the healing of memories long since buried in one's psyche.
As the consciousness of his unhappy family grows within him, Harry unlocks the door to discover many family skeletons.
He learns about his father's weak spirit, which caved in to his mother's strength; how his father committed adultery with Harry's aunt and tried to kill his mother; how his father deserted the family when Harry was eight years old.
He understands ‘the endless drift of shrieking forms in a circular desert’ of his own boyhood emotions.
So as Harry now leaves home for good on his mother's birthday, he cannot really explain what is happening to him.
He cannot say where he is going or why he has to leave, except to admit:
This last year, I have been in flight
But always in ignorance of invisible pursuers.
Now I know that all my life has been a flight
And phantoms fed upon me while I fled.
With newly-growing insights, Harry now knows ‘that my business is not to run away, but to pursue, not to avoid being found, but to seek’.
According to the bland sociological surveys of happiness, some sixty per cent of Americans are said to have responded that they were happy in their marriages.
No doubt Harry's family would also have replied in the affirmative, indicating that they really did not know what happiness was.
The many millions of divorces each year in the western world reveal the starkly real statistics of family unhappiness and breakdown.
One of the saddest aspects of such family tragedy is that the statistics of divorce among Christians are not all that different from the rest of society.
Marriage as walking in the Presence of God
If being a real person implies consciously living before God, as we saw in the previous chapter, then the integrity of a man and woman living together needs the further consciousness of God in both their lives.
Part of the problem of having a broken human nature is that we easily deceive ourselves.
This is why it is so important to have soul-friends, who sometimes know us better than we can ever know ourselves.
A true friend helps us to break through the barriers of self-deceit.
A marriage partner can be a true soul-friend in this sense.
Western society has placed an exaggerated emphasis on individualism.
This does not help us to live more truthfully with ourselves, but often traps us in our own false perceptions.
Modern counselling techniques can mislead us even further, as we turn to our ‘paid friend’ for advice about our problems.
The paid friend may well act from the impure motive that ‘the customer is always right’!
Such a friend can never help us honestly to confront the most painful aspects of our personalities.
This may help us to understand why it is that the family was never more expertly advised, psychoanalysed and researched, yet never has it fallen apart more dramatically than in the last generation.
If we need God's help to enable us as individuals to taste reality, then our marriages need God even more.
In our narcissistic culture, how can two people, infected with self-love, learn to love each other?
This is where we need the dynamic of God's transforming presence.
Some of the early church fathers used to argue that marriage was more of a sacrifice than celibacy.
They said that denying the sexual urge was nothing compared to dealing with the male and female cross-currents that sweep through a marriage.
We can only freely give ourselves to someone else when we are ‘real persons’— just as Harry was beginning to see in the play.
True marriage requires us to show trust, loyalty, stability, permanence and self-sacrifice.
None of us naturally has these qualities, since we are descendants of flawed parenting, in one degree or another.
So how can we create a happy family, in reality?
This can only come about through the person of Jesus Christ.
He is the only person who can make it possible for us to become ourselves — to become a true person in an impersonal world.
This is the true happiness of the human race, to be like Jesus in his humanity.
In turn, Jesus points us to the mystery of the Trinity, where each divine person is mutually self-giving, depending on each other and yet holding their distinct identity.
This means that community and relationships are at the heart of God's being.
If becoming a person can only arise through communion with God, then in the same way the marriage of two persons arises and is sustained only in God.
So perhaps it is not so far-fetched after all to say that ‘marriages are made in heaven’!
At this point, someone might rightly argue: ‘I happen to live on earth, and it is here that I want to have a happy marriage!’
That, argued an early church preacher, John Chrysostom, is why Jesus performed his first miracle at the wedding in Cana of Galilee.
There he not only blessed the marriage with his presence, but he turned the water into wine.
This miracle was a sign that Jesus is the miraculous source of joy in marriage.
His presence transcends our best efforts to make relationships work.
To this day, the Eastern or Orthodox church wedding service makes repeated allusion to this incident in the ministry of Jesus.
In our own marriages, full of human limitations, Jesus can multiply our sources of happiness beyond all recognition.
I see it myself in my own marriage, and with our own four children.
This thirty-seventh year of my marriage is the happiest yet, and hopefully the festivities will echo in some way through the generations to follow us.
Is this presumptuous?
It was not to the Israelites in the  ancient world, as they recited Psalm 128.
This is what they sang in praise to God:
Blessed are all who fear the Lord,
who walk in his ways.
You will eat the fruit of your labour;
blessings and prosperity will be yours.
Your wife will be like a fruitful vine
within your house;
your sons will be like olive shoots
around your table.
Thus is the man blessed
who fears the Lord.
May the Lord bless you from Zion
all the days of your life;
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem
and may you live to see your children's children.
Peace be upon Israel.
This hymn is full of symbolism.
It is worth looking at each key word or phrase in turn.
‘Blessing’ is the happiness we seek, the ultimate good for our lives.
To ‘fear the Lord’ implies both trust in God and obedience to his word and will.
To ‘walk in God's ways’ reflects all the demands made on Israel by Yahweh, the personal God of the Old Testament.
Psalm 25 echoes this thought by saying: ‘Show me your ways, O Lord, teach me your paths; guide me in your truth and teach me, for you are God my Saviour.’
The vine was the symbol of fruitfulness or blessing, so a ‘fruitful’ wife was both a blessing to her husband and the bearer of his children.
The olive, like the vine, was symbolic of all that was long-lasting.
This included well-being and happiness, and also children.
Children were recognized as a cause for long-lasting happiness, so they are included in the vision of the happy family.
‘Around your table’ converts every ordinary domestic meal, with the family gathered  round, into another divine celebration of joy.
‘Zion’ is the symbol of God's heavenly presence, and ‘Jerusalem’is its earthly counterpart.
This is true in the same way that our ideal of what God can do in our lives is counterpoised by the actual human condition we find ourselves in.
When Old Testament psalms such as this one were sung in the New Testament church, they took on new meaning, although the old promises were still there, ready to be fulfilled in the lives of the worshippers.
For the New Testament, ‘Israel’ is now the Christian church, and ‘Zion’has visited earth in the coming of Jesus Christ.
Our marriage is now to him, and a true Christian family is a tangible evidence of his kingdom, or kingly rule, on earth.
The Orthodox church wedding ceremony includes the crowning of the bride and groom, which expresses the truth that marriage symbolizes God's rule on earth.
Transformed by God, our marriages can be ‘crowned with happiness’.
In reality, however, we often take each other, and God, for granted, and fail to see how our lives could really be.
If we have not realized that the source of personhood and community lies in the being of God as Father, Son and Holy Spirit, then the odds are that we will have a low view of human life and of relationships.
This is why we need to ask how marriage can be remade as God originally intended it to be.
Marriage as a mystery
Why talk about the ‘mystery’ of getting married?
If a man and a woman like each other, decide to settle down together and get married, what is so strange about that?
Living happily ever after may not be so common these days, but as we have a much greater life expectancy, perhaps we shouldn't expect too much of only one marriage.
Marriage is simply two people agreeing to get together.
This argument unwittingly follows the ancient Roman  attitude towards marriage.
In Roman law, a marriage was simply an agreement between two free parties.
Its famous dictum was nuptias non concubitus, sed consensus facit : ‘marriage is not in the intercourse but in the consent.’
This gave Roman women much greater individual liberty than women in other societies, even though they were still not legally regarded as a person in the way that men were.
So the whole basis for marriage, then and now, was by mutual agreement between the two people.
In ancient Israel, the basis for marriage was to have children.
At that time, there was no clear faith in an after-life, and so children represented the future hope both for the nation and for individuals in it.
However, by the time of the New Testament this had changed.
Because Jesus had died and risen again from death, the link between child-bearing and the future hope had been severed.
The future hope was now in a full after-life.
This is why the New Testament does not speak about child-bearing being the basis for marriage.
From a Christian point of view, mutual agreement and the procreation of children are wrong reasons for getting married.
Because our culture devalues the reasons for getting married, it also has a limited view of the permanence of marriage.
This again is true to our cultural roots.
The Romans and Jews, with their different legal frameworks, allowed for divorce.
The Christian vision of marriage is radically different.
It sees that marriage is between two unique persons, whose personhood is acknowledged to come from God.
Because of this view of persons, the whole concept of marriage being ‘until death us do part’ begins to make some sense.
In the teaching of Jesus, the permanence of marriage is never a legal matter.
Jesus said that divorce was not allowed, ‘except for marital unfaithfulness’.
This does not mean that adultery is the one legal basis for divorce among Christians, because Jesus never encouraged his followers to think or act in legalistic terms.
It is when we do not act and behave as  Jesus' followers that adultery can take place, followed by legal proceedings for divorce.
Such standards, which exclude the possibility of adultery and divorce, appear today to be impossibly hard, just as they did to Jesus' disciples then.
Their response to Jesus' words was to despair: ‘If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.’
Jesus' response was to say that not everyone can take this teaching.
But the teaching does treat adultery and divorce with the seriousness it deserves.
Unfaithfulness in marriage is a tragic betrayal of freedom within the relationship.
Divorce can be the only outcome, unless grace and forgiveness can intervene.
Is marriage broken by death, leaving the surviving partner free to marry again?
This was clearly the view in ancient Roman and Jewish times, but again this cuts across the Christian view.
Paul the apostle taught that Christian love ‘never fails’, and as a result he does not recommend widows or widowers to remarry.
He does not actually forbid remarriage for those whose partner has died, but his view seems to be that this is not God's purpose for marriage.
It could be said that the hard teaching of the New Testament is hopelessly out of touch with modern life.
On the other hand, it could also be said that the madness of modern life is hopelessly out of touch with God!
It seems that our pursuit of happiness is proving to be much more radical than we bargained for.
In marriage we thought we were just ‘getting together’.
Instead we find that we are joined together ‘in Christ’.
Christian marriage is no less than the unity of two people, living out the reality of Christ's coming, death and resurrection in their lives together.
True marriage is to experience the life of God's kingdom in our daily domesticity.
‘This is a great mystery,’ declares the apostle Paul, for it is so much more than two people getting together.
Its profundity, he argues, lies in the fact that the unity of marriage enters into the mystery of the unity of ‘Christ and his church’.
In other words, marriage is a picture in miniature of the whole realm  of the Gospel.
The love, forgiveness, presence, power and friendship of God are all involved in marriage.
For this reason, a Christian marriage is a like an opened door, through which we see new visions, and walk out into a vast panorama we never knew existed.
This is not magic, for it introduces us to new relationships of intimacy and friendship, rather than of impersonal power and fantasy.
The apostle Peter speaks of the mutual submissiveness of wives and husbands, just as Jesus himself was submissive in his time on earth to death.
Peter makes a strong connection between Jesus' attitude and the attitude we need to have.
As Christ lived for others in his relationships, so we must serve others, not only in marriage, but in all our friendships and other relationships.
Marriage as the power of intimacy
The creation account in the Book of Genesis contains a beautiful picture of God walking with Adam and Eve in the cool of the evening, in the garden they had created and cultivated in harmony with each other.
This picture symbolizes the life of Christian marriage, in its intimacy of friendship.
The word ‘intimacy’ means nearness, coupled with honesty, affection and love.
The obsession with sex in our society has conditioned us to assume that intimacy must always mean sex.
However, this limited definition robs intimacy of all its power and richness.
If we have no intimate relationship with God, then we can have no true intimacy within marriage either.
This is an echo of the double commandment in the Old Testament to love God and others too.
True intimacy begins when we cry out to God in the words of Psalm 27: ‘My heart says of you, ‘Seek his face!’
Your face, Lord, I will seek.’
This explicit desire for deep communion with God runs right through the psalms, and it was also characteristic of the early Christian  community.
It is a call to us, too, to leave behind us the false self of our own independence, to celebrate how wholly dependent we are upon God.
Because God never takes advantage of our intimacy with him, we know that we are safe, more secure, and truer in his presence than anywhere else.
This intimacy with God helps us to reach out to our marriage partner in developing a more intimate life together.
The result is that the friendship of a husband and wife should be the most intimate and most spiritual friendship two human beings can ever enjoy together.
This intimacy between a husband and wife is sexual, too.
Sexual intimacy is a mirror in which we face each other, so that whatever weaknesses, fears and loneliness we have  is reflected in sexual intercourse.
This is where false sex can be devastating.
Our weaknesses are ruthlessly exposed, without the true understanding and compassion of the other person.
Obsessive lust can reveal the absence of true intimacy.
Sexual intimacy can also be deceptive, suggesting a short cut to love and closeness, instead of being the climax of a whole environment of happiness in marriage.
If one partner is always condemning the other, or if there is no gentle understanding, no gracious acceptance of the other, then sexual intercourse can be a violent thing, a form of legalized rape.
It becomes a cause of further alienation, expressing the dependence of one partner and the lonely giving and resignation of the other.
Sexual intimacy, or the absence of it, can also point the way towards greater intimacy with God.
Our sexual condition can help us to recognize how guarded we are, or how self-seeking, manipulative, or fearful we are, instead of being trusting, selfless, kindly, reverent and free in the bonds of love.
Intimacy is a living experience, rather than a state which we can arrive at.
Intimacy is marked by cycles of encounter and withdrawal which ideally involve trusting in absence, as well as communing in each other 's presence.
Prayer, too, reflects  the cycles of our intimacy with God.
Sometimes we need patience and faithfulness, as we experience a desert of spiritual dryness.
At other times God is so near us, surrounding us with his presence, that silence becomes the most appropriate way of enjoying the intimacy.
Happy couples can take a long walk, without a word spoken, for the quality of silence says it all.
Being silent in prayer is another dimension of being quiet with the other person.
Prayer, practised over many years, brings great changes in our person.
Human intimacy does similar work in us.
For a Christian, it should be almost impossible to judge which changes have been brought about by the marriage and which have been brought about by the love of God.
Being in love with God helps us immensely to be in love with our partner.
Intimacy brings a deeper understanding of God and of our partner.
One of the great passages of the Old Testament, Psalm 139, expresses the intimacy of God's love for us:
O Lord you have searched me
and you know me.
You discern my going out and my lying down;
you are familiar with all my ways.
Before a word is on my tongue
you know it completely, O Lord.
You hem me in, behind and before;
you have laid your hand upon me.
Search me, O God, and know my heart;
test me and know my anxious thoughts.
See if there is any offensive way in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting.
Such inmost knowledge can cut both ways.
Without love it would be a terrifying experience.
Or it could be the deepest level of intimacy and trust.
This interchange between God's intimacy with us and our intimacy in marriage is beautifully illustrated in another Old Testament poetry book: the Song  of Songs.
At one level it celebrates sexual intimacy.
From verse one, it plunges straight in with the fervency of love: ‘Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.’
Later, in the interplay of presence and absence, the lover expresses her yearning for her absent lover:
All night long on my bed
I looked for the one my heart loves;
I looked for him but did not find him.
And later: ‘I called him but he did not answer.’
The symbol of their intimacy is a garden.
The bridegroom says: ‘You are a garden locked up, my sister, my bride,’ while the bride responds, ‘Let my lover come into his garden and taste its choice fruits.’
‘I have come into my garden, my sister, my bride; I have gathered my myrrh with my spice.’
The conclusion is clear: ‘I am my lover's and my lover is mine.’
All these descriptions are given richly sensuous images.
Scents and flowers, animals and trees, herbs and spices, as well as descriptions of the body, give a lyrical quality to the joy of intimacy.
Yet it is clear from other Old Testament passages that intimacy is also a quality between God and his people.
In spite of the unfaithfulness of Israel to God, pictured in the prophet Hosea's broken marriage, God promises:
I will show my love to the one I called ‘Not my loved one.’
I will say to those called, ‘Not my people,’‘You are my people’;
and they will say, ‘You are my God.’
Even more daringly, the prophet Isaiah says of God:
As a bridegroom rejoices over his bride,
so will your God rejoice over you.
It is no wonder that Christians later interpreted the message of the Song of Songs as the love of Christ for his bride, the church.
Just as we derive our reality and uniqueness from the life of God the Trinity, so true human intimacy derives its reality and validity from God's love given to us.
Marriage as the focus of trust
I have a friend who has had a miserable marriage, because his wife has never given him her trust.
All the time she wildly imagines him being unfaithful to her in a thousand trivial ways.
Although his marriage has become loveless, he has remained faithful to his wife, simply because he has experienced the faithfulness of God.
This reveals the profound importance of trust in a marriage.
Trust begins with personal integrity which is then shared in marriage too.
In the strictness of my own father's wisdom, he instilled into me a deep respect for the opposite sex, so that there was no physical play or caress with any women until after I had married my wife.
What a rock this can be in the shaky marriages around us.
Many people start their marriages wondering how many affairs their partner has already had, and wondering if they can compete with the possibilities that might threaten them in the future.
In contrast, trust is like the precious soil in which a relationship can grow and put down secure roots.
This trust can be blown away or eroded.
If this happens, it can take generations before trust can once more be established in a family.
So while trust is a creative agent, bringing about growth, distrust destroys and inhibits relationships.
Just as happy people create their own inclination towards further happiness, so trusting relationships create further trust.
Faith in each other is a lifelong process, beginning with trust in God.
We discover that our trust in the other person is founded in how we see him or her trusting in God.
What really makes us trustworthy is not ourselves, but our faith in God.
The Book of Proverbs expresses this dependence on God for trust in this way:
Trust in the Lord with all your heart
and lean not on your own understanding;
in all your ways acknowledge him,
and he will make your paths straight.
We can begin to understand this vital principle when we reflect on how we have been emotionally wounded in the past.
It is in the nature of a young child to trust, first the mother, and then the father too.
As Unamuno, the Spanish philosopher, observed: ‘The child is an infinite believer.’
However, as we become more emotionally mature, we begin to see that we have been hurt by the inconsistencies of our parents.
Mother loved, but she loved manipulatively.
Father cared, but he did not give us enough time and attention.
The imperfections of our parents cause us to generate compensatory emotions that go on influencing us throughout life.
One person might say: ‘I am a workaholic, because I realize now I had to win points to get the approval I craved from my parents.’
Someone else might realize: ‘I dream and idealize a lot, because I was left so much to my own company.’
These and many other distorting compensations we carry into our marriage, only to learn that our dynamics of trusting each other are profoundly affected by the way we related to our parents.
In fact, this process often begins a stage earlier.
A woman might marry someone who reflects the emotional responses she had with her father.
A man might marry a woman who echoes his relationship with his mother.
How can we escape from the emotional addictions we carry in ourselves?
It is only through a living faith in God that we can make a new start in our emotional life with each other.
That is why the initiative of God towards us is so vital for a new start in life and marriage: ‘We love God because he  first loved us.’
Only by experiencing the love of God can we both walk in his ways in our marriage, and trust each other with what God is doing in both of our lives.
Paul the apostle gives us this assurance: ‘He who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.’
An essential unit in the community of happiness
If sexual intimacy mirrors our inner life, then family life mirrors our outer life.
When one little girl was asked by her mother to pray before the family and some guests started eating, she became tongue-tied and shy.
‘Just pray by reciting what I told you this morning,’ the mother persuaded her.
‘O God,’ stumbled the little girl, ‘why did I ask all these people for lunch?
Amen.’
How many little voices have been silenced to censor such embarrassing moments!
More seriously, our families are the index of our own personal and marital happiness.
Unhappy homes have a tendency to breed further unhappy homes in succeeding generations.
One young man recently told me about his emotionally disturbed mother, who attempted suicide but succeeded only in permanently injuring herself.
In the last ten years of her life, her two teenage sons bore the brunt of her bitter and depressed spirit, while their father turned to the bottle and left them to it.
To build up happiness in his life, this man will now face a long, slow rebirth of all his emotions, growing as a Christian through the support of others.
The world today desperately needs to build communities of love and peace.
And yet the family is often the last place where people expect to find these qualities.
The popularity of religious cult communities reveals the extent to which many people have turned their backs on the family.
In Christian thought, the family has always been seen as an essential unit in the community.
The early church fathers said that the home should be a ‘little church’ or, as the New  Testament describes it, ‘the church that is in your home’.
It is in the home that Christian identity is formed and encouraged, and where Christian relationships are worked out.
It is here too that the husband should act as priest within his own household, as the example and nurturer of his wife and children.
The home provides a safe and secure place for children to ask their biggest questions about faith and to discover for themselves the love of God in Jesus Christ.
In earlier chapters, we saw that our emotional life is centrally important in the growth of our personal life and faith.
So much of our unhappiness reflects disharmony in our emotions and relationships.
Human selfishness is so real in all of us that it requires no social encouragement, as in the breakdown of marriage, to pass it on to our children.
The collapse of love, and the growth of irresponsibility and indifference to children, will ultimately have to be paid for in society.
Like the decline of Rome, collapse takes place when there is softness and corruption within the structure of the family.
This is why every family needs to be renewed in its relationships — both to one another and to God.
Part of the problem is that the church over the centuries has given mixed signals about the family.
The virtue of celibacy has been extended into the vowed life of monasticism and the single priesthood.
Marriage has been seen in cultural rather than biblical terms, which has sometimes demeaned its God-given value.
The mystery of sexuality has caused much confusion in the history of the church.
Even the place and character of children have been misinterpreted.
Until the seventeenth century, children were seen as miniature adults.
Their emotional development was not understood as it is today.
Christian growth and education has often been seen as a job for the church, which has robbed the home of its crucial importance for its shaping of Christian character.
Parents are not viewed as the primary educators of their own children, either in the world or in the church.
So a radical  reform of the Christian faith is needed, to bring about an essential re-focus on the importance of the family.
Whatever we think about child baptism, it did reflect a serious interest in the role of the family in bringing up children.
Child baptism is the equivalent of circumcision in the Old Testament and in the modern Jewish household.
It reinforces the idea of family solidarity.
The baptism of the child is directly related to the faith of the parents.
Children are baptized by the faith of their parents, and on no other basis.
This is, in fact, highly realistic, relating to the way that families work.
Social studies on the religiousness of adults have shown a very clear correlation between what they now believe and the spiritual environment of the home in which they were brought up.
It is the loss of tangible, lively faith in the home that exaggerates the external, rationalistic and professionalized expressions of religion that are so deadening today.
The loss of socializing the faith in the home leads to its loss in society at large.
As Harry says in the play with which we started this chapter:
I think that the things that are taken for granted at home, make a deeper impression upon children than what they are told.
It is this environment of faith in the home that western society needs so desperately to recover.
So what are some of its characteristics?
Accepted and accepting
If kindness is giving territory to the uniqueness of other people, then it also reflects an assured sense of one's own identity.
Earlier in the book we examined the essence of what it means to be a person.
Christians, living as whole, remade people, are ‘in Christ’.
They know that their personal life is rooted in God the Trinity.
Forgiven as a sinner, accepted by Christ, secure in God the defender come life or death, he or she is a person in the fullest sense.
Because of this profound sense of acceptance, we understand and come to terms with our own uniqueness.
For most people, this is a great hurdle to overcome.
Many of us handle our uniqueness wrongly.
Either we become arrogant —‘Thank goodness I'm not you!’— or we feel threatened —‘Poor me, I am so lonely without you!’
The joy of the Christian life is that God recognizes and accepts my uniqueness, much more than my parents could ever have done.
I vividly remember some years ago, sitting in a private room in Washington DC, expressing this to a high official in the White House.
He wept for joy to hear this good news, when all his social connections (and at the back of it all, his own father) never gave him this recognition.
The truth that ‘Jesus loved me and gave himself for me,’ was an incredible transformation for him.
I become more myself by knowing and loving, and being known and loved by, God the Father, Christ the Son and the indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit.
I learn the secret of happiness by being accepted by God.
This revelation enables us to show kindness to others.
Once we are recognized and accepted by God, we become free to accept others.
This can be true in spite of our inherited characteristics.
We may have drunk judgmentalism in our mother's milk, or received a streak of meanness from our father.
The Old Testament addresses this issue, quoting a piece of ancient near-eastern pop psychology:
What do you people mean by quoting this proverb about the land of Israel: ‘The fathers eat sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge’?
As surely as I live, declares the Sovereign Lord, you will no longer quote this proverb in Israel.
Redemption and grace stop the flow of cause-and-effect in our parenting.
As we think about it, a major cause of personal unhappiness in our lives arises from the ways in which we are quickly aroused to emotional resentment and prejudice against other people.
This often takes place because their responses to us arouse the wounded feelings that our parents or other family members inflicted on us.
We can judge this by the massively negative emotions aroused within us by little pin-pricks that we should be easily able to take.
God's acceptance of us can put a stop to our inherited reactions.
In the New Testament, Paul frequently tells his readers to ‘be kind to one another’, ‘consider one another in love’, and so on .
Without this awareness of ‘one another’, our personal relationships can be shadowy, superficial and unreal.
Warm acceptance, and a compassionate and kindly approach, should be the marks of all that we give to others — and to our own children too.
An environment of prayer
What are the true foundations for a happy family life?
Some of them must be: for children to see their parents on their knees in the privacy of their own room; a spiritually disciplined life that is accepted as the daily norm; the absence of prolonged marital discord coupled with complete honesty with each other, a deep awareness of personal loyalty to God and to each other .
None of these qualities may actually be talked about in the home.
Instead, they are felt with the keen sense of personal radar which we all have.
In such an environment, children can begin to explore and learn to take risks.
They can grow emotionally, exploring their own inner lives, living without fear.
Later, if the child takes a definite stand as a Christian, there will also be a deeper challenge to struggle to change at heart; tackling  inward dispositions as well as facing the difficult questions of faith.
These inward struggles for wholeness as a person lie at the heart of what it means to be a Christian.
Wholeness is not found in disorder, but in the tranquillity of an ordered life.
This does not mean the absence of struggle and effort, but the absence of anarchy and emotional fogginess and confusion.
As a result, happiness and fulfilment in our lives never come ready-made, but the emotional environment we give to our children can contribute enormously to their growth.
This environment, in turn, reflects the stage of maturity we have been able to reach as men and women in Christ.
If we remain ‘stuck’ Christians, we cannot expect our children to become ‘growing’Christians.
The prayer of parents is therefore profoundly important for authentic family happiness.
The life of one of the great leaders of the early church, Augustine, illustrates this well.
In spite of Augustine's youthful rebellion, he could never forget the prayers of his mother Monica for him.
Immediately after his experience of Christian conversion, he went to tell her.
He later recorded her response:
How she rejoices!
We related to her how everything happened; she exulted and gloried and was now blessing you (O God) who are able to do above what we can ask or conceive, because she recognized that with regard to me you have given her so much more than she used to beg for when she wept so pitifully before you.
You had changed her mourning into joy, a joy much richer than she had wanted and much dearer and purer than she had looked for.
Ever since, ‘a mother's prayers’ have been almost proverbial of what authentic Christian parenting is all about.
This bond of Christian love between Augustine and his mother transformed their already close relationship.
A few days  before Monica died, they stood together by the open window, looking towards the sunset.
Just as Paul the apostle had once written of being ‘transported into the third heaven’ in a mystical experience of God, so mother and son were united in their desire for God.
Their experience, as Augustine expressed it, took them:
Up to the sky itself from which the sun and moon and stars shine upon this earth.
And higher still we ascended, by thinking inwardly and speaking and marvelling at your works, and we came to our minds and transcended them to reach that region of unfailing abundance where you feed Israel forever on the food of truth.
Five days later, Monica died, but Augustine's memory was for ever engraved by the transforming reality of their communion together in ‘delighting in God’.
As I was typing these words, a young friend phoned to tell me about the wonderful summer holiday he had just had with his father.
They had for many years been estranged from each other.
He said, ‘How wonderful it has been for us both to seek new understanding of each other as we have prayed together and sought healing from each other 's wounds.’
Prayer within a family takes on new focus and gives new prospects, when the love of God flows through it all.
Family unity in suffering
We have to admit that happiness has no integrity unless it has burst through the clouds of sorrow.
In the Old Testament Book of Job, Satan questioned the integrity of Job's faith in God because he had never suffered.
In the same way, we can question the substance and basis of our happiness if it has not been put to the test of suffering.
Without some element of suffering in our lives, it is difficult to  distinguish a pleasurable life from a happy life.
In chapter two we looked at the differences between pleasure and happiness.
Pleasure can be no more than a gourmet's appreciation for delicacies, whereas a happy person can readily settle for a much simpler diet.
Because of this, suffering is less of a threat to happiness, while it spells death to the pleasure-seeking life.
The truly happy person is not affected by many types of irritation and stress.
One American psychologist surveyed 659 people to count up some 21,000 examples of everyday irritations and annoyances.
Some of those questioned said that these annoyances disturbed their pleasure, though none would really add up to forms of unhappiness.
Because they had no lasting influence, they were regarded as minor.
Yet when such annoyances are compounded by the strains of family living, what would cause one family annoyance might easily add up to long-term unhappiness in another family.
Great suffering is usually identified with unhappiness for most people, if it also generates feelings of hopelessness, meaninglessness and despair.
When these feelings become rooted in the family character, then unhappiness seems to be permanently established.
But even in these circumstances, some people will discover inner resources to cope with suffering that would be intolerable to others.
It is how we react to suffering, rather than the magnitude of what we have to bear, that distinguishes one person from another.
For some people, it is precisely the impact of suffering that strengthens their character and faith in God.
This was what Paul himself found in his sufferings:
We also rejoice in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance; perseverance, character; and character hope.
And hope does not disappoint us, because God has poured out his love into our hearts by the Holy Spirit, whom he has given us.
Family suffering is a time of reckoning, when the genuineness of goodness and character, faith and hope, love and forbearance with one another are most severely tested.
There may be a suicide within the family.
This must be one of the greatest afflictions parents or a marriage partner may be called upon to endure.
As one father walked with me recently by the lake where his seventeen-year-old son deliberately drowned himself, he spoke of being ‘a man of affliction’.
Divorce can bring far more anguish to young children than parents ever realize.
Loving rebellious children unselfishly can bring great suffering to parents.
Having to accept a Down's syndrome baby into a family can bring much anguish.
However, the ultimate test of family happiness must be found in the words of Paul: ‘Godly sorrow brings repentance that leads to salvation and leaves no regret, but worldly sorrow brings death.’
Brought before God, and left in trust before him, suffering can lead to creative consequences we will never regret.
Failure to trust God leaves us in despair and ultimately leads to the grave.
Paul added: ‘See what this godly sorrow has produced in you: what earnestness, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what concern, what readiness to see justice done.’
This response from his readers brought Paul joy.
The by-product of suffering brought true happiness.
One of the greatest gifts given to the spirit of a family is the gift of being triumphant, transcendent, transformed by the creative consequences of suffering, endured and conquered in the presence of God.
In the early pages of the Old Testament, Joseph was cruelly treated by his brothers, who sold him into slavery.
But years later he was able to tell his brothers: ‘You meant it for evil, but God meant it for good.’
Joseph saw that although he was given evil he was able to turn it into goodness.
This is also what the cross symbolizes.
The cross shows us a union of opposites: returning forgiveness when evil was given; giving life when death was inflicted; showing love in  the face of hatred.
The crucifixion of Jesus was no naive rejection of the reality of evil, but a confrontation with evil that destroyed it.
Evil was destroyed by the love, submission and death of Jesus.
The cross is therefore the key to every family situation, as well as for all human history.
God has gone ahead of us to provide, in the suffering and death of his Son, all the special grace we may individually need to cope with evil and the abuse of love.
For this reason, our happiness is ultimately not in our circumstances, nor in our temperaments, nor even in our families, but in God alone.
Happy indeed is that family that stands united in sharing such a common faith, hope and love in God.
Suffering will not tear it apart — each member interpreting and reacting to it differently — but will leave it standing, united and transformed.
Suffering achieves its greatest act of transformation when it forces us to see how helpless we are, without God's help to overcome our own natural reactions of bitterness and despair.
Suffering then becomes God's megaphone, as C. S. Lewis puts it, not merely to nudge our personalities towards God, but to warn us that our lives are wholly unreal unless God actually enters into them.
Suffering at this level can then take on the character of being a positive good that was wholly unexpected, and previously unacceptable to us.
It drives us home to the God who longs to turn our disasters into triumph.
Truly Man
Man never attains to a true self-knowledge until he has previously contemplated the face of God.
The knowledge of God and the knowledge of ourselves are bound together by a mutual tie.
John Calvin
Know yourself and you will have a wholesome fear of God.
Know God and you will also love God.
You must avoid both kinds of ignorance, because without fear and love, salvation is not possible.
Bernard of Clairvaux
To know God and yet nothing of our own wretched state breeds pride; to realize our misery and know nothing of God is mere despair; but if we come to the knowledge of Jesus Christ we find our true equilibrium, for there we find both human misery and God.
Blaise Pascal
As the quotations above show, there is a recurrent recognition by the great minds of the Christian faith that we cannot separate the knowledge of ourselves from the knowledge of  God.
The two hang together.
Yet, as we have seen, this is not the view of modern man.
Above the gate of the ancient Greek Temple of Apollo at Delphi was an inscription: ‘Know yourself.’
It warned people on their way into the temple of their position before the gods.
‘Know that you are human and nothing more,’ might express the spirit of this inscription.
Since the gods were the measure of things, it was a warning against presumption and a call to the virtue of temperance.
Knowing who we are as humans has been one of the great vexed questions, searched after and written about down the centuries.
Later thinkers, such as Socrates, isolated self-knowledge.
‘Know yourself became a form of self-examination, interrogating ourselves about our own nature.
Plato argued that to know yourself was the very essence of knowledge.
Yet it was so great a task that only Zeus, chief of the gods, could master it.
Then Protagoras went further in saying that ‘man is the measure of things’, a saying that has become a secular creed for modern times.
However, since the Holocaust, the Jews and many other peoples have had difficulty in accepting this belief.
If the Nazis of the extermination camps are the measure of our humanity, then we are left in darkness and despair.
So what is it that we want to know?
Do we want to classify ourselves zoologically?
To know our ultimate destination?
To search for the essence of our humanity?
The problem is that no amount of self-knowledge can entirely express our full humanity, precisely because we are incomplete beings.
Animals occupy a closed, instinct-driven world in which they are complete, but humans are different.
The presence and influence of other persons in our life make us more than we are on our own.
This means that ‘consciousness-of’, is the human equivalent of ‘instinct-in’ in animals.
We do not behave simply according to our instincts, but look to others to follow and imitate.
Humans have a surprising degree of receptivity — or even gullibility — in being open  to other people in their lives.
Rather than being a finished product, we are always in a state of dynamic change: becoming more or less ‘human’, or ‘personal’, or indeed ‘spiritual’.
Most people have some fear of death.
But our deepest fears should be reserved for everything that keeps us from becoming more human, more personal, or more spiritual.
So self-understanding cannot be merely a matter-of-fact.
The essence of being human consists in the values we place on ourselves in being human beings.
As a result, knowing ourselves involves much more than self-observation, or self-description.
It also means assessing and judging our character.
However, we have already seen how easily we can deceive ourselves, because of our broken humanity which connives with evil.
So in fact, self-knowledge requires no less than revelation.
We can only know the truth about ourselves from an outside source.
The truth which shatters
In one of the stories of Flannery O'Connor, a black couple, Ruby Turpin and her husband Claud, are in the doctor's waiting room with a crowd of other patients.
Mrs Turpin is a self-opinionated woman.
She is never entirely comfortable until she has surveyed those before her, put them mentally in their places and seen herself rise to the top in doing so.
She is in the process of doing this with her fellow patients, when her gaze is met with hostility by a fat, pimpled, nineteen- or twenty-year-old girl.
The girl scowls as she raises her eyes from her book entitled Human Development .
Mrs Turpin remarks to the woman next to her that she once knew a girl who had everything a child could possibly want, but was still a spoilt, ungrateful brat.
At this point, the book flies across the room and hits her.
The girl hoarsely whispers: ‘Go back to hell where you came from, you old wart-hog.’
After the doctor, nurses and others have rushed  to the scene to settle the girl with a syringe and have taken her off in an ambulance, Mrs Turpin goes home.
But she feels dead inside.
Lying on her bed, the vision of herself as a razor-backed hog with warts on its face haunts her.
‘I am not a wart-hog from hell,’ she moans.
One evening soon after, she goes out to the pig yard and hurls defiance against the Almighty: ‘Go on, call me a hog!
Call me a hog again!
From hell!’
A garbled echo returns to her.
A final surge of fury shakes her and she roars, ‘Who do you think you are?’
Then the evening sky begins to burn with a transparent intensity.
A long purple streak spreads across the sky.
As she looks in its direction, she sees in a way she has never seen before:
She saw the streak as a vast swinging bridge extending upward from the earth through afield of living fire.
Upon it a vast horde of souls were rumbling towards heaven.
There were whole companies of white-trash, clean for the first time in their whole lives, and bands of black niggers in white robes, and battalions of freaks and lunatics shouting and clapping and leaping like frogs.
And bringing up the end of the procession was a tribe of people whom she recognised at once as those who, like herself and Claud, had always had a little of everything and the God-given wit to use it right.
She leaned forward to observe them closer.
They were marching behind the others with great dignity, accountable as they had always been for good order and common sense and respectable behaviour.
They alone were on key.
Yet she could see by their shocked and altered faces that even their virtues were being burned away.
She lowered her hands and gripped the rail of the hog pen, her eyes small but fixed unblinkingly on what lay ahead.
In a moment the vision faded but she remained where she was, immobile.
The fat, smug ego is the relentless enemy of God and of the happy life.
It has to be put in its place.
This can only be done by having a transformed imagination, something that can only come about through a ‘revelation’.
Mrs Turpin has to place everybody in her universe within a hierarchy: ‘nigger’, ‘white trash’, ‘common’, ‘stylish’, ‘good’.
She compared them all to herself, rather than to God.
She was the measure of her own world.
She thought she knew herself very well, but faced with God she realized that she knew virtually nothing.
Mrs Turpin did not know Bernard of Clairvaux's observation, that the first step into pride is comparison, and the subsequent steps lead into a self-focused life.
Her sense of gratitude was not for God's gifts, but for her own virtues.
Everything was absorbed by Number One, by Me.
Nothing could penetrate that world of her unshakeable convictions but the humility of being exposed and shattered by the ugly girl with her outspoken rudeness, significantly called Mary Grace.
Was it really God's grace after all, to use this unpromising Mary to break Mrs Turpin's view of things?
It was this humiliating act that allowed God's revelation to take place in her heart.
When God breaks in
But truth is often stranger than fiction.
These two true stories reflect the way in which God can break into the closed world of the self.
Paul was a young dentist whose dental practice enabled him to travel widely all over the world.
He treated wealthy Canadian patients, as well as giving free treatment to the poor in Third World countries.
He literally travelled from the Arctic to the Amazon in the course of one year, as well as attending his patients in downtown Toronto.
Although his life was packed with drama, exciting travel  adventures, wealth and personal idealism, yet in his heart he felt the emptiness of it all.
Then Paul began to dream.
Although Paul usually forgot his dreams on waking in the morning, he began to remember his dreams and started to keep a diary of what he had dreamt.
In one of his most vivid dreams, he saw a large aspirin bottle, labelled: ‘Guaranteed to mask pain for a while!’
The label also included a caption: ‘Joy of life in remedy bottle.’
It listed the drugs mixed together: alcohol, promiscuity, masturbation, materialistic attitudes, workaholism, thrill-seeking, attention-seeking, competitiveness, self-indulgence, etc.
Then Paul saw that he had emptied all the contents, and that the bottle was now empty.
This posed a dilemma for him.
What do you do when the pain is still there, caused by a low self-esteem, the absence of love in one's heart, the loss of personal assurance, and emotional confusion?
In his deep distress at seeing the empty bottle, the words of Paul the apostle came to him:
Therefore, as God's chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience.
Bear with each other and forgive whatever grievances you may have against one another.
Forgive as the Lord forgave you.
And over all these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity.
All this has been the consequence of Christ's death on account of our sins, and now of our experience of resurrection with him.
As he awoke, Paul thought to himself: that's like the story of the Prodigal Son.
‘When the son returned to his father, he was not rebuked, for the father knew that the son had already learned what was necessary now to trust the father.
So he then clothed the Prodigal in his love.’
That for Paul has been the gift of revelation, as the most significant  turning point of his life, away from self to be moving now towards God.
The second story is about George, a medical man who gave up professional research to go into property business.
With two partners, he created a vast financial empire of over half a billion dollars in some six years.
But then disaster struck.
The bank they had bought failed, and the property market softened.
George lost everything, including his home.
His religious faith, which had always been a rationalistic, brittle thing, simply broke apart.
In his despair, he began to see the truth about himself.
He lived a very wilful life, and the fear of chaos had always haunted him from childhood.
That was why he always had to be in the saddle, controlling everything within his reach with great brilliance and clarity of mind.
He had always been able to anticipate the actions of others, especially his rivals.
It was only when he was confronted by God, broken and forced to give up his pride, that he began to see clearly for the first time the vast difference between living a self-directed life and living for God.
He chose to move towards God rather than continue the journey deeper and deeper into the trap of himself.
The Book of Psalms opens by describing this choice which we all make: the choice to move towards God, or away from him.
Psalm 1 begins with a graphic contrast between two entirely opposed ways of life:
Blessed is the man
who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked
or stand in the way of sinners
or sit in the seat of mockers.
But his delight is in the law of the Lord,
and on his law he meditates day and night.
The ‘blessed’ person is the true worshipper, who turns towards God, while the ‘wicked’follow their own devices regardless of God.
This same choice is open to everyone.
The  consequences of our choice are serious, because God has made us in his image and likeness.
If God made us for himself, as Augustine recognized at the beginning of his Confessions , then we will always be restless until we orient our lives towards God and rest in him alone.
Augustine also said, ‘Narrow is the mansion of my soul; enlarge it that you may enter in.’
This is exactly what happens once God has met us, spoken to us, challenged our ways and thoughts, and revealed himself to us.
Living in awe of God
Awe of God is basic to our lives.
Without it, we live unhappily, unaware that God can make such a vast difference to us.
Living without awe of God is like living as a beggar, when instead we could live in the king's palace as the heir.
Our sense of awe wakes up when we begin to take notice of the mysteries of life.
We begin to see that life is too vast and too mysterious to be flattened into cheap explanations.
Perhaps we have actually known that God has encountered us personally.
Nothing else explains the conviction we have that we have heard him speak to us.
Awed by this, we have naturally developed an awareness of the transcendent.
In other words, we see beyond the material world to spiritual reality.
We are reverent and grateful to God, showing him what the Old Testament frequently calls, ‘the fear of the Lord’.
This is a blend of real fear at the presence of God, combined with a powerful awareness of his ‘otherness’ to ourselves.
Our sinful condition can also make us uncomfortable in the presence of God's moral perfection.
Awe is therefore a natural human response to God.
It helps to melt away the human spirit of arrogance and wilfulness, replacing them with gratitude for God's love and mercy.
Our faith turns away from the search for personal security, which we all instinctively seek when we feel threatened, and leads us  to abandon ourselves to God alone.
As awe of God enters the core of our being, it becomes a whole new principle and power within our inner life, turning us towards God.
At times, the experience of awe before God may fill and dominate us completely.
Our other values, arrangements, cares and concerns are eclipsed before the wonder of God's own presence with us.
Then it is as if our fragmented lives are integrated, fulfilled and satisfied as they have never been before.
With God as the absorbing focus of our lives, we can act and love, trust and desire, in ever-deepening channels that flow into the ocean itself.
This in turn raises our relationships with others to a new plane.
In place of our fears of other people, we now enter into their lives as never before.
We discover that the mysteries in others, which used to leave us baffled and frustrated, now enrich our inner selves.
We become enlightened in our relationship with God and with other people, and the Christian faith makes sense as nothing else ever could.
If the awe of God shatters our drive towards self-security, then the strongly growing desire towards closeness with God frees us from our drive towards self-fulfilment.
We realize that the spiritual life matters infinitely more than all the material possessions or human status we once may have enjoyed.
We are delivered from the me-generation to become aligned with God.
Instead of seeking praise for ourselves, we begin to worship God.
Self-abandonment leads us away from our own ego towards the unknown journey with God.
We begin to take his word — the Bible — seriously, as it becomes our light and guide in our daily prayer and communion with God.
All of this means that we are inwardly nourished by the awe of God, and enriched by his closeness to us.
Our human dignity of being made in the image and likeness of God takes on new meaning.
The frenzied living for ourselves which we once used to value so highly now disappears before the far more vital longing to keep company with God in faith, hope  and love.
It is as if we are at home with God, for his presence and his friendship become a greater reality for us as we grow to know him better.
There is a new openness in our inner lives, a new emotional effectiveness, a dynamic gentleness that is a blessing to others who are attracted to the serenity of spirit they see in us.
We gain a new sense of loyalty, steadfastness and fidelity that are not our own.
Our relationships take on a completely new dimension as we deepen our relationship with God.
We begin to sense with a keener sensitivity the needs of people around us.
Events in our own lives take on a pattern, as if we really were walking with God in our midst, guided continually by his presence.
We find ourselves saying words that truly comfort.
We are able to see into the heart of things for other people.
In these ways, our relationship with others grows and deepens, freeing them to be in Christ as they might long to be.
We are able to enter into their sufferings so that they are no longer alone in their grief and pain.
We become something of a bridge between other people and God.
Our personal involvement with them brings them the warmth of human love, while at the same time raising them up and beyond their problems to the love and healing of God.
This new vision of life is in marked contrast to the blindness and insensitivity of self-interest and pride.
To become a ‘presence’ for others opens up a new dimension of being, and at the same time we know the joy of God's presence in our lives.
The fear of God's presence
Our instincts tell us to beware of abandoning ourselves to the care of someone else.
Many men experiment with one sexual liaison after another, always afraid of what personal commitment might involve.
Women can similarly become inwardly cold when a man gets too close to them.
If this is a common  experience sexually, how do we approach commitment to God?
Many people never break through this barrier to faith, but carry on living in fear of self-abandonment.
They create the illusion that they are the sum total of their own accomplishments.
They believe that the approval of others only shows how great they are, seeing the loss of self-will as a form of rape.
Why is it that we fear to allow God to take control of our lives?
For some of us it is because we have suffered from the emotional manipulations of others.
There is evidence that Freud's father sexually abused his own children.
To reject such a father is closely associated with the rejection of God, which is exactly what Freud did.
For many people, disbelief in God is the closest revenge they can take against a manipulative parent.
Freud himself vocalized the logic of this rejection:
Psychoanalysis has made unfamiliar with the intimate connection between the father-complex and belief in God; it has shown us that a personal God is psychologically nothing other than an exalted father, and it brings us evidence every day of how young people lose their religious beliefs as soon as their father's authority breaks down.
The Christian psychologist Paul C. Vitz has said, ‘From Freud's example, one has reason to suspect that behind many an atheist, agnostic or sceptic of today lies shame, disappointment or rage directed at the father.
For many people, disbelief in ‘God the Father’ is the closest to revenge that they can get.’
Atheism is an expression of neurosis in a way that belief in a personal God can never be, for it is an irrational and emotional reaction to personal hurts and disappointments.
It reveals distrust in other people and the impressions they convey about their God.
That is why awe  of the love and holiness of God must come first in the awakening of our hearts.
We need to throw open our entire personalities to God.
If we find it difficult to trust others with our inner selves, then we will find it difficult to trust God.
And yet this is just what we must do.
It is much easier to trust God with selected areas of our lives, holding back from trusting him completely.
We need to bear in mind the wise counsel of Francis de Sales, the seventeenth-century Bishop of Geneva, when he dedicated his book,Introduction to the Devout Life , to his close friend Philothea:
You want to live a life of devotion, because you are a Christian.
Everyone paints devotion like an artist painted all his portraits of women, after the appearance of the women he loved.
So one will prescribe spiritual disciplines and fastings perhaps as number one exercise, and neglect to deal with hidden anger within him.
Another will focus on prayer and yet keep on saying all sorts of damaging things about other people.
Another will place philanthropy on a pedestal and yet have a resentful, unforgiving spirit.
Another gives generously yet never settles his debts.
In a true relationship, God enters into every need and every area of pain in our lives.
There is no blanket, generalized approach to God.
He calls us by name, and his relationship to each one of us fits our own person uniquely.
That is why there is such comfort and assurance in being related to his Holy Spirit.
No one can be more intimate in his relationship with our spirit than God's Spirit.
He is closer to the true core of our being than our own heart throb, nearer to us than our own presence.
Yet he is the ‘Holy’ Spirit, and therefore other than ourselves.
He is not be to confused with our human parents, as Freud and others have neurotically identified him.
He is God, and not human.
He is ‘other’ than our sinful selves, holy and righteous in all his ways.
So Francis de Sales rightly adds:
Genuine, living devotion, Philothea, presupposes the love of God, and thus it is simply the true love of God.
We allow ourselves to tune in to the personal life and love of God, not to an abstract principle or an impersonal deity.
We begin to realize more deeply that knowing God and knowing ourselves is a single process.
God introduces us to our true selves, so that we come to recognize ourselves, and our God for the first time.
Faith, obedience and the Bible
True faith is not simply about thinking the right thoughts — although right thinking plays a part in our faith.
The heart of true faith is that we enter into an experience of God which takes up our whole being, emotions included.
In place of the animal, instinctive life, where we behave addictively, we start to realize how a relationship with God, who is above and beyond us, can transform our whole lives and our relationships.
Paul recognized this when he wrote: ‘I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me’.
The more we surrender our lives to God, the more true we become to ourselves.
This may seem like a contradiction.
If I stop concentrating on myself, then surely I will lose out?
In fact, we find that the reverse is true.
As we give up concentrating on our selves, our lives begin to reflect more clearly what it means to be human, as God intended us to be.
Our lives become richer and more free as we give ourselves to God and to of hers.
Relinquishing the self leads to maturity of the self in God.
One hymn expresses this vision of a transformed humanity in this way:
Take my life and let it be
Consecrated Lord to thee;
Take my moments and my days —
Let them flow in ceaseless praise.
Take my hands and let them move
At the impulse of thy love;
Take my feet and let them be
Swift and beautiful for thee.
Take my will and make it thine —
It shall be no longer mine,
Take my heart — it is thine own,
It shall be thy royal throne.
Abandoning ourselves to God does not mean that we become quiet and passive.
To be a Christian means actively to follow Jesus Christ in faith, just as the first disciples of Jesus did.
Discipleship is a dynamic, open and practical road for us to follow.
Sharing in such a personal faith gives unity to the diversity of human beings, bringing us together with others.
As we are inspired and taught by others, we find that the closer we get to Jesus, the more we share in common with those on the road with us.
In spite of the distances of time and culture, we also discover that we can learn from the great men and women of faith who lived before us.
We can understand the heartbeat of Augustine, Bernard of Clairvaux, Julian of Norwich, Teresa of Avila, Martin Luther or John Calvin, just as we know our own fears and our longings.
Jesus Christ is the common denominator between all Christians.
This gives us a powerful sense of tradition, in the best sense of the word.
We know that the roots of our faith can hold us firmly in all the insecurities of the modern world.
On a deeper level, we discover that our roots go straight down into the Bible, the word of God.
Reading the Bible, we enter into an amazing new world of thoughts, prayers, stories and relationships.
This is a world in which we can grow  closer to God.
But it can also be a foreign world to us, and to those whose faces are set against God it is a closed world.
With our secular, modern spirit, we need to become attuned to the Bible, in order to appreciate its power to transform our minds and hearts.
We can only become familiar with this new world by spending time in it.
Reading the Bible can be done, of course, out of a sense of curiosity.
However, with God himself at the focus of our lives, we can rise above mere curiosity and focus in on the true purpose for reading the Bible.
The Bible encourages in us the desire for God as the source of human happiness.
This requires that we give up foolish, immoral reading, or reading to acquire power, or reading that is self-indulgent.
The monks of the Middle Ages used to practise ‘divine reading’, which meant that they expected their lives to be transformed as a result of what they read.
We too need to read the Bible in our hearts, rather than simply to discover facts or satisfy our curiosity.
The Bible is the law of God, which encourages us to obey God and to live for him.
The Bible shows us the will of God, which we can accept with great delight.
In the Bible, we discover the revelation of unseen things; mysteries which we approach in awe and reverence.
As we read this book, like many before us, we cannot depend on our own strength or understanding, but instead need to be humble and allow God's Spirit to instruct and guide us.
Jeremiah, the Old Testament prophet, assures us of God's promise: ‘You will seek me and find me when you seek me with all your heart.’
And Jesus once said: ‘If anyone loves me, he will keep my word.’
This is the key to reading the Bible.
Reading from the heart
A Roman Catholic scholar, Hans von Balthasar, recently observed that the weakness of his own church in the past was  that it neglected the Bible, while concentrating too much on the teaching of the church.
On the other hand, Protestants, he observed, have been too busy trying merely to understand the Bible.
In place of these two extremes, we need to be like Mary, Jesus' mother, who received the word within her, so that she actually gave birth to the Word of God.
The faith of Mary sets the pattern for all true believers.
It is not how much we read, nor even what we understand in our heads, but receiving in the same spirit in which the scriptures were first written.
To understand what David says, we must listen to his spirit.
To read Paul's letters, we seek his spirit too.
We try to listen to the Bible, hearing what God is saying to us through it.
Faith and obedience to God go hand in hand with personal involvement in the Bible.
Obedient reading of the Bible means that we do not read it selectively, choosing only the passages that reinforce our moods and temperaments.
True faith in God means that I distrust myself in order to trust in God.
In this way, self-distrust — or humility — and obedience go together and reinforce each other.
Humility enables us to be wise about ourselves and to learn to resist our weaknesses more firmly.
This then leads us to trust in God and to obey him rather than ourselves.
Good literature requires good readers, who can discern its qualities and receive them.
In the same way, the moral value of the Bible generates spiritually discerning readers, who see its power to transform their lives.
‘Good reading’ of the Bible enlarges our capacity to receive more of its depth and riches, to see with other eyes the wondrous things that God reveals to those who ‘have eyes to see, and ears to hear’.
This also comes into being as we couple reading the Bible with prayer.
Prayer opens our lives to all of God's word and will.
For it is prayer that enlivens our attitude towards the Bible, and that keeps open the channel of communication between ourselves and God.
We are open to receive; open to respond.
We respond to God from the heart.
This is the focus of  the Bible, which tells us that while ‘man looks upon the outward appearance, God looks upon the heart’.
It is specifically the heart that God calls to turn back to him.
One Bible passage says: ‘If you seek the Lord your God, you will find him if you look with all your heart and with all your soul.’
And one of the prophets says: ‘Your hearts must be fully committed to the Lord our God.’
This is also echoed in the Book of Psalms:
Teach me your way, O Lord,
and I will walk in your truth;
give me an undivided heart,
that I may fear your name.
The heart is above all the place of encounter between a human being and God.
It is the sphere of the mind, of our thinking faculty, as well as of our affections and our will.
It represents the core of the whole person — feelings and emotions, as well as mind and spirit.
It is the source of all our passions and desires.
It is also the source of deception.
As Jeremiah put it: ‘The heart is deceitful above all things and beyond cure.
Who can understand it?’
In answer to this question, God said to Jeremiah: ‘I the Lord search the heart and examine the mind, to reward a man according to his conduct, according to what his deeds deserve.’
We are reluctant to open our hearts to God and to receive his word within our hearts, and this is well understood by the Bible's writers.
By entering the world of the Bible, we soon become familiar with all the obstacles used to keep God at a distance: avoiding the truth, conflicts in personal relationships, self-alienation, hardness of heart, and, above all, pride.
The human heart is very possessive.
It wants to control, and fiercely resists its own capitulation.
So we struggle to avoid giving God our whole heart.
The paradox is that it is only in our self-surrender that we are truly blessed.
John of the Cross, the mystical writer, expresses this truth:
In order to experience pleasure in all,
Desire to have pleasure in nothing.
In order to arrive at possessing all,
Desire to possess nothing.
In order to arrive at being all,
Desire to be nothing.
In order to arrive at knowing all,
Desire to know nothing.
This is why Paul the apostle could say: ‘May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world.’
Christina Rossetti, the Victorian poet, struggled with these words of Paul in her desire to overcome the world, the flesh and the devil.
In one of her poems, she feels sad, weary and footsore, but then sees that her sufferings are nothing compared to the sufferings of Jesus.
At this point, the devil accosts her with further arguments:
‘Thou shalt win Glory.’
‘In the skies,
Lord Jesus, cover up mine eyes
Lest they should look on vanities.’
‘Thou shalt have knowledge.’
‘Helpless dust!
In thee, O Lord, I put my trust:
Answer thou for me, Wise and Just.’
‘And Might’—
‘Get thee behind me.
Lord,
Who has redeemed and not abhorred
My soul, oh keep it by thy word.’
This is the secret of the heart's loyalty to Christ: to keep listening to God.
Jesus proved this during his temptation by the devil in the desert at the outset of his ministry.
He resisted temptations by relying on the word of God.
The great  call to Israel in the Old Testament is the shema , which means ‘hear’.
The shema is still repeated daily by devout Jews the world over: ‘Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is one.
Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength.’
Jeremiah also underlines the importance of listening to God: ‘Listen to my voice.
Then I shall be your God and you will be my people.’
Solomon wisely asked God: ‘Give your servant a listening heart so as to be able to discern.’
This appeal to hear God continues throughout the Bible: ‘All who are on the side of truth,’ Jesus told Pilate at his trial, ‘listen to my voice.’
As we listen to music, we allow it to flow over us, and we enter into the atmosphere it conjures up.
In the same way, as we trust God with our whole heart, we begin to listen to him appreciatively, intelligently, and with genuine willingness.
This listening to God also has a future dimension.
The Song of Songs contains these words: ‘I slept but my heart was awake.’
To listen is also to expect.
We wait in anticipation of his future coming back to earth.
Like love, listening to God has its own reason for being.
It implies a whole-hearted self-abandonment, an unpossessiveness that never sleeps, never stops listening, obeying and loving.
Gentleness of spirit
The wholeness of the Christian life lies in surrendering, dying, and rising to new life in Jesus Christ.
This wholeness comes about when we realize for ourselves that we need Jesus as our rescuer and companion, redeemer and friend for life's journey.
Because each of us is unique, we will never really know ourselves.
We are a mystery to ourselves, and it is only God who sees into this mystery, knowing us completely.
Because of this, we surrender to God our self-knowledge and our self-significance, all the things we struggle so  desperately to hold on to in our egoism.
Then we can begin to understand what Paul means by being ‘in Christ’.
This is not as mystical as it may sound, for it means that Christ has priority over our lives, our careers, our relationships, and over the meaning of our identities.
As we reorient our lives away from ourselves and towards God, we discover that we are oriented towards joy, happiness and well-being.
We become authentic people, for we are in contact with the Original (authentikos is a Greek word, meaning ‘original’).
The genuine person measures up to true personhood in Christ.
Personal authenticity coincides with a holy life.
We can never achieve a perfect life by our own efforts, but as we rest in God's love, seek God's will, and identify with God's life, then we are holy as he is holy.
Purity of life, in our thoughts and attitudes, becomes our quest.
We grow in prayer, because friendship with God becomes our dominant concern.
We seek God, serving others to the utmost, in care, compassion and the desire for healing and encouragement.
Stretched beyond ourselves, we rest in our communion with God.
Our communion with God produces new qualities of life in us.
We turn to God in worship, thanking him daily for all things, pleasant or not.
We learn a new quality of silence.
Silence is the garden of the soul, where space and time are devoted to the presence of the Lord, and a deeper understanding of the truths of God.
We gain a wide vision of God, so that narrowness and meanness are excluded from our relationships with God and others.
A wide view of God gives us a perspective on life that is not cramped by our everyday circumstances.
This allows us to be patient in the face of the daily frustrations of life.
Detachment from the everyday gives us a higher view of our lives.
If we want to see the night sky, we have to leave the bright lights of the city behind and climb a darkened mountain.
Only self-detachment has this sort of clear vision.
Out of these qualities, gentleness becomes the sustained  environment of our inner lives.
Jesus once said, ‘I am gentle and humble in heart.’
The New Testament calls us to follow Jesus in this, by being ‘completely humble and gentle’.
Gentleness is the fruit of obedience and listening.
If I refuse to listen, violence possesses my soul, and I live in stress and stubbornness.
I plan my own life, impose my own desires, and disrupt others' interests.
I refuse to hear anything that might disrupt my own plans.
But when I listen, I become gentle.
I give space for others, and allow others' plans to come before my own.
I share kindness in order to let others be themselves.
The gentle spirit hears new things and sees new perspectives beyond those of self-interest.
In fact, the gentle spirit hears ‘the still small voice’ of God in ways that the noisy temperament will never hear.
So gentleness becomes a special way of hearing others, and of hearing God in stillness and solitude.
Gentleness becomes an important mark of our spiritual ministry to others.
As Francois Fenelon prayed: ‘Gentleness is thy work, my God, and it is the work thou hast given me to do.’
Gentleness is a major feature of spiritual growth and wholeness, and we should therefore cultivate it seriously.
Peter once said that the true inner self is ‘the unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great worth in God's sight.’
There can of course be a facade of gentleness that is not genuine.
But the test of true gentleness is that it relies deeply on the love of God, and is therefore closely associated with confidence in God.
Confidence in God allows us to be gentle with others as we no longer struggle to assert our own plans and willpower over them.
In the ancient Greek language, the word for ‘confidence’ is parrhesia .
This is made up of two words: pan, meaning ‘all’, and rhe, the root of the word ‘to speak’.
This expresses the confidence and boldness of having said it all.
Everything has been expressed and exposed before God, so there is nothing to hide, and no concern about being made vulnerable.
This is why the first  Christian believers were able to proclaim the good news about Jesus so fearlessly.
The writer of the Book of Hebrews expresses Christian confidence in this way: ‘Let us then approach the throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.’
Because of Christ, we ‘have parrhesia towards God’, says another New Testament passage.
This means that ‘whatever we ask of him, we shall receive it’ according to his will.
This holy boldness in turn reinforces our gentleness of spirit.
We do not need perspiration if we have inspiration.
We do not need to be aggressive and anxious if we have open access to the Father, the indwelling presence of Christ in our hearts, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
Instead of being so pushy, ambitious and restless, we can place our trust and confidence in God.
This means that there is no need for the barrenness of a busy life.
Instead, our identity lies in Christ, not in our function before others.
Gentleness keeps us from being caught up in the illusions of the world.
We are not homeless or alienated, because we are indwelt by the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, who give us this gentleness of spirit.
This indeed is the whole, happy and joyful life of the children of God.
The spiritual writer, Francois Fenelon, had this to say about Christian gentleness:
Don't lose any opportunity, however small, of being gentle towards everyone.
Don't rely on your own efforts to succeed in your various undertakings, but only on God's help.
Then rest in his care for you, confident that he will do what is best for you, provided that you, for your part, work diligently but gently.
I say ‘gently’ because a tense diligence is harmful both to our heart and to our task and is not really diligence, but rather over-eagerness and anxiety.
Soon we shall be in eternity and then we shall see how little it mattered whether some things got done or not; however, right now we rush about as if they were all-important.
When we were little children how eagerly we used to gather pieces of broken tile, little sticks, and mud with which to build houses and other tiny buildings, and if someone knocked them over, how heartbroken we were and how we cried!
But now we understand that these things really didn't amount to much.
One day it will be like this for us in heaven when we shall see that some of the things we clung to on earth were only childish attachments.
I'm not suggesting that we shouldn't care about these little games and trifling details of life, for God wants us to practise on them in this world; but I would like to see us not so strained and frantic in our concern about them.
Let's play our childish games since we are children; but at the same time, let's not take them too seriously.
And if someone wrecks our little houses or projects, let's not get too upset, because when night falls and we have to go indoors — I'm speaking of our death — all those little houses will be useless; we shall have to go into our Father's house.
Do faithfully all the things you have to do, but be aware that what matters most is your salvation and the fulfilment of that salvation through true devotion.
The Truly Happy Life
Beatitude is, in my opinion, a possession of all things we believe to be good, from which nothing is absent that a good desire may want.
Now the one thing truly blessed is God himself.
Whatever else we may suppose him to be, this pure life, the ineffable and incomprehensible good, is Beatitude.
He is the one lovable who is always the same, rejoicing without end, in infinite happiness.
Gregory of Nyssa
We saw in the first chapter how we can understand more about ourselves according to our type of personality.
We looked at ourselves in terms of our compulsive traits, seeing the weakest aspects of our inner lives.
Later in the book, several of these personality types have been illustrated in the stories of people who have revealed their inner thoughts and feelings and their struggles with themselves.
With them, we long to believe that our expectations of happiness can be transformed, so that we can become happy in a way we never thought possible.
This chapter looks at how our personalities can experience ‘more than we can ask or think’, as Paul the apostle once expressed it.
The essence of God is that he is personal.
No other religious faith communicates this truth about God.
This makes it possible to believe that God can relate to us, and that he  can reach out to us and transform our nature.
When we see our old personality being changed, then our happiness is truly a transforming happiness.
Christ has come into the world.
Christ has died for our sakes.
Christ has risen again.
Now by his Holy Spirit he lives in our innermost selves, so that we become transformed into his image and likeness.
This means that in many ways we become like God, and yet in others we remain unlike him.
God's Spirit is called the ‘Holy’ Spirit, to remind us that we are not to be confused with his unique identity, nor are we perfect as he is perfect.
We remain sinners, while he is the Holy God.
However, as ‘Spirit’, he is able to enter into our spirits.
He becomes closer to us than any human friend could ever be.
The Christian faith teaches that all my human nature needs to be redeemed by Christ.
One early writer, John of Damascus, said: ‘Had there been anything of me not assumed (by the Word of God) it would not have been saved,.
We believe that Jesus Christ did assume, or take on, our human nature in every part.
However, he did this without falling into the compulsions, the defence mechanisms, and all the sinfulness and deceitfulness of our own lives.
Jesus is the happy life
The truly happy life — life as God intended — became reality in the earthly life of Jesus Christ.
We can test this if we compare the human character of Jesus to our own personalities, as we saw them in chapter one.
The perfectionist, as we saw, tries to do things perfectly because of his or her compulsive desire to avoid showing anger.
Jesus was different.
He could be angry when he saw injustice and evil.
He spoke of being perfect, but he saw perfection as abandoning ourselves to God, seeking to do his will.
While the human perfectionist judges others, Jesus accepted those around him, especially those who were judged and despised by others.
Jesus clearly  accepted others, rather than rejecting as we do.
The perfectionist is an anxious person, always afraid of what may go wrong.
In contrast, Jesus said: ‘Do not worry about your life, what you eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear.’
The perfection Jesus spoke about is in marked contrast to the obsessions of the perfectionist.
The giver identifies strongly with Jesus as the servant of others.
However, as we saw, this type of personality hangs on to others, looking to them for affirmation and praise.
This was not the way in which Jesus was a giver.
The secret of Jesus' great kindness to people was that he helped them and yet always gave them space to be themselves.
The performer, like the giver, identifies with Jesus' call to his disciples to work with him in service.
However, Jesus never called people to work for work's sake.
Instead, he called them to ‘follow me!’
This call was to himself.
It was not a call to workaholism and a sense of achievement, but to an abiding relationship with him.
Achievers fear failure, and yet Jesus' life was a failure by most human standards.
He spent some thirty years in an obscure village, and only three short years in his public ministry, which was misunderstood by the great majority of the people who saw and heard him.
Performers also crave for power.
But Jesus, faced by temptation in the wilderness, resisted the three temptations to seek power.
He ended his life by hanging, powerless, on a cross, saying, ‘Father, into your hands I commit my spirit.’
The romantic is attracted to Jesus because he seemed to be a great charmer who attracted others.
However, while the romantic is afraid of being ordinary, Jesus was so ordinary that even his own family could see nothing special about him.
Jesus was so steeped in ordinariness that most people never recognized him to be their Messiah.
Romantics can suffer tragically, because they are unrealistic about themselves.
But Jesus' sufferings were experienced on behalf of humankind, not because Jesus was unrealistic about himself.
The observer loves knowledge for its own sake, but Jesus  stood against this attitude.
He was constantly in conflict with the religious and legal authorities of his day.
The trap of the observer is to be distant from the needs of others.
This is why the experts of Jesus' time criticized him for healing the sick on the Sabbath, accepting social outcasts, or infringing the fine points of the law.
Jesus rejected this.
He spoke in stories or parables, so that the simplest might understand if they had a heart to see and hear.
Above all, Jesus taught the truth with his own life.
The responsible show great loyalty, but they also make great demands upon other people.
They like their lives to be organized and tidy; they hate paradox and mystery.
It was people like this who crucified Jesus, because they hated the mercy he showed to the common people.
They saw Jesus as a threat to their legalistic religion.
Their self-righteousness was a cover for their fear of disorder.
They felt profoundly insecure in the face of something that was so personal and intimate.
The apostle Paul was later to fight this ‘letter that kills’, in order to communicate the Spirit who gives life.
Our transformation by God does not come about through the law, but because of God's love and grace.
This is why Jesus could forgive a woman caught in adultery, when the legalists were ready to stone her to death.
The fun-lover likes to have a good time.
Jesus also enjoyed himself, to the point where he was criticized as ‘the friend of tax-collectors and sinners’.
At a wedding at which the wine ran out, he miraculously turned the water into wine.
One of the marks of Jesus' discipleship is a great sense of joy.
However, the fun-lover is motivated by a fear of pain, which he or she tries to escape.
In contrast, Jesus never ran away from trouble, nor left people in their sickness or sorrow.
Instead, he healed the sick and comforted the broken-hearted.
Jesus always faced the human condition head-on.
Jesus did not hide behind laughter, in the way that the fun-lover does.
Instead, he used wit appropriately, as in some of his parables.
He also warned his disciples of future  persecution, hardship, and the judgment that lay ahead of them.
The realism of Jesus is a strong counterbalance to the superficiality of the fun-lover.
The strong boss, who faces violence head on, is afraid of weakness.
Yet the secret of Jesus' life was that he was wholly submissive to his Father.
His humility was no weakness, but absolute strength.
One of the positive aspects of strong bosses is that they fight against injustice, and show themselves to be externally strong characters.
Jesus, too, confronted injustice and corruption, to the point of driving the money-changers and merchants out of the temple court.
His language was certainly not watered down when he charged the scribes and Pharisees with being ‘white-washed sepulchres’, ‘blind guides’ and even ‘a brood of vipers’.
There was no compromise with Jesus against all injustice and dishonesty.
Yet at heart Jesus was not a strong boss.
Strong bosses are ruled by their aggression and assertiveness.
Jesus instead spoke of giving his disciples peace.
This would be a peace unknown to this world, and which this world cannot give.
Finally, the mediator is patient.
Jesus, too, encouraged those who heard him to wait in patience for the promises of God.
God's purposes will be fulfilled, but the times are in his hands.
The temptation of the mediator is to be lazy, and this is where the mediator and Jesus part company.
Mediators also lack self-assurance, something that Jesus promised to give to all those who follow him.
So in contrast to the mediator, who fears and avoids conflict, the followers of Jesus are fully equipped to fight the good fight of faith.
God's prescriptions for happiness
Some people might object to being classified as a personality ‘type’.
After all, I'm me!
Others identify more easily with the types we have looked at.
They do not feel so defensive, but they may well feel uncomfortable about these new insights  into their personal weaknesses.
In either case, we need to recognize that the uniqueness of the person can really only be handled and sustained by God.
Because we have been created in his image, he is the source of our personhood.
Individually, we are not up to the task of trying to handle our own uniqueness.
Either we are arrogant, saying, ‘Thank God I am not you!’
Or we say, ‘Poor me, I am so anxious, because I am alone, unrecognized, even by those who should know me best.’
And so we tend to wobble between these two extremes in seeing our uniqueness.
We are incapable of accepting and handling our unique dignity and character.
In fact, the defences and addictive attitudes described in the first chapter only illustrate the false ways in which we deal with ourselves.
We seem to be unaware of our true essence, unable to express that essence authentically, and therefore unable to embody who we really are in the sight of others.
The transformation which God works in our lives is that we become real people.
We have true relationships with other people, because we are becoming more like Jesus Christ.
This is the great paradox of the Christian life, that the more we abandon ourselves to God, the more genuinely real and unique we become as individuals.
This is the polar opposite of those who have been brainwashed by an ideology, and who lose all sense of being individuals.
Jesus does not destroy our person, he always enhances and deepens it.
This discovery of our true selves is most strongly expressed in the sayings of Jesus known as ‘the beatitudes’.
Each beatitude begins with the word ‘blessed’, which could also be translated as ‘happy’.
True happiness, according to Jesus, comes about when we turn away from the commonly-accepted prescriptions for happiness to abandon ourselves to God.
Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are those who mourn,
for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek,
for they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness,
for they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful,
for they will be shown mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they will be called sons of God.
Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
These beatitudes do not signal the elimination of the self, but the integrity of the self in God.
Jesus was describing a fulfilled life which could only grow to be better and better.
The truly happy life has the resources of a great river that flows endlessly, bringing strength and hope to ourselves and to others.
One of the psalms speaks of the abundance which God gives to us:
They feast on the abundance of your house; you give them drink from your river of delight.
This life is eternal in character.
Paul, writing in the New Testament, said:
I always pray with joy being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
It is no wonder that one psalm-writer could sum it all up by saying:
Blessed is the man whose God is the Lord.
The beatitudes of Jesus show the way in which we can experience transforming happiness in our own lives.
The beatitudes were never meant as a sort of new Ten Commandments, which we have to strive to keep.
Instead, they express the source of our personal well-being and blessing.
The beatitudes are counter-cultural, because they correct and challenge the ways in which we understand happiness.
They come up against our distinctive types of personal defence and weakness.
They are not simply beautiful, poetic sayings.
They rebuke and correct us, calling us to break with our old way of life.
If we reflect further, we can also see that each beatitude addresses the weaknesses of the different types of personality we looked at earlier.
Not only do the beatitudes speak to these types, but they also promise the gifts of God to redeem us from ourselves.
We will look at each beatitude in turn.
Blessed are the poor in spirit
The perfectionist has to learn that Jesus was ‘poor in spirit’.
Where we may boast of our striving for perfection, Jesus had only humility.
He calls us to follow him in humility.
When we come to the end of our own virtues and realize our inner poverty, it is then that we can start to experience ‘the kingdom of heaven’ in our lives.
We start to live under God's rule.
To rediscover the life of Jesus in our own times is to come before him, poor and naked, and to live his life, not ours.
Unless we can see the profound radicalism of the spiritual meaning of his poverty, we cannot hope to enter into all the other aspects of the truly happy way of living.
Poverty always spells weakness, vulnerability, humiliation, and having no prospects for improvement.
For this reason, poverty is closer to our true condition than the  much-admired qualities of the rich or the powerful.
Poverty forces on people the reality of the whole of their lives.
The poor in spirit, those who recognize their inner helplessness, are ready to confess the words of the famous hymn, Rock of Ages:
Nothing in my hand I bring;
Simply to Thy cross I cling;
Naked, come to Thee for dress;
Helpless, look to Thee for grace;
Foul, I to the fountain fly;
Wash me, Saviour, or I die.
The first beatitude shocks us with this blunt realization that true happiness is reserved for children and the poor.
It is not for the superstar, nor for the superman.
It is not for those intent on self-fulfilment nor for the ‘successful’.
It contradicts all the assumptions of secular culture — that I can gain self-knowledge and pull myself up by my own shoestrings.
It strips us of all the illusions and idolatry of the world, to face our basic personal need.
This is the way of Jesus, ‘who though he was rich, yet for our sakes became poor’.
He lived as a village carpenter's son.
He chose his companions from among the poor and the despised.
He held a common purse with his disciples, and he allowed Judas, who was to betray him, to hold it for him.
Perhaps there was no other way to expose the absurdities of human pride.
Francis of Assisi, like Jesus, lived out this beatitude.
He embraced poverty as a follower of Christ.
Like Jesus, he used his poverty to be totally available to those in need around him.
His lack of possessiveness made him fearless.
He was not afraid of losing anything, because he had nothing to lose — no reputation, no possessions, no clinging to any aspect of life.
Christian poverty is not an end in itself.
It is a means of identifying more closely with the joy of Jesus Christ.
It enables us to remove anything that gets in the way of our  relationship with God.
Poverty is also a means of increasing our sensitivity towards others.
We are able to be alongside them in their pains and their distresses.
The instinct to have or to achieve is toppled off its throne, and instead we receive a strong sense of communion with others and of living in community.
Celano, in his Life of Francis, says that the brothers who lived with Francis ‘desired to meet, and together they were happy; on the other hand, absence was painful for them, separation was bitter and parting sorrowful’.
The detachment of poverty liberated their spirits to love each other and to enjoy all things.
Jacopone da Todi, the follower of Francis, expressed it in this way:
Poverty, deepest wisdom, you are slave to nothing,
And in your detachment you possess all things.
The man who desires possessions is himself possessed,
Having sold himself to the things he loves.
God does not dwell in a heart that's confined,
And a heart is only as big as the love it holds:
In the great heart of Poverty
God has room to dwell.
Until we are ‘poor in spirit’ we can never have room to receive Christ within our hearts.
Until we are ‘poor in spirit’ we never recognize the riches that God has to give us.
When he was elected Governor-General of Canada, Georges Vanier felt deeply inadequate for the heavy duties he had to face.
He wrote to a friend: ‘I feel it is only in weakness that I can glorify God.’
It is only when we are weak and ‘poor in spirit’ that we can experience the overwhelming power and wealth of God.
Blessed are those who mourn
If the first beatitude cuts sharply across the ways of the  world, then this second saying follows hard on its heels.
No one would ever naturally connect mourning with happiness.
Mourning is the one thing people want to avoid doing.
However, like that about poverty, this saying talks about mourning in a spiritual sense.
In the first place, we all need to mourn for our own sins and for the negative contribution we bring into the world.
As long as I refuse to recognize my part in the fallenness of the world around me, I will never be a blessing to others.
Pride will prevent me from receiving God's forgiveness and mercy, and from transmitting it to others.
Spiritual mourning reinforces ‘poverty of spirit’.
To mourn in this sense means to be conscious of living in a fallen world, where people live such lonely, broken lives.
It is an openness to life as it is, without falsification and without cosmetically touching up the serious flaws in human nature.
True mourning cures us of superficiality.
It deepens us and makes us more reflective as people.
Returning to our personality types, the giver has a great deal to learn from the saying, ‘blessed are those who mourn’.
The trap of the giver is pride, believing that you have enough inner resources to give away to others.
In contrast, spiritual mourning implies personal distress and loss.
To mourn is to be stripped of self-sufficiency and to identify with the needy on their own level, not from above them.
In becoming human, Jesus stooped to our level of need.
He became the ultimate mourner, suffering with us in our distress.
It is only when we begin to face an illness that we can find a cure.
This is what Jesus did in facing up to our fallen condition.
He lived in the depths alongside the needy, the sick and the poor.
He saw the foulness of sin, our rebellion against God, and our indifference to the sufferings of others.
He understood all the causes of human unhappiness.
He wept and mourned over it all.
Mourning enables us to see the millions who die of starvation in our world not as impersonal statistics, but as  unique human beings.
We can learn to see them as people loved by God, and for whom Christ died.
This kind of mourning leads us to side with the poor, and to take action alongside them.
Mourning also helps us to see the dangers facing our planet.
We are only one generation away from causing irreparable damage to the Earth's biosphere.
This could decide our extinction or survival as the human race.
Without mourning on our part, can future generations ever hope to be blessed, and to bless the earth in their turn?
Mourning shatters the illusions of self-sufficiency and breaks through the blindness of self-containment.
It helps us to see that suffering is a part of being human.
However, mourning has its dark side.
It can either lead us into bitterness and despair, or it can drive us towards greater sensitivity and responsibility and a deepening love for God and for others.
Mourning leads to happiness when through it we sense our place within the human family, and our need for God's love.
Our mourning can only be taken up into joy when we bring it back to Jesus Christ.
Jesus had these words to say about his followers' mourning:
Now is your time of grief, but I will see you again and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.
In that day you will no longer ask me anything.
I tell you the truth, my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name.
Until now you have not asked for anything in my name.
Ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete.
In our self-absorption, we may never have seen the fullness of joy that we can experience when we begin to know the character of God.
As we draw near to him in our distress, we learn to ask him for the things we need.
This is an experience we can enter into now, for our present existence, as well as being a future hope.
This mourning cleanses us of our false expectations and superficialities, where we try to flatten everything into a manageable world in which we are in charge.
Mourning also cleanses us of pity, which can be a subtle form of pride, or of self-pity which is a form of blindness to life as it really is.
It heals us of depression and sadness, as if they were intrinsic to the kind of person I believe myself to be.
Mourning helps us to escape from the many different kinds of self-imprisonment.
Instead we begin to see things on a bigger canvas.
We live in the presence of God, seeing things from his perspective.
By our own poverty of spirit, we begin to gain a new realism about life and the way we ourselves live.
Blessed are the meek
We are now beginning to see that the beatitudes are like steps cut into a mountain.
They lead us up to where Jesus is enthroned, giving us a broader, more eternal perspective.
Each step leads us upward and forward, each providing further transformation of our lives before God and before ourselves in the light of God.
We start by learning to live as ‘poor in spirit’, and therefore open to see our own sinfulness and that of others.
This leads us to mourn for our condition.
From this, we step forward to reflect on the essential need for humility.
Jesus speaks these words especially for the performer.
The trap of performing types is to display their efficiency by constantly seizing the initiative.
Jesus releases us from this addiction by revealing himself as the willing servant, humbled to the point of death, submitting his will to the will of God.
This type of humility is clearly not a sign of weakness, but of great strength.
True humility is realizing that God can make a much better job of my life than I could ever  do by myself.
Humility is to orient our lives towards God, so that we understand and obey him in a greater and greater sense.
Someone has characterized the beatitudes as ‘be-attitudes’.
Our identity lies more in ‘being’ than in ‘doing’.
We learn that to ‘be in Christ’ is far more important than ‘being in myself.
We begin to reinterpret our lives as receiving from God, rather than being a series of self-achievements.
Perhaps we can only ever see this when we have been ‘broken’ by God, perhaps through failures or disasters that he has allowed us to experience.
It may be that we can only find true humility through humiliation.
Humility begins to grow within us when we go into the desert to be alone with God, to enter into the heart of God.
This is not to be confused with the alienation of spirit where we are alone with ourselves.
Instead, this is a solitude that gives space for God within us.
We learn to exercise silence before God, to be like Mary, the mother of Jesus, as she ‘pondered all these things in her heart’.
‘Humility,’ as John of Climacus says, ‘works alongside obedience.’
Humility is therefore the hallmark of our relationship with God.
In a passage from the Book of Isaiah, God says: ‘This is the one that I esteem: he who is humble and contrite in spirit, and trembles at my word.’
To be humble is learning to know ourselves in the light of the knowledge of God.
As John of Climacus said: ‘The man who has come to know himself is never fooled into reaching what is beyond him.
He keeps his feet henceforth on the blessed path of humility.’
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness
To the romantic Jesus expresses his hunger and desire to live only by the words of God.
Jesus helps us to hunger and thirst  after righteousness, not for romantic notions of unreality.
The romantic gets trapped in his or her own small world.
It is only by relating outside ourselves to God that we can avoid this trap.
Nothing else will do.
The more open we are to God, and the weaker our self-will becomes, the more desire will grow and flourish within us.
Desire and reason do not make good bed-mates, for where reason tries to control the world, desire is aware of the vastness of life, which it knows it can never control.
So the desire for God grows as self-will diminishes.
This desire is the longing to be freed from selfishness and sin, and to live in harmony with the will and purposes of God.
Self-concern, with all its fantasies, is left behind.
This experience is an echo of one of the psalms:
As the deer pants for streams of water,
so my soul pants for you, O God.
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God.
When can I go and meet with God?
It is perhaps at this stage of our spiritual pilgrimage that we begin to develop an appetite for reading the Bible devotionally — that is, out of love for God.
We may also be inspired by some of the great classics of Christian writing.
We begin to realize that we are not alone in our restlessness of spirit, but in company with others who have also taken God seriously.
Read the quest of Francis of Assisi as a young man, or the search of Ignatius of Loyola in the early years of his conversion.
By identifying with the agonizing quest of John Bunyan or John Wesley, you too will stand in awe of the infinite longings of the soul for God.
This longing is profoundly expressed by John of the Cross:
O lamps of fire!
In whose splendours
The deep caverns of feeling,
Once obscure and blind,
Now give forth, so rarely,
So exquisitely,
Both warmth and light to their Beloved.
How gently and lovingly
You wake in my heart,
Where in secret You dwell alone
And by your sweet breathing,
filled with good and glory
How tenderly you fill my heart
with love!
What should we do with our desire for God?
We begin by reminding ourselves daily that God provides all that we need for our lives.
This then means that we feed daily on the Bible, which tells us about his righteousness — or right-relatedness to him.
We allow the Bible to redirect our lives, making its authority the standard by which we relate to God, just as Greenwich mean time helps navigators know where they are at sea.
For our emotions, too, can be at sea unless the authority of God's word is hidden within our hearts.
One of the great spiritual writers, Madame Guyon, speaks about ‘experiencing the depths of Jesus Christ’.
For this to occur, we must first get rid of selfish desires, and replace them with desire for God.
This occurs when we start to ‘pray the Scriptures’, linking the Bible with meditative prayer.
In our personal encounter with Christ, we begin to distinguish how we have naturally tried to please him, instead of allowing his love to enter our hearts so that we begin to love him with his gift of love to us.
We begin to ask him for more of his love to love him more.
When this happens, we begin to enjoy him for himself, present within us.
A new stillness enters our hearts, where there is no longer any need to express ourselves.
Like lovers, we simply hold hands in the silence.
A new simplicity enters the soul.
We learn to pray with a  believing heart, with an emphasis on trust rather than on understanding.
Periods of dryness may follow, to test whether it is faith, rather than feelings, that controls your relationship with God.
As our lives are transformed by God, we experience a deepening desire to enter into the heart of God.
To hunger and thirst after righteousness in this way is another step up the mountain to God.
Blessed are the merciful
To the observer, Jesus expresses mercy.
He is mercy.
The observer has an insatiable desire for abstract knowledge.
He or she lives in an impersonal world, out of touch with other people.
But it is in mercy that we most relate to fallen people like ourselves.
Jesus once said that those who had been shown the greatest mercy by God were the ones who loved him the most.
If we experience the mercy of Jesus, we will naturally share mercy with others, rather than hiding from them as mere observers.
Every step we take upwards towards Jesus is also another step forward in search of other people.
Every new insight of God's love for us is another motive to love others too.
Personal spirituality can only make progress if it is in partnership with social spirituality.
Receiving mercy from God can only mean that it will overflow, as a full cup runs over.
For this reason, those around us benefit from our being in love with God.
Today we know what it is to be ‘professionalized’, experts at our job.
But sadly our world suffers because we are not ‘mercied’ in our professions.
We fall into the trap of being efficient technicians of life, starved of the personal dimension of being ‘mercy-full’.
Those who have been filled with all the previous beatitudes of Christ now overflow in mercy to those around them.
Some years ago, broken and wounded by others, and  deeply convinced of my own self-concealing sinfulness, I cried out to God in the words of one of the psalms:
Have mercy on me, O God,
according to your unfailing love;
according to your great compassion
blot out my transgressions.
As I began to reflect on this verse, I let its truth penetrate deep within me.
What does this word ‘mercy’ convey but the reality that God, too, has gut feelings of the most intimate tenderness towards me.
These are the feelings a mother has when she is carrying a child within her womb.
Does God have this kind of tenderness towards me?
And is his love so imperishable that, when others deal treacherously with us, he never fails to be loyal?
If this is true, then what else can I ever have that is more precious than the possession of his Holy Spirit within me?
This is how he shows us mercy and enables us to be merciful in turn to others.
How happy is our life when his Holy Spirit takes residence within us!
Martyn Lloyd-Jones, the Welsh preacher, once said:
We are not meant to control our Christianity; our Christianity is rather meant to control us.
I am to be dominated by the truth because I have been made a Christian by the operation of the Holy Spirit within.
Paul expressed it in this way: ‘I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me.’
A whole new attitude to living unfolds within me.
This new life reveals more and more the gifts of God, and less and less the human efforts we vainly try to make.
We are reborn in God, leaving behind us the continuity of our earthly and parental life.
How are we merciful?
Only to the extent that we are becoming aware of the mercies of God.
Jesus spoke about  forgiveness in the Lord's prayer: ‘If you forgive others when they sin against you, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.’
This is not a conditional statement, reflecting some deal that God makes with us: ‘You forgive first, then I'll forgive you.’
Instead, this is the evidence that God's forgiveness possesses our lives so powerfully that we are given the strength to forgive others in turn.
In each of Jesus' beatitudes, God's blessing comes in the first line, and is then followed by the effect of this blessing on us in the second line.
Our lives show the evidence of God's blessing.
So as we are shown forgiveness and mercy by God, we become merciful ourselves.
It can never happen the other way round.
God's grace transforms our lives so that we become givers of God's grace to others.
It is our communion with God that enables us to have empathy, kindness, intimacy and identification with others, which flow forth from us like rivers in an oasis.
Compassion then fills our life, because the compassion of Christ has transformed our hearts.
Blessed are the pure in heart
To the responsible, Jesus speaks of being ‘pure in heart’.
The responsible are over-cautious, hiding behind others.
They can never expose themselves, nor deeply know themselves.
But the ‘pure in heart’ are those who ‘see God’.
Because of their profound sense of being accepted by God's love, they can live transparently, not hiding behind the mask of being dutiful.
One of the psalms echoes this beatitude of Jesus:
Create in me a pure heart, O God
and renew a steadfast spirit within me.
We cannot expect to receive from God unless our spirits are in harmony with his Spirit.
It is interesting that Jesus, at  this point in the beatitudes, turns to focus on the heart.
Because the heart is the seat of all our emotions, affections and willpower, this means that the impact of being blessed by God eventually reaches down to the very core of our persons.
We are being transformed through and through.
This is not an option for having more of an emotional than an intellectual life, but of being wholly for God.
If we are naturally more ‘the feeling type’, then our transformation by God will bring about deeper thought within us.
If we are ‘the intellectual type’ then we will grow in our emotions before God.
As God penetrates the core of our lives, we realize that it is in the heart that all the issues of life are decided.
All our weaknesses, sins and troubles arise because of our faulty, uncleansed hearts.
To receive a ‘pure heart’ implies the cleansing that God alone can give, since it is also the source of our own self-deception.
When God makes our hearts pure, we stop deceiving ourselves.
We become single-hearted and single-minded before God.
Our lives become focussed on one aim.
Another meaning of the word ‘pure’ reveals that the heart is also cleansed.
To become ‘pure in heart’ is therefore to be like Jesus.
To have purity of heart is to become godly, expressing the holiness of God, so that in turn we may ‘see God’.
This is the choice before us: to be self-seeking or God-seeing.
But how can we ‘see God’?
In the Old Testament, Moses asked to see God, only to be told that ‘no man can see God and live’.
In fact, Moses did ‘see God’, but only in a partial sense.
God always has to ‘empty himself as the incarnation demonstrates, for us to see God.
He comes alongside us and takes on our humanity, in order for us to see him, in the same way that the intensity of the sun is scaled down to the ray of light through the window.
To Moses, God appeared as ‘the compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in love and faithfulness.’
These were the words Moses heard as God passed by.
Learning to see God as he is in his own being will be reflected in our own hearts.
We learn to see God as he really is, and not as we have imagined him to be.
The evidence of this is the change which takes place within our own hearts.
The apostle John spoke about this when he said: ‘We know that when he appears, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.’
Then he adds: ‘Everyone who has this hope in him, purifies himself, just as he is pure.
No one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him.’
Where the heart is turbulent and restless, where it is mixed in motive, and conceals anger, pride, or fear, then the vision of God cannot be seen.
We cannot understand God's true character.
Purity of heart, said Soren Kierkegaard, is to will one thing — to hunger and thirst after God alone.
Kierkegaard compared the heart to the ocean.
Its depth determines its purity, and its purity determines its transparency.
When the heart has great depths, no surface storms can affect its clarity.
The deep, transparent heart seeks only for God.
Blessed are the peacemakers
Only after this prolonged focus upon personal and inward spirituality can we now turn to the outward expressions of social relationships.
God's children, ‘his sons’, are to be known as God is known, as reconcilers, or ‘peacemakers’.
This beatitude speaks especially to the fun-lover.
Jesus offers us his peace, which is wholeness of life.
Fun-lovers live superficially, afraid to face suffering and to enter deeply into the ambiguities and hurts of an imperfect world.
However, Jesus is our peacemaker.
He does not give as the world gives, but gives instead his peace, fullness and wholeness of life.
He enables us to accept pain and suffering, doing it for Christ's sake.
We are now reaching the high point of the truly happy life.
This is a life so transformed that it stands in utter contrast to the life which comes naturally to us as human beings.
It reflects an entirely new way of living with ourselves and of behaving before others.
If the pure in heart gain integrity, then peacemakers gain their wholeness and health.
When Dante, the Italian poet, was exiled from his home in Florence, he decided to walk from Italy to Paris, to search for the real meaning of life.
Late one night, he stopped at the gates of a Franciscan monastery to seek shelter.
He was asked by the friar who opened the gate to him, ‘What do you wish?’
Dante answered in one word: ‘Peace.’
This is the desire to have a completely new foundation as a person.
This is what it means truly to be a child of God.
Our lack of peace is reflected in every area of our lives.
Many people today are aware that they do not have the full assurance of their sexuality.
Inadequate parenting has left them wounded, confused, fearful of intimacy, double-minded, and addicted to all kinds of emotions.
Their sense of inner emptiness and fear is projected outwards in deformed relationships and actions.
This is turn generates unrest and disturbance in society at large.
One young man told me how he was recruited into the South African police force.
He had a strong desire to be a ‘peace-keeper’.
But at the age of eighteen he was wholly unprepared for the terrors that awaited him.
One night, he found himself with a few other police enveloped in the hatred of a black township uprising.
As he stood guard in the hut where a handful of police had taken refuge, a terrible fear possessed him.
He had been well educated, and came from a home where much love was shown, but alone in the darkness he imagined a thousand evil eyes upon him, and his one instinct was to blast away with his gun with murder in his heart.
He fired out into the night again and again.
At sunrise, the sickening reality dawned that bullets, his bullets, had mown down human beings.
They now lay  for ever dead.
Guilt besieged him for many years.
How could he ever become a peacemaker?
How is it that love and hate live so close together within one pulsing heart?
This man is learning slowly how deeply the experience of God's forgiveness has to penetrate through his whole being.
Among Jesus' last words, he left us this legacy, which in a sense reflects his whole life:
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you.
I do not give to you as the world gives.
Do not let your hearts be troubled, and do not be afraid.
Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness
It may seem strange to pass from peace-making to being persecuted.
But the radical life-style of the true Christian is so contrary to the ways of the world that it cannot help being a threat to others.
This was the experience of Jesus, and it was the experience of the early Christians in the Roman Empire.
In a world that substitutes power for relationships, lust for love and magic for the true love of God, we will always have to fight to express the truth of what it means to be truly human.
In the struggle between good and evil, we will inevitably suffer.
To the strong boss, Jesus promised his Spirit in the midst of persecution, with all the violence of evil we may have to face.
As this type of personality is trapped in the fear of appearing weak, facing the ridicule of those who persecute goes against all the grain of personality.
But Jesus, who was himself reviled, and ‘led as a lamb to the slaughter’, is able to strengthen us in our weakness of personality.
And so we can go back to all the Beatitudes, seeing how each stands or falls in relationship to the previous  ‘Be-attitudes’ that we have before God, in God, for God, and through God living in us.
Truly then, the Beatitudes test the personal integrity of our lives and of our interpretation of true happiness.
Desiring God
Maturity, at least for me, seems to lie in the discovery that happiness and circumstances don't have all that much to do with each other; that happiness is more a matter of choice and habit than we suppose, and less dependent upon the accident of circumstances.
For me, too, it seems allied with giving the fundamental grief and despair room and expression, using them as a kind of necessary ballast but not taking so much of them on board that they swamp the vessel.
Monica Furlong
When we are young, we assume that if only we can get the circumstances of our lives right, then we will automatically be happy.
This is not very far from the belief that pleasure and happiness amount to the same thing — a belief with deep flaws, as we saw in an earlier chapter.
As we travel through life, we begin to realize that grief and deep disappointments lie beneath the surface of our lives.
If these underground emotions came to the surface all at once, they would shatter our existence, but fortunately they come upon us gradually — more so for some than for others.
As we have seen, the legacies of childhood set the pattern for the way in which we interpret and live our adult lives.
This is graphically illustrated in the case of one girl, whose  mother died when she was seven years old.
Ever since, she has always felt that she has a tenuous grip upon life.
It is only now, in middle age, that joy is beginning to develop in her heart, as she begins to realize that God has truly given her the gift of life.
In spite of her unhappy childhood, the love of God has brought her healing and reassurance.
Depths of desire
Perhaps it is a basic rule of life that the deeper the emotional deprivations of the heart, the simpler our joys appear.
C. S. Lewis, whose mother died when he was ten, tells us:
With my mother's death all settled happiness, all that was tranquil and reliable, disappeared from my life.
There was to be much fun, many pleasures, many stabs of joy; but no more of the old security.
It was sea and islands now; the great continent like Atlantis had slid under the waves.
As a growing child, three simple experiences set the pattern of joy for the rest of Lewis's life.
He describes these experiences in his autobiography,Surprised by Joy .
The first occurred one summer's day, when he was standing beside a flowering currant bush:
There arose within me without warning, and as if from a depth not of years but of centuries, the memory of that earlier morning at the Old House when my brother had brought his toy garden into the nursery.
It is difficult to find words strong enough for the sensation which came over me; Milton's ‘enormous bliss’ of Eden (giving the full, ancient meaning to ‘enormous’) comes somewhere near it.
It was a sensation, of course, of desire; but desire of what?
Before I knew what I desired, the desire itself  was gone, the whole glimpse withdrawn, the world turned commonplace again, or only stirred by a longing that had just ceased.
It had taken only a moment of time; and in a certain sense everything else that had ever happened to me was insignificant in comparison.
The second glimpse came through Squirrel Nutkin though I loved all the Beatrix Potter books.
It troubled me with what can only be described as the Idea of Autumn.
It sounds fantastic to say that one can be enamoured of a season, but that is something like what happened: and, as before, the experience was one of intense desire.
It was something quite different from ordinary life and even from ordinary pleasure; something, as they would now say, ‘in another dimension’.
The third glimpse came through poetry.
I had become fond of Longfellow's Saga of King Olaf: fond of it in a casual, shallow way for its story and its vigorous rhythms.
But then, and quite different from such pleasures, and like a voice from far more distant regions, there came a moment when I idly turned the pages of the book and found the unrhymed translation of Tegner's Drapa and read:
I heard a voice that cried,
Balder the beautiful
Is dead, is dead —
I knew nothing about Balder; but instantly I was uplifted into huge regions of northern sky.
I desired with almost sickening intensity something never to be described (except that it is cold, spacious, severe, pale and remote) and then, as in the other examples, found myself at the very same moment already falling out of that desire and wishing I were back in it.
Lewis then adds: ‘The reader who finds these three episodes of no interest need read this book no further, for in a sense the central story of my life is about nothing else.’
He goes on: ‘The quality common to the three experiences is that of an unsatisfied desire which is itself more desirable than any other satisfaction.
I call it Joy.’
He then proceeds to distinguish this joy from happiness or pleasure, though like them it has the quality of wanting it again.
But Lewis says that it could equally be called ‘a particular kind of unhappiness or grief’.
Desire and fulfilment
In C. S. Lewis' quest for joy, we can clearly see that the void left by his mother's death was never replaced in his childhood, nor indeed perhaps ever in his whole life.
His father certainly never replaced his mother's love.
He was never able to relate adequately, as a sorrowing widower, to the two small boys left in his care.
Even when he scolded them for some minor wrongdoing, he would cite the great orators like Cicero or Burke, as if he was taking part in a parliamentary debate, instead of addressing two small boys.
Later in life, Lewis and his father drifted apart, never to be reconciled.
As a result, the three childhood incidents were profoundly important to Lewis all through his life.
They created in him a sense of desire and longing.
Throughout his adolescence and youth, Lewis interpreted the void in his heart as a tragic awareness of ‘the North’, which he saw as ‘cold, spacious, severe, pale and remote’.
This was only changed when he became a Christian and was ‘surprised by joy’.
In his book Mere Christianity , Lewis tells us that there are two mistakes people often make in the way they think about their desire.
The first is the Fool's Way.
The fool puts the blame on the things he desires.
All his life, the fool thinks that if only he tried another woman, or holiday, or whatever, then this time he would really catch the mysterious something.
The second is the way of the disillusioned ‘sensible man’.
He decides that his desires are simply moonshine.
He longs for what he can never really have.
And so he represses the part of himself which used to cry for the moon.
In fact, this second approach is exactly what Lewis did.
As a young man, he decided that belief in God was all moonshine.
However, he gradually came to believe in an impersonal God, and then in the personal God of the Christian faith.
He saw that God personally exists and relates to us, with us, and in us.
He discovered that all his desires were related to the need we all have for God himself — not just for a mother's love or for some other intense childhood need.
He said:
Creatures are not born with desires unless satisfaction for these desires exists.
A baby feels hunger; well, there is such a thing as food.
A duckling wants to swim; well there is such a thing as water.
Men feel sexual desire; well, there is such a thing as sex.
If I find in myself a desire for which no experience in this world can satisfy, the most probable explanation is that I was made for another world.
This is not a proof for the existence of God.
It is more like a wager, where we gamble our lives on the probability of God.
We would be foolish to leave God out of our reckoning, never taking time to consider deeply why we are so restless with desire.
Blaise Pascal, the seventeenth-century mathematician and philosopher, observed:
There are three kinds of people: those who have sought God and found him, and these are reasonable and happy; those who seek God and have not yet found him, and these are reasonable and unhappy; and those who neither  seek God nor find him, and these are unreasonable and unhappy.
Desire is a powerful force within each one of us, not simply because of some human need for another human being, but because of our need of God.
Augustine expressed his own restlessness and desire by saying to God: ‘You created us for yourself, and our hearts are restless until they find their rest in you.’
In Book Ten of his Confessions , Augustine searches and questions all created things for satisfaction, only to be told by them: ‘We are not God, seek above us.’
He goes on: ‘I asked the whole frame of the world about my God; and it answered me, ‘I am not he, but he made me.’’
Then Augustine begins to ponder that the memory is a vast and boundless sphere, full of desires and hopes of happiness, as well as being full of fears and sorrows: ‘Great is the power of memory, a fearful thing, O my God, a deep and boundless manifoldness: and this thing is the mind, and this am I myself.’
Augustine recognizes that his desire for God is part of the way in which he has been made.
The writer of the Book of Ecclesiastes declared: ‘He has made everything beautiful in its time.
He has also set eternity in the hearts of men.
I know that there is nothing better for men than to be happy and do good while they live.’
We each have a God-designed vacuum within us, which God alone can fill and satisfy.
This is the common message of great minds such as Pascal, Augustine and the writer of Ecclesiastes, among many others.
In modern times, psychologists have said that our unconscious mind, which powers our inbuilt desires, is simply another name for God.
For Christians, it is a grave mistake to confuse God with our inner desires, even if God placed them there in the first place.
But at least psychologists are coming to recognize that the unconscious mind, with its restlessness and its infinite desire, may be God-given and God-directed.
Our desires are of course double-edged.
They can drive us into the arms of God, or into the clutches of evil.
Many people trivialize their desire for God, and settle for something that is inferior.
When this happens, we exchange God for cheap idolatry, whether we worship work, money, sex, or status.
But they can never satisfy desire.
It would be like trying to fill the Pacific Ocean with pebbles thrown into the waves.
As Augustine said, the response of the ocean itself would be, ‘But I too am a creature, that God made me.’
The God-shaped vacuum
Our deepest desires can only be satisfied when we seek after God and eternity.
To prove this claim for ourselves, we need to take two important steps.
First, we must be ready to recognize that a natural desire within us points to a real object which can satisfy that desire.
Secondly, that our desire for God is distinct from our desires for created things.
We desire a lot of things that the advertising industry brainwashes us to believe are indispensable.
The ‘right’ perfume, deodorant, hairdo, suit of clothes, and shoes trivialize our desires and can devalue us as people.
This happens when we are manipulated by ‘the hidden persuaders’ of fashion, the dictates of society, and the many fantasies about what people think of us.
Our high desires for spiritual reality are transmuted into the sordid quest for consumerism and materialism.
However, there are other desires which do correspond to truly human values: the desire for friendship (because as human beings we were made for relationships), or the desire to give happiness to others (because our human nature makes us aware of the needs of others).
Desires are not free-floating, like particles of dust in the sunlight with no apparent attachment to anything.
Instead, our desires reflect the collection of values that we attach to our humanity.
In other  words, desires are authentically related to our very nature as human beings.
As we have seen, C. S. Lewis, more clearly than most writers, has sensed the uniqueness of God-inspired desire and of having God as the object of desire.
In his book,The Pilgrim's Regress , he says that the experience of intense longing is distinguished from other longings by two things:
In the first place, though the sense of want is acute and even painful, yet the mere wanting is felt to be somehow a delight.
This hunger is better than any other fullness; this poverty better than any other wealth.
In the second place, there is a peculiar mystery about the object of this desire.
Every one of these supposed objects for the desire is inadequate to it.
It appears to me therefore that if a man diligently followed this desire, pursuing the false objects until their falsity appeared and then resolutely abandoning them, he must come out at last into the clear knowledge that the human soul was made to enjoy some object that is never fully given — nay, cannot even be imagined as given — in our present mode of subjective and spatio-temporal experience.
There is an empty throne within the throne room of our hearts that only God can fill.
In many cases this invisible emptiness inside us takes visible form.
A dying man asked for a chair to be placed by his bedside, because he sensed that Jesus Christ was sitting beside him in the darkness throughout the night.
When he died, his hand was found outstretched, resting on the chair, as if held by an unseen friend.
But as we have already seen, there is also a negative side to our infinite desires.
There is the wretchedness and restlessness of our empty hearts without God.
‘Who does not feel more unhappy at not being a king except a king who has been deposed?’ asked Pascal.
Because we have been given the possibility of sight, it is no surprise when we are inconsolable if  we have no eyesight.
Such examples of human misery, Pascal said, prove our greatness: ‘It is the misery of a great lord, the wretchedness of a deposed king,’ that reflect upon the human dignity of being made in the image of God.
For Pascal, the truth about our condition was a strange paradox:
So man's greatness comes from knowing that he is wretched, for a tree does not know that it is wretched.
Thus it is wretched to know that one is wretched, but it is a sign of our true greatness to know that we are wretched.
The ability to think gives us dignity.
The enjoyment of our place among others also gives us dignity.
But our dignity supremely lies in the capacity and desire that God has given us to enjoy him and to seek for his esteem and friendship.
This belief implies that we have a destiny rather than a fate.
In other words, that we are not victims of chance and fate, but take an active part in our destiny, which is a spiritual drama.
We are both exalted and fallen at the same time: sinful and yet given unique status in the universe of things.
Our exaltation is related to our sinfulness, because sin is really the desire to grasp God's position for ourselves.
This is why Jesus came, as the God-man, to redeem the evil of the man-God, who wanted to usurp the place of God in creation.
Without God as the supreme expression of goodness, love and personhood, human beings can have no true exaltation or dignity.
In the modern world, we are reduced to an idealized figment of the communist imagination or we fall into secular despair, but we cannot be exalted as a personal being, uniquely loved for our own sake.
The uniqueness of the Christian faith is that it orients man to hope in God, to respond to his love and to rest in God alone as the only source of ultimate happiness.
The God-shaped vacuum within us makes itself felt most when we ask ourselves — or our psychiatrist —‘Who am I?’
This is a question which animals never need to ask.
Humans, with their openness to life and their profound sense of incompletion, are in sharp contrast with the instinctive, closed world of the animal realm.
So the question ‘Who am I?’ reveals both our dignity and our folly.
We cling to the symbols which give our life meaning and help us in answering this question.
We depend upon emotionally-packed images, formed in childhood or reinforced in times of crisis during our emotional development.
The symbol for our inner life is ‘the heart’, a symbol taken up in the Bible.
The heart is the focus of life-shaping changes in our existence.
It has a direct impact on our growth as persons, happy or unhappy.
Our lives begin with the influence of another's heart upon us.
The mother's heartbeat is a constant feature of the unborn child's life: sixty beats a minute, 3,600 an hour, 86,400 a day and a staggering 24 million throughout the whole period of pregnancy.
In the absence of mother, nurses have learned the trick of placing an alarm clock under the newborn baby's pillow.
The Hebrew word rechem , meaning ‘God's mercy’, is drawn from the same imagery, since it literally means ‘the womb’.
This tells us about God's compassionate relationship with his people.
In the Bible, the heart is a powerful symbol for our inner selves.
The heart can be joyful or sorrowful, proud or humble, as well as the home of our desires.
‘A whole heart’ signifies integrity, and it is ‘from the heart’that the essential qualities of a person flow, either for good or evil.
The heart is as much identified with thought and the mind as with the emotions and the will.
So the ‘listening heart’ means the ‘understanding mind’.
The psalms and the Old Testament prophets use the language of the heart to say that ‘the cleansing of the heart’, or a heart transplant, is essential for our relationship with God to be restored.
In the New Testament, God's love is poured ‘into our hearts’ through the Holy Spirit, while it is ‘on the heart’that Christ writes our new identity, as we now belong to him.
Today, it is plainly recognized that stress is heart-related.
The physical condition of the heart can be linked with the emotional conditions of the inner life.
This points to our need for healthy relationships with other people, and above all for a healthy relationship with God.
To ask, ‘Are you happy?’ is ultimately to ask the question, ‘How is your inner life before God?’
As God made us for himself, how are we relating to him?
The heart, or the inner life, is therefore a great teacher, pointing us back to the source of all happiness — to God himself.
‘Listen to your heart,’ we advise each other.
These, then, are some of the symbolic inklings we have of eternity, and of our divinely-destined path of happiness.
The desire for joy lies deep within the human spirit, as deep as the soul's quest for happiness.
It is certainly deeper than the body's appetite for pleasure.
The drive for idol-worship is another sign.
The belief that the unconscious mind is wise and good, and that it can be identified with God, is another signpost, false though its trail is.
The God-shaped vacuum in every heart is an explicit signal of eternity.
The desire for happiness is deeper and more powerful than we know.
Looking for happiness in the right place
We live our lives on a human tightrope of infinite desires and yet of physical mortality.
This keeps us in our place, although it frustrates us with a great deal of suffering.
However, it is foolish to live with the denial of death, as modern culture tends to do.
In our heart of hearts we know that we will all die.
We also live absurdly if we forget the dignity of every one of our fellow human beings.
We are naive, President Gorbachev said, if we repress the religious dimension of mankind.
That is why we need windows of the soul, such as desire, happiness and joy, so that we do not lose sight of what our lives are truly all about.
Today, there are many religious and secular beliefs open to us.
For this reason, we need a wise awareness of the  important dimensions of life.
This will help us not to confuse physical pleasure with true happiness or the spiritual reality of joy.
In the introduction to her autobiography, the writer Elizabeth Goudge speaks of this when she compares her adult romantic interest in roses with her childhood delight with the snow.
She says:
I appreciate roses more than snow, but that was not the case at the beginning.
Then, in company with all children and most dogs, I thought snow the wonder of the world.
The snow-light filling the house with magic as the white flakes drifted down in the windless silence, the splendour where the sun came out and the hills and fields and trees sparkled under the arc of blue sky, the thought of the things one did in the snow, tobogganing and snowballing, and building a snowman: it was all ecstasy.
And somewhere tucked away at the back of one's mind was the knowledge that every crystal in the vast whiteness, though too small for the human eye to see, was fashioned like a flower or a star.
How could snow not be the wonder of the world?
Looked at from one point of view, snow is the wonder of the world, provided you have a child's appreciation of magic and can withdraw quickly from the cold into the warmth of the indoors.
It is a wonder, as long as you do not carry the responsibilities of having to clear the roads for traffic, nor understand the host of problems that a winter blizzard can bring to disrupt the economy.
When you grow up, the appreciation of the rose does have more appeal, especially if you enjoy the cultivation of a garden, or receive a bunch of roses from the person you love most.
In the same way, there is an appropriateness to each realm of happiness.
The whole nature of the aesthetic is the appreciation of each thing in itself.
The Elizabethan playwright, Ben  Jonson, challenges us to see that it is appropriate to appreciate everything:
Have you seen but a white lily grow before rude hands had touched it?
Have you seen but the fall of snow before the earth hath smutched it?
Have you felt the wool of the beaver, or swan's down ever?
Have you smelt of the bud of the briar or the nard in the fire?
Have you tasted the bag of the bee?
These are good questions.
Have we seen, felt, smelt or tasted the beauty of the world?
And if happiness opens up to us such vast caverns of the soul, have we in a much greater sense been sufficiently aware of the greatness and the mystery of God?
Even popular magazine articles recognize that there are appropriate steps necessary to being happy.
These include the following pieces of advice.
Form close relationships with other human beings.
Of all the circumstances that happy people share, loving relationships are the most important.
So the first priority is to spend time in cultivating friendships.
Aim for durability and frequency in relationships, but not in intensity.
There can be high peaks of pleasure, but these cannot last, whereas steady, constant relationships are more likely to sustain and deepen the qualities of true happiness.
So work consistently and faithfully in your personal relationships.
Do good, by seeking the well-being of others.
This relieves the stress of being selfish and competitive with others, in recognizing that relating is far more important than selfishly achieving within society.
This enhances a true sense of personal integrity and self-worth.
It also creates an atmosphere of harmony with friends.
Develop an emotional interest in other people.
It has been proved that when people are not emotionally involved with other people, and have no interest in the world around them, they cannot be happy.
We get much more happiness in investing in other people's lives than we do in self-isolation.
Strive to see things in proportion.
This gives us space for others, allowing us to show kindness and understanding and helping us to live appropriately with others.
So we can mourn with those who mourn as well as rejoice with those who rejoice.
Keep your body fit.
Exercise your mind by reading widely and reflecting on life.
Cultivate the affairs of the heart and of the soul.
Be open to God in all of your existence, as the highest good in all of life.
All these pieces of advice contain a certain amount of wisdom.
How much further do we need to explore to discover happiness in God?
The answer is clearly stated in the New Testament.
When Jesus Christ becomes the focus of our emotions as well as of our minds, then the Christian life is essentially a joyful life.
In ancient Greek literature, joy was seen only as the delight of the gods, who alone were the lords of joy.
But in the New Testament joy becomes an essential element in the life of the ordinary Christian.
This joy is not questioned or limited in any way.
We simply ‘rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ’.
Christian joy expresses a fullness of life that is infinite, everlasting, and incorruptible.
It is like the enormous energy of the sun's radiation, of which a fraction of less than one per cent is absorbed by all the life-systems of the Earth.
The potential of joy is vastly greater than our capacity to absorb it all.
God's love is able to sustain human happiness beyond our wildest desires.
How can we enter into this happiness and make it part of our lives?
Joy accepts the rule of God
Jesus came as the messenger of joy.
At the heart of his message was a call to belong to the ‘kingdom of God’, which means to submit to the rule of God as king.
Jesus said that God's kingdom would come in the future, at the end of time, when all evil would be destroyed.
But he also spoke of the kingdom being present on earth now, in a way that pointed forward to the fullness of its coming in the future.
The kingdom of God, he said, could be seen in the hearts of all who love and obey God now.
Accepting his teaching and following him as a disciple means to live in that kingdom now.
To belong to God's kingdom is to experience the reality of joy.
For Christians who live closely with God, life is like a festival, and with each new believer brought into reality there is joy for all believers.
In Jesus' parables, this was the joy experienced when the lost son returned to his father, or when the lost sheep was found, or when the lost coin was pulled from its hiding-place.
The presence of Jesus within our hearts, as we submit to his rule, brings the greatest joy.
This is why we pray, ‘Your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.’
The evidence of belonging to God's kingdom is that our character changes and is re-formed.
As we saw in chapter ten, the beatitudes of Jesus express the radicalism of living under the rule of God's own character.
Happiness only comes about when we live within the disciplines of life, given to us by God.
The Book of Proverbs makes it clear that happiness and discipline go hand in hand from the beginning of our lives: ‘He who spares the rod hates his son, but he who loves him is careful to discipline him.’
Another passage says, ‘My son, do not despise the Lord's discipline and do not resent his rebuke, because the Lord disciplines those whom he loves, as a father the son he delights in.’
These Old Testament sayings are re-echoed in the New  Testament.
The writer of the letter to the Hebrews tells us what God's love for us means:
My son, do not make light of the Lord's discipline, and do not lose heart when he rebukes you, because the Lord disciplines those he loves, and he punishes everyone he accepts as a son.
Endure hardship as discipline; God is treating you as sons.
For what son is not disciplined by his father?
If you are not disciplined (and everyone undergoes discipline) then you are illegitimate children and not true sons.
Moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it.
How much more should we submit to the Father of our spirits and live!
Our fathers disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, that we may share in his holiness.
No discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful.
Later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace for those who have been trained by it.
We cannot enjoy a happy life with God unless we are willing to be disciplined — unhappy though that may appear at first.
We cannot receive the happiness of being sons and daughters of God without the chastening education of our Father's love.
The uncomfortable truth is that our rebellion against God has estranged us from him.
This sin needs to be uprooted from our hearts, which is a painful process.
The way of life which Jesus described in the beatitudes appears at first sight to be a contradiction.
How can we be ‘blessed’ or ‘happy’, if we have also to be humbled as ‘the poor in spirit’, or to mourn, or to be meek, or to ‘hunger and thirst for righteousness’?
This seems a very strange form of happiness!
But this shows how necessary it is for proud, independent, self-reliant people to be broken, re-educated, and  redirected to walk in the ways of the Lord.
This process means that our characters have to be transformed.
It is not simply a question of becoming nicer or trying harder to live a good life.
We need the complete transformation of our inner selves that only God can achieve.
Joy lies in repentance
The Bible's word for turning back to God is ‘repentance’.
This was the central message of the Old Testament prophets, as they called God's people to return to him.
Jesus, too, called people to repentance.
His parables are full of this message.
The outcome of true repentance is always joy, pictured in several of Jesus' parables as a great feast.
Because the transformation of repentance is always brought about by God's power, rather than our efforts, the images in these parables speak of God's generous giving.
He provides the feast for rejoicing, as well as the fine clothes for the banquet guests to sit before him.
The feast gives us a graphic picture of the character of God, showing how he loves to redeem those who have been lost, to restore the lives which have been wasted.
We might think that this change of life would bring joy primarily to the person who is redeemed.
But Jesus' teaching shows us that repentance is God's joy.
It is God who rejoices at the repentance of a sinner, just as the father rejoices at the return of the prodigal son.
Jesus' parables, and his way of life, reveal some unusual features about the character of this merciful and forgiving God.
Although God is holy and hates sin, yet Jesus had time for criminals, prostitutes and the men who exploited them.
He encouraged them to turn back to God and accepted them with a forgiving spirit.
He calls his followers to do the same in their relationships with others.
In the Lord's Prayer, God's forgiveness of our  sins is linked with our forgiveness of others.
‘Forgive us our debts as we also forgive those that are indebted to us.’
To follow Jesus means to open ourselves to others.
Jesus' parable of the Good Samaritan shows that a fully Christian life is one that is open to everyone who is in need.
We live with a double command: to love God, and to love other people too.
The joy that Jesus brings is the joy of sharing and receiving love in the mercy of God.
This joy expresses unlimited trust in the power of God to transform the most stubborn aspects of our human nature.
Joy experienced in Christian worship
The atmosphere of joy in the Gospels inspired the worship of the early church.
Jesus, the man of joy, leads his followers to be filled with thanksgiving and praise to God.
Jesus is therefore the passport for fullness of joy.
Jesus once told his disciples: ‘So far you have asked nothing in my name.
Ask and you will receive, that your joy may be complete.’
Fullness of joy comes from entering into fellowship with the Father and the Son, through the Holy Spirit, each enjoying the company of the other.
This is the heart of Christian worship, and the heart of our joy in God.
Christian joy is also founded on the historical events of the death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ, the coming of his Holy Spirit, and the ongoing fellowship of God with Christian believers.
Christian joy is the essential spark that gives vitality to true worship.
Each service of worship should be an occasion for praise and rejoicing.
The roots of this joy in worship can be seen in the psalms, the hymn book of the Old Testament.
The psalms let us hear the exultant shouts of the worshippers, and allow us to join in imagination with the pilgrims who go up to Jerusalem to keep the festivals.
In the psalms, the courts of the temple resound with praise and worship.
Christian worship on the first day of the week celebrates the whole life of the Christian.
Just as bees scatter widely to collect nectar from many flowers, so the ideal of worship is to bring together our wide experiences of the goodness of God from the workaday world.
In this way, every corner of our life is able to be brought in worship to God.
The poet George Herbert expressed this truth:
Let all the world in ev'ry corner sing
My God and King.
The heav'ns are not too high,
His praise may thither fly;
The earth is not too low,
His praises there may grow.
Let all the world in ev'ry corner sing
My God and King.
While Sunday provides the flash-point for our worship, this can only happen when our Mondays to Saturdays are filled with praise for God as well.
In a different poem, George Herbert says: ‘Sev'n whole days, not one in seven, I will praise thee.’
And he concludes that although hymns and songs of praise are a ‘poore sort’, they reflect the true worship of heaven, which itself cannot do full justice to God's greatness:
Small it is in this poore sort
To enroll thee;
Ev'n eternitie is too short
To extoll thee.
Joy deepened through suffering
While we can appreciate that Christian worship is joy, it is harder to believe in what the poet George Matheson called  ‘Joy that seekest me through pain’.
Experiencing joy through suffering is a paradox, and yet it was this that marked the life of Jesus.
To follow Jesus as his disciples means that we too face opposition to living like him.
One form of suffering which we can avoid is the surprise of being persecuted.
In the New Testament, Peter wrote these words:
Dear friends, do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you.
But rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.
If you are insulted because of the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you.
‘Consider it pure joy,’ says James in his letter, ‘whenever you face trials of many kinds, because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance.’
This type of joy is not superficial, for it is a costly experience, gained only through suffering and sharing something of the crucifixion of Christ.
The writer of the Book of Hebrews links the joy and suffering of Christ by saying: ‘Let us fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy set before him endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.’
This theme of joy won through suffering was especially powerful in the persecution faced by the early church, as it has been in times of persecution since.
Paul understood his own sufferings as being a signal to unbelievers of the power of the crucified Jesus over suffering and death.
In a moving episode from the life of Francis of Assisi, Brother Leo asked Francis, ‘What is perfect joy?’
Imagine, said Francis, that I returned to Perugia on the darkest of nights, a night so cold that everything is covered with snow, and the frost in the folds of my habit  hits my legs and makes them bleed.
Shrouded in snow and shivering with cold, I arrive at the door of the friary, and after calling out for a long time, the brother porter gets up and asks: ‘Who is it?’
And I respond: ‘It is I, Brother Francis.’
The porter says: ‘Be on your way.
Now is not the time to arrive at the friary.
I will not open the door for you.’
I insist and he answers: ‘Be on your way right now.
You are stupid and an idiot.
We are already many here and we do not need you.’
I insist once more: ‘For the love of God, let me in, just for tonight.’
And he answers: ‘Not even to talk.
Go to the leper colony that is nearby.’
‘Well, Brother Leo, if after all this I do not lose patience and remain calm, believe me, that is perfect joy!’
This is the nature of Christian joy through suffering, which reconciles the negative with the transcendent love of Christ, enabling us to say, like Paul the apostle: ‘I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me.’
This is the absolute character of Christian joy, not in being supermen or women, but in receiving the gift of faith in Christ, who is able to do far above all that we can ask or think.
To experience joy in suffering is to realize that Jesus stands with the poor, the underprivileged, and those, like Francis of Assisi, rejected by their own people.
This is not a call to glorify suffering for its own sake, but to realize that nothing can separate us from the love of Christ, whatever it may be.
It is to anticipate eternity, when death will be no more, and when God will wipe away all our tears, allowing us to behold his glory.
This chapter began with a quotation from Monica  Furlong.
This passage from her writings gives us a sense of proportion about our joy through suffering:
Among the many other things that Easter means to the Christian, it must also mean a particular sense of proportion about our griefs and sufferings.
They hurt, sometimes excruciatingly, but on the deepest level of all, it is somehow ‘all right’; and out of the praise and gratitude and joy that spring from it when we can grasp it, I think that we may give ourselves permission for the more mundane, but wonderfully healing emotion of happiness.
Yes, we do have a supernatural gift of joy in Christ that is quite baffling for those outside Christianity.
Yet we remain human beings with quivering flesh and throbbing nerves who need the small delights of emotional well-being.
Much of what we have just talked about may seem far beyond our reach or experience yet, but it comforts us to believe that no exigency of life can ever rob the believer of accepting its transcendence as well as its immanence.
Joy sustained through prayer
Unlike our emotional highs and lows, which oscillate naturally, the quality of Christian happiness is sustained by the constant presence of Christ within us.
Prayer is the celebration of this constant presence.
Because prayer is the language of our hearts before God, it enables us to grow in our emotional life before God, so that these qualities of Christian joy become part of our very selves.
This experience is very different from having merely a cold, distant belief in God.
We no longer have ‘beliefs’ that are isolated from the way we live or from our emotions.
Instead, we become integrated and whole persons, where faith, hope and love all play a part.
Prayer becomes a constant relating to God throughout our daily lives, as we depend on him in trust and love.
This is because prayer is simply allowing ourselves to become new persons in Christ, reshaped in our attitudes and emotions.
To believe and trust in God means to communicate constantly with him, as friend to friend.
We allow our feelings to flow out towards him in adoration, confession, thanksgiving and praise.
In this way, prayer gives new shape to our emotions and a new character to our attitudes.
We acknowledge who we are in his sight, and we open ourselves to receive what he has to tell us.
Prayer is therefore another dimension of our whole lives.
In one of his letters, Paul told his readers to ‘pray without ceasing’.
The early Christian leader Origen commented on these words in his book On Prayer :
The man who links together his prayer with deeds of duty, and fits seemly actions with his prayer, is the man who prays without ceasing, for his virtuous deeds or the commandments he has fulfilled are taken up as a part of his prayer.
For only in this way can we take up the saying ‘pray without ceasing’ as being possible, if we can say that the whole life of the saint is one mighty, integrated prayer.
Significantly, Paul links his command to ‘pray without ceasing’ with two other directions: ‘Be joyful always’and ‘give thanks in all circumstances’.
Gratitude to God is the pulse beat of prayer and communion with God.
To experience the true power of prayer, we need to do away with the indifference and moral complacency that so readily chill our feelings for God.
We can do this by giving thanks to God in all our circumstances.
This is obviously not always an easy thing to do, especially if we are in the darkness of suffering.
But giving thanks to God, even in suffering, can be inspired by a radiance of hope that sees all things in the light of eternity.
To praise God, says C. S. Lewis, ‘not merely expresses but completes the enjoyment; it is its appointed consummation.’
As we praise God for all our circumstances, seeing them in the light of his presence and love, then we become literally ‘thankful persons’, transfused by a new radiance of joy and thanksgiving.
The more we understand of God, the more we long to praise him for who he is.
One of the psalms says, ‘Happy are the people who know the Lord as their God.’
This sums up well this chapter's exploration in search of happiness.
We live today between the times.
The blight of western civilization has been to divorce our thought from our emotions.
Even many Christians have split lives, with a thinking faith that leaves their emotions untouched.
They may believe in Jesus Christ, yet they do not enjoy him.
They have a rational understanding of faith, but they do not live by faith.
They have lots of theological notions in their heads, but little evidence of transformed feelings for God.
This is why the search for true happiness will inevitably start to expose the shallowness of our lives.
And hopefully it will lead us on to deepen and enrich ourselves, providing a strong foundation for a new way of life.
This quest for happiness will not fail with prayer as our means of friendship with God.
Light that groweth not pale
With day's decrease.
Love that never can fail
Till life shall cease.
Joy no trial can mar,
Hope that shineth afar,
Faith serene as a star,
And Christ's own peace.
Delighting in God
There is a Joy that is not given to those who do not love you (O God), but only to those who love you for your own sake.
You, yourself, are their joy.
Augustine
The search for happiness, as we have seen, has been the quest of western civilization, as well as for all of us as individuals.
That is why we have pursued its progress in the changes of society, as well as through individual story-telling.
The vivid emotions of childhood are vitally important to our growth as adults, and perhaps the stages of change in society can also be likened to the stages of childhood.
The recent history of western culture certainly corresponds to the struggles of adolescence: the flower-children of the sixties, the rebels of the seventies, and the yuppies of the eighties.
We have also looked further back, to the roots of our culture in the classical period, when philosophers first interpreted happiness as peace of mind.
This emphasis was developed during the renaissance, when happiness was interpreted as the search for Utopia.
In the modern world, we looked at the findings of psychologists, with all their promises of self-knowledge — or at least, self-analysis.
And yet, despite our earnest desire for happiness, we persist in disregarding the spiritual depths of ourselves.
If it is true that God made us for himself, then without God we  are bound to live with an underlying frustration and unhappiness.
What should we do about this?
Power or love?
We first need to recognize that probably our most basic choice in life is between power and love.
Either we choose power or we choose love as our first priority in living.
If it is power we seek, then our grammar of living is to communicate the need of achievement.
To achieve or succeed we have to climb over others in the struggle to rise to the top.
In a remarkably candid expression of this issue of his faith, the American Secretary of State, James Baker, said: ‘Power doesn't really bring the fulfilment that many think it does.’
As a successful campaign manager of two presidents, Ronald Reagan and George Bush, James Baker has been a highly efficient operator of political power.
But he confessed:
Power, of course, can be intoxicating.
It can be addictive, for power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
Over these last nine years, I have had opportunities to participate in the exercise of more power than I ever imagined I would have.
I have felt the weight of responsibility that that brings, and I have to admit to you as well that I have felt the temptations that are attendant to it.
James Baker said that he had always believed that a professional should never admit to hurt or personal problems.
This changed when he became aware not only that he had a personal problem, but that he was that problem.
Then he began to see that friendship and love, shown to our marriage partner, our friends and to God himself, are ultimately the most important dimensions of life.
He learnt, he said, that  he ‘really needed to stop trying to play God, and to turn the matter over to him’.
This struggle is acted out at every level of society.
Jesus, too, was tempted by the Devil in the wilderness.
He had to choose whether to grasp power at every opportunity or to love others and to trust in God.
We also begin to realize that making such a choice is not merely a matter of changing habits, even habits of mind.
We need a change of heart to become truly unpossessive in our love for God and each other.
To love in this way implies the total surrender of self.
In chapter two, we saw how Gloria struggled to see God as real and relevant in her life.
She had to struggle to understand what she already knew about in her head, but not in her heart.
In her journal, she wrote these words to God:
Self-surrender is simply giving back to you what you have given me.
My possessions, my talents, my desires, my friends, my knowledge, my accumulated belongings — all of them belong to you.
They all have their source in you, and you have allowed me to own them.
But that is just half of the plan.
If I stop there and clutch my possessions, they grow to possess me and I will be their slave.
I must choose to give it all back to you and to feel the happy liberation of unpossessiveness.
For true freedom lies not in holding, but in letting go; not in receiving, but in giving.
This is all such old stuff.
I've heard it many times before.
But to fully relinquish myself and to trust you, O God, is a much deeper and wider experience than I can yet fully enter into.
But I am going in that direction.
Self-surrender also means to surrender the imprints of our childhood emotions.
We give up seeing ourselves as ‘the dream child’, ‘the shadow child’, ‘the rejected child’, or any of the other wounded images that affect our relationships  with others.
Of course, these images of ourselves are deeply persistent.
In an indifferent and often insensitive world, we so often feel alone and misunderstood.
The words of a song by the group Supertramp express the feelings of many people:
There are times when all the world's asleep,
the questions run too deep
for such a simple man.
Won't you please, please tell me what we've learned,
I know it sounds absurd
but please tell me who I am.
The wisdom of the ancient world saw that it is in our points of greatest personal weakness that we are most defensive, and where we compensate addictively in our emotions.
However, when we recognize that God is able to rule over our personal woundedness, then we begin to appreciate how profoundly indebted we are to him.
He heals us, saves us from ourselves, and redeems us.
In place of an animal existence, which trivializes the needs and desires of our hearts, we see that true happiness has a glory and majesty about it.
As C. S. Lewis observed in his sermon, ‘The Weight of Glory’:
Indeed, if we consider the unblushing promises of reward and the staggering nature of the rewards promised in the Gospels, it would seem that Our Lord finds our desires, not too strong, but too weak.
We are half-hearted creatures, fooling about with drink and sex and ambition when infinite joy is offered us, like an ignorant child who wants to go on making mud pies in a slum because he cannot imagine what is meant by the offer of a holiday at the sea.
We are far too easily pleased.
Certainly, in reading the biographies of popular  celebrities, we can see the truth of this.
Their total lack of concern for any spiritual growth, other than what pleases the senses of the body, exhibits what medieval writers described as Animal Man.
Yet we are also familiar within ourselves with what we may call our rational streak.
We are able to remain detached observers of life.
We need to rise above the animal and rational levels in us, and seek to become spiritual men and women.
We have to be prepared to sacrifice lesser values such as physical or rational pleasures, and search for happiness as the gift of God to us.
In the words of a quotation from William of St Thierry, worth considering again and again:
When the object of man's thought is God and the things that belong to God, then the will reaches the stage when it becomes love.
Then the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of life, makes his presence felt by the way of love and gives life to all.
But he adds:
This way of thinking does not lie at the disposal of the thinker.
It is the gift of grace.
It is bestowed by the Holy Spirit who breathes where he chooses, and upon whom he chooses.
Man's part is simply to prepare his heart continually by ridding his will of foreign attachments, his reason of anxieties, and his memory of idle or absorbing business — even though that business appear to be so very necessary.
That is it.
Instead of merely existing on the animal or rational level, we want to experience the fullness of life as truly spiritual men and women.
Then our happiness will become authentic and secure.
However, there is room for even more progress.
While we have already had a taste of the true joy of  the Christian life, how can we progress to delight in God as the source and fulfilment of all our happiness?
Motives for delighting in God
The Christian experience is that in this life, as the Bible puts it, ‘we have no continuing city’, no permanence of abode.
Instead ‘we seek one to come.’
This sense of being a stranger on earth is well expressed by Malcolm Muggeridge, who was an old hand at lampooning the foibles of the world:
For me there has always been — and I count it the greatest of all blessings — a window never finally blacked out, a light never finally extinguished.
I had a sense, sometimes enormously vivid, that I was a stranger in a strange land; a visitor, not a native, a displaced person.
The feeling, I was surprised to find, gave me a great sense of satisfaction, almost of ecstasy.
Days or weeks or months might pass.
Would it ever return — the lostness?
I strain my ears to hear it, like distant music; my eyes see it as a very bright light very far away.
Has it gone forever?
And then — ah! the relief.
Like slipping away from a sleeping embrace, silently shutting the door behind one, tiptoeing off in the grey light of dawn — a stranger again.
The only ultimate disaster that can befall us, I have come to realize, is to feel ourselves at home here on earth.
As long as we are aliens, we cannot forget our true homeland.
It is only as we remain exiles, stay-behind agents, spies in enemy territory, that we can really learn to delight in God alone.
As Thomas Aquinas observed, the state of ultimate happiness does not lie within ourselves, but in God alone.
One of the psalms says: ‘My soul, find rest in God alone.’
This then leads us to explore ultimate happiness in God's  own being.
God delights in himself.
Happiness is his essential nature.
He is therefore the ground and source of all goodness and happiness.
God's pleasure in himself is not a self-contained, self-satisfied pleasure, as we might imagine.
God is a Trinity of three distinct persons, each loving and relating to the others within the unity of God.
So the happiness of God — the happiness that is at the heart of the universe — is in the eternal relationship of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
It is in the descent of the Son to earth, and his return to the Father, that we learn how we too can relate to God's happiness.
We renounce our own way of living and thinking to live the life of obedient faith — just as Jesus lived on earth.
Our happiness lies, as Jesus said, in doing the things that please the Father.
Only by the power of his Spirit can we see our lives oriented with his life; his will with our will.
It is God as Father who enables us to see the true essence of God.
It is God as Son who reveals God to us in terms we can understand — by becoming a human being.
It is God as Spirit who brings us the intimate presence of God to us, enabling us to be friends of God.
It is no wonder that Christians throughout the ages have said that by contemplating the Trinity they have found the ultimate essence, expression and exercise of happiness.
How does God communicate this happiness to us?
God's happiness generates new life within our hearts.
It makes us more fully alive, like the sap in a vine that brings life to the branches.
God's vitality and happiness produce the fruit of the Spirit that is ‘love, joy and peace’.
God's happiness also nourishes our inner life.
It feeds the soul, so that we can grow spiritually and become more like Jesus Christ.
God's happiness is contagious, producing delight in the lives of those who worship him.
Out of the fullness of our hearts, praise flows out to God like a river in flood.
These are descriptions of a transformed, and transforming, happiness.
The dazzling reality of God's happiness can  only become a living experience in our lives when we discover the spiritual disciplines that keep us close to God.
The key to delighting in God is going through a constant process of sublimation.
We exchange the things of lesser value for the things of greater value.
This is what Paul meant when he said: ‘I count all things but loss, for the excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.’
Jesus once told a parable about a merchant who sold everything that he had, in order to buy one single pearl of immense value.
All growth of character implies this exchange of the lesser for the greater.
There is the self-denial of the musician who devotes all her time and energy to mastering her musical instrument.
We too are called to exchange the things that are important to us for the sake of the transformation God wishes to work in us.
How do we do this?
We can simply summarize these ways as meditating on God's word, living a life of prayer and praise, and growing in our love for God.
Meditating on God's word
Meditating on the Bible is a personalized way of thinking, reading, and learning from God.
It is a homely way of doing your own theology.
Meditation is habit-forming.
It cultivates in us attitudes of obedience, humility before God, sensitivity to our conscience, spiritual discernment and moral wisdom.
Meditation is a tacit way of acknowledging that truth does not live in us, but in God alone.
It is a way of living ‘under the shadow of the Almighty’.
Meditation can bring us into the immediate presence of God.
This is what the Deuteronomist meant, when he said: ‘The word is near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart.’
The psalm par excellence for the practice of meditation is Psalm 119.
At least nine times over the writer expresses his delight in meditating upon God and his word.
Twice he says, ‘I will delight myself in your statutes.’
He also speaks  of God's testimonies as being his delight.
He compares himself with those whose hardened hearts are calloused and unfeeling, and then says: ‘But I delight in your law.’
By ‘the law’, the writer means a whole way of living.
This is why no fewer than eight different terms are used to convey the richness of the law, which reveals God's own character.
By spending each morning meditating on one verse and each week upon one stanza, we can happily fill half a year on this wonderful psalm alone.
Blaise Pascal has observed that ‘a man's own need is the measure of his greatness’.
This is certainly the case when we measure our intimate need of God before his word, in a constant life of meditation.
Jesus is often described in the Gospels as ‘having compassion’ on people.
This does not mean merely a general concern for others, but a unique perception of the precise needs of those who came to him.
In meditation, we encounter the compassion of God for us.
He knows the precise needs of our hearts, in such a unique and personal way that we experience the remarkable conviction that we are being personally and intimately addressed by his word.
This is why meditation on God's word is of such vital and central significance for our personal and spiritual growth.
We learn to delight in God alone.
In the meditative life, we exchange the worldly things that give us delight for the full commitment of loving God above all.
The poet George Herbert knew this well, and expressed it best in his poem The Pearl :
I know all these, and have them in my hand:
Therefore not sealed, but with open eyes
I flie to thee, and fully understand
Both the main sale, and the commodities;
And at what rate and price I have thy love;
With all the circumstances that may move:
Yet through all these labyrinths, not my grovelling wit,
But thy silk twist let down from heav'n to me
Did both conduct and teach me, how by it
To climbe to thee.
In the legend of Theseus, in Greek mythology, he prevented himself from getting lost in the Cretan labyrinth by holding on to a silken thread.
The thread eventually led him out once more to safety.
George Herbert took up this image by saying that God's ‘silk twist’ links earth to heaven.
That thread is the word of God that guides us in our climb to God.
Meditation is holding on to that silken thread throughout life.
We make whatever sacrifices and exchanges we can for the ‘pearl’ of our objective, beyond the labyrinth of the world.
Living a life of prayer and praise
Meditating on God's word leads us forward into contemplating God himself.
These two motions of the heart towards desiring God are closely related and yet are quite distinct.
They can be distinguished as desiring to know God's will, and delighting to live in God's presence.
Desire for God prepares us for delight in God.
The thought that prayer is ultimately about delighting in God helps us to stop seeing it as a ‘technique’ in which we are advancing.
The purpose of praying is not prayer, but to delight in God, and commune with him for his own sake.
Of course, we also need to pray for the needs that others have, as well as for our own needs.
We live exhausted, frustrated, perplexing lives that need the strength and clarity of purpose that God alone can give us.
James, writing in the New Testament, focuses on the fact that we pray to the ‘giving God’, who enjoys giving to those who ask him.
James calls him ‘the Father of lights, who does not change like shifting shadows’.
According to James, much of our unhappiness  comes about by failing to ask God for what we need: ‘You do not have, because you do not ask God.
When you ask, you do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives.’
The psalms help us to interpret this, by reminding us that we are given our heart's desires when we also delight in God:
O Lord, the king rejoices in your strength.
How great are the victories you give!
You have granted him the desire of his heart
and have not withheld the request of his lips.
He asked you for life, and you gave it to him —
length of days for ever and ever.
Delight yourself in the Lord
and he will give you the desires of your heart.
As we contemplate God in the beauty of his holiness, he shapes our hearts and our desires to what gives him delight.
His happiness becomes our happiness, and his life becomes ours too.
He gives us of himself, to be like him.
This looking towards God is therefore the life of contemplation, which is at the heart of the truly Christian life.
We can only experience God's happiness for ourselves when we grow in contemplative prayer.
This is impossible without the Trinity, in which each person of the Godhead delights in the others.
We live in the knowledge that ‘the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit’ are indeed with us always.
A contemplative way of life can only grow gradually, because it implies the transformation of our natural, instinctual way of operating.
Our emotional addictions need to be destroyed.
Our inner wounds need to be healed.
We have to learn to trust not in our own feelings, but in the God of our feelings.
All this takes time.
We discover that prayer grows as it keeps pace with the moral and emotional changes within us.
The essence of prayer is this: is our relationship with God characterized by the words of the psalm: ‘My soul, find rest in God alone’?
Resting and delighting in God is not confined to the mind, nor to the emotions, but brings our whole being into the presence of God.
This means that we contemplate God in our many different moods and emotional conditions.
We contemplate both the small things and the great realities, at times when it is very hard work, when we feel spiritually dry and unreceptive, or when we rejoice in God and receive his refreshment.
Contemplation can mean watchfulness and moral vigilance, as well as quiet discernment and the pursuit of wisdom.
Why is it so diverse, so varied in its character?
Because the object of contemplation is God himself, who opens to us the infinite possibilities of himself and of our own lives.
It certainly makes a great difference to our lives when we see prayer as delighting in God.
Prayer then becomes a way of living wholly before God.
It becomes spontaneous, and is an intimate expression of our inner selves.
We stop seeing prayer merely as a means of asking for things from God — important though that is.
Instead, it is praise that begins to empower our prayer-filled lives.
This is a praise that flows from superabundance, when ‘our cup runs over’.
Growing in our love for God
As we saw earlier in the book, our culture majors in rationality, while staying fearful and ignorant of human emotions.
In contrast, the life of the Christian is a full-blooded existence.
We are called to love the Lord our God with all our heart, and all our mind, and all our strength.
Desiring and delighting in God express the fullness with which we love him.
Miguel de Unamuno, the Spanish philosopher, made a point of this when he showed that it is impossible to separate belief from emotion:
Those who say that they believe in God and yet neither love nor fear him, do not in fact believe in him but in those who have taught them that God exists.
Those who believe that they believe in God, but without any passion in their heart, any anguish of mind, without uncertainty, without doubt, without an element of despair even in their consolation, believe only in the God-idea, not in God.
True religious feelings clothe the nakedness of theory with practice.
They give flesh to our desire for God and become lived expressions of our life in God's life.
This does not mean that we all display the same feelings about God or become the same temperamental type.
Some people are full of effervescence and spontaneity in their faith, while others are more quiet and reflective.
We are not talking here about natural feelings, but a depth of desire which is given to us by God.
This focuses on the effects of God's grace within our lives; the evidence of his Spirit at work in our spirits.
God has made us so that our affections are very much the spring of all our actions.
Whatever affects us deeply will also take hold of our souls.
This is why the Bible shows so much concern about the danger of having ‘hardness of heart’, or of being coldly indifferent in our thoughts towards God.
It is much easier for us to disobey God when we have developed a calloused conscience, or have paralysed our desires for God.
The Bible is full of powerful imagery about the heart.
The heart not only explains what we do, but why we do it.
This inner focus is truly the compass of our lives, directing us in the ways we live and behave.
This is why the Bible tells us that we need to have a ‘new heart’— or, in modern terms, a heart transplant.
This shows that faith, obedience, and belief are all intrinsically bound up with the cultivation of emotions that are appropriate to the truths we profess to believe.
No one can believe in righteousness without living righteously.
No one can love God or delight in God without having a passion for God.
So the whole language of meditation, prayer, praise, contemplation and the love of God is interlocked with our emotions and commitment to God.
The New Testament is full of signs of the emotional engagement of its writers.
They speak of having ‘boldness’, or the most intimate inner assurance, in their expressions of faith and worship.
Godly sorrow, gratitude, humility, mercy, joy, thankfulness, love — all communicate the pulse beat of the believer's heart in the light of the good news of Jesus Christ.
Desiring God is the essence of our response to God.
This link between emotion and belief is beautifully
Almighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid.
Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee and worthily magnify thy holy name; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
This is not simply to say that emotions are expressed, but that emotions are reformed, cleansed, redirected and redeemed.
The practice of meditation and contemplation is life-long, reflecting this daily process of repentance and change at heart.
We should never take for granted that we will find our happiness in God alone, as though it was ours by right to have.
Instead, we need to live with discipline, persistence, and daily dependence upon God.
It is the mark of a truly human, and truly happy, life that we are ultimately contented in God alone.
‘I have learned,’ said Paul, ‘in whatever state I am, to be content.’
Paul had found all the resources for living, all the things that attracted him, all the relationships that mattered, in God alone.
‘I have learnt the secret of being content,’ he admitted, ‘in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want.’
Then he explained how he had found this incredible contentment: ‘I can do all things through him who gives me strength.’
For all of us, happiness is the result of everything we have experienced and possessed in life.
It is in a sense the balance sheet of our human existence, the closing of the accounts.
A happy life is a good life, the mark of integrity.
But, without contentment and happiness in God, it can be interpreted as a complacent, even smug, life.
Blaise Pascal has the last word:
Happiness is neither outside or inside us.
It is in God, both outside and inside us.