

PROLOGUE
At 4 a.m. it was purely by chance that Bob Newman first heard that Tweed had murdered and then raped a girl.
Returning from a London party, he was driving down Radnor Walk when he saw the unmarked vans parked by the kerb in front of Tweed's terrace house.
Men in civilian clothes moved up and down the steps leading into the narrow three-storey building.
They walked quickly, as though in a hurry to complete some urgent assignment.
A uniformed policeman stood under a lamp, his hands clasped behind his back.
Otherwise the street was deserted.
Newman slowed his Mercedes 280E, parked it a dozen yards from the rear van.
He cupped his hand to mask the lighting of a cigarette while he watched.
One dark-haired man in a business suit he recognized as he hurried back inside the house.
Harris, Harvey — some such name.
Special Branch…
Two men in boiler suits emerged from inside the rear van.
They carried a long plastic body-bag into the building.
It looked very much as though the Clean-Up Squad was at work.
Newman climbed out of the car, locked it, strolled up to the entrance to the house.
The uniformed policeman stopped him.
‘You can't go in there, sir.
Best get back to your car and go home…’
‘I know the man who lives here.
What's going on?’
The policeman looked uncertain how to reply.
He glanced up the steps and the dark-haired man peered out.
Harvey.
That was his name, Newman remembered.
Chief Inspector Ronald Harvey.
A thick-headed bureaucrat.
He hustled down the steps to confront the new arrival.
‘Newman, what are you doing here at this hour?
Did Tweed phone you?’
‘Why would he do that at this time of night?’
Newman countered.
That was when Howard, Director of the Secret Service, appeared framed in the doorway.
But not the immaculate Howard that Newman was accustomed to seeing.
Tall, in his fifties, his plump reddish face was disfigured with a stubble of unshaven hair.
His tie was badly knotted, his shirt had a crumpled look — everything about him suggested a man hastily summoned out of bed.
His expression was grim and Newman could have sworn he was still feeling dazed.
‘Better come in, Bob,’ he mumbled.
‘This is a terrible business.
And the Minister is here…’
He was talking as he led the way along a narrow hall, mounting the staircase to the first floor.
Harvey followed close on Newman's heels, protesting.
‘This is no time to let a foreign correspondent into here.’
‘I'll take full responsibility.’
Howard addressed him over his shoulder, still ascending the steps.
‘And you know perfectly well Newman is fully vetted, has often worked with us.’
‘Which Minister are you talking about?’
Newman asked.
‘Minister for External Security.
Buckmaster in person, which I could do without.
Brace yourself, Bob.
It's in here…’
Howard stiffened himself, walked very erect into Tweed's bedroom.
The place seemed full of people.
Curtains closed over the window, Newman noted.
But his gaze focused on where ‘it’ lay.
On Tweed's bed.
The girl would have been in her late twenties, early thirties, Newman estimated.
A mass of beautiful blonde hair spread like a wave over the pillow.
She lay with the sheet pulled down, exposing her naked body, her long legs, knees pressed together.
A brutal sight.
Her tongue protruded, flopped to her left side from between well-shaped lips.
In life she had been glamorous.
Her greenish eyes were wide open, staring sightless at the ceiling.
Her neck was horribly bruised.
She looked bloody awful, Newman was thinking.
A man in a dark suit, also unshaven, straightened up, reached down to lift a black bag off the floor.
The doctor.
Removing a pair of surgical gloves, he dropped them inside the open bag he'd perched on a chair, closed the bag.
Harvey plunged in.
‘Well, Doctor, what are your findings?’
The doctor, short, plump with thinning white hair, raised his eyebrows.
‘For heaven's sake, you'll have to wait for the autopsy.
I'm not given to making guesses.’
‘Perhaps not,’ a fresh voice drawled, ‘but you can tell me a few preliminary conclusions.
Time, my dear chap, is of the essence, considering the murderer's identity.’
Newman swung round.
A tall slim man stood in the doorway to the bathroom.
His thick brown hair fell down the sides of his face.
In his mid forties, he stood six feet and his aura of authority dominated the room.
Unlike the others, he was freshly shaven and his swift-moving brown eyes were alert.
He wore an expensive check sports jacket, a spotless white shirt, blue tie with a regimental tie clip sporting the symbol of the airborne forces.
Lance Buckmaster.
The Minister for External Security.
Noted for his attention to presenting a faultless appearance.
The tone was clipped, public school.
‘You know the Minister, Bob,’ Howard said to Newman.
‘We have met.’
‘And I'm still waiting, Doctor, for a reply,’ Buckmaster said with a snap.
The doctor sighed, pursed his lips.
‘The girl was strangled and then savagely raped.
More I can't say before —’
‘The autopsy,’ Buckmaster interjected impatiently.
‘We know the form.
But how do you interpret the sequence — strangulation first, then rape.
Why not the other way round?’
‘Despite the victim's slimness she looks agile and strong.
If she'd fought the rape there'd have been skin from her attacker under the fingernails.
There may be a trace under her index finger, but nothing more.
And that's subject to the autopsy,’ the doctor repeated firmly.
‘I'd like to go now.’
He looked at the group of waiting men.
‘The preliminary examination is finished as far as I am concerned…’
Nodding to Howard, he walked out without a glance at Buckmaster.
Harvey checked with the photographer, the forensic expert, who both said they didn't need the body any more.
Two waiting men in boiler suits carefully wrapped the corpse inside a canvas swathe, lifted it on to a stretcher, removed it from the room on their way downstairs.
Buckmaster, hands clasped behind his erect back, paced the room restlessly, pushed a shock of hair over his head.
‘Why assume it was Tweed?’ asked Newman, staring at Howard.
‘Because he lived here.’
It was Harvey who answered.
Wearing plastic gloves, he was picking up a pipe from a glass bowl to slip it inside a transparent bag.
‘He even smoked his pipe before he did the job.’
‘May I look at that pipe?’
Newman persisted.
‘It's full of tobacco and barely been smoked.’
‘So he had a few puffs before he grabbed her round the neck and got on with the job…’
Newman walked over to a small wall cupboard.
‘Can I look inside here?’
‘You cannot,’ Harvey informed him.
He sealed the bag holding the pipe.
‘What's inside it that interests you?’
‘Maybe a tin of tobacco.’
‘Then we'll have a look at it, shall we?’
Harvey stretched out a gloved hand, opened the door.
A tin of tobacco rested on the shelf.
He prised off the lid.
Newman leant forward, sniffed at the half-empty tin.
A stale musty odour.
‘Satisfied?’
Harvey replaced the lid, put the tin back on the shelf.
‘And Tweed has disappeared —’
‘Looks like he's run for it,’ Buckmaster interjected.
‘Our best hope is he'll do away with himself.
All this has to be kept under wraps, Newman.
You've signed the Official Secrets Act.’
‘And the neighbours?’
Newman enquired.
‘A rumour will be spread Tweed has gone off on another insurance investigation.
He had nothing to do with his neighbours.
All they know about Tweed is he's supposed to be Chief Claims Investigator for an insurance company with a lot of business abroad.
Howard told me that.’
‘And you want this kept under wraps,’ Newman reminded him.
‘So what are you doing here — you're highly recognizable with your picture in the papers at every opportunity…’
‘Don't quite like how you phrased that.’
Buckmaster's tone was aggressive.
‘You are talking to a Minister of the Crown, in case you've forgotten.
As to my presence, Howard phoned me.
And I've left my Daimler and driver round two corners from here.
And it's time I left.’
He looked at Howard.
‘I will be in touch with you by nine this morning.
See you're available in your office.’
He pulled out a folded check golfing cap from his pocket and rammed it low over his forehead.
He sneered at Newman.
‘You think anyone will recognize me now on my way back to my car?’
He walked out of the room.
Howard shrugged his shoulders as they were left alone.
‘He's got a point.
He normally never wears anything on his head —’ He broke off as Buckmaster reappeared in the doorway.
‘Funny business this.
I'd never have associated a man like Tweed with such an atrocity.’
Then he was gone again.
Howard waved his hands with the air of a man lost.
‘And I'd never have thought Buckmaster capable of such a human remark.
People are a funny mixture…’
‘How did you first hear about this business?’
Newman asked in a low voice.
‘Anonymous phone call.
Woke me up.
‘Tweed is in desperate trouble at his apartment in Radnor Walk.
Better get over there before the police do.’
I think those were his exact words…’
‘So it was a man who made the call?
Recognize the voice?
I want you to think — think hard.’
‘No, I don't think I've heard that voice before.
I dressed quickly.
I was on my own.
Cynthia is away, fortunately.
I arrived about 1.30 a.m.
The door wasn't locked.
I found that out when I'd pressed the bell and no one came.
I walked inside, came upstairs…and found her lying on the bed.
No sign of anyone else.
I phoned Buckmaster.
Only thing I could do.
When he arrived he alerted the Clean-Up Squad.
We can't have a scandal like this made public.
It would destroy the Service…’
‘Who is — was — the girl?’
Newman asked crisply.
Howard, still in a state of shock, stared at Newman.
The foreign correspondent was in his early forties, well-built, of medium height and with light brown hair verging on sandy-coloured.
Even at that hour he had an alert look, as aura of controlled energy.
The normally droll smile was absent.
‘We've no idea of her identity,’ Howard replied.
‘They've torn the place to pieces and couldn't even find a handbag.
Of course now they're recalling the fact that Tweed's wife left him several years ago for a Greek shipping magnate, that he hasn't had a lot to do with women since…’
‘He likes girls,’ Newman interjected sharply.
‘He's been on the edge of having an affair more than once.
But he blotted out his wife by dedicating himself to his job.
You know that.’
‘I thought I did…’
‘Not you, too?
That's great.
That's really great.’
Newman slapped a hand against his thigh, heard a noise, turned to find Harvey had come back.
‘One thing strikes me as odd, Mr Newman,’ he began, his manner officious.
‘How you happened to turn up here at this hour?’
‘I'd been to a party at Cipriani's in The Strand which went on all hours.
To sober up I walked back to my flat in Beresforde Road.
I wasn't sleepy, so I decided to drive round London a bit to tire myself.’
‘That's a jolly long walk, if you don't mind my saying so,’ Harvey remarked and smiled in a twisted way.
Newman could have hit him.
‘So what the hell are you getting at?’ he asked quietly.
‘Nothing.
At the moment.
But we can check your story later — find witnesses who saw you leave Cipriani's.
Get someone to do the same walk at the same time, see how long it takes…’
‘Why not do the walk yourself?’
Newman rapped back.
‘Might help to take an inch or two off your waistline.’
‘No need to get personal.
The main thing is, where is Tweed at this moment?’
Kneeling in front of the safe in his first-floor office at Park Crescent, headquarters of the Secret Service, Tweed turned the dial to the last numbers of the combination lock, hauled open the door.
The curtains were drawn over the windows looking towards Regent's Park and he hadn't turned on the light.
He used a flash to see what he was doing.
Fulling open a drawer, he took out several stacks of banknotes in German marks and Swiss francs.
He arranged them neatly in the executive case open by his side, then concealed the banknotes with several layers of insurance magazines and four paperbacks.
He locked the case, closed the safe door, spun the combination dial, stood up.
In his mid forties, Tweed had a compact build, dark hair and wore horn-rim glasses.
In repose his face was that of a kindly man with exceptional intelligence.
The eyes behind the lenses were watchful and wary.
He wore a business suit which lacked the elegance of his chief, Howard.
The Deputy Director of the SIS was a man you could pass in the street without noticing, an effect he'd been careful to cultivate.
Still using the flashlight, he perched the case on his desk, took out his key ring, used the two keys which unlocked the specially reinforced bottom right-hand drawer.
Reaching down, he delved beneath three code books, hauled out the six passports with his photograph — minus glasses — and all in different names.
He chose the passport with the name William Sanders, thrust it in his breast pocket.
The other five he spread out flat at the bottom of the executive case.
He re-locked the drawer, stood up, and that was when someone switched on the main light.
Paula Grey, his attractive assistant, closed the door, leaned against it.
In her early thirties, her raven black hair gleamed in the overhead light.
She had excellent bone structure, a well-shaped determined chin, a good figure and long legs.
She was wearing a dark blue gaberdine suit, a white blouse with a pussy bow, her check coat folded over one arm.
The February early morning was chilly, with a hint of snow to come in the air.
Tweed, enduring high tension, concealed his shock well.
His mind went cold as ice.
His voice was completely normal when he asked the question.
‘What on earth are you doing here at this hour?’
‘I might ask you the same thing.’
She nodded towards his suitcase standing next to the desk.
‘Going somewhere?
You never told me.
And something's wrong.
I can tell.’
His right hand went automatically towards his pocket for his pipe.
Then he remembered he'd given up smoking the damned thing.
His mind was moving at extraordinary speed.
‘Something cropped up unexpectedly.
I'm going abroad for a short time…’
She walked towards him, her movements swift and graceful.
She put both her hands on his shoulders.
‘This is Paula.
Remember me?
I came in to do some work — I couldn't sleep.
Now, what's wrong?’
‘Brace yourself.
I'm going to be accused of murder and rape.
A beautiful young girl I've never seen before.
She's lying in my bed at Radnor Walk.
Now you'd better ask the question — did I do it?’
It was the only hint of emotion he showed.
She clenched her teeth, shook him.
Tried to.
He stood immovable.
‘What the devil are you talking about?
How dare you ask me that.’
Her voice quavered with emotion, then she regained control.
‘Are you mad?
Fleeing like a common criminal.
You're the Deputy 19 Director — in case you've forgotten.
You must stay and fight it.
Find out what really happened.’
‘Can't.
I have a secret project I was controlling.
Only one other person over here knows about it.
I have to remain free to carry that project through.
A lot is at stake — maybe even the security of the whole western world.
Which sounds melodramatic.
I'm leaving, Paula.
Catching the earliest plane to Brussels.’
‘Why Brussels?
And I still don't see why you're so certain you'll be accused of this dreadful thing,’ she protested.
‘Because someone very clever and ruthless has planned this frame-up.
So they may have planted some more damning ‘evidence’ somewhere in my flat.
I had no time to search thoroughly.
And why Brussels?
That's only the first stage.
I have to find a bolt-hole — somewhere I can operate from.
They'll lock me up when they find that poor girl.
Everything points to me as the murderer, the rapist.
Who do you think I could trust with that hanging over me?
No one for certain—’
‘You bloody fool,’ she snapped.
‘You can trust me.
I'm coming with you.
My case packed for an emergency is in that cupboard over there.
And a couple is less conspicuous than a man on his own…’
‘Out of the question.’
Tweed forcibly removed her hands, walked across to the stand near the door, donned his old Burberry.
He picked up the executive case, his suitcase.
He paused by the door, looked back at her.
‘Your job could be at stake.
You live for your job.
Stay here and keep the home fires burning.’
He left the room, closing the door behind him.
That was when Tweed began running and running and running.
The nightmare had started.
The Fugitive — Tweed
At 7 a.m. the same morning Lance Buckmaster arrived at the headquarters of the company he had founded in Threadneedle Street, World Security & Communications Ltd.
To avoid any risk of being noticed he drove his wife's Volvo station wagon.
The twenty-storey building was empty at that hour.
Buckmaster parked the Volvo in the underground garage, used the special key to open the executive elevator door, ascended to the eighteenth floor.
Gareth Morgan, his deputy and confidante, waited for him in the large office with windows overlooking the City.
A white mist obscured the view, gave the high-rise buildings a ghostly look.
It was going to be a bleak February.
‘It worked.’
Buckmaster threw his check cap on a couch, strode across the room and lolled in his executive chair.
‘Special Branch bought it, swallowed it — hook, line and sinker.’
‘And Tweed?’ his deputy enquired.
Gareth Morgan was forty-two years old and looked more like fifty-two.
Five feet six, he was overweight for his height and his body resembled a large turnip in shape.
He had small neat feet and moved with agility.
Dark-haired, he had shrewd beady eyes, was clean-shaven and showed the beginnings of a jowl.
A slow deliberate talker, he fixed his small eyes on the subject he was conversing with, as though exerting a hypnotic effect.
He was a man of great energy, ability and ruthlessness.
Buckmaster's wife, Leonora, had once told a woman friend,
‘Lance and Morgan go well together.
Two of the world's greatest con men…’
‘Tweed has vanished off the face of the earth,’ Buckmaster informed his subordinate in his lofty voice.
‘Which is just what we hoped for — that he'd run for it.’
‘Don't underestimate that man,’ Morgan warned as he lit a cigar.
‘He'll have headed for Europe…’
‘So it makes your job easier.
We have WS & C offices with trained staffs all over the Continent.
I'm putting you in charge of the operation.
Locate Tweed and eliminate him.
Essential you make it look like an accident…’
Morgan pursed his thick lips, his expression grim.
‘You mean go over there myself?
I have to mind the shop here.
When you became a Minister you appointed me Managing Director.
Remember?’
‘You like moving about.’
Buckmaster's tone was brusque.
‘The assignment should be right up your street.
You fly to Europe, put the boot in to our top people, get them looking, then fly back here.
Like a Kissinger shuttle, Gareth.’
He checked his watch.
‘And I'm not supposed to be here.
I'm leaving shortly for the Ministry.’
Morgan ran a thick thumb across his jowl, puffed at his cigar.
Buckmaster was right: he shouldn't be in the building.
When he'd been appointed a Minister he'd handed over his parcel of shares to his wife, Leonora.
And the idea did appeal to Morgan: a Kissinger-like shuttle.
Appealed to his ego.
He'd use the company
‘I'll have to return here frequently,’ he said eventually.
‘I find Leonora is becoming a bit active — curious about things — as chairman.
And she's become chummy with that accountant, Ted Doyle…’
‘Curious about what?’
Buckmaster demanded.
‘Company figures.
The balance sheet.
So far I've kept her away from the secret files.
When is that fifty-million pound loan coming in?
I can't bluff the City for ever.’
‘Soon.
And you've left off a zero.
It will be five hundred million.’
‘As much as that?’
Morgan concealed his shock.
‘That should put us back in business nicely.
But where the hell can you raise that money?’
Buckmaster stood up, donned his check cap.
‘Leave that to me.
You deal with Tweed.
And quickly…’
‘It may take time,’ Morgan warned.
‘I told you not to underestimate him.’
‘Not too much time.
The deadline is running out.
Fly to the Continent today.
I'm off…’
Morgan sat in the leather chair facing Buckmaster's desk for some time after his chief had left, his bulk squeezed between the arms.
He had come a long way since his early days as a security guard with a small outfit, had climbed with Buckmaster.
He recalled as almost yesterday the advertisement in The Times for an experienced administrator to join a new security organization.
He'd called the number in the ad. from Cardiff and Buckmaster had answered the phone.
Buckmaster had been off-hand in his reaction.
‘I don't know you have the experience I need…’
‘But I do have a first-class ticket from Cardiff to London in my fist.
And I'm calling from the station.
The express leaves in five minutes — I can see it from where I'm speaking.
Give me fifteen minutes of your time and you'll hire me.
If you decide not to I'll walk straight out of your office and you'll never see me again.
Only four minutes now before that express begins to move…’
The audacious ploy had worked.
Buckmaster had warned him there would be no question of paying his fare.
Morgan had replied he paid his own way.
He boarded the express with two minutes to spare.
It was Morgan's handling of the attempted bank raid a few days earlier in Cardiff which turned the trick.
It had made the national press.
Instead of travelling with the security truck carrying the money, Morgan had checked out the area round the bank the previous day.
On the morning of the delivery he hid in an alley armed with a baseball bat concealed under his raincoat.
Two armed men had jumped from a car as the money was being carried towards the bank.
Morgan had appeared behind them, had first smashed the skull of the man carrying a machine-pistol and then crushed the kneecap of the second robber armed with an automatic.
At the interview Buckmaster had explained he was founding a new security firm specializing in protecting high-risk and valuable cargoes.
His first reaction was to reject Morgan until he remembered the abortive Cardiff robbery.
‘Routine.
That's where established firms make their mistake,’ Morgan had told him, speaking rapidly and with an air of total authority.
‘And they use one of three alternative routes in recognizable trucks.
The vehicles must be varied in appearance, the destination told to the driver in code as he leaves the depot — by you or me.
We must have dummy runs to confuse the intelligence systems of the professional robbers.
And I hire every member of the staff — I can smell a wrong 'un a hundred yards away…
We infiltrate informants into the underworld to organize our own counter-espionage apparatus…
In certain countries on the Continent we use tougher methods…’
‘On the Continent?’
Buckmaster, who normally dominated a conversation, had found himself taken aback by the scale Morgan foresaw they would operate on.
‘Of course.’
Morgan had waved the unlit cigar he'd held clenched between his teeth.
‘It is an international organization we are thinking of.
Europe first, then the States…’
‘And when could you start?’
Buckmaster had eventually asked.
‘As your right-hand man, now.
I brought my packed case.
It's waiting in the lobby…’
Buckmaster had hired him on the spot.
A decision he had never regretted.
Morgan had suggested the name, World Security & Communications.
And that was twenty years ago.
Long before Buckmaster's eyes had turned to politics and he'd become the youngest MP in the Commons, leaving Morgan to run the largest security organization in the world.
It had expanded by leaps and bounds.
And that, Morgan thought as he stirred in the chair, was when I advised caution.
That we consolidate what we had built up; but Buckmaster had the bit between his teeth.
More offices had been opened up in many countries.
Too many too quickly.
‘And one day I'll own the whole outfit,’ he said to himself.
‘Providing it doesn't go bust first.’
Through nominees he'd bought up a major holding in the company.
Morgan thought of only one person in the world.
Gareth Morgan.
Stretching, he yawned.
He'd been up all night.
First things first.
The tracking down of Tweed.
Tweed moved fast.
He caught the first Sabena flight to Brussels, using the William Sanders passport at London Airport.
Arriving in the Belgian capital, he took a cab to the Hilton on the Boulevard de Waterloo.
He booked in at the special executive reception on the eighteenth floor, reserving an executive suite on the twentieth floor.
Dumping his case inside the suite, he left the hotel.
He hired a BMW from Hertz, showing a driving licence in the name of William Sanders.
He parked the car in an underground garage near the hotel.
He could have parked it in the Hilton garage, but if he needed to leave suddenly that might be dangerous.
‘Do you really think we can disappear into the blue?’
Paula asked as they walked back to the hotel.
‘If we keep moving…’
The presence of Paula Grey was one thing he hadn't counted on.
She had followed him in a second taxi to London Airport, taking her case with her.
His first realization that he was not alone came when he booked a return Business-Class ticket at the Sabena counter.
He turned and Paula was standing behind him.
‘A Business-Class return to Brussels,’ she informed the airline clerk.
Collecting her ticket, she came up behind him again as he checked in for the flight.
Tweed was unable to argue with her — it was too public and the last thing he wanted was to draw attention to himself.
They were sitting alongside each other in the half-empty aircraft before he could protest.
‘What on earth do you think you're doing?’
‘Coming with you.
I told you.
Back at the office.’
‘I can't risk having you with me.
There are things you don't know.
You could be in terrible danger.’
‘I've been there before.
Remember Rotterdam?
For starters?’
‘I want you to catch the first flight back from Brussels.
I'm a common fugitive — wanted for murder and rape.
It's a queer feeling I can tell you…’
‘So you need every bit of support you can get.
Back at the office you said something about a secret project.
Is that why you have to go underground?’
‘Yes.
And don't ask me about it.’
‘I, m not leaving you,’ she warned him.
‘Tell me later what really happened to you last night.
First we must decide what to do, where to go, who we can trust.’
Tweed, reacting automatically to the danger, still felt stunned.
Paula, he recognized, was thinking with her usual clarity.
She had summed up his immediate task in a nutshell.
For the first time he wavered in his determination to get rid of her.
She sensed his uncertainty.
‘Well, for starters, who can we trust?’
‘No one,’ he'd said bleakly.
‘Absolutely no one— they'll react as soon as they guess I've left the country.
The first move will be to alert all my known contacts, to request that I be held incommunicado if I approach any of them…’
‘And you really think someone like Chief Inspector Kuhlmann of the German Federal Police is going to swallow this absurd idea that you're a murderer and a rapist?’
‘He won't have any option…’
They had argued like this until the plane touched down in Belgium: Tweed uncharacteristically negative; Paula positive and working out escape routes.
Tweed's mood changed as soon as they reached Brussels, reserving the suite at the Hilton, hiring the car.
Returning to the Hilton, they went straight up to the suite.
It was Paula who had insisted they share the suite against all Tweed's objections.
‘If we book a separate one for me,’ she pointed out, ‘I may have to show my passport.
Being registered as Paula Grey will lead the baying hounds straight to you — once they grasp that I've disappeared too.
I can sleep on a couch if they haven't twin beds…’
‘They had twin beds the last time I was here,’ Tweed recalled.
‘Stop being so Victorian,’ she'd snapped.
‘If you register I can pass as your wife…’
It was Paula who, on the way back to the hotel, had dived into a shop, emerging with a folder full of Michelin road maps of different areas of Europe.
‘Need these to plan our route,’ she'd said briskly.
Now Tweed was staring from the suite window at the panoramic view over the city.
Close by reared the immense domed bulk of the Palais de Justice, a complex so large it covered a greater area than St Peter's in Rome.
He found it ironic.
‘If they catch up with me now,’ he mused, ‘I suppose that's where they'll take me…’
‘Oh do shut up and look at these maps with me.
Where are we heading for when we leave here?’
‘Switzerland might be best.’
Tweed shook off his mood of resignation, leaned over her shoulder to study the maps.
Again her driving force was animating him, pushing back an insidious sensation of inertia.
‘I'll have to risk contacting Arthur Beck, Chief of the Federal Police in Berne.
Switzerland being neutral, it might be our best bet.’
She carefully concealed her satisfaction at this first use of the word ‘our’.
Tweed's finger traced a route through Liège to the east and then down through the Ardennes, a remote hilly district.
‘Not much traffic if we can make it into the forest,’ he said.
‘Definitely our best chance of not being spotted.’
‘But where do we go from there?
How can we safely cross into West Germany — assuming the alert has gone out by then?’
‘Our best chance is to drive along the secondary roads in the Ardennes into Luxembourg.
There's no check on crossing that border.
Then, if we get lucky we drive over the Luxembourg frontier into Germany, head south down the Rhine for the Black Forest.
There's a small place where I think we could slip over the German border into Switzerland.
It's one hell of a long shot.’
‘So we follow that route,’ Paula said firmly.
‘The big question is — will we ever reach the Swiss border?’
Paula asked the question which had preyed on her mind while they were drinking coffee from room service in Tweed's suite.
She took a deep breath, nerved herself, dived in.
‘Isn't it about time you told me what really happened back at your flat in Radnor Walk?’
‘Like an idiot, I walked straight into a carefully prepared trap.
If one of my staff had done the same thing I do believe I'd have fired him.
I was so incredibly stupid I still don't know what got into me.’
Paula crossed her legs on the couch, facing Tweed who sat bolt upright in an executive chair.
‘Well, what did you do?’ she coaxed.
‘I was working late at the office as you know.
You'd gone home and only Monica was left in the building with me.
She took the call and said it was for me.
The caller would only tell her his name was Klaus.
I guessed it was one of my circle of private informants on the Continent — the people even you don't know about.
I've promised them all total confidentiality.’
He paused, sipped at his coffee.
‘I know you have these people.
Go on,’ Paula encouraged him.
‘I took the call.
It sounded like Klaus Richter, although there was a lot of background noise.
People chatting, laughing.
He said he'd flown over urgently to see me and asked me to come to the Cheshire Cheese, that pub in Fleet Street, at ten o'clock that night.
He sounded edgy.
I agreed.
Where I made my mistake was in not checking back with his number in Freiburg at the edge of the Black Forest.
Although they'd probably covered that.’
He spoke the last words grimly.
‘Who is ‘they’?’
Paula asked.
‘I've no idea who's behind the conspiracy — because that's what it has to be.
And a very dangerous conspiracy since I suspect it's connected with the secret project I was controlling alone.
Don't ask me about that.
I arrived at the Cheshire Cheese early deliberately — to spy out the land…’
‘Your usual ploy in such cases.
You did have all your marbles,’ she encouraged him again.
‘It was 9.45 when I entered the pub.
Place was crowded.
I ordered a glass of wine and sat in the corner where I could survey the whole place.
No sign of Richter.
I waited and waited.
It was just before closing time when a girl dropped an envelope in my lap.
Unsealed.
The message inside was brief.
Came early.
Had to leave.
Being followed.
Meet you at Radnor Walk.
k.
I'd just time to read it when the girl returned.
She whispered that Klaus told her she must take the message from me after I'd read it.
A clever touch that.
Klaus was a very careful man.
I let her take it…’
‘Seen that girl before?’
‘Never.
Head wrapped in a scarf and tied over her chin.
It was a cold night.
About thirty at a guess.
About five foot ten, well dressed, pale white complexion, blue eyes.
Then she was gone…’
Tweed stared into the distance, recalling the incident.
Paula prodded again.
‘So what was your next move?’
‘As I said, it was late, near closing time.
I walked back all the way from Fleet Street to Radnor Walk, which took a while…’
‘To check that you weren't being followed?’
‘Exactly, I wasn't.
At least not on foot.
There was an Audi which passed me soon after I'd left the pub.
I believe now the driver — I didn't see who it was — was checking that I had left the pub.
Eventually, after midnight, I arrived at Radnor Walk.
The front door was slightly ajar.
No trace of any forcing of the two security locks.
I crept inside, picked up that heavy walking stick with the weighted tip I keep in the umbrella stand, explored the ground floor.
Nothing.
I had the strong feeling the place was empty.
Then I went upstairs…’
He drank more black coffee slowly, the faraway look in his eyes again.
This time Paula waited in silence.
He put down the cup, stared straight at her.
‘I entered the bedroom and the bedside light was on.
I saw her at once, lying face up in my bed.
The sheet rumpled.
Brutally strangled.
Big bruises round the neck.’
Tweed was now speaking in a normal detached tone.
‘The sheets had been pulled down over her long legs.
She was naked, had a good figure.
I soon realized she'd been raped — no need to go into the details.
I also realized it was the perfect frame — that I'd be accused.’
Why?’
Paula was leaning forward, watching Tweed carefully.
‘You knew the girl?’
‘Never seen her in my life.
The murderer had added some subtle touches.
My pipe, filled with tobacco, partially smoked, lay in a glass bowl.’
‘You gave up that pipe several weeks ago.
You said you were a wet smoker and didn't enjoy it.’
‘Which is one thing about me the murderer doesn't know.
But it doesn't mean a damned thing.
I could have tried the pipe again before I set about her.
A glass I'd left in the kitchen in the morning was on the bedside table — with a drop of wine in it.
Chablis.
From a bottle on another table which was almost empty.
The glass would still have my fingerprints on it, I'm sure.’
‘Could they still feel so sure you were guilty?
People like Howard, for God's sake.’
‘No option.’
Tweed was cleaning his glasses with his handkerchief, a mannerism which Paula welcomed seeing.
Relating what had happened was calming him.
‘And no alibi,’ he went on.
‘I was walking back for over an hour through deserted streets.
I doubt if anyone at the Cheshire Cheese would remember me — I was deliberately making myself inconspicuous…
‘The girl who gave you the message from Richter.
She knows you were there.’
‘And is obviously part of the plot, hired to hand me the note, and take it off me afterwards.
No evidence…’
‘This Klaus Richter in Freiburg,’ she suggested.
‘Could he help?’
She frowned.
‘You used the past tense when referring to him.
Why?’
‘Because I think he's probably dead,’ Tweed replied.
‘The people who organized this are professionals — and ruthless as hell.
What they did to that girl proves that.
They've left no loose ends, I'm sure.’
‘What on earth did you do after you'd found this unknown girl in your house?’
‘Thought fast.
I could see a noose had been thrown round my neck I'd maybe never get free from.
The only answer was to run — in the hope that I can escape being apprehended while I find out what's happening to the project I was working on.
As I said earlier, I'm a fugitive.
We can't trust anyone…’
‘There's Newman — and Marler.’
‘A horrific crime like the one at Radnor Walk makes a man an outcast, a pariah without friends.
We're on our own.
Someone is counting on that.’
‘But we're not just going to sit here until they come for us?’
‘No.
Instead we'll do the unexpected.’
‘I've found out Tweed caught an early flight to Brussels.
I'm having the staff of our office there check every hotel.
I flew over copies of that photograph of Tweed you gave me,’ Morgan reported as he drove the Daimler beyond Exeter towards Dartmoor.
His bulk was squeezed inside the chauffeur's uniform, which did not fit his turnip-like shape too well.
A chauffeur's peaked cap was pulled down over his high forehead.
Buckmaster sat beside him, staring at the bleak snowbound slopes of the moor.
Morgan had adopted his disguise because, as a Minister, Buckmaster was not supposed to have any further connection with the world-wide security organization they had built up.
Buckmaster ran a hand over his lean face.
‘It's essential at least to keep Tweed harassed and fearful — on the move until you can locate him and do the job.’
‘There is one complication.’
Morgan leered.
‘Paula Grey has also disappeared you said earlier.
Looks as though he's taken his bedmate with him to keep himself warm.’
‘There's no record that their relationship is anything but professional,’ Buckmaster snapped in a puritanical tone.
‘That means they may be more alert.
Bear that in mind.
And if this Grey woman is with him when you pinpoint their whereabouts — she'll have to go too.’
‘That can be attended to.
I've contacted Armand Horowitz and he's meeting me in Brussels.’
‘So, you've gone to the top,’ Buckmaster commented as they turned on to the Okehampton road.
It was getting dark.
‘You need a real professional on a job like this,’ Morgan responded.
‘Horowitz has never failed to take out a target.’
‘Don't want to hear about it.
No details, no pack drill.’
Morgan subsided into silence.
Buckmaster's habit of distancing himself from the seamier side of the company worried him.
He had little doubt that if anything went wrong Buckmaster would let him drop over the cliff.
Which, he reflected, is why he pays me one hundred thousand pounds a year.
But, he also reflected, it means I'll have to watch my back.
Treachery was the name of the game in politics.
In business too.
Because he had grasped this fact was why Morgan had risen so high.
‘What are you going to do next about Tweed?’
Buckmaster asked as Morgan turned off the Okehampton road and drove through the snow towards Moretonhampstead.
‘Tell you in a minute.
I'd better get out of these togs — I also suggest you sit in the rear of the car before we arrive at Tavey Grange.’
He stopped the car on the grass verge of the deserted road.
Getting out, he tossed the cap on the seat, wrestled off the uniform, exposing the lightweight dark suit he wore under it.
While Buckmaster sat impatiently in the rear and drummed his fingers on his knee, Morgan put on an expensive black overcoat, the collar trimmed with astrakhan, buttoned it up, got back behind the wheel and resumed driving.
Passing between the granite houses lining the main street of Moretonhampstead, he drove on, his headlights picking out the bends in the serpentine road.
Tavey Grange lay half a mile beyond the Manor House Hotel.
He answered Buckmaster's question as he turned off the road between lodge gates and proceeded down the long drive across open parkland.
A half-moon was rising and the snow-covered slopes of Dartmoor glowed weirdly.
‘I'm taking the chopper from your helipad here back to London.
Tomorrow I'll take Stieber with me to Brussels, pick up the trail there.’
‘You'd better know — unofficially — that an alert for Tweed has now gone out secretly to our counter-espionage friends and certain police chiefs in Europe.
Locate and hold is the order.’
‘That might handicap me.’
Morgan grunted.
‘Wish you hadn't done that.’
‘Had to.
It was the obvious reaction I had to make as Minister.
If I'd held my hand it would have looked suspicious.
The PM agreed.
It will serve the purpose of isolating Mr Tweed from his old buddies, keep him running like a scared fox.’
‘If you say so.’
Morgan felt more comfortable as he approached the Grange, still hidden by a copse of trees.
It was only in London they had to keep up the pretence that Buckmaster had nothing to do with his company.
The servants at the house were mostly foreigners who didn't know their arse from their elbow, as Morgan put it to himself.
They passed the copse and the lights of a large Elizabethan house came into view.
Tall stately chimneys, the lights shining from behind mullion-paned windows.
Morgan reduced speed and checked his appearance in the rear-view mirror, driving with one hand.
Wanted to look his elegant best for the bitch, his nominal company chief, Leonora Buckmaster.
He combed his hair.
In the rear Buckmaster made a gentle hissing noise between his teeth.
The sooner Morgan boarded the chopper and pushed off the better.
Leonora Buckmaster came to the front doorway as the Daimler pulled up.
Morgan jumped out, opened the rear door.
Buckmaster alighted.
His wife called out in her well-modulated voice.
‘Drinks are ready in the library.
Then straight into dinner.
I'm famished.
Good evening, Gareth.’
‘Good evening, ma'am.’
Morgan dipped in a little bow and gave her his best smile.
Leonora Buckmaster was ten years younger than her husband.
A slim blonde creature, she wore a Valentino black and white dress.
Her husband gave her a hug and hurried inside, saying he was going to take a quick bath, then he'd be down for drinks.
‘A drink in the library for you, Gareth?’ she enquired.
He pecked her on the cheek.
She managed to conceal the physical revulsion she always felt from close contact with this man.
She might be chairman of the company with Lance's block of shares in her name, but Gareth Morgan was managing director and ran the organization.
‘That would be nice, Leonora,’ he agreed after closing and locking the car.
The garage man would put the Daimler to bed.
He followed her into the library, produced his cigar case, then hesitated.
‘Not in here.
Out on the terrace,’ she informed him.
‘I've got a drink.
Do pour your own.
Leave some in the bottle…’
It was not a friendly joke: Morgan was aware she thought he drank too heavily.
To hell with her, he thought and kept his coat on in the warm book-lined room.
He poured half a glass of neat Scotch, raised it to Leonora who had seated herself in an arm chair, erect and elegant.
‘Chin-chin,’ said Morgan and drank a heavy slug.
He opened the door to the terrace spanning the full width of the rear of the mansion, closed it behind him.
The ice-cold air hit him.
He lit his Havana, took a deep satisfying puff.
Leonora was getting to be a pain, probing into the affairs of the company.
At least he'd kept the vital figures away from her.
He strolled along the terrace below which the grassy slopes fell away steeply towards an ornamental lake.
A cottonwool mist was floating down towards the lake from the ridge in the moonlight.
On the terrace he took his decision.
He'd board the chopper when he'd finished his drink, tell the pilot to take him to London Airport.
His suitcase was in the boot of the Daimler.
He could get a couple of hamburgers and a glass of beer at the airport, then catch the evening flight to Brussels.
Get after Tweed.
At SIS headquarters in Park Crescent, London, Howard sat behind Tweed's desk, facing Bob Newman.
Monica, Tweed's close associate for many years, sat at her desk, her head bent over some files while the two men talked.
‘Do you really think Tweed is guilty?’
Newman demanded point-blank.
‘It's inconceivable, I agree,’ responded Howard, waving a well-manicured hand, his plump face pink with embarrassment at the directness of Newman.
‘But he made a great mistake fleeing the country.
And taking Paula with him.
Doesn't look good for his case…’
‘His case!’
Newman exploded.
‘You talk like a bloody prosecuting counsel.
He obviously had his reasons.
What was he working on?
And how do you know he's fled the country?’
‘Can't talk about what he was working on,’ Howard said stiffly.
He paused.
‘Didn't even know myself until I talked with the PM this afternoon.
And you won't like this, but since you're fully vetted and have worked with Tweed in the past…’
Another wave of the hand.
‘A general alert has been sent out to certain security personnel in other countries to locate and hold him when found.
All very hush-hush.
The press mustn't get on to it — and you are the press.
I'm invoking the Official Secrets Act form you signed on that one.
Have to.
Sorry and all that…’
‘I said,’ Newman repeated slowly, ‘how do you know he's fled the country?’
‘Well, Buckmaster gave the order.
Check with airports, seaports.
Show his photograph.
Only to top security personnel, of course.’
‘Of course!’
Newman interjected ironically.
‘Do get to the point of what I asked.’
‘Jim Corcoran at London Airport made discreet enquiries.
Found a girl with a good memory who remembered him checking in early this morning for a flight to Brussels.
Appeared to have a girl with him.
From the description Corcoran obtained I'm afraid it could be Paula Grey…’
‘Makes sense,’ Newman commented.
‘Makes sense!’
Howard's pompous manner changed, his voice went up several decibels.
‘If it was Paula that means I have two of my staff as fugitives from justice…’
‘Balls!’
Newman lit a cigarette.
‘Buckmaster's doing this all on his own?’
‘Well…’
Howard showed more indecision.
‘Actually I wasn't privy to the decision to send the alert.’
Wasn't privy to …
Newman controlled himself with an effort.
Howard really was the most bombastic prig.
‘Then who was?’ he demanded.
‘Buckmaster — after due consultation with the PM I was told at Downing Street to issue a discreet alert.’
He leaned forward.
‘I might tell you I persuaded her to cut down the list Buckmaster had drawn up of people to be informed.
Only those I feel we can trust to keep it under wraps have been contacted.’
‘Who are they?’
Howard hesitated again ‘Why do you want to know?’
‘For Christ's sake — because I believe Tweed is innocent, that he's been framed up to the hilt.
And I'm going to do something about it, not just sit here on my tod wringing my hands.
‘I can't do anything else, Bob,’ Howard said quietly, ‘except sit here on my tod, as you put it.
I needed to know that you're also convinced it's a conspiracy.
It's not a view I can admit to officially.
I'm very relieved you're going into action — and you might like to know I reworded the signal Buckmaster was sending, made it, shall we say less positive.’
‘Buckmaster seems to be running this outfit these days,’ Newman snapped.
‘I don't like that either…’
It was a recent experiment on the part of the PM — to create a new ministry to oversee the security services.
The Ministry for External Security.
The first man to be appointed as Minister, Lance Buckmaster, had seemed logical.
He was youngish, energetic and a good orator.
It had seemed even more logical to choose this MP since he'd built up a vast international organization devoted to security.
World Security & Communications specialized in the safe movement of high-risk cargoes — gold bullion, old-master paintings, large consignments of banknotes.
But WS & C as it was now known world wide had carried the development of security to the ultimate.
It handled secret data for the research departments of major companies.
It had gone into the communications field, using its own satellites to provide a watertight method for directors talking about vital topics over the phone from, say, Frankfurt to Washington, supplying the coded systems.
With all this experience behind him, Buckmaster had proved a natural choice to control the new Ministry.
The snag was it had deliberately not been made clear how much power he wielded over the Secret Service.
Howard was still able to report direct to the PM.
She had insisted on retaining ultimate control.
Howard waved his hand a third time before speaking his mind.
‘Just between you and me it's a running dogfight between myself and Buckmaster.
I won't let him come here often.
There are certain files I refuse to let him see.
It may cost me my job, but so far the PM has backed me.’
‘And what about Turnip Top, as the press has labelled Gareth Morgan?
I met him at a party.
His conversation is a lie a minute.
His policy is to ingratiate himself with anyone who might be useful to him, a nauseating spectacle.
But I detect something sinister behind the showbiz front, the big cigar.’
‘I wouldn't have said sinister.
Why use that epithet?’
‘Rumours from contacts I have.
Hidden inside WS & C is a well-organized industrial espionage section — run by an unpleasant character with a dubious background.
Helmut Stieber.
Not his real name, by the way.
His father came from Czechoslovakia.
Married an English girl.
Both are dead.
Stieber is Morgan's deputy.
Spends most of his time on the Continent.
Also rumoured they used strong-arm tactics during one of Buckmaster's many takeover bids to build up his conglomerate.
Even to sabotaging competitors' plants.’
‘I didn't know that.’
Howard sat up straight.
‘I can tell you one thing — Morgan isn't allowed anywhere near this place.
But some of Buckmaster's requests for data I suspect emanate from Morgan…’
He broke off as Marler strolled in after tapping lightly on the door.
In his early thirties, he was supposed to be the coming man at SIS.
Among his talents was that he was the most deadly marksman in Western Europe.
Slim in build, wearing an expensively cut sports jacket and slacks, he was clean-shaven, had a strong face and spoke in a high-pitched drawl.
‘Evenin', Bob.
Haven't seen a story from you for ages.
Living off the proceeds of that bestseller you wrote,Kruger: The Computer That Failed ?’
Marler, five feet seven, perched his backside on Paula's desk and swung his legs.
Newman looked at him with no particular liking.
He'd noted that Howard had clammed up as the new arrival appeared.
Why?
‘You know perfectly well, Marler, that these days I only go after a story I think is really worthwhile.
That's the advantage of being financially independent.’
‘So you won't be doing a piece on the somewhat grisly events at Radnor Walk?’
‘There's a ‘D’ notice on that,’Howard snapped.
‘We've led the press to believe some foreign diplomat was involved in a wild party.
Drugs and all that.
Put them off the scent.’
‘Jolly good idea.’
Marler lit a king-size cigarette.
‘Can't have the world thinking Tweed broke loose at long last, had his way with an attractive girl and then throttled the poor dear…’
‘You have such a nice way of putting things,’ Newman commented.
‘Life and soul of any party, you'd be.’
‘Keep your hair on, old chum.
I know it's a bit of a shaker.’
He addressed Howard.
‘Since Tweed appears to have scooted, are you sending out a general alert, setting the hounds after him?’
‘All options are still under consideration,’ Howard told him stiffly.
‘Fair enough.
Just came in to say I've been summoned to the presence.
Thought you ought to know…’
‘You mean the PM?’
Howard's sense of outrage was clear in his tone.
‘Lordy, no.
Lance Buckmaster, our esteemed Minister for External Security has asked me to attend him down at the ancestral home, Tavey Grange on Dartmoor.’
‘Why?’
‘I'll know when I get there, won't I?
I'd better get moving.
It's a quite a drive — even at night.
Our posh new Minister never sleeps.’
He glanced at Newman as he stood up.
‘The Radnor Walk episode would give you something to get your teeth into.
Assuming you're still on Tweed's side…’
‘Are you?’
Newman rapped out.
‘I always keep an open mind…’
‘Because there's not much going on inside it?’
Newman suggested.
Marler gave a mock salute, left the office without replying.
‘You don't trust him,’ Newman said with a slight sense of shock.
‘You asked me earlier who had been informed in Europe.
If you ever quote me I'll deny I ever said it.’
Howard was now looking uncharacteristically grim.
He spoke in a monotone.
‘Chief Inspector Benoit of the Brussels Criminal Police.
Arthur Beck, chief of Swiss Federal Police in Berne.
Pierre Loriot at Interpol in Paris.
Gunnar Hornberg of SAPO in Stockholm.
René Lasalle of French Counter-Intelligence in Paris.
And Chief Inspector Otto Kuhlmann, head of Federal Criminal Police in Wiesbaden.
That completes the list.’
‘Thank you.’
Newman paused as Howard stood up to leave.
‘It will be a miracle if the news doesn't leak out.
And you really have closed him in.’
‘The list was much longer as drawn up by Buckmaster,’ Howard replied as he reached the door.
‘And the signals included details of the crime committed at Radnor Walk?’
‘Those men are his friends of quite a few years…’
‘But will they still be his friends after receiving the signal you sent?’
‘I edited the Ministry version,’ Howard told him.
‘My signal used the phrase ‘alleged offence’ I must go now.
Good luck, Bob.
I can't do another damned thing.’
He left the room and Newman swung round to face Monica who had remained like a piece of the furniture during the whole time since he'd arrived.
Now she held one finger to her lips, picked up a portable radio from the kneehole beneath her desk and switched it on.
Carrying it over, she placed it on Tweed's desk, switched it on, found a music programme, kept it on low volume and sat down close to Newman.
‘Why that?’ he asked.
‘In case the Ministry has bugged the office.
Some odd people with papers bearing Buckmaster's signature have been here.’
‘Surely Howard realizes the danger?
Yet lie let me talk…’
‘He can't believe a Minister would do that.
I can — I've met the Right Honourable Lance Buckmaster.
Honourable?
You have to be joking.
He's one of the biggest con men in politics, and that's saying something.
Of course I may be prejudiced — he called me Old Faithful.’
‘Patronizing swine…’
‘Oh, he did it on purpose — to try and needle me.
Part of his stock-in-trade when he wants to take over an organization.
He sows dissension.
Howard thinks Marler is in the running for his job.’
‘Marler wouldn't play.
I don't like him, but he's a cynical bastard and won't be taken in by the likes of Buckmaster.’
‘Are you sure?
It's a big carrot he's dangling in front of Marler's nose.
That has unsettled Howard — all part of the well-known Buckmaster technique.’
She leaned closer.
‘Am I right in thinking you really believe Tweed had nothing to do with that beastly murder?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then you might like to know Tweed took a large sum of money with him.
A small fortune in Swiss francs and
German marks.
It's missing from the safe and only two people had the combination.
Tweed and myself.’
‘So he's OK for funds.
That worried me…’
‘And, Bob, he's also taken six dummy passports in different names, all carrying his photo…’
‘Anyone know about that?’
‘Only me.
He kept them in his bottom right-hand drawer.
I'm the only one besides Tweed with keys.
I checked while I was on my own.
Plus international driving licences in the same names.
He's up to something.’
‘He needs back-up.
I have to find him.’
‘He does have Paula with him as far as we know,’ Monica reminded him.
‘He needs more than that.
I'm leaving for Brussels today.
I always carry a large sum in one thousand Swiss franc notes.’
Newman frowned as he worked it out.
‘I won't even go back to my flat just in case someone is watching it.
I can buy what I need in Brussels — clothes, shaving kit.
Luckily it won't seem odd at the airport, travelling without a suitcase.
Businessmen are travelling there and back in a day.’
‘If only we knew who was behind all this,’ Monica mused.
‘I'll have to find out, won't I?
Remember, I'm used to doing just that — as a foreign correspondent.’
Morgan had missed the last flight to Brussels the previous evening.
Fog had delayed the landing of his chopper at London Airport.
He stayed overnight at the nearby Penta Hotel.
In the morning he ate a large breakfast — double portion of ham and fried eggs, plenty of cream in his coffee.
After he'd booked his Brussels flight he used a public phone to call Stieber, his Chief of Security, in Threadneedle Street.
He gave Stieber the number he was calling from, told him to call him back from outside.
Stieber was back on the line in five minutes.
His cold voice, with a hint of the Czech accent he'd never eliminated, sounded a shade excited.
‘The bug in you-know-who's office worked.
It came over a treat on the radio transmitter when I played it back…’
‘Give me the guts, then pick up your case from the office and get your backside out here.
London Airport, Terminal One.
At Sabena's reservation counter.
Buy yourself a Business-Class ticket.
From Brussels you'll fly on by yourself to Frankfurt, then maybe Freiburg.
I'll instruct you on the plane.
You have one and a half hours to get here.
Give me your news.
Fast…’
‘Marler was on his way to see the chief on Dartmoor.
What is really interesting is Bob Newman is getting into the act in some way.’
‘The foreign correspondent?’
Morgan's tone was sharp.
‘So what is he up to?’
‘I don't know.
I think after Howard left the room there was maybe a further conversation between Newman and someone else…’
‘You think?’
‘Wait for me to finish, please.
A radio was turned on and it played music, which I found odd.
So there could have been conversation I didn't pick up — scrambled by the radio.’
‘You're guessing.
Unless Newman is a smart cookie.
Forget Newman.
He's a has-been.
Get your arse over here.’
The evening before Morgan phoned Stieber, Marler had driven his second-hand red Porsche to Dartmoor.
After dark he stopped at a Little Chef, had a quick meal of scrambled eggs and coffee, then continued his journey.
It was ten o'clock when he turned in between the lodge gates and guided the Porsche down the winding drive to Tavey Grange.
Leonora appeared behind the Spanish butler, Fernandez, who opened the nail-studded front door.
‘Mr Marler?’
She gave him her best smile, liking what she saw under the porch lantern.
‘Please come in.
José will take your case up to your room.
Have you had dinner?
I've kept something for you.
Lance is making long-distance calls from his study — he's looking forward to seeing you in the morning.
A drink for you?’
Marler extended his hand, smiled back.
Leonora had small, well-shaped hands and clasped his warmly.
Marler, normally cold and distant, could exert considerable charm with attractive women.
‘Very kind of you, Mrs Buckmaster.
But I grabbed something to stay the pangs of hunger on the way down.
If your husband isn't going to be available until mornin' I think I'd just as soon get some kip.
Long drive and all that…’
Leonora escorted him up the massive oak staircase to his room at the back, wished him a good night's sleep and walked slowly back along the landing.
She had excellent legs.
Marler, still holding the executive case he'd refused to hand to José, noted the curtains were drawn the full length of the large room.
He began his check.
There was no key to the door.
Opening the executive case, he extracted a rubber wedge, jammed it under the door.
He next pulled back a section of curtain, opened one of the mullion-paned windows.
Icy air flooded into the heated room.
With a flashlight — also taken from the executive case — he examined the exterior, leaning out.
The beam illuminated the deserted terrace one floor down.
He swivelled it to check the outside wall.
No fire-escape, no convenient drainpipe anyone could shin up.
But to the right of the window he'd opened he found an old ivy creeper clawed to the brickwork.
A ready-made ladder for an intruder who wanted to search his possessions during the night.
He closed the window, drew the curtain back across it, glanced round the room.
A small heavy porcelain vase on a side table caught his eye.
He placed it carefully on the window ledge behind the curtain.
That would make enough noise to waken him.
Satisfied with his precautions, he had a wash in the luxurious bathroom, cleaned his teeth, undressed and got into bed.
What would the morning bring?
He was still uncertain of Buckmaster's motive for wanting to see him.
The following morning, while Morgan was waiting for Stieber at London Airport, Buckmaster joined Marler in the dining-room.
‘Good of you to come,’ he announced breezily.
‘Hope you don't mind, this will be a working breakfast.’
‘You talk, I'll listen,’ Marler replied and continued piling marmalade on his buttered toast.
‘I'm not too happy with the way things are run at Park Crescent — under the present regime, I mean.’
Buckmaster poured coffee for himself, Marler said nothing.
‘What I'm getting at is our friend, Howard.
Nice chap, right sort of background, but is niceness enough?’
‘He's proved satisfactory to the PM so far.’
‘So far.
That's the operative phrase.
But what about Tweed and the new emergency?
If the Radnor Walk horror becomes public it would be the greatest scandal in the history of the Service.
Can we afford that?
Some of my advisers think the simplest solution would be if Tweed never came back.’
Buckmaster paused to digest some crinkly bacon.
‘I understand you are one of the best marksmen in Europe,’ he remarked as though apropos of nothing in particular.
‘What exactly are you proposing, Minister?’
Marler demanded.
‘Oh, no definite proposal, my dear chap.
Just thinking aloud.
Looking at the problem from all angles.
And from what I hear you are the person most likely to smoke Tweed out of his hideaway, wherever that may be.’
‘I wouldn't count on that,’ Marler parried.
‘We know he took a flight to Brussels with that girl, Paula Grey.’
Buckmaster pushed a cardboard-backed envelope across the table with his fork.
‘Inside are two photos, one of Tweed, the other of the Grey woman.
I suggest you start with flying to Brussels today.
We've notified Benoit that Tweed is wanted.
Also Kuhlmann, Loriot, Lasalle and Arthur Beck.’
‘You mean I could use them to help in the search?’
Marler probed.
Buckmaster paused in the act of forking a strip of bacon into his mouth.
‘Well, it would be entirely up to you to decide whether that really is the best way to go about solving this problem.
If you see what I mean.’
‘I'm not sure I do.’
‘I glanced through your personnel file last night.
An abbreviated version, I suspect.
Howard is still a little jealous of his authority, hasn't yet quite grasped the new set-up since my Ministry was established.
I got the impression you're something of a lone wolf.
I like that.’
‘And you're authorizing me to leave for Brussels, to handle the problem in any way I see fit?
Have I understood you?’
‘Broadly speaking, yes.
In the interests of the Service.
Draw any amount of expenses you need.
There's my authority for you to do that inside the envelope.
Mission unspecified, of course.
For your protection.’
Buckmaster gave his public smile now so well-known from his pictures in the press.
‘Supposing I did solve the problem for you…’
‘Not for me,’ Buckmaster corrected him quickly.
‘For the reputation of the Service.
I'm only a cog in the machinery.’
‘I was going to say,’ Marler persisted, ‘where would that leave me?’
‘A good question.’
Buckmaster dabbed at his thin lips with his napkin.
‘We all have to think of ourselves from time to time, don't we?’
Again, the public smile, showing two rows of perfect teeth.
‘You have to remember that with Tweed gone the post of Deputy Director becomes vacant.’
Buckmaster leant back in his chair, brushed a hand through his hair.
‘And when it's all over who knows?
Howard might decide the time had arrived for him to think of retirement.’
‘No sign of that at the moment,’ Marler pressed him.
‘I wouldn't be too sure.
Tweed was Howard's appointment.
He might think it the honourable thing to do.
With a little gentle persuasion…’
Buckmaster jumped up suddenly, left his chair standing away from the table.
‘Let me show you something before you leave for Brussels.
Upstairs in my study…’
He took the treads up the great staircase two at a time, a demonstration of his boyish energy.
Marler followed at a slower pace.
Inside the panelled room Buckmaster picked up a malacca cane, pointed to the wall over the fireplace.
The badge of the Airborne Division had been enlarged in colour and framed as a centrepiece.
Below it was Buckmaster's beret, worn during his Army service.
Four photographs of the wearer showed him in the act of jumping from an aircraft.
‘We were taught to go for the jugular,’ Buckmaster remarked.
‘That was in the Army.’
‘Oh, come, man.
This is a war we're fighting now.
A war to preserve the SIS against all enemies, against all who put its reputation in peril.
Agreed.
‘I'm listening…’
Buckmaster folded his arms, leaned against his desk, still gripping the malacca.
Almost as though he was posing for a fresh picture to be taken.
‘You really are a close-mouthed character.
I like that.
Makes for good security.
Now, you've had time to sleep on the problem.
What's your first move against Tweed?’
‘Search, locate, destroy.
I'd better get moving now.
I want to be in Brussels today…’
‘This conversation never took place.’
Buckmaster stood upright, towering over his guest.
‘I have some phone calls to make.
I'd give you a lift to London in the chopper which arrived back last night, but I'm inspecting a certain defence establishment en route .’
‘And I have my car…’
Buckmaster watched the slim marksman leave.
Everything was working out well: security and police chiefs on the Continent had been alerted; the whole apparatus of WS & C was looking for Tweed under Morgan's iron hand; and now he had Marler in the manhunt.
Buckmaster was banking most on Marler.
He had one great advantage over all the others.
He was working from the inside.
Marler collected his suitcase and executive case from his room and ran down the staircase in search of Leonora Buckmaster to pay his respects.
To his surprise she was waiting in the large hall, wearing a mink-lined raincoat open at the front.
Underneath it she was clad in a close-fitting N. Peal black sweater which showed off her figure to full advantage.
A Liberty scarf was wrapped round her head and she picked up a travelling case.
‘Could you possibly give me a lift to town if that's where you're going next?’
‘My pleasure.
Car's outside, rarin' to go.’
Marler concealed his surprise and opened the passenger door of the Porsche.
She swung her shapely legs inside and began talking as he switched on the ignition.
‘The chauffeur has a touch of the flu.
Hence the Daimler isn't available…’
As the car moved away from the Elizabethan pile Marler glanced in his wing mirror.
Behind him was the stable area, now used as garages.
He saw a uniformed chauffeur polishing the bonnet of the Daimler just before he turned under a stone archway on to the drive.
‘In any case…’
Leonora laid a hand on his arm.
‘…I wanted to talk to you about this and that.’
They were well on their way, bypassing Exeter, before she spoke again in her throaty voice.
The mist had lifted in the night and Marler was making good time.
‘You're with General & Cumbria Assurance, my husband told me.
One of the top executives.
You're concerned with ensuring — and insuring — VIPs' security against kidnapping?’
‘That's right.’
Marler decided Buckmaster was good at security if he didn't let his wife know that General & Cumbria was a cover organization masking the SIS.
‘So you must be a real expert on all forms of security,’ Leonora continued.
‘I would hope so.’
‘I'm sure you know that when Lance became a Minister he had to transfer his block of shares in WS to me -in my name.
I'm the chairman and I can do what I like.’
‘Really?’
 Marlet was concentrating on his driving.
‘I don't too much like the man, Gareth Morgan, Lance appointed as managing director.
He runs the whole organization as though I didn't exist.’
‘You sound a trifle irked.’
‘More than a trifle.
The fact is I'm looking for someone who one day could take over from Morgan.
A horrid man.
And I've got another problem.’
‘Unfortunately life is full of them…’
‘Don't be so coy.’
She nudged him playfully in the ribs with her elbow.
‘I feel you are a man I can talk to — knowing that whatever I say won't go any further.’
‘Up to you to decide that, Mrs Buckmaster.’
‘Please, Leonora.’
She slid out of the sleeves of her coat, lit a cigarette, took a deep drag.
‘The fact is my husband is playing around with women.
One mistress I could ignore — but he's now on his sixth.
I find that a bit much.’
‘Are you sure?
Rather dangerous — his being a Minister and all that.’
‘Of course I'm sure.
I could give you names.
But he's very’ discreet.
His training in security helps the bastard.
Doubt if I could prove anything.
Not sure I want to — it would ruin his career.
Then he'd want his shares back.
It could end up as a public dogfight.
Not in my interest.’
She spoke coolly.
‘And it might lead to an investigation of my own background.’
‘So, mum's the word.
And why tell me all this?’
‘I have to talk to someone.
You don't imagine I could confide in my best friends, do you?
They're the ones who'd love to dish the dirt.
You're neutral.
Besides, I wanted to put you in the picture.
In case I can lever out that toad, Morgan.’
The rest of the journey she went silent, smoking and staring into the distance until Marler pulled up in front of the HQ of World Security in Threadneedle Street.
He refused her invitation to join her for ‘a cup of coffee, or something stronger.’
‘Frightfully kind of you,’ he said to her as they stood by the kerb.
‘Trouble is I've an urgent appointment with one of those VIPs you mentioned.
A millionaire.
Business calls…’
He drove back to London Airport and stopped in the long-term garage.
He sat there for a few minutes.
Something of a record — to be ‘head-hunted’ by the husband and then the wife on the same day.
A bright future spread out before him.
Then he grabbed both cases and made for the airline counter to buy a ticket.
To Brussels.
Tweed muddied the trail leading to him.
After spending one night at the Hilton he reserved the suite for a week and paid in advance.
He explained to the blonde girl receptionist who controlled the executive suites that he had to go to Bruges on business.
‘We may have to stay there overnight but I need to have accommodation available for when we get back…’
After an early morning breakfast with Paula, he walked with her to the garage where the BMW was parked.
They put their cases in the boot and within ten minutes he was leaving the outskirts of Brussels, heading east for Liège — the opposite direction to Bruges.
‘Do you think the trick will work if they trace us to the Hilton?’
Paula asked.
‘It will confuse them.
That is what we have to do from now on.
Throw out smokescreens.’
Before midday they were across the border into Luxembourg, surrounded by cliffs looming over the narrow serpentine road.
No other traffic in either direction.
Paula's head was bent over the map, acting as navigator for the route to the point where they would attempt the crossing into Germany.
‘Do we assume German security has been informed?’ she wondered.
‘Yes.
We always assume the worst.
If we can only slip inside Germany we can make for the autobahn and then for the Black Forest area.’
‘You have a plan?’
‘Ultimate objective Switzerland.
Arthur Beck may or may not be cooperative.
We can't assume he will be.
After all, a murderer and a rapist isn't the type of person anyone wants to get mixed up with…’
‘And you're assuming they'll believe that about you?
Friends and allies for years?’
‘That goes out of the window when you become an outlaw.
I'm working on the premise we have no friends anywhere.
We're on our own this time.’
‘There's Newman and Marler.
They'll never swallow the frame-up.’
‘No friends anywhere,’ Tweed repeated, twisting the wheel as he followed the lonely road through the limestone gulch.
‘We will know something in less than two hours.
That's when we'll hit the German border.’
Chief Inspector Kuhlmann of the Federal Police in Wiesbaden was chewing on his cigar as he read the Most Secret signal from London.
His assistant, Kurt Meyer, watched his chief.
Kuhlmann was a small wide-shouldered man with dark hair and a mouth which was also wide.
In his forties, he had thick dark eyebrows and an aggressive thrust to his jaw.
His movements suggested great energy and he threw the signal on to his desk.
‘You've read it, Kurt.
What's your reaction?’
‘This Tweed sounds a monster…’
‘That's because you've never met him.
He's totally incapable of committing any type of crime, let alone murder and rape — that signal is oddly worded, coming from Howard.’
He strolled over to the window, lit his cigar, stared down as plain-clothes policemen hurried across the courtyard one storey below.
He grunted as Meyer took the two photos from the envelope delivered by secret courier.
One of Tweed, the other of a dark-haired girl with an attractive face and intelligent eyes.
‘What do we do?’
Meyer asked.
‘The Minister in Bonn suggested we circulate all frontier posts, after phoning them…’
‘The Minister is a cretin.
Another politician.
Always pass the buck.
Well,’ Kuhlmann removed his cigar to gesture with it.
‘He's passed the buck to me so let's get creative.’
‘Creative?’
‘The Minister said we ought to circulate Tweed's photo as well.
It occurs to me we're just about to circulate the picture of that man, Stein, suspected of wholesale fraud — so maybe we get them mixed up, Kurt.’
‘Mixed up?’
‘That's it.
The instructions are to have Stein followed without his realizing it.
Not sufficient evidence for an arrest.
So we send out Stein's photo as Tweed, and Tweed's as Stein.’
‘Why are we protecting this Tweed?’
Meyer enquired.
‘Partly because I've known him for years.
He's incapable of throttling a cat, let alone a woman.
And the wording of the signal from Howard is intriguing.
Whereabouts required because of alleged complicity in the murder and rape of an unknown woman.
Please report direct to me.
Repeat direct to me .
Howard.
He's sending me a message.’
‘I still don't understand…’
‘But then you're not supposed to — nor is anyone else except me.
Howard doesn't believe a word of this crap.
Something very funny is going on back in London.
Better get on with it.
Don't forget to switch those photos.
A whole pile of messages are going out.
Be surprising if we didn't slip up on one of them.’
Paula was tense as they approached the German frontier post beyond Echternach in Luxembourg.
Tweed, who had refused to let her take over the wheel, appeared outwardly to be perfectly relaxed as he stopped and presented the passport in the name of William Sanders.
‘What is the purpose of your journey to the Federal Republic?’ asked the Passport Control official in German.
Some instinct made Tweed reply in German.
‘We're taking a late holiday now the package-deal tourists have gone home.’
The official stared hard at Tweed and slowly turned the pages of the passport.
Tweed put an affectionate hand on Paula's neck and she managed a wan smile.
The official seemed to take for ever examining the passport before he handed it back and waved them on.
‘Oh, my God,’ said Paula as they drove out of sight of the frontier post, ‘my palms are wet inside my gloves.’
‘So what a good job you were wearing them.
They look for little giveaway signs like that.
Now we're inside Germany and we can keep moving.’
‘What route?’ asked Paula.
And it? beginning to snow.’
‘A devious one.
I'm doubling back to Trier, still inside Germany, then on to Mainz and Frankfurt.’
‘That's a funny way to Switzerland.
And surely we'll be passing close to Wiesbaden, the HQ of the Kriminalpolizei?’
‘Which is the last area Kuhlmann will expect to find us in if the hounds have been loosed.
The route from there?
South on the autobahn.
Later we'll move on to the E35 — the autobahn to Basle in Switzerland.
The idea is to move faster than London will ever dream we could.
Later, you can take over the wheel.’
‘I'd like that.
It will take my mind off things — with no limit on the autobahn.
I'm really beginning to think we might make it.’
Arriving at the Mayfair, the most expensive hotel in Brussels, on the Avenue Louise, Morgan immediately called the World Security office on Avenue Franklin Roosevelt.
Horowitz sat in an armchair in Morgan's room, listening.
‘I'm at the Mayfair, George,’ Morgan began.
‘Have you any info on the subject I told you was top priority?’
‘Yes, we have.
He's in Brussels.
Very close to where you're speaking from.
Maybe it would be best if you came over here.’
‘Expect me in ten minutes.’
Armand Horowitz had been staring into space, mentally checking the measures he must take to trace Tweed.
Six feet tall, he was in his forties, had a long bony face tapering to a pointed jaw.
Clean-shaven, he wore steel-rimmed glasses and moved with calculated deliberation.
He had already killed fifteen men — top industrialists and other VIPs.
His secret opinion of Morgan was not high.
The Welshman was too fond of high living.
His manner was too flamboyant for Horowitz's taste.
But he paid the huge fee Horowitz demanded for accepting an ‘assignment’.
Inside the luxurious villa on Avenue Franklin Roosevelt George Evans, chief of European Operations for World Security, greeted the two men in his office overlooking a trim lawn with a light covering of snow.
Also in his forties — Morgan disliked older men in positions of power — Evans was a large heavily built man, simian arms hanging by his sides, with a moon-like face and dark hair.
He reminded Horowitz of an ape.
‘Get to it,’ snapped Morgan as he whipped off his overcoat, refused any refreshments and eased his bulk into an armchair.
‘Tweed, I suspect, is both tricky and cunning…’
‘I didn't come here for a pen portrait.
Where is he?
Close to the Mayfair you said on the phone.’
‘Since then I've had another report from one of my top security agents.’
Evans played with a pencil as he leaned over his desk, staring at Morgan, who stared back with a bleak expression.
All these people needed a boot up the backside at regular intervals to keep them up to scratch.
‘My agent’, Evans continued smoothly, ‘phoned while you were on your way over here.
We doubt whether Tweed and his mistress, Paula Grey, will ever return to the Hilton where he was staying…’
‘Chapter and verse,’ Morgan snapped.
‘I was just coming to that.
My agent took a dummy package to the Hilton, addressed to Tweed, marked ‘Personal and Confidential’.
Reception at the Hilton said no one of that name was staying there.
My agent said Tweed was attached to the European Commission and often travelled incognito — under a different name.
He had a forged authority signed by one of the Commissioners who is away on holiday.
He also showed the photo of Tweed you sent over with the courier who travelled here by night ferry.
The girl receptionist was reluctant to give any information.
My agent chatted her up and she let slip Tweed and the Grey woman left early this morning after booking their suite — and paying for it — for another week.’
‘He's slipped the net,’ Morgan muttered half to himself.
‘You said Paula Grey was his mistress,’ Horowitz intervened in his slow way of speaking.
Evans stirred in his chair: there was something sinister about Horowitz which made him feel uneasy.
‘What positive proof have you about their relationship?’
Horowitz enquired.
‘Well.’
Evans spread his large hands.
‘From her photograph she's attractive and younger, so one makes the natural assumption…’
‘Which could be quite wrong…’
‘Does it matter?’
Evans, conscious of his position, resented contradiction from the hired help.
Then he became aware of the eyes behind the steel-rimmed lenses gazing at him and felt uncomfortable.
‘It might matter a lot to me in my job,’ Horowitz informed him.
‘Knowing the true relationship between two people who are in flight can be most helpful.’
‘Well, we haven't actually photographic evidence of copulation,’ Evans responded brusquely.
Morgan watched the exchange with secret satisfaction.
No harm in taking Evans down a peg.
Horowitz nodded thoughtfully.
‘Thank you for the data, Mr Evans,’ he said politely.
‘How did you get on to this Hilton business?’ demanded Morgan.
‘I've had my whole staff touring the best hotels in town.
The extract from the file on Tweed you sent with the courier made the point he often stays at top places because he thinks he's less likely to be noticed.’
‘And that's all you have?’
‘No.
I didn't stop there.
Another group of my agents have toured the car hire firms, using the same tactics.
Tweed has hired a BMW under the name William
Sanders.
The doorman at the Hilton saw them driving east early.
Here is the registration number.’
He passed a slip of folded paper to Morgan who handed it to Horowitz without looking at it.
Standing up, he slipped on his overcoat, his expression still bleak.
‘You lost him,’ he told Evans.
‘What are you going to do next?’
‘Tweed was seen driving east out of the city.
A logical move if I was in his shoes — Belgium is too close to Britain.
He has to be heading for Holland, Germany or France…’
‘Then alert our organizations in those countries.
Pick up his trail…’
‘If I may make a suggestion,’ Horowitz, also standing, addressed Evans.
‘You said you'd read an extract from Tweed's file, detailing some of his techniques…’
‘Only an extract.
Someone in London must be blocking complete access…’
‘I was about to say,’ Horowitz continued, ‘that Tweed must have assumed something like this would happen.’
He's a pro.
So it's likely he'll change his normal habits.
He could still be here, staying at some small hotel.
Why not switch your agents to checking those places?’
‘Do it,’ said Morgan.
‘I'll be back in a minute for a private word.’
He marched to the door, followed by Horowitz who put his soft trilby back on his head, pulling the brim down.
Outside in the corridor Morgan stood near the mahogany door he'd closed.
‘What do you think?
Holland, Germany, France?’
‘Oh, definitely Germany,’ Horowitz said promptly.
‘Holland is a cul-de-sac, leading him nowhere.
And with all the terrorist problems the French face their borders are watched closely.
I would make for the Federal Republic.’
‘Wait here.’
Morgan went back into Evans' office, closed the door, marched back to the desk behind which
Evans was sitting, phone in his hand and about to use it.
‘Put that thing down.’
Morgan leaned across the desk, his face close to Evans's.
‘That was a real cock-up, wasn't it?
You had him in the palm of your hand and let him escape.
Now, just for once try and earn that over-inflated salary we pay you.
Use the satellite phone for top security.
Call Frankfurt, tell them I'm coming.
And while I'm on my way all our operatives in Germany hit the streets — with copies of Tweed's photo, and Grey's.
All the hotels.
But they're to concentrate also on car hire firms.
Tweed may decide to switch that BMW for something else.
I want a fix on that man.
And fast.
‘Understood.
I'll then fly to Frankfurt myself to oversee the operation.
I may see you on the same plane.’
‘I hope not.’
Morgan straightened up.
For the first time he smiled as he took a cigar from his case, laid it on the desk.
‘Havana.
May give you inspiration.
I'm relying on you…’
He left the office.
Horowitz stood in the corridor, hands in his trench-coat pocket, staring up at a framed portrait of the founder, Lance Buckmaster.
‘No inspiration there for you,’ Morgan commented as they walked to the elevator.
‘We'll catch the first flight to Frankfurt after we've picked up our bags from the Mayfair.
That way we should be ahead of Tweed.’
‘Don't bank on it.
I'm beginning to build up a vague picture of this man.
A formidable opponent, I suspect.
I shall want a met forecast for the weather over the whole of Western Europe.
And while you go straight back to the hotel I want to buy some road maps.’
As Morgan walked back to the Mayfair alone he felt satisfied.
He'd shaken up Evans, first bawling him out then ending up with a show of confidence in him with the Havana.
The only way you kept the top brass in line, reminded them who was the boss.
Chief Inspector Kuhlmann put down the phone and looked at Kurt Meyer as though he'd never seen him before.
It was a technique he employed when grilling a suspect he knew well.
Meyer felt confused as he sat behind his desk and started examining a file.
‘We've pinpointed him,’ Kuhlmann said eventually.
‘Stein crossed the border near Echternach in Luxembourg a few hours ago.
He's on our patch.’
‘Stein?’
‘Tweed, you dumb bastard.
Travelling in a BMW with a girl.
Sounds like Paula Grey.
The frontier post spotted him from the photos we rushed to the western frontier.
I have the registration number too.’
‘Shouldn't we record it?’
Meyer, young and lean-faced, had his pen poised over a pad.
‘It's in my head.’
Kuhlmann walked over to a large-scale wall-map of the Federal Republic.
‘I wonder where he's making for?
Could be anywhere except near Wiesbaden, near me.’
‘Shouldn't we inform the Minister?’
‘Not yet, we haven't caught Tweed yet.
That phone call never happened.
Your job hangs by a thread,’ he informed his subordinate cheerfully.
Hands thrust inside his jacket pockets, Kuhlmann went over to the window and stared down into the courtyard again.
He had omitted to tell Meyer Tweed's BMW was being followed by an unmarked police car, a vehicle which would be replaced by another later to allay suspicion.
Kuhlmann was notorious for playing a lone hand.
The web was being spun, he thought.
The big question was who was the spider?
Newman boarded the aircraft for Brussels at London Airport, fastened his seat belt.
Into the empty seat beside him a passenger joined him.
Newman turned his head slowly.
His fellow passenger was Marler.
‘Didn't know I was on your tail, old chum, did you?’
Newman clasped his hands.
He said nothing until the machine was ready for take-off, moving forward to the main runway.
When he responded it was in a monotone, as though reciting a catechism.
‘You phoned Julia, who practically runs the house where I've an apartment in South Ken.
Presumably from the airport.
She told you I'd left with a bag.
You waited at the entrance to Terminal One, saw me arrive in a taxi.
You then followed me to the ticket reservation counter, chatted up the girl afterwards, found I'd booked a Business-Class seat to Brussels, did the same yourself and waited outside the final departure lounge until you saw me boarding.’
‘Ten out of ten.
And I kidded myself up you hadn't seen me.’
The plane lifted off the ground, climbed steeply through a dense cloud-bank, emerged into brilliant sunlight.
Below was a sea of unbroken cloud like endless mountain ranges.
‘Now you can tell me what you're up to,’ Newman demanded.
‘We're both on the same side.
Trying to find Tweed and Paula, to protect them.’
‘Well, that's reassuring, isn't it?’
Newman suggested ironically.
‘Cryptic remark.’
‘Not really.
Here comes the $64,000 question.
Do you think he did it?’
Newman lowered his voice.
‘Strangled and then raped that girl?’
‘You have to be joking.’
‘I have a funny sense of humour.
Maybe not on your waveband.
You haven't answered the question.
And who sent you?’
‘I thought you knew.’
Marler's tone was flippant.
‘When Tweed is out of action, Howard is in control.’
Newman remained silent for the rest of the flight.
He was thinking furiously.
He had never liked Marler, although he recognized his great ability.
Now he didn't trust him.
Why?
Some sixth sense he'd learned not to ignore.
He had two options, he thought, as the plane began the descent to Brussels.
One, he could ditch Marler.
It wouldn't be too easy, but he knew he could manage it.
Two, he could go along with Marler, pretend to accept him at face value, and this way he could keep an eye on him.
He decided on the second option as the wheels touched down.
Remembering where Tweed had stayed once during a desperate operation in the past.
Newman told the cab driver to take them to the Brussels Hilton.
He went up to his room while Marler went to his, dumped his bag on the bed, ran back to the elevator and walked out of the hotel.
It took him a few minutes to find a public phone booth.
He took out his small notebook, found the number for Kriminalpolizei in Wiesbaden, dialled Kuhlmann's personal number.
To his relief the Chief Inspector answered the phone himself.
His voice sounded as gravelly as ever, charged with energy.
He told Newman to hold on and the Englishman heard him call out in German.
‘Kurt, take that file down to the Registry and lock it away yourself.
The combination hasn't been changed…’
A pause.
‘OK, Newman, what can I do for you?’
‘Have you received a message from London to apprehend Tweed?’
‘Where are you speaking from…’
‘A public call box, of course…’
‘OK.
Keep your hair on.
I had to check.
The answer to your question is yes.
Partially.
Newman, what was the weather like when me met in Lübeck?’
‘A bloody heatwave.
Why…
Oh, I see.
Yes, it is me.
You said partially.
What does that mean?’
‘Sounded like you,’ Kuhlmann said calmly.
‘I had to be sure.
You think he did it?’
‘For God's sake!’
Newman was unusually vehement.
‘Have you lost your marbles.
He's innocent.
It has to be some kind of conspiracy.
Who's behind it I don't know.
But Tweed badly needs help, back-up.
I'm in Brussels.
He came here but I'm sure he didn't linger.
Not with the wolves after him.
And he has Paula with him.
I just don't know where to start looking.’
‘Frankfurt might be a good place to start.
Don't come here.
Call me and I'll meet you somewhere.
I've decided where.
At the Frankfurt Hof.
We'll fix a time over the phone.
Speak to me only.’
The tone of voice changed.
‘I'll see to it — and thanks for calling, Lothar.
Bye…’
Newman guessed Kurt had returned to the office.
Kurt Who?
And Kuhlmann was obviously trusting no one except himself.
It was getting worse.
The stench of treachery in the air.
As he re-entered the vast lobby of the Hilton Newman stopped, then moved to the right into the sitting area.
Marler was standing at the reception counter, talking to one of the girls.
He had an envelope in his hand.
Newman watched him stuffing banknotes into the envelope, sealing it, writing on the front.
Then he disappeared and the girl also vanished.
Newman guessed they had gone to the security vault behind the counter.
He was waiting when Marler reappeared.
‘Unpacked your bag?’
Marler enquired and lit a king-sized cigarette.
‘Not yet.
I had some coffee.
I saw you at the counter.’
‘Let's stroll a bit down the Boulevard de Waterloo,’ Marler suggested.
He waited until they were outside before speaking again.
‘While you were quenching your thirst I was busy making a few enquiries.
By devious means, of course.
Tweed has been here.
He reserved an executive suite for another week — but Tweed has gone.
And won't be coming back is my guess.’
‘How did you find that out?
Hotels don't give information about guests easily.’
‘Oh, I simply told the girl I'd agreed to leave a large sum of money I owed to a friend.
Showed her Tweed's photo.
Asked for a safety deposit box after she'd seen me cramming Belgian banknotes in an envelope.
Two large denomination bills on top, the rest a small sum.
Gave her the key, got a receipt, told her my friend was travelling incognito.
She wrote William Sanders on the envelope she'd put the key inside.
I can read upside down.
Now all we have to decide is where to look next for him.’
‘Frankfurt,’ Newman said, and left it at that.
George Evans just managed to catch the same flight as Morgan and Horowitz, but the last seat available was Economy Class.
When the plane landed at Frankfurt he left the airport first, bypassing the wait at the carousel which held up his colleagues.
World Security HQ was in Kaiserstrasse, a new building with armoured plate glass windows and a system of scanners covering the entrance and all corridors.
Arriving an hour later, Morgan stepped out of the cab and looked around while Horowitz paid.
Morgan didn't like Frankfurt.
He liked Hamburg and  Münich , but he called Frankfurt the Machine City.
Too much traffic clogging the streets, too many high-rise buildings, too little greenery.
A concrete fortress of a place.
His first act on entering was to test the security.
He walked straight towards the bank of elevators.
Two uniformed guards intercepted him, one reached for his suitcase.
‘I'm Morgan.
I run this show,’ he snapped and waved his pass in their faces.
‘And I'm short of time…’
‘I'm sorry, sir,’ one of the guards replied in English, ‘but we have to check your case with the X-ray machine.’
Horowitz, more stoical, was already at the counter while his case passed through the type of machine used at airports.
Morgan waited while his own case was processed, biting his lips.
‘George Evans is expecting me.
He may not have got here yet.’
‘He's in his office now.
Just stand in front of this screen while I call him…’
‘What the hell for?’
‘So he can see you on the screen in his office.
All identities of callers have to be confirmed…’
The guard was talking to Evans as Morgan glared at the screen, then took out a cigar and clamped his teeth on it.
‘If you're seeing me, get these people off my back, George — we're supposed to be running an operation…’
‘You can go up now, Mr Morgan,’ said the guard, replacing the phone.
‘Room 401, fourth floor.’
‘I run this outfit.
I know where the hired help lives…’
Inside the elevator Horowitz made his comment.
‘They were doing their job.
And the security is reasonably good.’
‘You have to keep people on their toes.’
Morgan chuckled, a wheezing sound.
‘Management must manage.’
Evans got his blow in first as he stood at the door, ushered them into a large office overlooking the Kaiserstrasse.
Venetian blinds were half-closed over the windows to avoid any risk of observation from the buildings opposite.
‘We've traced Tweed.
I'm expecting another call from our informant.
The connection was broken as you came up…’
He broke off as his phone rang.
‘Hello.
That you, Kurt again?
Make it snappy — I have important visitors.’
He listened, said yes, he'd grasped it.
‘Keep me up-to-date on their progress.
What we need to know is where they're heading for — so we can be ready for them.
The money will be waiting in the usual safety deposit.
Bye, Kurt.’
He offered drinks and Morgan said he'd have a double Scotch.
Horowitz shook his head, nursed his small case on his lap and glanced at Morgan.
On the plane his employer had downed several drinks: Morgan was a man who drank heavily.
Maybe the pressure of the job was getting to him.
No excuse.
‘Tweed’, Evans began as he handed a cut-glass tumbler to Morgan, ‘has arrived in Germany.
With Paula Grey, so far as we know.
With a woman, anyway.
He actually came into Frankfurt in his hired BMW, then changed it for a Mercedes.
Here is the registration.’
Another folded slip changed hands, was again passed on to Horowitz.
Evans looked pleased with himself as he settled behind his large antique desk.
In his armchair Morgan drank half the Scotch, smacked his lips, scowled.
‘A Mercedes.
That doesn't help.
This country is lousy with them.
Look at the taxis — all Mercedes.’
‘Which is maybe why Tweed chose that make,’ Horowitz suggested in his quiet voice.
‘Have you a toilet here?’ he asked his host.
Evans gestured towards a door and Morgan waited until he was alone with Evans before he asked the question.
‘How are we getting this info so fast?
Who is Kurt?’
‘I don't like to advertise my contacts.’
Evans glanced at the closed toilet door, leaned forward, lowered his voice.
‘Kurt Meyer.
Chief Inspector Kuhlmann's assistant — an inside track right into the centre of the Kriminalpolizei at Wiesbaden.
I can tell you that isn't easy to arrange.’
‘But it's your job to do things like that.
You've got something on this Kurt Meyer?’
‘Pornographic pictures taken in a high-class bordello.
And he's married.
We pay him to put icing on the cake, and tie him to us.
I have receipts signed by Meyer in the safe — he didn't want to provide them but a little arm-twisting works wonders.
‘And that's all we know?’
Morgan demanded.
‘That Tweed and his girl friend are driving somewhere in a Mercedes?’
‘No, that isn't all we know.’
Evans made no attempt to conceal his satisfaction.
‘Unmarked police cars are following him.
They're using the leapfrog technique, one vehicle taking over from another at regular intervals.
They radio in reports of their locations to Wiesbaden.
When he can, Kurt then passes them on to me — from an outside phone, of course.
We now have operatives following Tweed.’
Morgan twirled his cigar between his thick stubby fingers as he thought about it.
Evans's news was better than he'd ever hoped for.
‘Where was the latest sighting?’ he asked.
‘On the autobahn, heading south towards Karlsruhe.
He could turn off east or west, of course…’
‘Not west.
He won't risk France.
But he might head east.’
Morgan put the cigar in his mouth, lit it as Evans pushed a heavy Rosenthal bowl towards him.
‘He could just be heading for Russia via the Czech border…’
‘From the little I've grasped about him I'd say that was unlikely, to say the least.’
‘But it would be a good rumour to spread, step up the pressure all round.
Feed it into the grapevine, use your press contacts.’
He blew smoke into the air.
‘But on no account let anyone know we're interested.’
‘You know we have a department devoted to doing just that.
Feeding rumours on behalf of a client about to make a take-over bid — rumours about the bid victim…’
‘But no names,’ Morgan warned.
‘Just rumours about a highly placed British official defecting to the Fast.’
He looked up as Horowitz reappeared.
‘We have a tail already locked on to Tweed.
Driving south on the autobahn.
You'll have to be careful.
The German police are tracking him — unmarked cars.’
Horowitz, tall and thin in the trench coat he still wore, and carrying the case he never let out of his sight, stared at both men.
There was something remote, detached in his ice-blue eyes.
Again Evans felt disturbed: it was almost like a hangman measuring his latest customer for the drop.
‘I find that curious,’ Horowitz remarked.
‘I understood from you, Morgan, some kind of alert had been sent out.
If so, why hasn't Tweed been arrested?’
‘No idea.’
Morgan disliked people who brought up insoluble problems.
‘What do you propose to do?’
‘I'd like an executive jet placed at my disposal at Frankfurt Airport.
The company jet.
To fly me to the small airport outside Freiburg near the Black Forest.’
‘Consider it done,’ Morgan replied before Evans could speak.
‘It may be an hour or two before I arrive to board the jet,’ Horowitz continued.
‘I have to pick up a helper.
I'm on my way now.’
Evans watched him leave, noted how silently he closed the door behind him.
He let out his breath.
‘I'm not sorry to see him go — it's like having death in the room.’
‘Maybe that's his trade.’
Armand Horowitz walked a hundred yards along Kaiserstrasse, disassociating himself from World Security before he hailed a cab.
Looking back, he could see the complex of radio masts and satellite dishes on the roof of the building he'd left.
WS operated a highly sophisticated communications system.
But Horowitz, who had been born in Hungary, was no slouch himself at communications.
He had spent a while in the toilet, most of the time with his ear to the stethoscope-like instrument he'd pressed against the closed door.
He'd heard quite clearly Evans's reference to his inside track with the Kriminalpolizei at Wiesbaden, to Kurt Meyer's treachery.
Secret Knowledge, Horowitz always felt, was power.
As the cab drove out of Frankfurt to the address on the way to the airport, Horowitz, sitting erect, case in his lap, reflected he was the only real professional in this game.
He'd developed a contempt for men like Morgan and Evans.
They carefully distanced themselves from the dirty work, but didn't hesitate to employ his services.
Evans had been distinctly uncomfortable about Horowitz's presence in his office.
The cab stopped at the street intersection he'd been given, his passenger paid him, took time drawing on his gloves until the cab was gone.
Horowitz then walked the last hundred yards to the decrepit villa standing back from the airport highway, pushed open the left-hand iron grille gate.
He walked up the moss-infested path, mounted the steps and pressed the bell-push two times, paused, then gave one long press.
He'd seen no reason to reveal to Morgan and Evans that his helper was a woman.
Newman arrived at Frankfurt an hour later than Morgan.
With Marler he took a cab to the Hessischer Hof, one of the two best hotels in the city.
They registered and avoided using a porter.
As the elevator ascended Newman made his flat statement.
‘Wait in your room — or in the hotel.
I have to go and check with someone.’
‘I don't actually recall anyone putting you in charge…’
‘Then get off my back and I'll work on my own.’
‘No need to get shirty,’ Marler responded mildly as they walked along a quiet, carpeted corridor.
‘If that's the way you want to play it, fair enough.
I'll mooch about the hotel…’
Newman dumped his bag, took out two spare suits, hung them on a hanger, left the case lid open and left the Hessischer Hof.
He walked across the small park on the far side of the street towards the vast exhibition centre, glancing back frequently: he'd chosen this route because it was impossible for Marler to follow him without being seen.
From a public phone booth he called Otto Kuhlmann who answered immediately.
‘I'm in Frankfurt.
The heatwave man in Lübeck…’
‘Meeting point changed.
Can you be near the ticket office at the Hauptbahnhof one hour from now?’
‘I'll be waiting for you there…’
It was only a short walk to the main rail station.
Newman went straight there.
He spent half an hour in the restaurant, drinking coffee.
When he emerged on to the vast concourse he saw Kuhlmann standing at the entrance to one of the platforms opposite the ticket office.
The German saw him at once, walked over, shook hands, greeted him in his own language.
‘Let's just stroll up and down, Bob.
That way we can talk without being overheard.’
‘You don't believe this incredible accusation against Tweed?’
Newman asked him point-blank.
‘No.
Neither does Howard.
But what about you?
Any doubts?’
Kuhlmann challenged.
‘None whatsoever.
Why the devil do you think I came haring over here?
To try and find Tweed, give him some back-up, find out what the hell is going on.’
The tannoy was calling out a message about an express leaving for Basle in Switzerland.
Passengers were hurrying to barriers.
A locomotive was gliding in, hauling a trainload of coaches.
Kuhlmann, inches shorter than Newman, wearing his normal dark suit, which emphasized the great width of his shoulders, took his time replying.
‘There's the stench of treachery and conspiracy high up in London,’ he commented eventually.
‘Tweed — with Paula Grey, I assume — at this moment is driving south along the autobahn from Frankfurt.
He crossed the Luxembourg border in a hired BMW with Belgian number plates.
Since then — in Frankfurt — he changed cars.
Now he's in a black Mercedes.
My men picked him up as he came over the Luxembourg border.
They're following him in unmarked cars.
I thought only I knew this.
I haven't told my Minister.’
‘You said Howard doesn't think him guilty.
That surprises me.
How do you know?’
‘Because the signal he sent spoke of alleged complicity in murder and rape, and only asked for his whereabouts.
It also was emphatic that I reported back to him alone.
I haven't even done that yet.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because my men tracking Tweed have reported a complication.
Someone else is playing the same game — following him with a series of cars.
I found out who they are just before I left to see you.
Gave me cause to think, pause.’
‘Who is it then?.’
‘Prepare yourself for a shock.
The registration numbers of two of the cars were radioed back to me.
I called Vehicle Registration.
The cars belong to World Security & Communications GmbH.
Lance Buckmaster's international colossus before he became your Minister for External Security.
The damned fools omitted to hire cars.’
Newman was stunned.
They walked in silence while he absorbed this new twist.
He stopped to let a woman with a pram rush past him.
Kuhlmann lit a cigar.
They began walking again.
‘You have to be quite sure about this?’
Newman queried.
‘I thought you knew me well enough by now to know I'm careful — very careful — about what I say,’ Kuhlmann growled.
‘Maybe you can also work out why I'm in no hurry to communicate with anyone in London.
Who can we trust?’
‘Maybe someone high up in WS is playing his own game.
Buckmaster no longer has any control over his company.’
‘Not like you to be naïve.
We've had trouble with that outfit before now.
They were suspected of trying to smuggle restricted high-tech equipment into East Germany.
Aboard one of their own security trucks.
I grilled a man called George Evans, the managing director of their operations here on the Continent.
A crook if I ever saw one.
I just hadn't enough evidence to bring the case to court.’
‘What are you saying?’
Newman asked, wanting the German to confirm his own growing suspicion.
‘I'm saying that officially the WS organization is now run by Buckmaster's wife, Leonora.
She has his block of shares.
I did a little research at the time of the East German business.
But do you think even a man like Evans, managing director for Europe, would risk his position by going into business on his own?
I cross-examined him.
He's not the type.
He'd only carry out orders — coming from Lance Buckmaster.’
‘And you think he's still doing that?’
‘Yes!’
Kuhlmann was emphatic.
‘What it's all about is what I can't fathom.
But now you can see why I'm in no hurry to contact London.
First, Tweed is a man I like, admire.
Someone is trying to put the fix on him — whoever they are they're not getting help from me.
Second, I have a score to settle with World Security.
They were guilty as hell over the East German business and made me look a fool.
I even got a reprimand from my creep of a Minister.
So now I watch and wait.’
‘You're really relying on me.’
Newman faced Kuhlmann, confronted him.
‘Yes, I am.
You have freedom of movement.
I haven't.’
‘I don't even know where Tweed is,’ Newman pressed.
‘So, you call me at regular intervals.
Let's give you a code name.
Felix.
Speak only to me.
I've worked out Tweed can't drive for ever— even if Paula Grey gives a hand with the wheel.
Somewhere he's got to stop.
I'll know when he does — and where.
I'll have a police chopper waiting at Frankfurt Airport to fly you to the nearest airfield.’
Kuhlmann took an envelope from his breast pocket, gave it to Newman.
‘The pilot's name is Egon Wrede.
That letter identifies you, authorizes you to be flown anywhere you tell Wrede.
Best I can do…’
‘Wait!
There's something odd you haven't told me.
Why did you think up this secret system of approaching only you?
Code name Felix, etc.
Sounds as though you don't trust anyone except yourself.’
‘I don't.
There's a lot of power behind this thing.
Best I can do,’ he repeated and walked away.
Tweed checked the small notebook he rested on his knee.
Paula was behind the wheel of the Mercedes moving at between 140 and 160 k.p.h. — about ninety miles an hour.
Ahead the autobahn E 35 stretched away into the distance.
They were well south of Karlsruhe and approaching Offenbach with Freiburg beyond.
Paula had at last persuaded Tweed to hand over the driving to her for awhile.
No great burden — she loved speed.
Out of the corner of her eye she saw Tweed glance again in the wing mirror.
‘They're still with us?’ she asked.
‘Indeed they are,’ he said calmly as though working on a crossword puzzle.
‘Seven cars spread out behind us and that silver Merc a quarter of a mile ahead.
That makes eight cars — I've double-checked the registration numbers,’ he remarked, glancing down at his notebook.
‘It's a bloody convoy.’
‘It's exactly that.
Which is what I don't understand.
Eight cars tracking us all this distance.
At first I thought they were police cars.’
‘Why shouldn't they be?
They're probably looking for us now.’
‘Because it's too many — even for using the leapfrog system.
If Kuhlmann was waiting to pounce — waiting to see where we're making for — he'd use four cars at the most.
Eight suggests two different groups.’
‘Who could they be?’
Your guess is as good as mine.
It s OK for me to talk.?’
‘I want you to…’
She loved the speed but was only too aware of the danger of slipping into a hypnotic daze.
The four-lane highway curved and straightened and curved.
The scenery which might have relieved the monotony, kept her alert, was non-existent.
It was like driving along an endless concrete canal.
But she kept up her high speed.
Tweed was desperately anxious to get to Freiburg and it was late afternoon already.
‘What do we do when we reach Freiburg?’ she enquired.
‘Before we get to Freiburg,’ he corrected her.
‘I take over the wheel and we lose them, the whole shooting match.’
‘Don't see how…’
‘You will.
Just keep moving.’
Horowitz gazed out of the window of the descending Sikorsky.
Freiburg airfield came up to meet him.
Alongside sat a girl in her early thirties with titian hair, good bone-structure and an excellent figure concealed beneath the windcheater she wore.
Tight denims clung to her legs and she wore knee-length leather boots.
Horowitz had picked up Eva Hendrix from the villa on the way to Frankfurt Airport.
It wasn't her real name and — like Horowitz — she'd been born in Hungary.
Normally he mistrusted the use of women but he foresaw the opportunity of infiltrating her into Tweed's company in the future.
‘Where are we going first?’ she asked as the machine touched down with a bump.
‘World Security HQ in Freiburg.’
‘Funny place to have an office — I thought they had a main HO in Basle, thirty minutes down the autobahn from Freiburg.’
‘They have.
Freiburg is more discreet.
On the edge of the Black Forest.’
‘Good place to bury the bodies,’ she joked with black humour.
Horowitz froze for a few seconds.
She had come nearer to the truth than she ever dreamed.
Too busy lighting a cigarette, she didn't notice his expression.
She glanced out of the window into the dark as the pilot entered the cabin.
‘Oh my God, it's started to snow.’
‘So for once the met forecast people got it right.
Which
He didn't explain why it was going to be helpful and the pilot told him the car he'd specified was waiting for them.
Horowitz nodded as he followed Hendrix out of the cabin, carrying the case he'd picked up from the Frankfurt villa in one hand, his executive case in the other.
Horowitz, who preferred travelling light, had suitcases with clothes packed deposited at various locations all over Europe.
The car was a Ford, as he'd requested.
Nothing flashy.
He had perfected the technique of not being noticed to a fine art.
Eva Hendrix started to chatter in her persuasive voice while the uniformed chauffeur drove them into the ancient town of Freiburg.
The snowflakes were larger now, the windscreen wipers flicked back and forth.
‘Is it a seduction job again?’ she whispered.
‘Not exactly.
More an infiltration — if the chance arises.’
He feeds out information as though each word costs him money, she thought.
Well, he was paying so let him get on with it in his peculiar way.
She glanced at his strong profile, staring ahead at the snowbound road.
He wasn't queer, she felt sure, so did he have a woman every now and again she wondered?
If he did it would be a clinical performance, precise and calculated, like everything he did.
Not for me, she decided.
‘I'm not interested in you sexually,’ he remarked, spacing out the words in his deliberate way.
‘Just in the work you can do for me.’
Christ! she thought.
A man who can read a woman's mind.
It was supposed to work the other way round.
When they arrived at the HQ of World Security in Freiburg the closed gates were opened for them immediately.
At least someone with the car's description and registration number had been told they were coming.
Inside the lobby Horowitz handed the uniformed guard the letter of introduction Gareth Morgan had supplied.
‘We've no photograph of you, Mr Schmidt,’ the guard complained.
‘Read the note at the bottom.
You're not very good at checking documents, are you?
Mr Morgan wouldn't like that.’
So far as he knew, no photograph had ever been taken of Horowitz.
He'd been very careful about that.
The photos in his collection of passports were blurred images of the real man — and without the steel-rimmed glasses he habitually wore.
‘Sorry, sir,’ the guard apologized.
‘The chief's office is available for you.
I'll take you up there — unless you'd like some refreshment first?’
‘Nothing for me…’
‘I'm starving,’ Hendrix complained.
‘I'd like a good steak, cooked rare, and a drink.
A double vodka-martini.’
‘See to her wants.
Feed her.
She can stay down here in that sitting area.
Now, take me to the office,’ Horowitz ordered the guard.
The office was a large room on the first floor equipped with a desk on which perched three phones in different colours.
Horowitz told the guard he wanted to call the Frankfurt office.
Privately.
‘I'll leave you alone, then.
The blue phone is the one to use.’
Horowitz waited until the guard had gone, then placed his bags on a couch and studied the room.
High up in one corner was a camera aimed at the desk.
They do trust each other, Horowitz thought.
Dragging a chair over, he stood on it, took off his scarf and wrapped it round the observation lens.
Before using the phone he checked the room minutely.
He found the tape recorder attached to a small alcove carved out from underneath the desk.
His keen hearing had caught the whirring of the tape.
They'd probably switched it on by remote control while he was on his way up.
This was one call they wouldn't be recording.
Crouching down, he examined the machine.
He used the manual switch to turn it off.
Then he extracted the cassette, hauling out the length of tape which had been recording and stuffed both items in his jacket pocket.
He was seated at the desk, about to dial Frankfurt, when the door was thrown open and a uniformed guard entered the room.
He pointed at the camera.
‘That has to be left alone…’
Horowitz replaced the phone, stood up slowly without a word, walked slowly up to the guard.
His right hand took hold of the guard's tie and collar and he threw him backwards through the doorway.
The guard hit the far wall and slid to the floor.
‘I have already said I wish to make a call privately.
Stay out of this room.
If there is another intruder I will break both his arms.’
The guard, still slumped on the floor, gazed at the slate-grey eyes behind the glasses.
He had never felt so frightened.
Horowitz had spoken quietly, the words spaced out.
He closed the door and went back to the desk, sat down, dialled the number from memory.
He was still wearing kid gloves.
‘I wish to speak immediately to Gareth Morgan.
No need for my name.
He is expecting the call.’
‘Morgan here,’ a familiar voice rasped within thirty seconds.
‘Is that…’
‘No names are necessary.
I'm speaking from your Freiburg office.
Can you tell me where the subject is now?’
‘Yes.
A car radioed in only a few minutes ago.
Coming straight towards you.
On autobahn E 35.
About midway between Offenbach and Freiburg…’
‘Then I'd better go.
You arranged for that vehicle I requested when I called from Frankfurt Airport?
With a reliable driver?’
‘I dealt with it personally.
Driver's name is Oscar.
He should be waiting for you in the transport yard at the back.’
‘And the subject is still in the same vehicle?’
‘He is…’
‘Goodbye, then.’
Horowitz picked up his cases, retrieved his scarf from the camera, keeping clear of the lens, took the elevator downstairs.
Eva Hendrix, an empty glass on the plate glass table, was sitting waiting for her food.
Horowitz dumped his suitcase beside her.
‘Look after that.
I'll be back in a few minutes.’
He went out of the front entrance, made his way round to the back of the building as snow fell on him.
He was hardly aware of the chill in the night air, his mind totally concentrated on his job.
He found the enormous twelve-wheeler refrigerated truck parked inside a large shed with the doors open.
A man sat in the cab attached to the trailer vehicle, smoking a cigarette, reading a newspaper.
He folded the paper, opened the door, jumped out and threw his cigarette out into the snow as soon as he saw Horowitz.
‘I'm Schmidt,’ Horowitz said, examining the driver.
‘Who are you?’
‘Oscar.
I need identification for this job.’
Horowitz handed him the authorization signed by Evans.
Oscar read it carefully by the sidelights of his huge vehicle.
The engine was purring like a tiger.
Oscar reminded Horowitz of the Michelin tyre man — short and tubby, his belly bulging behind his belt, round-headed.
But there was nothing amusing about Oscar.
His rubbery face, unsmiling, was the prototype-of the ‘heavy’ seen in ‘B’films.’
He handed the sheet back and Horowitz showed him the piece of paper with the registration number of Tweed's Mercedes.
Oscar glanced at the paper and handed that back.
‘You can remember the number?’
Horowitz asked.
‘It's my job to remember things like that.
What make of car?
What colour?
Where?’
‘A Mercedes.
Colour black.
Now driving down the E 35 from Offenburg.
One man, one girl inside.
What is that contraption mounted over the cab?’
‘Show you, then I'm off.’
Oscar climbed nimbly back inside the cab, slammed the door shut and pressed a switch.
On top of the cab was a very big circular disc with a grille over it like miniature venetian blinds.
When Oscar pressed the switch half way a lamp like a huge searchlight came on, so strong Horowitz had to dip his head.
The driver pressed the switch fully down and the beam became of blinding intensity.
Peering up, Horowitz saw the narrow ‘blinds’ had swivelled to become mere rims.
He guessed its purpose.
It must have a range of three hundred yards.
He stood aside and the great vehicle moved ponderously out of the garage.
Oscar sounded his deafening horn three times and the gates to the yard swung open.
Horowitz watched it turn on to the road and vanish.
It should, he reflected, be more than large enough to finish the job.
Returning to the front entrance, he found Hendrix still waiting for her food, smoking yet another cigarette.
He bent over to speak so only she could hear him.
‘We, re leaving now.
On foot.
So put your coat on and then we can get out of here…’
‘I'm waiting for those sluggards to bring my steak.’
‘No, you're not.
I booked two rooms at the Hotel Colombi from Frankfurt Airport.
You can have an eight-course dinner there, if you can cope with it.
And I may not need your services now, so you could be on a train back to Frankfurt tomorrow.’
‘The snow is getting worse.
I'll get soaked…’
‘Put this scarf round your head.
Then get moving, woman.
No more yacking.
You know I don't like attention drawn to myself.’
As they plodded through the snow, which was falling even more heavily, Horowitz had a mental picture of Tweed in his Mercedes driving towards Freiburg, while Oscar in his refrigerated truck drove towards Tweed.
Night.
Tweed had taken over the wheel from Paula.
Visibility was bad.
The falling snow was approaching blizzard conditions.
He had the heaters full on.
He was driving at 100 k.p.h.
His undimmed headlights showed the curve of the autobahn ahead far enough to keep up that speed.
‘It's getting worse,’ said Paula.
‘I calculate we're within twenty miles of the turn-off to Freiburg.
Do we go on?’
‘Yes.
The vehicles are still behind us.
We have to shake all of them off.’
The headlights behind him were blurred, the gap between pursued and pursuers had widened, but they were there.
And the silver Mercedes was still somewhere ahead of them.
He shifted his position: he was beginning to feel stiff and achy.
The view beyond the windscreen was weird.
A belt of heavy snow along the highway south, the neon lights cast a weird light over the snow, reflecting back a ghostly glow.
There were few headlights coming in the opposite direction beyond the barrier, and few travelling in his direction.
He yawned.
‘Isn't it getting too hot?’
Paula suggested, looking up from her map.
‘I'm happy to turn down the heating.’
He reached a hand out and switched off both heaters.
There was a danger he'd lose his concentration if too much warmth built up.
The belt of snow rolled on and on and on.
Tweed straightened up, pushed his back hard against the seat, anything to keep alert.
‘Will the snow make your manoeuvre to lose them more difficult?’
Paula asked.
‘Could make it easier.
We can't be seen so easily.
Please keep an eye on the signs.
I need to know we're approaching the Freiburg turn-off well in advance.’
‘Will do.
We're coming up to one soon, but it's not the one for Freiburg.’
Oscar sat inside his parked truck at the top of the slip road leading down on to the E 35 for traffic heading along the autobahn to Freiburg and Basle.
His engine was running and his windscreen wipers whipped back and forth to keep the glass clear of snow.
He held a high-powered pair of night-glasses pressed close to his eyes.
From his vantage point he could see vehicles approaching from the north a good way off.
The snow was falling more lightly, thank God, which increased his range of vision.
The manoeuvre he had planned was highly dangerous and quite illegal.
He was banking on the size of the truck to make it easy, not all that dangerous and successful.
He wore gloves, as he had since he'd first entered the vehicle — stolen from a food depot a hundred miles to the north.
And he had added a subtle touch for afterwards when the police investigated the catastrophe.
On the seat beside him was a half-empty bottle of bourbon — also handled with gloves.
An ex-amateur racing driver, Oscar was confident that after the ‘accident’ he could execute the necessary U-turn to head south again.
If some other car became embroiled, bad luck.
Only an army tank crashing into his truck could put it out of action.
And that was what he had once driven when he had done his military service — driven a Leopard tank.
When the police eventually found the abandoned truck they'd assume the driver who'd stolen it had been drunk.
The bottle of bourbon would convince them of that.
Oscar felt sure he'd foreseen every contingency.
But that was what Schmidt was paying him nine thousand marks for.
Attention to detail.
He stiffened.
A Mercedes was approaching.
The snow had almost stopped falling and he had a clear view.
A lone woman driving.
In any case, it was the wrong registration number.
The car seemed to float towards him.
And she must be doing 140 k.p.h.
Stupid cow — in these conditions.
No wonder there were pile-ups on the autobahn.
Probably racing on to meet her lover, he thought.
The car seemed to take ages to reach the point where the slip road entered the autobahn.
Then she was gone.
The incident reassured Oscar.
He'd have plenty of time to drive down when the target vehicle came into sight.
He lit a cigarette, then frowned.
The weather was changing.
The snow had stopped coming down.
The temperature had dropped suddenly.
In the distance over the autobahn it was becoming hazy.
Creeping in from both sides was a freezing fog.
He lifted the pair of binoculars to his eyes again.
At the moment he'd still have time to drive down on to the autobahn — providing the freezing fog came no closer.
‘We're approaching another turn-off,’ Paula warned.
‘Still not the one to Freiburg, but we're getting closer.’
‘I congratulate you on spotting that sign,’ Tweed replied and gripped the wheel more firmly.
A sinister white vapour was floating over the autobahn.
Snake-like curls of mist drifted downwards.
His windscreen was icing up.
The wipers kept knocking slivers of the ice off the windscreen.
He turned up the heater.
Raw cold was penetrating the interior of the Mercedes.
The silver car ahead had disappeared.
Could it have driven up the turn-off?
He doubted it.
‘It's stopped snowing,’ Paula remarked, ‘but this fog is going to make it difficult for you.’
‘So we're lucky there's nothing just ahead of us.’
‘The trouble is I can't see any more how close our friends behind us are.
Let's hope they keep well back.
We don't want one of them slamming up our rear.’
It was a thought which had occurred to Tweed.
He wriggled and sat up straighter.
For no particular reason he felt more alert and in control.
Second wind.
The adrenalin was flowing again.
Probably the arrival of the fresh hazard had triggered it off.
He would have liked to reduce speed but he was worried about what might be coming up behind him.
The ice made a crackling sound now as it froze harder and the wipers shifted it.
In his headlights the endless lane ahead gleamed like glass.
The surface was becoming very treacherous.
Paula yelled an urgent warning.
‘Oh, my God!
Look what's coming.
He must be mad…’
In the distance a huge truck was advancing towards them on collision course, its headlights blazing.
Then mounted on top of the cab another light came on, a powerful beam like a great eye glaring at them.
Paula froze with terror.
The searchlight beam became much stronger, blinding her as the monster rumbled on towards them.
Even above the sound of their own engine she could hear the drumming beat of Oscar's souped-up motor.
Tweed's mouth tightened.
His eyes flickered for a second to the rear view mirror.
No sign of any traffic behind his Mercedes.
He kept his speed, resisted the temptation to lessen the pressure on the accelerator.
The two vehicles rushed towards each other.
The gap was closing to collision point in seconds.
‘He's crazy as a fox,’ Paula gasped.
‘Brace yourself!’
Tweed ordered.
He could see now it was an immense refrigerated truck weighing God knew how many tons.
It would crush his car like an eggshell with its size and the combined speeds.
He knew instantly the driver was intent on killing them.
Still he kept up his speed, stayed in the same lane as the oncoming juggernaut.
Oscar was crouched over his wheel, his dead cigarette hung from the corner of his thin mouth.
This was the target — everything was right.
Number and sex of the people inside.
Registration number.
He pushed his foot down and the truck shook with the power of its movement.
Oscar leant back in his seat, away from the wheel, ready for the shock…
Paula closed her eyes.
She knew she was dead.
The thought flashed through her mind that at least she would die with Tweed…
Behind the wheel Tweed sat immobile as a waxwork figure.
His mind was as cold as the ice forming on the windscreen.
The driver of the truck must now have assumed he was petrified with fright, unable to think, maybe even asleep as sometimes happened.
Tweed calculated the combined speeds of the two vehicles as best he could, his mind moving like lightning.
When he judged the moment was right — that he could turn the Mercedes faster than the truck driver could alter the onward rush of his mammoth — he swung the wheel to the left, switching to the outer lane.
The juggernaut loomed over him.
He was skidding.
Tweed drove into the skid, the car responded, he was free of the skid.
The wall of the truck slid past on his right, inches away.
Oscar swore foully, then blinked.
Headlights were racing towards him.
Instinctively he swung the wheel and the truck hit the car.
There was a grinding crunch of metal as the front of the car telescoped, a second crashing sound as the car behind it rammed into the wreckage — followed by a third.
The truck was skidding all over the autobahn, skating over the ice-rink surface.
Oscar fought desperately for control, saw the outer metal barrier rear up before him, swivelled his foot — too late — for the brake.
The truck smashed into the barrier, broke through it, lurched down an embankment.
The cab separated from the trailer which turned over on its side, sliding down the slope.
Freed of its burden, the cab sped on, rammed into a low concrete wall.
Oscar was hurled through the windscreen like a fighter pilot jerking forward at G-speed.
When the police found him later his head was almost severed from his neck, lolled through the fractured opening in a macabre way, the dead cigarette still tucked in the corner of the dead man's mouth.
‘I don't know how you managed it…’
Paula used a handkerchief to wipe sweat off her brow, to dry her hands.
She was breathing deeply, her breasts heaving, fighting to get a grip on herself.
Tweed said the first thing that came into his head.
‘Neither do I, but I did.
At a cost.
You realize there was a major pile-up?
Lord knows how many vehicles — all of them following us, I suspect.
How close to the Freiburg turn-off?’
He asked to switch her mind to something else, and because it was essential to leave the autobahn after what had just happened.
He reduced speed and carefully wiped each of his own damp hands on his coat.
Paula was already studying the map, looking up to check a sign.
‘It's the next turn-off.
We're stopping in Freiburg?’
‘Yes, I know the place.
Spent six months at the University once to learn German.
We'll stay there the night.
You'll find it relaxes you.
Freiburg has a first-rate hotel.’
‘What's it called?’
‘The Colombi.’
On their way to the Hotel Colombi, their shoulders stooped to ward off the falling snow, Horowitz paused when he saw a car hire firm which was still open.
Eva grumbled as she stood in the cold, carrying her case.
‘I want something to eat,’ she protested, clasping her coat collar round her slim neck.
Horowitz's patience was exhausted.
Smiling, he put down his luggage, placed both hands on her shoulders.
A good four inches taller than his companion, he bent down to speak to her.
‘If I have any more moaning from you they'll find your body in a ditch.
How would you like to end up that way?’
She trembled as he stared straight at her, and not with the cold.
‘I'm sorry.
What are we doing?’
Her teeth chattered, and again not with the cold.
‘I am going to hire a car.
We'll then drive the last few metres to the Colombi.
Are we feeling better now?’
‘I'm OK.
Anything you say, Armand…’
Horowitz used a driving licence in the name of Vogel to hire an Audi.
The formalities completed, he drove away along the cobbled streets of the old town.
It was important to have transport, mobility, He reserved two rooms at the luxurious hotel which had a large reception hall and modern curving staircases leading to the first floor.
Hendrix mellowed in the warmth and the palatial surroundings, said she'd go up to her room to get ready for dinner.
Horowitz handed his suitcase to a porter with his room key.
‘I'll see you in the bar,’ he told Hendrix.
It was with a sense of relief that he made his way alone into the bar and ordered a glass of champagne.
At that time of year there were few people about and he sat at a table by himself.
An infrequent drinker, he sipped his champagne.
A radio playing somewhere was interrupted by a news flash.
Horowitz froze, his glass half-way to his lips.
‘A major pile-up on the E 35 near Freiburg…reported eight cars involved…heavy casualties…also reported a large refrigerated truck driving north along the southbound lane caused the latest holocaust…the truck driver believed to have died in the pile-up…more details in our next news bulletin…
’ Horowitz put down his glass still half full.
He ordered a second glass, checked his watch.
When Eva Hendrix arrived he pointed at his own glass.
‘You can finish that up before you start on the one I ordered for you.
I have to go out — something I forgot to attend to.
Start dinner without me — I may be a while.’
‘And I got myself all dressed up for you…’
She saw his expression and stopped.
She was wearing a green off-the-shoulder dress which hugged her figure.
‘Don't worry,’ she went on quickly, ‘I'll start dinner and see you when you get back…’
And maybe, she thought, if I'm lucky he'll be away a long time and I'll meet an interesting man.
Horowitz was not even looking at her: opening his executive case, he lifted the base, sorted through several documents, found what he was looking for and shut the case.
Still holding on to it, he nodded and went out to where the Audi was parked.
It took him half an hour's fast driving up the autobahn to reach the disaster point.
Police cars with blue lights flashing, revolving.
Uniformed police everywhere.
Beyond, a glimpse of carnage — the pile-up on the southbound lane resembled a scrap metal yard.
Police were directing the traffic, waving traffic on.
He pulled up on the hard shoulder, switched off and got out.
He was careful to approach one of the older policemen: the younger ones gave out no information, delighted in exerting their brief authority by telling you to move on.
The policeman he spoke to stood with his hands on his hips, had grey hair showing beneath his peaked cap.
Horowitz began the speech he had rehearsed.
‘I'm a state official, a commissioner of taxes.’
He showed the forged document.
‘I heard about this awful accident on the radio and I'm worried sick…’
‘You think someone you know might be involved?’ the policeman asked sympathetically.
‘Yes.
My wife.
She was driving from Frankfurt and phoned me to say she was leaving late.
But she could have arrived here about the time of the accident…’
‘Registration number?
We have managed to find all of those at least.’
The policeman immediately regretted his choice of the last two words.
‘What make of car?’
‘A Mercedes.’
Horowitz hesitated.
‘You have a list of the numbers?
You have?
Would you mind if I looked down the list?
I'd sooner see it listed for myself.
I'm in a state of shock.’
The policeman nodded again, took a folded sheet of paper from his tunic pocket, unfolded it, handed it to Horowitz and held a flashlight while the tax commissioner checked the numbers, moving his index finger slowly down the list.
Horowitz let out a deep sigh.
‘She's not included.
Thank God.
Do you mind if I do a U-turn through that smashed barrier and get back to Freiburg?
I may have missed her coming out here.’
‘I'll guide you out, sir.
This is your lucky night.
No one survived that.
Freezing fog and still they drive at high speed.
Madness.’
‘There's a lot of it about in the world.
And thank you for being so helpful, officer…’
Horowitz drove back to Freiburg in a philosophical mood — the registration number of Tweed's Mercedes had not been on the list.
He was still loose, roaming about somewhere.
The question was where?
He tried to think himself into Tweed's position: what would he do?
By the time he had arrived back at the Hotel Colombi he had decided.
He was going to have a busy day tomorrow.
Tweed got lost driving into Freiburg.
They had altered the street route system since last he'd been in the place.
He found himself in front of the main station.
‘I think the bookstall is still open in the ticket hall,’ Paula said.
‘I'll nip out and try to get a street guide.’
She returned a few minutes later with an air of triumph, waving a folded map.
Sitting beside Tweed, she stopped before opening the map and looked at him.
‘If you want to go on further I'm game.
Is it safe to stop so close to that accident?
That truck driver tried to kill us — and he knew where to locate us exactly.
Lord knows how but maybe we should get out of here.’
‘You're dog-tired and hungry…’
‘I told you, I'm game.’
‘I'm dog-tired and hungry too,’ he told her.
‘and that's when I'm likely to make a major mistake.
I know Freiburg.
Let's see if we can find the Colombi Hotel.’
‘It's on the Rotteck Ring.
I saw an advertisement for it in the booking hall.
Give me a moment.’
Tweed waited and looked round.
Modern buildings in front of the station he didn't recall — obviously erected since his stay years ago in Freiburg.
‘Got it!
And it's so easy.
See that street over there— Eisenbahnstrasse?
We simply go down there and turn left into the Rotteck Ring.
The hotel is on the far side of the Ring.’
‘Let's get moving, then.
I could do with a bath and I expect you could.
Then a decent dinner.
The food is fabulous.’
It was only a short distance and Paula spotted the Colombi as they turned a corner.
Quite suddenly Tweed pulled in at the kerb before they reached the hotel.
Leaving the engine running he drummed his fingers on the wheel.
‘What's the matter?’ asked Paula.
‘You're suffering a delayed reaction from that appalling business on the autobahn aren't you?’
‘No.
But a few minutes ago I said I was dog-tired and hungry.
I also said that was when I was likely to make a major mistake.
I think I was just on the verge of making one.’
‘I don't understand.
We can talk about it when we're settled inside the Colombi in the warmth…’
‘Which is the mistake I was about to make.’
He leaned back in his seat.
‘Think, Paula.
I'm wanted for murder and rape.
So in London they're bound to have looked at my file — which gives some of my personal techniques while abroad.
One is that I often stay at a first-class hotel to merge into the background.
The Colombi is among the ‘Thirty Best Hotels in Germany’ list — and we were followed close to Freiburg…’
‘But,’ Paula hesitated, then went on, ‘it must have been a massacre when you evaded that truck.
I heard it — a terrible sound of vehicles crashing into each other.
They may all be dead.’
‘More than possible.
But someone sent those cars after us and whoever he is, he'll soon know we weren't involved.
They'll check the car registration numbers.’
‘You think then some high-powered organization is behind that pursuit.
Probably the police…’
‘And maybe someone else.
I told you, eight cars following us was too many for one outfit.
So we go to the Colombi, someone knows that habit of mine, we're walking into a trap.’
‘Yes, you could be right,’ she agreed.
‘So what do we do?’
‘Stay at a much smaller hotel, the one I stayed at when I was here to learn German.
The Oberkirch on Schusterstrasse.
It has the advantage of being tucked away behind the Munster — and there used to be a large car park there.
Don't bother with the map.
I know where I am now.
I turn into the Kaiser-Josephstrasse, then turn off that down a side street and we're in the Munsterplatz…’
Tweed turned down the Kaiser-Josephstrasse, a long cobbled street bisecting the town from east to west.
It was almost deserted at that hour, in the wintry weather.
A yellow tram ran along the centre and the street was lined on both sides with closed shops.
Turning into the Munsterplatz, Tweed saw cars parked, covered with a coating of snow.
He drove round slowly, the wheels bumping over the icy cobbles, found an empty slot behind two rows of cars under the lee of the Munster, drove into it.
‘We're nicely tucked away here in case someone comes looking for us,’ he remarked as he switched off the engine.
‘It's only a short walk to the hotel.
Mind your footing.’
‘The main thing is we're within sight of sanctuary for the night,’ Paula said cheerfully.
‘I don't really care how far it is.
I'm stiff as a board and want to stretch my legs.’
Carrying their cases, they moved across the square, lonely and silent at night.
The only sound was the crunch of their feet on the crusted snow.
The great spire of the Munster loomed above them like an arrow pointing to heaven.
Tweed turned into the Schusterstrasse, which was also deserted.
Icicles were suspended from the roof gutters like daggers, gleaming in the light from ancient lanterns attached to the walls.
‘It's a lovely place,’ Paula remarked.
The street was narrow, cobbled, full of old buildings which were joined together and went back to medieval times.
Tweed nodded towards a small four-storey building on the left-hand side of the street.
It had cream-washed walls, brown shutters and beyond its rooftop he could see the tip of the Munster spire.
‘The Hotel Oberkirch,’ he said.
‘Refuge at last.’
‘Even from the outside it looks cosy,’ Paula observed, keeping up a cheerful note.
‘I think I'll skip the bath, settle for a nice hot dinner.’
‘I'll join you,’ said Tweed as he held open the door for her.
A wave of pure warmth met them.
Outside it was below freezing point.
Inside the temperature must be forty degrees higher, at least, Tweed reckoned.
He reserved two rooms in the name James Gage and arranged to meet Paula in the dining-room.
They stood in front of a blazing log-fire before they parted.
Paula crouched down, held out her frozen hands towards the fire.
They began to tingle almost unbearably.
She gritted her teeth, held her hands in the same position.
The tingle began to fade, she stood up.
‘What are we going to do tomorrow?’ she whispered.
‘Keep on the move?’
‘I haven't decided yet.
I think better on a full stomach — but I know one thing I'm doing immediately after breakfast.’
‘Which is?’
‘Find the local car hire outfit.
Exchange the Mercedes for a BMW…’
‘We had one of those when we drove from Brussels to Frankfurt,’ she objected.
‘So it will confuse the trackers mightily — especially since I think they picked us up at the Luxembourg border crossing, then followed us in our Mercedes down the autobahn.’
It was late in the evening when Newman left the Hessischer Hof in Frankfurt and walked across the little wooded park.
He had left Marler in the bar, saying he was going upstairs for a shower.
For the third time that day he called Kuhlmann from the public box.
He wasn't sure the police chief would still be in his office but the gravelly voice answered immediately.
‘Felix here,’ Newman said.
‘No more developments, I suppose?’
‘You suppose wrong.
There was a newsflash I caught of a big pile-up on the E 35 autobahn outside Freiburg…’
‘God!
Hot Tweed?’
Newman let the name slip in his anxiety.
‘No,’ Kuhlmann assured him promptly.
‘I know definitely — I've phoned Freiburg police HQ — they've a list of the registration numbers of the eight cars involved from a radio car on the spot.
Your associate is not on the list.
But I think he was somewhere near the disaster.
Eight of my men were killed in the pile-up.’
‘That's appalling.
You must be feeling sick…’
‘Not sick — grim.
Look, Newman, supposing we meet where we met before?
Say in three-quarters of an hour from now?’
‘I'll be there…’
Newman, puzzled, replaced the receiver.
He had slipped up in using Tweed's name because it had sounded as though he'd been one of the casualties.
But Kuhlmann had also slipped up — using ‘Newman’ at the end of the conversation.
And Kuhlmann never slipped up.
Unless intentionally.
Kuhlmann looked at his assistant, Kurt Meyer, as he replaced his own phone.
Meyer had his head buried in files he was comparing, apparently oblivious to everything going on around him.
‘I'm leaving for the night,’ he informed Meyer.
‘You expect to be here much longer?’
‘Maybe another two hours, Chief, I'm still trying to make head or tail of this Gruninger case.’
Kuhlmann left his office after slipping on his dark top-coat and scarf.
He walked down to the next floor where two men sat working at desks facing each other.
He leaned on the door he had closed, pursed his lips before speaking.
‘This is just between the three of us.
Friedl, I think it is possible Kurt Meyer may leave the building shortly.
I want you to follow him without being spotted.
See where he goes, who he contacts.
Bork, you go with Friedl.
Take that camera with you — the miniature job Zeiss developed for us where you get a picture within a minute of taking the shot.
The night version.
No flash-bulbs.
If Meyer meets someone I want his picture taken in the utmost secrecy.
Think you can handle it?’
‘No trouble at all,’ Friedl replied.
‘It so happens with the weather changing I bought a new windcheater and also a beret this morning.
Meyer has never seen them.
And I'll wear phoney glasses.
He won't spot me.’
‘If you can,’ Kuhlmann ordered, ‘meet me in the bar of the Canadian Pacific Hotel to report any findings.
I'll wait there till midnight.
See you…’
Kurt Meyer left the Kriminalpolizei HQ at Wiesbaden ten minutes after Kuhlmann had gone.
He drove towards Frankfurt, stopping on the way to make a call from a public booth.
George Evans answered the phone himself, working late in his office in the Kaiserstrasse.
‘Kurt here.
I have urgent information.
There have been serious developments.
Can we meet?
You'd want to know at once.’
‘Where are you calling from?’
Evans asked.
‘A public call-box, of course.
On the way to Frankfurt from Wiesbaden…’
‘So you have transport?’
‘Yes.
My own Passat.’
‘I'll meet you in the lobby of the Frankfurter Hof half an hour from now.
It had better be important.’
He slammed down the phone before Meyer could reply, stared across his desk at Gareth Morgan, perched like a large evil gnome on the edge of his chair, cuddling a glass of Scotch.
‘That was my Wiesbaden contact, Kurt Meyer.
I'm meeting him, as you must have heard, at the Frankfurter Hof.’
Morgan swallowed the rest of his drink, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
He sat frowning, staring back at Evans, then decided.
‘May be to do with that newsflash we heard about the pile-up near Freiburg.
You said one of your men was reporting to you when he cut out.’
‘He cut out all right.
Or was cut out, more likely.
He was just saying:Tweed is somewhere ahead of us but in this fog — Then he let out the most chilling yell —Ahhhhhhh — and the link went blank.’
Imitating the scream of agony he'd lifted his voice.
Morgan pursed his lips with distaste.
Any dramatics were his department.
He stood up, placed the empty glass on Evans's desk where the damp base left a ring on the highly polished surface.
Evans affected not to notice the sloppy touch.
‘I think I'll come with you, hear what this Meyer has to say for myself.
You can introduce me as your bodyguard…’
‘Is that wise?
Putting yourself on view?
And Meyer is running scared.’
‘I'd like to hear for myself,’ Morgan repeated.
‘Got it?’
He saw no reason to explain that Buckmaster had emphasized he wanted Morgan to supervise the whole Tweed operation personally.
And Evans might not handle this creep so he obtained every scrap of information available.
‘By the way,’ he continued as Evans fetched the coats from a cupboard, helped Morgan on with his black overcoat, ‘your running expenses here are astronomic.
I was going through the figures.
Do you really need thirty operatives in Frankfurt?
We have to watch expenses if we're to make a profit.’
‘I was told by London that expense was no object.
It was the image which counted — if we're to hold our position as the largest security organization on the Continent.
‘But you do have a budget?’
Morgan persisted.
He was well aware that the reference to ‘London’ meant Lance Buckmaster.
‘What's a budget?’
Evans asked airily.
Morgan grunted.
‘Let's get off to see this chap at the Frankfurter Hof.’
‘I still think your coming is risky…’
‘We're in the risk business — in case you hadn't realized it.’
‘I'm damned sure it was an attempt to kill Tweed,’ Kuhlmann told Newman as they again strolled up and down the concourse of the main station.
It was much quieter at this hour.
The whole tempo of the Hauptbahnhof had changed.
It was almost empty of passengers and the few there sat huddled on seats.
The tannoy seemed to have gone to sleep.
‘What makes you think that?’ asked Newman.
‘I had unmarked cars following him.
They reported that four other cars were also doing the same thing.
We know who they were now — security guards from the World Security apparatus.
Why am I sure?
A stolen refrigerated truck drives the wrong way up the autobahn — that was seen by a driver coming up the northbound lane — and Tweed's Mercedes was somewhere not far ahead.
Two sets of skid marks were found afterwards — one by the wheels of a car, the other by the truck before the driver went through the barrier and was killed.
Oh, yes, that was an assassination attempt.’
‘And where do you think Tweed is now?’
‘Somewhere in Freiburg would be my best bet.
They'd driven all the way from Brussels.
The last section was through near blizzard conditions.
The incident must have shocked them, so logically they'd rest up for the night.’
‘Is that police chopper at Frankfurt Airport still standing by?
Egon Wrede was the name of the pilot?’
‘Yes to both questions.
And Wrede will still be fresh.
He's an expert at catnapping while he waits.
And he'll have collected food from the airport.’
‘Then I'm using it to fly straight to Freiburg.’
‘I hoped you'd say that.’
Newman had stopped walking for a few moments, his mind racing.
Kuhlmann brushed past his right side, strolled round behind him, came up on his left side and his wide mouth broke into a grin.
‘Better check your pockets.
Careful.
Nothing on view.’
Newman felt inside his right-hand pocket.
He froze.
He could recognize the feel of a gun.
He checked his left-hand pocket and again his fingers touched metal.
‘A Walther.3S automatic,’ Kuhlmann told him.
‘It's OK — the safety's on.
Spare mags in the other pocket.
Better take this bit of paper…’
Newman read the typed sheet quickly.
An authorization to carry the weapon.
On official headed paper.
Signed by Kuhlmann himself.
‘How did you manage that trick?’ he asked.
‘I used to know a pickpocket when I was on the beat a million years ago.
A real pro.
He taught me all he knew.
Then I put him away for two years.
Are you wondering why I've kitted you up?’
‘Yes.’
They were strolling again to keep warm.
‘Three of the World Security guards dragged out of the carnage down near Freiburg were armed.
Which was naughty.
No authorization.
You may need protection.
Tweed certainly does.
Best I can do…’
Kuhlmann walked away.
Newman also left the station, found a cab and was back at the Hessischer Hof inside ten minutes.
During that time he took his decision about Marler: to continue keeping an eye on him.
He brought him out of the bar.
‘We, re leaving now.
Give you the details in the cab.
Get your bag.
Don't ask questions — you'll get no answers.’
‘Supposing I won't leave unless you tell me what's going on?’
Marler challenged him as they walked across the lobby.
‘Then I'll dump you…’
‘Meet you down here in five minutes.’