

Introduction
A nation's survival as a free, independent, and self-respecting entity hangs on the ability of its people to nourish and protect themselves; to provide the means of building and maintaining healthy minds in healthy bodies, and to develop the enterprise, resilience, and determination to surmount natural disasters and adapt to ever-changing conditions.
The spirit and morale of a nation has no foundation more important than the self-reliance and confidence of its individual people.
How can we possibly retain that self-reliance and confidence if we become more and more a nation of programmed consumers, stuffed with the produce of an automated technology over which we feel we can have little influence?
And what assurance can there be that the brittle, complex industrial structure will not collapse through the failure of some small but vital component?
Indeed many fear that collapse is happening already.
How can this frightening slide towards hopelessness be reversed?
How can we regain individual and group self-reliance?
The first requirement must be love of and pride in one's country, which can grow only in men and women who genuinely feel they have a stake in it, however small; men and women who know that their own initiative, ingenuity, and hard work will improve that stake and make fuller and more secure lives for their families.
To provide people with the opportunity to acquire even a tiny stake in the land is a daunting task calling for wisdom, courage, and political integrity almost unheard of in modern times.
Indeed, to do so would mean the reversal of a process that has, since the sixteenth century, relentlessly parted the commoner from his freehold and common rights, and reduced him to a landless labourer.
Today, with less than 2½ per cent of Britain's people left on the land (and this percentage is still falling), the destruction of the ‘bold peasantry’ might be considered complete; that it is too late to revive and rebuild it.
But this is a counsel of despair; an admission that our country is past praying for.
Fortunately the dogged good sense of the ordinary man is far from dead.
The instinctive urge to acquire a stake in the country, to get back to first principles and become, once again, master of his own fate, becomes ever more apparent as our top-heavy, complex society lurches from crisis to crisis.
A small but growing number of sane, apparently successful men and women are voluntarily abandoning the struggle for material gain and accepting the stem discipline of relearning the near-forgotten skills of smallholding.
Since the turn of the century there have been brief periods when Britain has been more or less self-sufficient in cereals, meat, and dairy produce — during the two World Wars, and today, under the extraordinary economics of the European Community.
In each case the land has been exploited far beyond its true potential — out of dire necessity during the Wars, and now for blind greed and short-term gain resulting in vast surpluses which cannot be eaten or sold.
As A. G. Street so clearly demonstrated in his classic Farmer's Glory in the 1930s, these indulgences have invariably been followed, quite suddenly, by much longer periods of agricultural depression when the land has had to be grassed down to rebuild fertility.
There can be little doubt that this is about to happen again, and our debt to the soil is far greater than ever before.
It has long been known that skilled smallholders, owning their own plots of land, can produce very much more from an acre than large-scale farmers with labourers who cannot possibly have the same dedication.
What is more, a good smallholder, in his own interest, will develop a system of husbandry that can be sustained indefinitely without robbing the soil.
How else could he retain his freehold to pass on to his descendants?
The Chinese have maintained a stable agriculture for 4,000 years and feed more than four times as many people per acre as we do.
Their system is based on a vast number of smallholders on tiny plots of land, working with incredible skill, dedication, and thrift.
What can be done to give even a tenth of our people the opportunity to acquire a small stake in the land, and to replace the missing bottom rungs in the farming ladder?
The present climate is not promising.
The cost of freehold land is so high that only a wealthy man who farms intensively can hope to make a living on his own small farm.
The increasing acquisition of land by large institutions reduces the number of holdings.
The tax and succession laws make it virtually impossible for landlords to create smallholdings on their estates, and the Land Tenure Acts (designed to protect tenants) have dried up new tenancies.
Many County Councils are selling off their statutory smallholdings; on the rest the rents are so high that the tenants are forced into intensive husbandry.
Government and EEC subsidies result in gross over-capitalization on nearly every farm in the land.
So, in the short term I see little hope for the newcomer or success for the organic smallholder.
In the longer term I am more optimistic.
The present idiotic trends cannot go on forever, and there could soon be drastic changes.
Can these changes stem from enlightened rethinking of principles or must they follow a collapse of the EEC and the present economy?
There are steps (not politically attractive) that our Government can take to bring about successful changes.
First, they must want to see a larger number of small farms (at present they don't) and this means discouraging land management by large institutions.
Second, the tax and succession duty laws need amending to enable landlords to create smallholdings on their estates without incurring unacceptable penalties (many would welcome the chance to do so).
Third, the Land Tenure Acts should be amended to make tenancies attractive to landlords.
Fourth, County Councils should be forced to meet their obligations to provide smallholdings and allotments, and should not be allowed to sell them off.
Finally (and this will raise a storm), a law should be enacted limiting the acreage which any individual (or institution) may farm ‘in hand’.
Opposition from vested interests will be intense, but no one should underestimate the power of the goodwill that survives to be tapped as soon as politicians are seen to be moving in the right direction.
The choice is there: I believe it is between hope and eventual disaster.
The philosophy of smallholding is the philosophy of self-reliance, freedom, and independence.
But this in no way implies selfish sufficiency, licence, or isolation.
No man is an island; no smallholder can possibly find the time or produce all the skills needed for complete self-sufficiency.
Nor is it suggested that the smallholder should revert to primitive subsistence living, although he may need to give up some of the consumer society's more expensive luxuries.
Co-operation with neighbours is the key to successful smallholding.
It is a matter of scale; of working with like-minded, self-employed farmers and craftsmen rather than of subservience to faceless officials and giant firms.
Given such co-operation, the main constituents of a full, rewarding life are available within the community, and cash farming can begin to take second place to the production of local needs.
This change of emphasis from cash to produce is probably the most difficult mental hurdle.
Immediate cash profit has far too long been the overriding aim: it has warped the genuine economy and forced farmers to consider every move in the context of ‘How soon will it pay?’
Cash profits are necessary; but the nearer a community can come to providing its own basic requirements of food, shelter, and energy, the less cash is needed for the luxuries.
Within the pattern of large-scale commercial farming, the independent smallholder can still provide more than his share of surplus food for the urban population, yet keep as top priority the conservation of his main capital — the soil.
The acceptance of discipline is probably the greatest step towards freedom a man can take, and nowhere is this so true as in smallholding.
How easy it is to let the seven-days-a-week routine become drudgery, be overwhelmed by work unfinished, and to lose sight of the original aim.
This is the prelude to disaster in which soil, crops, and (particularly) livestock can suffer as much as the farmer.
The failure of projects leads to parsimony which goes hand in hand with waste.
The holding becomes a slave-driving tyrant.
An old naval officer once said ‘True discipline implies a disciple — the happy follower of a teacher or ideal.’
True discipline must be self-discipline, freely accepted.
In my opinion the hardest task on the holding is to overcome inertia, to make a start on the daunting task.
Once this initial discipline is faced, the job itself is relatively easy.
The habit of frugality, the avoidance of waste at ever turn, is an essential part of smallholding, where margins are so narrow.
This habit is more natural to some than to others, but conscious discipline is needed to extend it into every aspect of the farm.
If parsimony stems from waste, so generosity can flow from a frugal husbandman.
Smallholding can be a very healthy occupation.
It needs to be, for an unfit smallholder has little hope of success, and too few people know what it feels like to be really fit.
It is a great blessing to possess a sound mind in a healthy body, and it is our duty to build this gift into true fitness.
Strength, agility, vigour, and endurance do not just happen, but require proper nutrition and training to develop their full potential.
Here, once again, discipline is vitally important.
Hand in hand with physical fitness goes the courage, enthusiasm, and mental power to stick to our aims when the going is tough and soft options beckon.
Each of the many skills of smallholding requires its own discipline.
‘If a job is worth doing, it is worth doing well’— so runs the adage.
On a smallholding there is no room for shoddy work.
As our eyes open to the perilous state of the world, it is hardly surprising that so many sensible people are turning instinctively to the land and looking for smallholdings.
But inflated land prices, which have been rising much faster than the cost of living index, have placed even smallholdings out of reach except for the well-endowed.
Even well-established commercial farmers are finding themselves on a cruel treadmill of soaring capital investment, the financing of which can only be serviced by increasing mortgages based on the rising cost of land.
While this inflation lasts, it is possible for these agribusinessmen to live superficially well if their nerves can stand the strain, and their real capital, the soil, survive such prodigal exploitation.
To go on thus is like walking up an ever-narrowing blind alley: the further you go the more difficult it is to turn about; the more certain and greater the ultimate disaster.
A great proportion of our farmers, large and small, know in their hearts that they are on the wrong road, but have neither the wisdom nor the courage to strike out on radically new lines.
To do so they would have to buck the very system on which they now depend.
For them freedom and self-reliance seem very far away.
I do not believe that the answer lies in amalgamations, technology, and further reduction of manpower.
The creation of paper ‘wealth’ through such manipulation of our economy can only spell moral bankruptcy for our people.
The sane alternative must be to create conditions in which small, self-reliant enterprises can take root and grow; to provide training and guidance for those bold enough to lead in this direction.
New definitions and values are needed for ‘wealth’, ‘profit’, and ‘economics’.
Johnson defined the latter thus: ‘Economy (gr. oikos nomos); The management of a family; the government of a household.’
I should like to add the rider, ‘for the joy and well-being of those who dwell therein’.
The organic approach
The purpose of this book is to provide a comprehensive guide for smallholders; for beginners and those with some experience, as well as for those who are just thinking about it.
The widely differing soils and climate within our countryside together with the variation in personal aspirations and abilities produce a vast range of enterprises to be considered.
Is the first aim to make money (we must obviously avoid losing it!) or to provide for our personal needs?
How self-sufficient is it sensible to be?
Do we plan to be full-time or merely spare-time smallholders?
These are but a few of the variables.
No one farmer could possibly be qualified to advise on all the options, nor could he do more than skate over them in one volume.
I have therefore based this book on my own limited experience, adding, with due acknowledgement, short outlines on systems or aspects beyond my personal competence, gleaned from experts in their own particular fields.
Most farmers have their own strongly held views or even prejudices, and I am no exception.
Basically the book is an account of one man's experience, his strength and his weakness, his success and his mistakes.
It also points to alternatives for those who do not wholly share his views.
I have been an organic farmer for twenty-five years, and look upon nature as an integrated and living entity based on an amazingly intricate and balanced plan.
Darwin's concept of evolution may hold water as far as it goes, but without the inclusion of an omnipotent ‘Master Mind’, working from outside to plan the possibility of purposeful development, it makes no sense to me at all.
I therefore decline to don the straitjacket of those scientists (not all) who can only accept such facts as they reach via their own limited, analytic logic; who tend to study the parts in ever narrowing detail but too seldom consider the whole.
Farming, especially mixed smallholding, needs to be viewed in its interlocking whole.
But no man can hope to attain scientific mastery of its many parts and re-assemble them into the wonderful symbiosis of nature.
He must be prepared to accept a great deal on faith, glad to admit ‘I don't know how, but it certainly works’.
I am reminded of the ant who asked the centipede in what order he put his feet to the ground.
The poor centipede worried over the answer until he had a nervous breakdown and lost the ability to walk naturally.
I have no doubt that every mystery of nature has a scientific explanation that may, one day, be expressed in terms of intellectual logic.
In the mean time the practical farmer must get on with his husbandry, relying on his limited knowledge and a great deal of intuitive instinct.
That this intuition can be trained and sharpened I have not the slightest doubt, and I further believe that this is most likely to occur when one looks upon natural phenomena with reverence and humility.
Some years ago I discussed my beliefs with a learned Professor of Agriculture at a leading university.
‘You are quite right,’ he said, ‘but ten years ahead of your time.
If I tried to teach that here, I should get the sack.’
Time is now catching up; attitudes are changing and conventional dogma is called in question.
Scientific logic has put men on the moon, but seems incapable of solving the energy crisis or of providing the means whereby mankind can live purposefully on a finite planet with shrinking resources.
Perhaps the time has come when we should humbly admit our limitations and seek solutions in co-operation with the Master Plan.
The land of Britain
How farming developed
Once upon a time man lived by hunting and by gathering.
Like other wild creatures, he moved with the seasons in search of food and made little impression on the countryside.
His keen instinct gave him a deep understanding of his environment and his innate intelligence led him to devise ways of altering it to his advantage.
Two main streams developed; the hunter became herdsman and the gatherer became agriculturalist.
But the two lifestyles were incompatible; the herdsman followed — and later drove — his animals from grazing to grazing and became a nomad, whilst the gatherer settled down to till the soil and defend his crops from predators.
The integration of these systems followed gradually, and much later, when man learned to grow and store crops for his now domesticated animals that they might survive winter or drought at home.
To this day the two life-styles survive separately over great areas of the Middle East and central Asia.
To a lesser degree they still exist nearer home; in the Alps herdsmen take their cattle to the ‘Alm’ meadows where they tend them during the summer, and in Scotland and Wales the hill sheep spend half the year on the mountain commons whilst the lower, enclosed land grows winter keep.
In many developing countries ‘agriculture’ and ‘farming’are still considered to be separate subjects; the tilling of the soil and animal management have not been integrated.
Until the Industrial Revolution, farming in Britain (in its combined sense) remained predominantly small-scale, mixed, and locally self-sufficient.
Most holdings grew their own wheat and every village boasted a mill.
Butter and cheese were made on practically every farm and even the cottager killed and salted his own bacon.
Surplus cattle were slaughtered in the autumn to enable the breeding stock to survive on the scarce winter rations.
But all this was to change as, from the sixteenth century onwards, enclosures were enforced and estates enlarged.
Wool, beef, dairy products, and cereals became more and more commercial sources of wealth, as opposed to providing for local self-sufficiency, and were concentrated in the areas most suited to their cheap production.
Land drainage and the development of transport and farm machinery hastened this process, and it became ‘uneconomic’ for every small farm or village to aspire to self-sufficiency.
Not only did farms become larger and more specialized, but village craftsmen — millers, blacksmiths, carpenters, wheelwrights, bakers, and cobblers — were squeezed out as their trades were concentrated in the towns.
Today we are in the vulnerable position of producing barely half our own food, with only 2½ per cent of our people directly concerned with working the land, and that percentage is still falling.
‘Economic’ considerations have forced our farming into extreme specialization where the basic rules of conservation and good husbandry (indeed, some would say ethics) are too often flouted.
But if only 2½ per cent are on the land, they are supporting (and rely on) a vast population of industrial and commercial workers — over whom they have no control — who supply the machinery, power, feeding-stuffs, and fertilizers that make the specialization possible.
Thus we have arrived at today's rural scene, which, with modern technology, is changing more rapidly than ever.
The British landscape
Four factors combine to make the British countryside what it is today: the geology of the earth's crust, the climatic history of the glacial and post-glacial ages, the present-day climate (particularly rainfall), and the influence of man.
The main shape of the landscape — mountains, rolling hills, and flat plains — is based on the geological rock formations, but has been severely modified by the movement of glaciers which carried vast quantities of rock, grinding it down in the process, depositing it in the form of boulders, gravel, sand, and silt, often many miles from its original outcrop.
This residue has been further moved by subsequent erosion and climate, and forms the soil we know today, which does not necessarily reflect the local underlying rock formation.
The modern climate, particularly the distribution of rainfall, has combined with different soils to produce the variable vegetation which now covers our landscape.
In this evolutionary process, man has played an increasing role; clearing forests, draining swamps, introducing new crops and animals, and, not least, altering the ecological balance between minerals, flora, and fauna in the soil itself.
In very general terms the western half of Britain is much higher, wetter, and more acid than the eastern half and the northern half colder than the South (see Figure 1).
The strong sand and clay loams and alluvial silts of the East are more fertile than the thinner, stonier soils on the western uplands.
The richer, drier East has a much longer growing season than the poorer West.
Within this general pattern there are local variations; the west coast of Cumbria and Scotland, for example, is particularly affected by the warm Gulf Stream and thus has mild, wet winters, and, within the hills of the North and West, are pockets of strong land and areas of much lower rainfall.
By and large, however, the best arable crops are grown in the South and East whilst the North and West are devoted to livestock rearing.
Hill farming
The rugged mountains and moors of Scotland, Wales, and the West Country are too steep and wet to grow good arable crops, too poor for dairying, and the grazing season is too short for fattening beasts.
These areas are predominantly used to rear hardy beef cattle and sheep which are sold in the autumn to be finished elsewhere.
The hill farms generally have small fields near the valley bottoms, larger rough grazing ‘in-bye’ areas which adjoin the open hill, and common hill land where sheep, ponies, and occasionally cattle are turned out during the summer.
Grass is the main crop, supplemented by the odd field of oats, barley, or roots for the winter feeding of breeding stock.
A few of the earlier lambs may be sold fat off their mothers, but the main sources of income are from six-to eight-month-old beef calves, store lambs (about six months old), four-year-old ewes which go down-country for cross-breeding and the wool clip.
There is seldom enough winter keep for the whole of the breeding stock, and ewe lambs are often sent away to winter in less rugged conditions.
Hill farmers are primarily stockmen who delight more in animals than in machinery, buildings, or cash crops.
Their main preoccupation is providing winter keep for their breeding stock from steep, wet, acid soils, which are expensive and dangerous to work with modern machinery.
Small wonder, then, that they confine their field-work to spreading lime and slag, making hay, and reseeding the odd pasture via a short rotation of feed oats, rape, and turnips.
For gathering, shearing, dipping, and sometimes haymaking, hill farmers still work a system of ‘help your neighbour’ in which several come together on predetermined dates to do these important jobs quickly and efficiently.
Many hill farmers are smallholders with part-time jobs elsewhere.
Hill farming demands very hard work for marginal returns and were it not for government subsidies for hill sheep and cattle, many hill farmers would have to give up.
As it is, the extra cost of fencing and improving steep land and buying supplementary winter feed is seldom balanced by the subsidies.
Fattening Pastures
The cheapest way to fatten beef is on grass, and for this rather special conditions are required.
First, we need a long, warm, unbroken growing season to provide a plentiful diet of lush herbage.
Second, there must be a constant supply of water to the sward even during long spells of dry weather.
Third, the ground must be well drained to prevent it being poached by the animals.
These conditions are best met in low-lying areas that were once marshland, and which still lie above a plentiful water table.
The most famous of these fattening pastures are in Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, and Rutland; others are in North Somerset, parts of Norfolk, the Severn Valley, Northumberland, and eastern Scotland.
Many of these areas lie too wet in winter for arable farming, and thus lend themselves to bought-in herds of cattle for summer fattening.
Smaller areas of good fattening pasture are to be found in other parts of the country, but before attempting to finish cattle on grass, the smallholder should ensure that the three main conditions — a long growing season, constant subsoil water supply, and good drainage — are met.
A long growing season is unlikely to occur in a high rainfall area or on ground above 600 feet.
A constant water supply cannot be guaranteed in sandy or rocky soils in a low-rainfall area.
Fattening pastures, as opposed to land where growing youngstock is reared or dairy cows kept, require little manure apart from the droppings of the grazing animals, as they are not exporting bone (phosphorus) or milk (calcium) from the land.
The grazier's main problems are to provide leys of palatable and nutritious grasses and clovers and to see that these are consumed in the lush, leafy state before they grow to stem and seed.
As the three important conditions (see above) vary, he must be ready to buy extra stock, top pastures with a mower to prevent the grass from growing to stem and seed and to encourage the nutritious leafy portion, make hay, or on occasion buy in oil cake or other succulent feed to keep his animals going steadily ahead.
The chalk downs
The light, well-drained chalk downs of Wiltshire, the Cotswolds, Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire were the first areas of the country to be farmed.
The soil could be worked by light, primitive ploughs and there were no forests to clear or swamps to drain.
But these are thin soils with an uncertain water supply; not naturally the best land for arable cash crops or cattle.
Later, in the middle ages, these downs were mainly tumble-down grassland with extensive flocks of sheep.
Later still, cereal and root crops were grown and the sheep were folded intensively over the roots and stubbles.
Now, with the advent of sophisticated machinery and chemical fertilizers, the downs are supporting large dairy herds in conjunction with the growing of barley and wheat for sale.
Water, particularly for cattle, is still a limiting factor.
Productivity has been maintained, as far as possible, by the increasing use of artificial fertilizers, but it has proved very difficult to keep up the humus level on which a good soil structure depends.
Straw-burning after harvest, now widely practised, exacerbates this problem, and some downland farmers are finding it necessary to go back to grass and more livestock to maintain the humus level and soil structure.
The flinty soils overlying chalk are ideal grazing land so long as water is available.
They do not poach in winter, but are liable to become desiccated in summer.
They will grow good cereal crops so long as soil structure is maintained by the return of sufficient organic matter.
The arable lands
The best plough lands are mainly in the broad, flat eastern half of the country from the Moray Firth to East Anglia and West Sussex.
Parts of the Midlands, East Lancashire, Nottinghamshire, Shropshire, and North Cheshire also grow excellent arable crops.
This land is mainly low-lying, of strong soil, low rainfall, and has a long, warm growing season.
The types of soil vary from heavy clay loams to deep, fine silts (the Wash) sands, and peats (the Fens).
In the well-drained driest parts, the heavy clay loams make the best arable land; in the wetter parts these clays are better kept in grass, and the sandy loams best for ploughing.
Wheat, originally a plant of the hot, arid, Near East, has been somewhat improved and adapted to temperate climates, but still needs strong land and a long, hot, dry growing season to develop and ripen.
Barley thrives in somewhat cooler climes and, being less ‘hungry’, does not need such rich soil — it tends to grow too long and ‘lodge’ on very strong soils — but it still needs a longish season to ripen well.
Oats and rye are much more tolerant of cold and wet and are more suitable for the poorer soils of the North and West.
As well as cereals, root crops — particularly potatoes and sugar beet — are widely grown on the best arable land, whilst in areas nearer the big cities, vegetables are most profitable, particularly on well-drained sandy loams.
The dry eastern half of Britain is generally susceptible to significant periods of summer drought, when growth ceases in shallow-rooting plants such as grasses and clovers.
This makes the area unsuitable for dairy farming where a constant supply of lush summer grass is essential.
Cereals and sugar beet, on the other hand, ripen well in such conditions.
Dairy farming
Ideal dairy land has a long growing season, no summer drought period, a stable soil structure with good drainage to avoid excessive poaching, and an unfailing water supply.
The larger dairy herds are thus to be found in the intermediate areas between the dry, hot plough lands of the East and South and the cold, wet uplands of the North and West.
Somerset, Dorset, the Severn Valley, parts of Devon, the west Midlands and the warm west coasts of southern Scotland and Cumbria are amongst the many good dairying districts.
Smaller herds can be managed commercially under less ideal conditions; the smallholder's house cow, receiving individual attention, can do well almost anywhere.
Conclusion
This general description of the countryside oversimplifies what is really a very complicated pattern of soils and climate.
Within the cold, wet hills of Wales and Scotland, there are pockets of much stronger land with warmer, drier climates.
Next to the thin chalk downs in Wiltshire lies the Vale of Pewsey with its superb deep greensand.
As a result of glacial history, wind-blown erosion of sand dunes, and silting of the river estuary, the south bank of the Ribble between Southport and Preston is one of the finest vegetable-growing areas in the country.
Within the overall pattern we must look very carefully for the local variations, realize the implications of both soil and climate, and plan our holding to make the most of the resources.
A smallholder, by virtue of his small scale, may often be able to farm successfully in a manner defying the commercial conventions of the district, but such success will depend upon his grasp of the principles of soils, crops, and animal husbandry and a wise assessment of his land potential.
Getting started
Acquiring the skills
The need for skill in smallholding can hardly be over-emphasized.
Farming for a livelihood demands manipulation of the life-processes in the soil, crops, and animals in such a way as to yield continuous sustenance or profit without depleting capital.
Soil husbandry involves much more than mere ploughing and cultivation, although these are hard-won skills in themselves.
To till properly, you must know a great deal about every bit of your land — you will find variations between different parts of even one small field — soil texture, structure, acidity, drainage, and history must all be considered; as must the significance of the life within the soil and its relationship to fertility.
Not only must you know how to plough, but when.
You must be able to assess your land potential and to farm within it, and know how to build up fertility to reach that potential by the most economic means.
You must understand the habits and characteristics of the crops you plan to grow and how they can best be fitted to the potential of your land.
What is more, you must be able to plan your cropping to meet the needs of your animals, your home, and the market, ordering your rotations well ahead to ensure the correct balance.
You must know and anticipate your climate and be ever ready to take advantage of any spell of good weather.
You must have a sound knowledge of the life cycles, nutrition, and management of the different species of animals on your farm, and develop this skill to a point where you can notice, almost instinctively, the slightest signs that a beast is off-colour.
You must then know how to cope with the trouble and judge whether to act on your own or call the vet.
You must grasp the complex relationship of all these subjects to each other; how all the parts fit into the whole.
This is possibly the most difficult of all skills and is a lifetime's study.
The beginner will do well to ponder on it from the start.
The more you can develop these faculties, the fewer will be your blunders and the better your economy.
Even highly skilled, diligent farmers can misjudge the weather or the market and make costly mistakes.
An unskilled smallholder is likely to lurch from crisis to crisis.
As well as a deep understanding of your soil, crops, and animals, as a smallholder you need to be capable of a high degree of self-reliance in maintaining fences, gates, water supply, buildings, machinery, and equipment.
Unless you can do so your holding will deteriorate or you will spend a small fortune paying outsiders to look after it for you.
Indeed, you need to be something of a jack of all trades and passably good at most of them.
The margins for error on a smallholding are extremely narrow; only a skilled and diligent husbandman can hope to succeed.
It is therefore prudent for a newcomer to spend considerable time and effort acquiring the skills before taking the plunge by buying a farm.
Before you can begin to achieve overall competence you must master the ‘language’ to a point where you can think, and even dream in a new vernacular.
The vernacular of any way of life can only be absorbed ‘through the skin’ by immersing oneself in its people; and to this end you would be foolish not to spend at least a year (preferably two) working on mixed farms in the district in which you hope to settle, making friends and winning the respect of the countrymen who will be your neighbours.
It is not easy to find training places on suitable farms, but it is well worth the search.
You should be prepared to work very hard for a pittance.
You will feel clumsy and inept at most of the manual skills for at least a year,; confidence and speed will only begin to appear the second or third time round.
Many skills such as ploughing, using a scythe, working with horses, or developing an eye for livestock may take years to attain; the later in life you come to it, the slower the progress.
Having completed this basic indoctrination, the budding smallholder will know better the joys and frustrations, the rewards and risks, the freedom and the discipline that make up farming.
If you then choose to go on with it, you are ready to begin a lifetime of training in depth.
Long-term training in depth may be carried out in many different ways, depending on the character and means of the aspirant.
Having learnt the ‘language’, you can take full advantage of the many facilities available, your ultimate aim being to gain a sound knowledge of the principles of husbandry and become expert in the many practical skills.
The day will come when your knowledge of the many-sided principles will come together in an almost intuitive wisdom of the whole, and your skills, transferred from head through heart to hands, will enable you to perform all your physical tasks quickly and well.
Only when you have achieved this mastery of theory and practice, will drudgery disappear and the full joy of smallholding be realized.
It is possible to jump in at the deep end, buy a farm, and teach yourself, learning by your mistakes.
Such close contact with the facts of life certainly drives the lessons home, but a blunder can be costly, and it is not always easy for a beginner to put two and two together and deduce the root cause of his error.
A succession of avoidable mishaps can so sap morale and resources, that it becomes impossible to see the wood for the trees, and your energy is exhausted reacting to emergencies.
At such times you need to turn to a wise and experienced adviser who might well have steered you clear of the mistake had he been consulted earlier.
If you have done your practical training on a farm near your own holding, you will have friends and advisers nearby who understand the problems indigenous to the locality.
Nevertheless, knowledge and skill can be acquired more quickly through a well-planned training programme, and you would be well advised to consolidate your early practical experience through further training before committing yourself to the full responsibility of your own farm and livestock.
A second year of practical experience on another mixed farm, together with concentrated reading, will confirm and consolidate the earlier lessons; local day-release courses in special aspects of practical farming can fill in some of the gaps.
Work alongside competent craftsmen together with such short courses is probably the most sensible path to mastery of the various skills.
The more time you have to concentrate on training, the quicker the results will be.
Full-time training at agricultural colleges, universities, or other specialized establishments can provide a much deeper knowledge of the theory of farming, but you should look very carefully at the syllabus to ensure that it covers subjects germane to practical smallholding before enrolling on a course.
Some agricultural colleges are beginning to think about organic husbandry and small-scale farming but few have any staff experienced in these aspects and none yet provide full-time courses suitable for a smallholder.
Most of their instruction is designed for large, sophisticated farms, and organic husbandry is still usually looked upon as ‘muck and mystery’.
Universities tend to train academics and research workers to have very detailed knowledge of relatively narrow aspects of agriculture; their farms are designed for experiment and demonstration rather than to impart practical skills and experience.
There are exceptions, however: Reading University now runs an experimental smallholding and Birmingham is doing research into biological husbandry.
The Agricultural Training Board supports a wide range of practical training projects for which farmers and farm workers can form local groups.
These courses cover such subjects as sheep-dog training, hedging, ploughing, stone walling, livestock handling, farm mechanics, and, in some areas, working horses.
They are extremely practical and instructors are usually skilled local farmers.
Having formed a group, the trainees decide among themselves what courses (within certain limits) they need.
Any smallholder would do well to join a local ATB group, particularly if he has taken on his own farm with relatively little experience.
A few private training establishments (see pp. 207–10) run long and short courses specially designed for smallholders.
So far they have gained little official recognition and therefore do not automatically qualify for government grants to students.
For a would-be smallholder who can find the time and money, these probably provide the best possible combination of theoretical and practical training.
These centres are the pioneers, the pace-setters for a pattern of training that may, one day, become an integral part of many agricultural colleges.
At least two of the centres are registered as charities, and can provide limited scholarships to offset the cost of tuition.
Whatever path you follow to reach your goal of competence, you should make time for reading.
No book or course of lectures can substitute for experience, but as you learn the vernacular and gain confidence in your practical ability, you can derive both inspiration and a sense of direction through reading the works of wise men.
Most writers have their own pet hobby-horses, and it can be dangerous to swallow the ideas of a single author hook, line, and sinker in the early stages.
A guide to suggested reading (see p. 203) can be very helpful in providing a balanced diet.
A small collection of reference books is a most valuable asset on any farm.
No one can hope to retain in his head the mass of detailed knowledge needed throughout the farming year.
But with a few well-chosen books you can know where to look for the information you need.
I have found, with growing experience, that many of the great authors (Elliott, Stapledon, Scott-Watson, Howard, Balfour, Fraser, and Voisin, to name but a few) yield more and more wisdom at the second and third reading.
Like music, the better one knows the score, the greater the delight and reward one gains from reading it.
The innate wisdom of illiterate peasants is legendary.
Folklore has been passed down from generation to generation, some of it full of deep and obvious truth, some mere dogma of doubtful veracity.
Some genuine truths have been reduced to cant and passed down without explanation.
‘It has always been done this way’ is poor reason unless one knows why.
There generally is a reason for any custom or tradition if only the peasant were lucid enough to explain it.
The new smallholder will do well to study local customs and folklore, to question their validity, and try to find out why.
before rejecting them out of hand.
In the long run, folklore is the accumulated wisdom of generations of practical experience.
Land Potential
What precisely do we mean by the term ‘smallholding'?
A few years ago I was a guest in an Indian village.
Asked what I did in Britain I replied ‘Like you, I am a smallholder; I farm only ten acres.’
‘But that is a large farm; here my family of ten lives on one and a half acres.’
By the same token, 500 acres in Saskatchewan might be considered a very small farm indeed.
The term is more a measure of the sort of living a holding will provide and the labour involved than a mere acreage.
According to the Smallholdings and Allotments Act of 1908, a smallholding was defined as ‘an agricultural holding more than one acre and not more than 50 acres in extent, though the area may be extended beyond 50 acres so long as its annual value for the purpose of income tax does not exceed £50’.
For the purpose of this book, I should like to think of a smallholding as any parcel of agricultural land of up to(say) 100 acres, organized to be worked by one or two people, without paid labour, and through which they can make part or the whole of their living.
At the lower end of the scale, this might be little more than a garden allotment worked in spare time to supplement the income from a full-time job.
At the other end it could be a full-time mixed small farm run on commercial lines.
The enterprise might vary from vegetables and fruit to livestock rearing, arable crops, or dairying.
The prime purpose might be to make money or to achieve a measure of self-sufficiency.
The range of possibilities is enormous.
But whatever the size of the smallholding and whatever the intentions of the owner, the first consideration must be the land itself.
If the land is poor, no amount of good buildings and equipment will compensate.
Poor land means less reward for more work, more risk of disappointment and failure, and it requires greater skill.
It is of the greatest importance for a potential buyer or tenant to assess the potential of a farm before committing himself to it.
Only by so doing can he be sure of acquiring a viable holding and be in a position to develop it to achieve its optimum long-term output.
Land everywhere varies in its capacity to produce; output depends on the type of soil and the climate, especially seasonal rainfall, and the limits of production are got by the highest standards of good husbandry…
In its application to the land science must be related to inherent land potentialities .
If we fail in this, all scientific discoveries do more harm than good.
There is urgent need to determine the limits of production…if we are to avoid the danger of trying to extract more from the land than it is capable of yielding.
The danger is very real when reclaiming neglected acres.
Derelict land may be derelict because some form of husbandry slowly became unremunerative…or the dereliction may be the result of exploitation…the land being later abandoned.
Both areas will be far below optimum today but — and this is the important point — in the one case the land can be brought back to full production easily, whereas in the other case a long and costly process of fertility building will be necessary.
A full and accurate assessment of land potential involves detailed enquiries into soil and climate and experience of the behaviour of the crops and livestock it carries, and this can only be achieved over a period of years.
But you can find out a great deal on your initial farm walk, and much more in the weeks and months before you sign a contract or bid at auction.
The general appearance of the holding, its grass, crops, and animals, give a valuable first impression.
Good, well-managed soil is reflected in the plants and animals it carries.
Poor crops and stock, however, may stem from land of low potential or from bad management (or both): it is not so easy to differentiate.
You should be armed with a spade when walking a holding, and examine the topsoil in every field for soil structure and life.
The presence of earthworms and deep, strong grass roots are very good signs; shallow, matted roots, a hard ‘pan’ near the surface, rushes, and surface water indicate a soil in poor structural condition.
Having gained a clear first impression, the next step, before taking the plunge, is to learn much more about the soil itself and the history of the farm.
A visit to the nearest Divisional Office of the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service (ADAS) will reveal whether or not the area is yet covered by the Soil Survey of England and Wales.
If it is, soil maps can be obtained from the London Map Centre or Sanfords and possibly a detailed ‘narrative’ of the various soil types, their qualities, and their shortcomings.
These maps and narratives can, in some cases, show remarkable soil variations within a very small area and give valuable guidance to their practical management.
Time will be well spent talking to the vendor and neighbours from whom you can learn a great deal as to what crops and livestock have been produced over the years, and with what success.
From this you can better judge both the potential of the farm and what is involved in bringing it up to that potential.
Buying a smallholding
Having now learned the language and basic skills and knowing how to judge the potential of land, you are well equipped to choose and buy a holding.
If your apprenticeship has been in the district where you intend to farm, so much the better, for you will have experience of local conditions and friends to help you look sensibly at whatever offers.
However carefully you are prepared, buying a farm can be an exciting and hectic experience, and there is always the danger of making a subjective judgement or acting on impulse; it is here that experienced friends are invaluable.
As stressed before, the potential of the land is of prime importance; if the aim is to farm successfully, all else must take second place.
Assuming that you have found land which is potentially viable, your next step is to find out the work, time, and cost involved in realizing that potential.
Only then are you ready to consider other factors.
Slope: what proportion of the farm is too steep to work safely or economically?
Aspect: will the sun ever be seen in winter?
Drainage: what needs to be done before a good soil structure can be built up over the whole farm?
Fences and gates: what will it cost to make the fields stock-proof?
Water: is there a guaranteed year-round source?
Does it supply all the fields?
Access: can one be sure of getting in and out in all weathers?
Buildings: are they adequate?
What will it cost to make them so?
Finally, the farmhouse: can it be made comfortable?
Any one of these subsidiary factors may be sufficiently important to render a farm unsuitable, but no combination of them can make a viable farm if the land has insufficient potential.
Farm buildings
The need for farm buildings varies greatly with the type of farming.
At one extreme (for instance, when grass-letting) you can get by with little more than the dwelling house: at the other (on an intensively-run livestock farm) special buildings are essential.
I make no apology for repeating the fact that a farmer's living comes from the soil and the crops and livestock that grow on it; and not from buildings, machinery, and equipment.
It stands to reason, therefore, that outlay on buildings and equipment should be kept to the minimum required for the efficient production of healthy crops and livestock.
Until you have worked out your long-term plans, you have no option but to make the best of existing buildings which may or may not suit your immediate requirements.
In the best case you may inherit excellent facilities needing only minor alterations; in the worst there may be no buildings at all or it may be wisest to level the lot and start again.
On a typical holding, however, you will use some buildings as they stand, modify others and eventually erect one or more designed to meet your specific needs.
Some buildings, such as milking parlours and farm workshops, are fully used for one purpose throughout the year; others, such as hay barns and Shearing sheds are not.
Over the years the economics of different enterprises wax and wane: milk gives way to beef, livestock to arable, new husbandry methods are evolved, and new equipment is invented.
With each change different buildings and facilities are needed.
When choosing or designing new buildings, simplicity and adaptability are of the greatest importance.
The siting of cowsheds in relation to hay and silage, access to roads and fields, aspects as regards sunlight and prevailing wind, proximity to the farmhouse, and drainage considerations, all deserve careful thought.
Well-planned, functional structures, properly sited, can enhance the landscape, particularly if the materials are carefully selected to blend with traditional buildings.
An uncoordinated hotch-potch can ruin a beautiful country scene.
Once again I stress the wisdom of working backwards, step by step, from the ideal long-term plan into which each new building is slotted in its turn.
The Farmhouse
I have known smallholders who lived in caravans and have seen nomad herdsmen in Asia who camp in the open or carry their tents on their backs.
For most of us, however, a comfortable dwelling house is an absolute necessity if we are to do our work happily and efficiently.
The style and scope of a farmhouse is a matter of means and taste and is mainly beyond the scope of this book; one point, however, is very important: the back entrance.
At the best, farming can be rough and dirty work; in bad weather it can be filthy.
It is very important to have a well-planned clean-up room beyond which no wellingtons, rainwear or dirty clothing is permitted.
Ideally this area should have a tiled floor that can be easily swilled down, plenty of hanging space for rainwear, drying racks for sodden clothing, a wash basin and a lavatory.
You should, if possible, have a cold tap and open drain outside the back door to facilitate removal of the worst of the mud from boots and leggings.
A clean, smart farmhouse is a great morale-booster, and the provision of good back-door facilities is well worth the cost in the benefit it provides.
Much as you might like to, no smallholder can escape the clerical and book-keeping side of the business.
Correspondence and records are best kept in a small office separate from the rest of the farmhouse.
In this it is also possible to plan and display future cultivations and other operations.
Having weighed up all these factors, you are ready to make a preliminary capital budget of the costs of fencing, drainage, water supply, access, fertility, buildings, and farmhouse; then of the purchase of livestock, machinery, and equipment.
The total of these requirements — some of which will be spread over several years — will give a good indication as to how much you have left to offer for the freehold or rent.
So long as land prices and interest rates remain astronomically high, few will be in a position to buy a holding, however small, with any prospect of their capital paying them a living through genuine farming (as opposed to exploitation or ‘mining’).
Nevertheless, the real value of land is constant; and capital invested in it will not deteriorate with inflation; in the long term the purchase of a smallholding even at inflated prices, can make sense if the buyer can hold back enough to put it in order, and stock and equip it.
Putting it together
Having bought a potentially viable holding, you must plan a programme for working it up to meet your aspirations.
In your mind you will have a picture of your ideal small farm with grass, crops, livestock, vegetables, and fruit meeting most of your needs, without waste, and a marketable surplus to provide a few luxuries.
Perhaps you will have a part-time job and a small capital reserve to tide you over the lean years until the farm is pulling its weight.
It is a good idea to start planning from the ideal and work backwards to produce a step-by-step programme over four or five years with clear priorities and objectives for each year.
Such a plan will inevitably be modified, but it does provide a framework on which to build.
In the first year you should keep your livestock rate very low; this greatly reduces the chance of disease and ensures adequate winter fodder.
It also gives time to improve fencing and drainage, extend water supply and renovate buildings without overtaxing yourself in the early stages.
As you gain strength, skill, and confidence you can take on more and more; but if you start off overcommitted, it may be difficult to extricate yourself from an impossible mess.
Looking ahead to the ideal holding some years hence (which, at best, is just a step on an endless ladder), as a new owner you will visualize your farm divided neatly into a number of well-drained, fertile fields, growing crops in a carefully planned rotation to feed both your family and livestock, with sufficient hay and grazing throughout the year.
Your livestock will be nicely balanced to make full use of grass and crops without overgrazing the fields and damaging the soil structure.
Your buildings, fences, gates, and water supply will be in good order, thus reducing unnecessary work and frustration to a minimum.
You will have just enough machinery and equipment to tackle the work without being over-capitalized.
The whole picture of crops and livestock will be matched to the potential and location of the holding.
Let us now look back from this idyllic scene and discover the implications.
Starting with the imaginary livestock, you soon realize that this population varies with the seasons, so you base your calculations on the breeding cows, ewes, sows, mares, and laying birds, adding their progeny in due season.
What are their needs throughout the year — grazing, hay, silage, grain, roots, straw?
How much of each can the holding provide?
How much land must you commit to arable rotation, and how much must be laid up for hay or silage?
What crop rotation will suit the farm?
How much feed will you have to buy in?
How many secure fields will be needed to cope with such a rotation?
What equipment must be acquired?
What buildings will you have to alter or build?
What drainage and fertility-building must be undertaken to bring the land into full production?
Consideration of these questions will inevitably lead to impossible situations and modification of the original ‘ideal’.
Gradually, through compromise, a workable plan will emerge, and this can then be broken down into a programme phased over a number of years.
To break the plan into sensible stages, you must have clear priorities.
You must build sound foundations before you tackle the upper storeys, and the first of these is the fertility of the land itself.
If you plan to keep livestock, the security of fences and gates must go hand in hand with fertility.
If drainage is a serious problem, this may have to be tackled before fertility can be built up.
It could be ruinously expensive to buy in livestock until you can produce enough fodder; the establishment of a crop rotation and hay or silage-making plans should therefore keep ahead of livestock build-up.
Water supply to the fields may be high on the list, although it is generally possible, if laborious, to carry water or move stock to it.
When these top-priority tasks are well in hand, you can start on other highly desirable but less vital works.
Farm buildings, the farmhouse, machinery and equipment, orchard and vegetable garden, and the buildup of livestock.
It is difficult to see, at first glance, exactly what buildings, machinery, and equipment are needed, or what livestock will best suit the holding.
You can struggle by with unsuitable buildings, borrow machinery or hire contractors until your needs become clear.
Good neighbours will always help out both with advice and equipment, and at the game time you will be learning about the characteristics of your land and how best to work it.
It may be wise to take over some livestock with the farm, particularly if it is home-bred and acclimatized, but there is a great danger of taking on too much too soon.
Possibly the most trouble-free and profitable course in the first year is to grass-let part of the farm, on your own terms, thereby keeping the farm in work whilst leaving you free to get on with your development plans.
Grass-letting can be done at auction, by tender, or by private treaty; the last two giving you a better choice of tenant.
Lets can be for 364 days or for two separate periods in winter and summer.
Another alternative is to buy in store cattle and sheep, selling out in the autumn to clear the land over the winter.
Whatever course you adopt, you must avoid overstocking the land and overcommitting yourself in the early stages.
Whilst crop rotations are being established and fertility built up, it will probably be necessary to buy in some feeding-stuffs.
This is best done at harvest time when hay and straw can be bought straight ‘off the field’ and cereals are cheapest.
Fences and hedges
Little Boy Blue, come blow on your horn,
There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn.
…or perhaps worse, your bull has broken into your neighbour's heifers or your lambs are on the road where they could cause an accident.
The need for stock-proof fencing is obviously of prime importance.
A sound perimeter (half of which is probably your neighbour's responsibility) should come first, if only to foster good relations; within your boundaries you are then free to work out your own schemes.
The second priority will be the division of your holding into a number of main blocks, depending upon your acreage, to give you a measure of control over the grazing of your pastures, to separate groups of stock (e.g. rams from ewes), and to shut off fields for hay or arable crops.
Finally, you may wish to subdivide these blocks into smaller areas, either permanently or for short periods for even greater control when strip- or paddock-grazing a ley or for folding stock over roots.
The perimeter and main dividing fences must obviously be permanent, and the stronger the better.
The rest may be light and movable.
If you take over a farm with poor fences, you will probably feel obliged to stock it before your fencing programme is anywhere near complete.
It may well be necessary to ‘botch up’ repairs using hurdles, bedsteads, corrugated iron sheets, scraps of wire netting, and baler twine.
The danger is that you may become so overworked that these stopgaps become a permanent feature of your farm, causing you even more work and worry.
You should therefore devise a clear plan with priorities, and introduce your livestock bit by bit as your fencing permits.
By far the strongest and most permanent field divisions are stone walls.
Once built they will last forever, the materials for repairs are always on site, and they provide shelter from wind and weather.
Few can afford the time and cost of building a new stone wall today, but the principles of dry stone walling, clearly outlined in Rainsford-Hannay's book Dry Stone Walling , are straightforward and you can easily acquire enough skill to do effective repairs.
Well-laid hedges of thorn, hazel, holly, or beech (or more generally a mixture of several species) form very effective barriers, and provide shelter for livestock and a habitat for wild life.
They require regular trimming to keep the growth thick at the butt (how often one sees huge, bushy hedges with little greenery and gaping holes near the ground) and should be allowed to grow up for relaying every ten to fifteen years.
Hedge-laying is a highly skilled craft, and even at moderate charges your hedge will seem expensive.
But when you consider the ecological and aesthetic benefits as well as the shelter and livestock control, a good hedge is good value for money.
But there are snags: the buds and leaves of hazel and thorn are tasty when grass is scarce, particularly to inquisitive cattle.
A single strand of taut barbed wire, 2½ feet high and 4 feet from the hedge is essential to prevent damage and eventual gaps.
This is required on your neighbour's side as well.
The most common permanent fence, and the easiest to erect, is the ‘stake and wire cattle mesh’(sometimes referred to as ‘pig wire’) with one or two strands of barbed wire above the mesh.
It is my opinion that the heavy grade mesh with the narrower width (6 inches) between verticals is by far the best value in the long run although considerably dearer in the first instance.
It is difficult to strain until taut, but provides a much stronger fence.
By the same token, your posts, strainers and stakes should always be tanalized (unless you can afford heart of oak).
Cattle-mesh fencing is suitable for all livestock although on uneven ground it may be wise to add a strand of barbed wire just above the ground to discourage a rooting pig.
The Ministry of Agriculture specifications for grant-aided fencing (available from your local office) give a clear indication of the materials you need.
Strained fences of up to ten strands of high-tensile steel wire can be much cheaper for very long, straight runs.
It requires extra-strong, rigid straining posts which are not economic for short lengths.
The intermediate posts or stakes are very far apart (hence the relative cheapness of the system) which means that on uneven ground there will be gaps through which lambs may escape.
For temporary fencing you have the choice of hurdles, sheep netting, or three systems of electric fencing.
Hurdles of metal, split oak, or wattle are very useful for quick repairs to a hedge or wall or to fold a few sheep on rape or turnips (although they are laborious for the latter.
Sheep netting comes in 50-yard lengths and has a 4-inch hexagonal mesh.
It is lighter and more flexible than cattle mesh and can be erected fairly quickly on ½ inch diameter iron stakes which are merely pressed into the ground.
It is difficult to get the bottom strained tight enough to prevent a small lamb from burrowing underneath, and the lengths are not easy to roll up neatly after use.
Sheep netting has now largely been superseded by various forms of electric fencing.
Electric fencing — single-wire, multi-wire, or plastic mesh netting — is the most common form of temporary fence now in use.
It is very quick to erect.
For cattle, a single strand is generally enough if the shock is strong enough and the animals properly trained to respect it.
For sheep, up to five strands are needed; the smaller the lambs the closer together the wires must be.
For pigs, not such agile jumpers, two strands at 6 inches and 1½ feet from the ground should suffice.
Electric netting, in which all but the bottom horizontals are electrified, is most effective for sheep.
It is no cheaper per yard than permanent cattle-mesh fencing, but is so light and easy to erect that its versatility outweighs the cost.
All electric fencing requires regular attention to ensure the system is ‘alive’ and not earthed out by wet grass touching the wires.
Netting is particularly prone to such earthing, and the bottom horizontal (which is not electrified) is frequently bitten through by rabbits or badgers, making gaps for lambs to squeeze through.
I have known a sow that enjoyed the sensation of a pulsating electric shock and a cow that learned to uproot a mesh fence with her horns.
Dry batteries for fencer units are outrageously expensive, so I have resorted to an old tractor battery, trickle-charged by a windmill made from a bicycle wheel with its dynamo hub: it cost nothing and worked without trouble for a year at a stretch.
However carefully you maintain and repair it, electric fencing deteriorates, and, apart from the electric pulse units, must be replaced every six or seven years.
Suiting enterprise to holding
Many factors must be taken into account when choosing the most suitable enterprise for a smallholding; some fixed, others variable and within the influence of the farmer.
Soil and climate, which should be taken together, determine the land potential (see Chapter 2) and largely dictate the main types of farming — arable, stock-rearing, fattening, dairying, etc. — that are most likely to be viable.
Altitude, aspect, and slope may further limit the scope.
If the farm has hill-grazing rights, these may assume an overriding importance in relation to other factors.
The size of the holding and its proximity to a town and markets have obvious implications and are beyond the control of the occupier.
Possibly the most variable factor is you, the smallholder.
What do you aim to achieve?
A cash income?
A measure of self-sufficiency?
A full-time way of life or a spare-time balance to another occupation?
Do you have a delight in animals and skill in their management?
Are you a jack of all trades or do you prefer to specialize?
Do you and your family have any particular skills to exploit?
Within the limitations imposed by the ‘fixed’ factors, you have a wide choice before you.
The larger the holding and the stronger the soil, the wider your choice.
Let us first consider the ‘commercial’ smallholder for whom money-making is the overriding aim.
If we discount the unscrupulous operator who is prepared to ‘mine’ his land for a quick profit, we are considering a responsible husbandman who aims to make a cash living whilst conserving and improving his capital, the soil.
As a commercial smallholder you will relate all your enterprises to the market, which assumes a dominant influence over your choice.
You must either study and cater for existing markets or create hew markets for your own special products.
Existing markets are very competitive and, especially in poultry and pigs, are dominated by agribusinessmen.
Unless you can sell top-quality produce at a premium or, through hard work and efficiency and the ‘personal touch’ can get high production at low cost, you will be hard put to compete against larger farmers whose ‘per-acre’capital investment is generally so much lower.
First amongst small commercial enterprises must be the dairy herd, where the personal touch of a skilled stockman can raise production, reduce costs, and maintain good health and longevity in cattle far beyond the scope of most large herds.
But cows must be milked twice a day, every day of the year, so if you are a dairying smallholder you must find your recreation in the variations within the farm.
A great advantage of milk is the regular cash income.
If you sell farm butter and cheese instead of whole milk you can do well if you have the right market.
This is a labour- and time-consuming enterprise if done on a commercial scale.
Pig-keeping, too, responds to individual attention, although the market tends to fluctuate rather widely.
pig enterprises can vary from outdoor breeding and weaner-rearing to intensive indoor pork or bacon production.
The price of bought-in feeding-stuffs and the capital required for intensive pig-keeping can be limiting if not prohibitive factors for a commercial smallholder.
If a regular source of swill is available nearby, pig-keeping can be profitable, but health regulations impose severe restrictions on swill feeding.
The breeding, rearing, or fattening of beef cattle can be viable in the right conditions, although it is hard to make a profit on a very small scale.
Here there is a choice of buying in cattle and selling later — a ‘flying’ herd — which has the advantage of relieving the land of excess livestock in winter.
With hill-grazing rights, there is a place for sheep on a smallholding.
Without it, in my opinion, the profit does not compare with that of dairy cattle.
But, as a means of maintaining good swards, it is a good policy to mix sheep with cattle.
A well-run herd of goats can be profitable near a town where a specialized market can be established.
There is a growing premium market for free-range eggs and table birds which can provide a profitable enterprise for an expert small-scale poultry man.
Unless you can find such a market, there is little prospect for small-scale poultry-keeping in competition with the huge multinational businesses.
As with pigs, the high cost of bought-in food is a major deterrent to success.
The scratching of poultry in fields and the value of their droppings add an unmeasured profit.
Vegetable and fruit-growing for a nearby market can be profitable on the right land, but this is very labour-intensive, and does not combine well with stock farming, which also requires the undivided attention of the smallholder.
Nevertheless, sustained horticulture needs an abundant supply of organic waste to maintain soil structure and fertility.
The growing demand for genuine, organically-produced vegetables and fruit offers a profit to the skilled gardener who is near enough to his market.
Bee-keeping can be a profit-making project, although in areas of high rainfall, results can be disappointing.
In conjunction with garden and orchard there is an added bonus in the better fertilization of fruit trees and garden produce.
Bearing in mind the long-term structure and fertility of the land, most smallholders will generally combine two or more of the above enterprises, and try to grow most of their own food.
The temptation is always to overstock, and this means that the land is asked to produce more than its true potential.
In the long run fertility and crops decline and less stock can be carried.
It is a fallacy to think that manuring (either organically or artificially) can overcome the effects of overstocking except in the short term.
On the other hand livestock is the source of fertility.
Pigs and poultry, sensibly managed, can be a rapid means of building up fertility on a run-down holding.
Should your prime aim be to provide a measure of self-sufficiency for your family, a different range of options opens to you.
Of course you are still bound to make ends meet, but you no longer have to make all your decisions in terms of money profit as the first requirement.
For a start, you will consider the needs of your family: bread, meat, dairy products, eggs, vegetables, and fruit — most, if not all, of which can be produced on a smallholding.
Fuel and clothing will probably be more difficult, and some needs can only be met by buying in from outside.
There must, of course, be money-making enterprises as well to buy those necessities that cannot be grown on the farm, but these will be looked upon as secondary calls on the agricultural operations in which farm surpluses are sold to supplement the cash income from non-farming sources.
Depending upon the size of your holding, you will keep one or two house cows or goats, turning their milk into butter, cheese, and yoghurt, and possibly a few beef cattle as money-spinners.
You may fatten a couple of pigs to kill and keep a small flock of laying hens or ducks on household scraps.
You will have a small vegetable garden and orchard and probably keep bees.
If you have a spinner in your family, you will keep some sheep; possibly with fleece rather than carcase quality determining the breed.
The larger the holding, the greater the surplus after family needs are met, and the more you can think of commercial enterprises as money-spinners.
In the end, it is your own ‘delight’, capability, and strength that will limit what you undertake.
At some point the size of the enterprise may dictate that you think commercially rather than in terms of self-reliance.
If you can keep your ‘surplus’ projects simple and labour-saving — grass-letting or flying flocks of grazing animals for example— you May still find time to concentrate on feeding your family as your first objective on quite a large holding.
Figure 2 shows the layout of my own ten-acre farm.
The land is old red sandstone with a very high content of fine silts.
The house is at 620 feet above sea level and the farm is on a gentle east-facing slope.
I have found a seasonal calendar, as shown in Table 1, a useful reminder of the sequence of work through the year.
The initial budget
So far we have considered our capital outlay on land purchase, land improvements, livestock, machinery, equipment, and buildings, and decided how this will be spread over the ‘build-up’ years.
You must now determine what financial help you need (including Government subsidies for such things as new buildings, fencing, hedging, hill cattle, and sheep), what it will cost, and how it is to be repaid.
A detailed planning budget for both capital and operating accounts must now be prepared not only to give you the information you require for your own plans, but also as the main evidence to persuade the Bank Manager to finance your endeavours.
In Table 2 I have shown a typical capital budget over four years.
The figures are based on my own in the 1970s and now bear no relation to the present day, but they serve as a broad outline.
Having worked out the capital expenditure and borrowing requirement, you can determine what surplus income will be needed to repay the loans, plus interest, over a given number of years.
It is not difficult to see that a smallholding cannot support a large mortgage as well as a family!
Now we come to the current account — the year-by-year income and expenditure on which the holding will succeed or fail.
At this point cast your mind ahead once again to your ideal farm (in, let us say, Year 4, to be optimistic) with crops and livestock nicely balanced to suit the land potential.
Now you can estimate the value of produce, for sale or home consumption, for a full year and balance this against likely expenditure.
In Table 3 I show a one-year budget, based roughly on my own farm in Year 4.
The individual figures are less important than the overall picture, which illustrates the limitations of production on a small farm and the unavoidable expenses.
It also emphasizes the need for ‘money-spinning’ enterprises if the smallholder is to rise above a very bare subsistence living and pay off a mortgage at the same time.
Once you have established a clear picture of your ideal (and realized its limitations) you work back step by step to the beginning and prepare a priority list for your development plan.
It may be necessary to adjust your ideal to reconcile it with reality, and prepare two or three budgets before you go firm on a viable plan.
I have found it very useful to prepare a graphical cropping plan (see Figure 3) looking ahead a number of years.
On this you can balance extractive crops with fertility-building leys, grazing with cutting, and thereby keep the individual fields in balance with the overall potential of the land.
At the same time you can plan your grazing and crops to meet the needs of the livestock.
But while recommending such long-term plans, I must stress the need for flexibility.
No two years are alike, and what succeeds this year may fail next: further, your early plans will be made without complete knowledge of all the factors, and modifications are bound to be necessary.
Nevertheless, a basically sound plan provides a framework on which you can build and progress in the light of experience and changing conditions.
The aim should be flexibility within a structure; variations on a theme.
The living soil
The foundations of health
Whatever the commercial motivations of those engaged in the ‘farming industry’, the ultimate purpose of agriculture must be to provide mankind with a sustained and ample supply of health-giving food.
As the world population grows, our limited resources, particularly of land, will have to be used efficiently and frugally to achieve this paramount aim.
As I have written elsewhere:
The late Sir Robert McCarrison determined very clearly the qualities of food required for sound nutrition; unadulterated food, unrefined food, fresh food, raw food.
Yet he went further than this…food must be produced from a healthy, living soil.
It is not merely a matter of the known constituents of food; fibre, protein, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, minerals, and trace elements in the correct proportions.
Animals can be sub-clinically sick and still be eaten by man.
plants can be sick, yet fed to both animals and man.
The soil, itself a vital symbiosis of plant, animal and mineral, can be sick, yet grow plants to feed animals and man.
As long as man eats unhealthy food (the product of unhealthy soil), even in the right proportions, the medical profession will perforce have to continue to treat the inevitable results.
As long as animals eat unhealthy plants, the vets will have to do likewise.
As long as plants are grown on sick land, the chemists, plant pathologists and  entymologists will be forced to continue with their pesticides and herbicides, with escalating side effects…not least of which is the further sickening of the soil.
So, in the end (or should one say ‘at the beginning'?) it comes down to the health of the living soil.
The origins of soils
Soil consists of a mixture of mineral (rock) particles, organic debris, and living organisms permeated by air and water.
It is a dynamic system of continuous progressive changes due to external environmental conditions and to the processes of synthesis and decay brought about by the living organisms within the soil itself.
The mineral fraction of soil consists of a wide range of particles from boulders through gravel, sands, and silts to clays.
In Britain, the gravels, sands, and silts have been produced by the breakup of rock by physical forces, chief of which was the grinding action of the Ice Age.
The particles produced in this glacial mill vary in size from rocks to silt.
The sand and silt particles, which are roughly spherical in shape range from 2,000 microns (″) to 50 microns in diameter (sands) and from 50 to 2 microns (silts); the finer silt particles being indistinguishable individually to the naked eye.
Clays, the product of chemical weathering, have very much smaller particles (one particle of fine silt would make 1,000 particles of clay) which are flat or plate-like in shape and lie against each other like sheets of glass, sticking tightly together as water is drawn between them.
The organic matter in soil consists of plant and animal debris or waste in varying stages of decay.
The proportion may vary from 100 per cent(peats) to practically none (sand dunes).
Soil texture
Soil texture has been defined as ‘a store of building materials’— stone, gravel, sand, silt, clay, organic matter, etc. — and is a measure of the potential of the land concerned.
The pores between silt particles are so small and retentive of water that tightly packed silt cannot be emptied by drainage.
Sand, however, drains easily as the pores are so much larger.
Silt can mechanical stability to prevent plants from being blown out of the ground.
Apart from the peats which were formed by the anaerobic decomposition of plant life in waterlogged conditions, organic matter in soils consists of a wide variety of living animals and plants, including earthworms, insects, bacteria, plant roots, and fungi, as well as decaying animals and vegetable fibres and wastes.
As these wastes are broken down by physical, chemical, and bacterial action, they gradually form ‘humus’, a highly important binding factor in the formation of stable soil crumbs or tilth and in the transformation of minerals into soluble plant nutrients.
Soil structure and fertility
We have likened soil texture to the store of building materials available and the measure of land potential.
Soil structure is what nature and man make of these materials; living room, dining room, water supply, ventilation, and drainage.
To build the most stable and convenient soil structure possible from the available resources should be the most important task of every farmer.
The ideal soil structure provides a firm and stable ‘bed’ in which plants can stand and grow.
This bed will contain abundant stores of water and plant nutrients readily available at all times.
It will be free-draining so that it is never waterlogged and will be well aerated.
It will be of good depth to encourage deep rooting and exploitation of its resources.
This perfect plant habitat will further be strong enough to withstand the physical punishment inflicted by the weather and by the animals and machines that harvest the crops it bears.
Finally it will contain the facilities to repair and rebuild itself should any combination of climate, beast, and machine conspire to break the structure down.
The method used to build the most stable and convenient structure possible will vary with the soil texture and climate.
Properly understood and managed, strong clays will structure themselves, and can nourish plants with relatively little organic matter present.
If pure sands can be given sufficient organic matter to retain moisture and provide plant nutrients, they need no further structure as the pores between sand particles are large enough to allow drainage and sand cannot be compacted into a ‘pan’.
If peats can be drained, sweetened (brought to a neutral pH) and kept mechanically strong enough to support plants, they are complete in themselves, although when ploughed they can oxidize rapidly into non-existence.
The almost pure loessic silts are incredibly fertile, but are by far the most unstable and difficult soils to work.
On their own they lack the ability to form large pores for drainage and aeration, and are most vulnerable to wind erosion, panning, and poaching.
Owing to the action of the glaciers, the majority of Britain's soils are mixtures of sands, silts, and clays.
The relative proportion of silt to clay is remarkably uniform at about six to four; it is the sand fraction that varies most.
Few soils contain the 40 per cent clay to qualify as true clays; few are pure silts or pure sands.
The common mixtures of sand, silt, and clay are called loams (silty loams, sandy loams, clay loams, silty clay loams, and so on) and in the absence of organic matter, reflect structural qualities in proportion to their ingredients.
The introduction of organic matter can change everything by the formation of a ‘crumb’ structure in which large pores allow aeration, root penetration, and drainage, and small pores (within the crumbs) retain water and nutrients (see Figure 4).
It is the building and maintenance of this crumb structure or tilth that forms the basis of soil husbandry.
The adequate return of organic wastes to the soil through its own decaying vegetation, grazing animals, rotted farmyard manures, and the avoidance of continuous extractive cropping is the primary measure required to maintain fertility.
But this would be to little avail if the ground were waterlogged or so acid as to prevent the normal action of soil life.
To realize the full potential of his land a farmer must enlist the support of many allies by providing conditions in which they will thrive.
These include various types of mycelium (fungi), bacteria, and, most important, burrowing earthworms.
This soil life, in proper balance, constitutes the digestive metabolism of plants through which the raw mineral and organic nutrients are combined into soluble, ‘available’ forms.
In many cases the threads of mycelium invade the plant roots and act in symbiosis as channels for nutrients between soil and plant.
For growing crop plants the following conditions must be present:
1.
The first essential of healthy soil life is air, and this means good subsoil drainage and adequate inter-crumb pores.
Until drains are put right, other factors, however favourable, are nullified.
Equally important is moisture; neither too little nor too much.
This is guaranteed by a good crumb structure with fine pores holding water like sponges, whilst allowing air and surplus water to move freely between the crumbs.
2.
The second requirement is a more or less neutral soil; neither too acid nor too alkaline.
Most of the useful soil flora and fauna (particularly earthworms) do not thrive in very acid soils (below pH5).
A neutral soil of pH6 is ideal, and the addition of ground limestone, calcified seaweed, slaked lime, and/or basic slag may be needed to achieve this.
3.
The third need of soil life is food, which can be provided by the return of organic waste in the forms of rotting vegetation from the plant cover, farmyard manure, compost, or from green crops specially grown and ploughed in.
The grass-ley break in an arable rotation is a typical attempt to provide food for life in the soil.
4.
Finally, having achieved these conditions, it is most important the resulting structure should not be destroyed mechanically by the wheels of heavy machinery or the feet of livestock in wet weather.
The provision of these conditions will encourage the buildup of soil life, particularly burrowing earthworms, and it is this active soil population which serves as the ‘repair gang’ to build an increasingly stable structure and to repair damage as it occurs.
At the same time, the earthworms burrow deep into the subsoil bringing minerals to the surface, churning and mixing mineral and organic matter in their gizzards, depositing the excavated material on or near the surface in very stable crumbs exactly the right size for optimum exploitation by plant root-hairs.
Their burrows act as ventilator shafts, drainpipes, and root channels.
For the most part, soil life thrives in the top six inches of the earth where moisture, air, nutrition, and temperature are most amenable.
Below this is the subsoil which is relatively inert.
Deep ploughing puts subsoil on top and buries the living topsoil below the optimum depth.
Ploughing serves two purposes: to bury turf and weeds, eliminating competition with the desired arable crop, and to stir and mix mineral and organic fractions of the topsoil.
These two aims conflict, and it can be difficult to strike the ideal balance; but to build and maintain good soil structure and fertility one should avoid ploughing where surface cultivation will meet the need, and abandon deep ploughing (over six inches) altogether.
Soils may be classified under two main headings: brown earth and podzol (see Figure 5).
A brown earth soil is aerobic, of more or less neutral pH, with a good mixture of mineral and organic matter, bearing deep-rooting plants and supporting a normal population of soil life, particularly earthworms.
A podzol soil is liable to waterlogging, is acid, organic wastes remain unrotted near the surface; the topsoil is thin; root penetration is shallow and matted.
Soil life is scarce and burrowing earthworms absent.
Normal grasses, clovers, and arable crops require brown earth soils; heathers, rushes, and coniferous trees have adapted themselves to thrive in podzol conditions.
To change a soil from podzol to brown earth may be both laborious and expensive, and will involve the provision of the four conditions mentioned earlier.
When reclaiming such land, it may be necessary to provide the first pioneer crops with a direct injection of nutrients through chemical fertilizers but it should always be remembered that the aim is to build up the life in the soil so that it can provide its own fertility within the land potential.
Concentrated sources of soluble nitrogen applied on the surface as superphosphate or sulphate of ammonia encourage shallow rooting and discourage earthworms.
If the burrowing earthworm population can be sufficiently built up, soil fertility (within the limits of its potential) will take care of itself.
Without earthworms and other soil life, no amount of cultivations and chemical fertilizers will build and sustain true structure and fertility.
Preparation and use of organic wastes
The natural cycle by which organic wastes are returned to the soil and broken down into humus presupposes a balance between soil, plants, and animals.
There is no ‘extractive’ cropping and no import of fertility from elsewhere.
When man comes into this cycle, he brings with him the possibility of radical changes which can completely upset the natural balance.
He can fell forests, I drain swamps, introduce and control new crops and livestock, import fodder and fertilizers, and export crops, animals, and milk.
Not only can he build up and improve the fertility of his land, but also exploit that fertility up to and beyond its latent potential.
In nature the cycle is practically closed, with vegetable and animal wastes returning directly to the soil where they have lived.
All this waste is attacked by a multitude of living organisms which progressively break it down and ‘digest’ it into humus.
The bodies of dead animals are devoured by other creatures large and small whose excreta and remains are, in their turn, returned to the soil.
Animal dung is spread by birds, devoured by insects, bacteria, and earthworms and mixed intimately into the topsoil.
The leaves of trees, grasses, and plant roots return direct to the soil or through the guts of grazing or browsing animals.
Thereafter the process of breakdown takes place entirely on or just below the surface of the earth.
The speed of breakdown depends upon the composition of the wastes, the availability of air and moisture, temperature, and the presence of the right soil fauna and flora.
A well-balanced mixture of vegetable matter (carbon) and animal waste (nitrogen), deposited in warm, damp conditions on a soil full of earthworms, bacteria, and fungi, will rot down very quickly.
This matter of cellulose breakdown is of vital importance to the whole question of the nutrition of the living cells, for it has been shown by experiment that raw cellulose can be injurious to plants as it is indigestible to animals, and in both the soil and the digestive tract of herbivora, cellulose decomposition is largely performed by fungi.
Such soil treatments, therefore, as ploughing in straw or green crops can only prove successful if conditions for the subsequent breakdown of the cellulose are present.
It is useless to apply organic matter in this form while at the same time inhibiting, by the use of certain artificial fertilizers, the fungi capable of converting that organic matter into humus.
Author's note: The injurious effect on plants refers to the fact that a surfeit of undigested cellulose upsets the C/N ratio and delays the breakdown of organic matter, thus causing a slowing down in plant growth.
Stemmy plant fibres (cellulose and lignins) in cold, drought, or waterlogged conditions will take much longer, and will retard plant growth until they have broken down.
By intensifying and controlling his livestock and introducing arable crops, the farmer must plan carefully to ensure that the natural cycle of return continues to operate evenly over the whole of his land.
Cereal-growing or hay- and silage-making in the same field year after year will obviously rob that field of humus and structure, especially if heavy-yielding crops are grown with chemical fertilizers.
By the same token, permanent grassland that is overgrazed by growing youngstock or milch cows and never cut will become deficient in phosphorus and calcium and may lose structure from poaching.
In such cases the addition of organic matter, slag, or lime will be essential if the farming system is to be maintained without a drastic drop in fertility and production — or the breakdown of soil structure which ultimately leads to the same thing.
Lime (to keep the pH near 6 and replace the calcium sold off in milk) and basic slag (to replace the phosphorus and other elements exported in animal bones) can be applied by contractor relatively cheaply to all but the steepest fields.
These minerals are relatively insoluble and act not so much as direct plant foods, but put the soil in a state that favours the buildup and activity of soil life.
Nevertheless basic slag is an artificially produced fertilizer, and its acceptance by organic farmers who reject ‘artificials’, poses a dilemma.
It is enough to say here that slag should be used sparingly as a soil conditioner from time to time, and not as a routine crop food.
Nitrogenous chemical fertilizers are direct plant foods which bypass the normal metabolism of soil fauna and flora, and in some cases inhibit their reproduction and useful activity.
They stimulate vigorous competitive root growth near the surface and can force plants to grow too quickly to take up their full needs of other nutrients.
In strong soils these side effects may take some years to show up; on poor land they can exhaust the humus very quickly with disastrous results.
That they can increase production in the short and medium run is beyond doubt, but unless employed in the full knowledge of land potential and soil life they can soon lead to diminishing returns.
There are many sources from which the farmer can obtain organic wastes for his soil, some from without and others from within his farm.
If he farms near a town he may be able to buy, still very cheaply, municipal compost and sewage sludge, ensuring beforehand that they do not contain poisonous mineral residues such as lead.
Fish-meal (with or without added synthetic NPK), dried seaweed, liquid seaweed extract (Maxicrop), guano, bone-meal, hoof and horn, dried blood, and shoddy may also be purchased, but are now costly.
Bought-in feeding concentrates for livestock are an indirect fertility import.
On occasions one can buy cow, horse, poultry, or pig manure from neighbouring farms or stables, but few farmers can now afford to part with such valuable by-products.
From within the farm, organic matter can be returned direct by grazing animals; as liquid slurry from dairy cattle sheds; as raw or rotted farmyard manure (FYM) consisting of dung, urine, and bedding; as rough or fine compost; as a specially grown green manure crop ploughed in; or as a grass ley.
It has long been known that raw, unrotted FYM does not produce a quick response in crops because the bacteria have to work so hard to break it down, and that fresh pig or poultry dung is too ‘hot’ for young plants.
It has thus been customary for dung and bedding to be rotted for up to a year in a midden (or field heap) before spreading on the land.
A farmyard midden may become waterlogged, its decomposition anaerobic, and substances may be leached out by rain.
Dung and bedding are added, as they as they come, with no particular thought to the balance between carbon- and nitrogen-rich constituents.
The heap may or may not heat up due to aerobic bacterial action, and the end product may be more or less valuable accordingly.
Slurry may be mixed with water and spread by tanker or irrigation pipeline.
Considerable storage space in tanks or lagoon is required to enable spreading to be done only when ground and weather conditions are right.
Compost-making: the general Principles
Properly made compost is greatly superior to FYM or slurry.
In the first place compost is made from a carefully balanced mixture of animal wastes (the nitrogen fraction from which the soil bacteria are built up) and vegetable matter (the carbon fraction which provides the energy with which the bacteria heat and break down the heap).
The end product is friable humus which is ready to feed the soil flora and fauna and, through them, the plants.
Even rotted FYM must be further broken down before it is fully used.
Raw muck and slurry can burn young plants and even slow down plant growth whilst it is being broken down in the soil.
Secondly, well-made compost preserves all its constituents in a stable form, whereas FYM is liable to lose a great deal of its value through leaching and evaporation.
Finally, there is strong evidence to show that humus in the soil can confer a remarkable degree of resistance to plant and animal pests and diseases.
Compost-making on a farm scale is yet uncommon in Britain (it has been practised for over 4,000 years in China) as it involves a very careful balance and mixing of ingredients, control of ventilation and moisture, and the extra work of at least one turning.
The prospect of setting yourself up for this job is far more daunting than the actual work, and once you have overcome the inertia of thinking it out and making a start, the results more than justify the effort.
Not only is the end product more valuable than slurry or FYM, but it can be spread much thinner (7 or 8 tons to the acre as opposed to 15 tons of FYM).
The principles and practice of compost-making are described in great detail by A. Howard, M. E. Bruce, and others.
The ‘Indore’ method as developed by Howard is probably the most practical for farm purposes.
In essence the process consists of mixing vegetable and animal wastes, adding a base to neutralize acidity, and managing the mass so that the aerobic micro-organisms which break it down can work to the best advantage.
This involves control of moisture, ventilation, and retention of heat.
Vegetable wastes include straw, damaged hay, hedge trimmings, nettles, lawn mowings, weeds, potato haulm, bracken, leaves, sawdust, wood shavings, paper, and kitchen waste.
Particular green crops such as comfrey may be grown specially for compost heaps.
Animal residues include the urine and dung of domestic stock — poultry droppings, pig, cattle, sheep, and horse dung — dried blood, slaughterhouse refuse, powdered hoof and horn, fish manure, sewage sludge, and shoddy.
A base is required to neutralize the acidity that naturally builds up during fermentation.
Ground limestone, calcified seaweed, or wood ash may be added to keep the pH near 7 for the optimum action for micro-organisms.
Slaked lime is less effective and quicklime is altogether too fierce.
The process must be kept aerobic and moist in the early stages.
If too much water is added, the process becomes anaerobic too soon; if too little water is present, bacterial activity slows down and ceases.
It is therefore important that the heap is built of layers of vegetable and animal wastes, evenly distributed and not compressed or trodden to a point where air is excluded.
In larger heaps ventilation passages must be provided.
The Indore method
The compost may be made in pits, bins, or heaps in the open.
In high-rainfall areas, bins on a well-drained site are best; pits may become waterlogged and open heaps are too exposed to cooling winds and beating rain.
For garden use, bins about 4 ft.
X 4 ft.
X 4 ft. are ideal; for a small farm I have found that three pits, 10 ft.
X 10 ft.
X 4 ft., each holding up to 5 tons, are adequate.
Bins should be sited as conveniently as possible to the main source of material, it being assumed that it will be carried by wheelbarrow.
They should be sited on bare earth (not concrete) and protected from the prevailing wind.
The sides of the bins may be timber, concrete blocks, or bricks, and should have ventilation gaps.
In the wetter parts of the country, a movable roof is required.
Some sort of ventilation shaft should be provided to lead air to the centre of each heap.
If one has three bins in line, one should start by filling bin 2, followed by bin 1.
When bin 2 is ready, it is turned into bin 3.
In due course bin 1 is turned into bin 2 and so on.
Bins are loaded in successive horizontal layers of greenstuff, FYM, a sprinkling of ground limestone, and a shovelful of topsoil or old compost.
The greenstuff layers may be about 8 inches deep and the FYM 2 inches.
If the materials are dry, a sprinkling of water should be added with each layer.
Any coarse greenstuff such as cabbage roots, hedge trimmings, etc. should be chopped up to avoid large air pockets.
If different types of FYM are available (horse, cattle, pig, and chicken dung) the more they are mixed in the heap the better; the same goes for different types of vegetable matter.
In winter, greenstuff, which is relatively rich in nitrogen is seldom available; straw bedding in the FYM must provide the cellulose and breakdown is correspondingly slower.
It is then more important than ever to include some topsoil to introduce the essential bacteria.
A well-made heap will heat rapidly to about 66°C in the first week, the temperature then dropping slowly down to about 29°C after three months.
Aerobic thermophyllic bacteria thrive between 41°C and 54°, and it is these that cause the rapid breakdown of cellulose.
After about four to six weeks, when the temperature has dropped to about 4l°C, the heap should be turned, when a further surge of bacterial activity and a second heating will take place, causing further breakdown of the vegetable matter.
At this turning, the outside, unrotted material should be placed in the middle of the heap.
A second turn may be made (ideally) when the centre of the heap has dropped to about 29°C.
Thereafter the heap will ‘mature’ and fix nitrogen from the atmosphere.
Once this process is complete, the compost is ready for the land, and any further storage will result in some loss, unless it is kept covered and turned from time to time.
All-vegetable compost
Gardeners and allotment holders may not keep animals or be near a convenient source of sewage sludge or other animal waste.
An alternative source of nitrogen will be required to ensure a rapid buildup of bacteria and the complete breakdown of cellulose.
A chemical breakdown can be achieved by the addition of any readily available nitrogen source such as sulphate of ammonia, or Nitro-chalk, but these soluble salts can inhibit bacterial action and the end-product is not so well balanced and does not produce such good results.
Some weeds and herbs rich in nitrogen — notably nettles, fat hen, and comfrey — heat and break down very rapidly without the presence of animal waste, and an effective catalyst may be prepared from herbal extracts or bought ready made.
The compost is  inoculated with a very dilute solution of these extracts which stimulate nitrogen-fixing bacteria and cause the rapid breakdown of the heap.
These extracts (sometimes referred to as ‘activators’ or ‘starters’) are not substitutes for the nitrogen-bearing vegetable matter in the compost ingredients.
Green manuring and sheet compost
The ploughing in of a quick-growing crop as ‘green manure’(mustard, rye, tares are suitable) is sometimes used to increase fertility and improve soil structure.
Unless this is done under ideal conditions the herbage may break down slowly, and while the soil population is engaged in this breakdown there may be a retarding effect on the growth of a subsequent crop; the benefit occurring later.
As in a conventional compost heap, the process can be hastened by the addition of animal waste, either by very intensive grazing or by spreading FYM or slurry before ploughing.
Nevertheless, green manuring should not be considered as a means of stimulating quick plant growth.
This method of making compost in the field is known as sheet composting, a variation of which may be achieved after a cereal crop by chopping the straw and stubble (using a forage harvester with delivery spout removed) behind the combine, spreading slurry, and then rotovating the mixture into the top soil.
This method is more suitable for large farms with sophisticated equipment.
Earthworms
The vital role of the burrowing earthworm in building soil structure and fertility has been sadly overlooked on modern farms.
Indeed it has been almost necessary for the agricultural industry to ignore it in order to develop the modern chemical systems of farming.
An acre of average British soil under mixed farming conditions may contain 50,000 burrowing earthworms.
A well-run organic farm could hold many times that number.
But an intensively worked arable farm growing continuous corn with the use of synthetic fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides may have none at all.
According to the classification of Michaelson (1900) there are eleven families, 152 genera, and some 1,200 species of earthworm throughout the world.
The most important family in the temperate and colder regions of the Northern Hemisphere are the Lumbricidae, consisting of ten genera and more than 40 species and sub-species.
Of these L. terrestris, A. longa, and A. nocturna are deep burrowers and of the greatest significance in maintaining soil structure.
These burrowing earthworms literally eat their way through the soil forming deep, vertical, permanent burrows with smooth walls cemented together with mucus secretions.
The mineral and organic matter that passes through their guts in the burrowing process is mixed and churned in the gizzard, the calcium content is concentrated by the calciferous gland, and the resulting casts, which arc deposited on or very near the surface, contain more micro-organisms, inorganic minerals, and organic matter in a form available to plants, than does the surrounding soil.
Worm casts have been shown to contain enzymes which continue to break down organic matter even after they have been excreted.
Not only are worm casts rich in plant nutrients, but are in a crumb form some ⅛ in. in diameter which can be very efficiently exploited by plant root hairs from all sides.
Root hairs are almost  in. in length.
An average British pasture with 50,000 earthworms to the acre has been estimated to produce about 10 tons of casts (or  in. of topsoil) per annum.
In the tropics there is much greater worm activity; in the Nile valley more than 1,000 tons of casts per acre per annum have been reported.
The value of this annual increment of rich topsoil can hardly be exaggerated.
If the population of burrowing earthworms could be increased five-fold (and there is no reason why it should not), the natural improvement in soil structure and fertility could transform the productivity of our land and save us enormous expense.
Given the right conditions of air, moisture, non-acidity, organic matter, temperature, and protection from physical damage, the earthworm population will increase naturally.
If one starts with a podzol soil (acid, anaerobic, and without worms) the increase will e very slow as earthworms cannot migrate quickly.
In such cases it would be worth the trouble of introducing worms from elsewhere.
If, on the other hand, a small but well-distributed population already exists, it will respond on its own as environmental conditions improve, although even here it might well be sensible to import new stock to speed up the process.
The culture of burrowing earthworms for  inoculation of soil is described in great detail by T. j.
Barrett in his book Harnessing the earthworm .
Once the principles are firmly grasped and the necessary boxes or bins constructed, breeding and  inoculating the soil with earthworms is neither difficult nor laborious, but care must be taken to keep the culture beds moist but not waterlogged, and the temperature within bounds, and to ensure a plentiful supply of organic matter to feed the growing population.
The non-burrowing earthworms play a different role in soil fertility.
In particular E. Foetida (the stinking dungworm or brandling) multiplies rapidly in a dungheap or compost pit and plays an important part in breaking down the cellulose once the temperature has dropped to about 32°C.
The breakdown of compost can be greatly hastened by the introduction of brandlings at the right stage.
Details of practical compost-making with help of worms are given in J. Temple's booklet Worm Compost , and J. Minnich's comprehensive treatise The Earthworm Book , in which he deals with almost every aspect of breeding and marketing earthworms.
Earthworms have extremely sensitive skins and cannot thrive under acid conditions.
In the short term, nitrogenous fertilizers, by increasing grasses and clovers, can result in an increase in the earthworm population, but continuous use of superphosphate or Nitro-chalk over a long period has been shown, in trials at Rothamstead, to reduce numbers in proportion to the amount of nitrogen applied.
There is further evidence to indicate that nitrogen applications on or near the surface tend to make earthworms feed and excrete their castings well below the surface.
In 1978 I attended the Welsh ploughing championships, held on rich alluvial land in the Wye Valley which had been in continuous cereal production for several years.
In 200 acres of fresh plough I saw hardly any earthworms at all.
Most pesticides are lethal to earthworms on or near the surface, and some can kill in very small concentrations to a great depth.
Herbicides tend to kill worms, either indirectly by killing the plant life on which they feed, or (in the case of fungicides) directly.
This is particularly important in gardens and orchards where so many herbicides and fungicides are used.
Soil health: the Paramount aim
By building up a good soil structure and providing conditions where all the natural soil flora and fauna can thrive, it is possible to realize the full potential of any piece of land, and to grow on it vigorous, healthy crops and livestock.
In these conditions it should not be necessary to use direct-feed chemical fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides other than to meet an occasional crisis, probably caused by a slip-up in our husbandry.
If we fail to build a healthy, living soil, chemicals will, at best, provide a short-term panacea; in the long term they will ‘kill the goose that lays the golden egg’.
Field Crops
The crops grown on a farm and the reasons for growing them can vary enormously.
At one extreme is a horticultural holding, with a high proportion under glass, growing vegetables or flowers for sale in a specialized market; at another is an all-grass farm where livestock are reared or fattened.
The aim may be cash or some degree of self-sufficiency.
The farmer's delight may be in one or more species of livestock, in arable farming, in gardening, or in bringing all these enterprises together in a mixed farm.
The land, climate, and markets will also play their part in dictating which crops are worth growing.
Cash crops are always ‘extractive’ and tend to lower the overall fertility of the farm.
Forage crops for consumption on the farm are not directly extractive (the sale of milk and livestock is) although they may transplant fertility from one field to another.
Grass leys, grazing catch crops, and crops grown to plough in as green manure all enhance fertility.
Crops may be annual plants (the cereals, mustard, Italian rye-grass), biennials (roots), or perennials (most grasses and clovers).
Let us consider the cropping on a small mixed farm with cattle, sheep, and poultry On which you are aiming, as far as possible, to grow all the fodder for your animals (your main source of income) and to feed your family.
As we consider each crop, we must assume that the land and climate make its cultivation viable.
You will be anxious to have enough grazing for your livestock in spring, summer, and autumn, to make enough hay or silage for their winter keep, to provide additional cereals and roots to supplement the hay, and to grow enough cereals, potatoes, vegetables, and fruit for your own table.
You will also want to preserve some well-structured meadows where stock can run in winter without too much poaching.
These requirements are bound to conflict on your limited acres, particularly in spring and early summer when a large proportion of your land is laid up for hay or in arable crops.
Your most important task will be to reach the best possible balance of livestock, grazing, and arable to suit your land potential.
Grass
The most important crop is grass: it is also by far the cheapest and least laborious to grow and feed.
Most grasses are perennials which last almost indefinitely under the right conditions.
Some, however, are annuals (notably Italian rye-grass and annual meadow-grass) which only survive by reseeding themselves.
Grassland is generally classified as ‘permanent pasture’, ‘short ley’, or ‘long ley’.
The term ‘permanent’ is something of a misnomer, for the content of any pasture is constantly changing as conditions become more favourable for one species and less for another; it applies only to the fact that a pasture remains in grass for an indefinite period.
Occasionally one hears of a ‘permanent ley’, but this is a complete contradiction in terms.
A ley, by definition, is a temporary sward of chosen species of grasses, clovers, and herbs which may be designed for a short or long term.
If it is left indefinitely, it will revert to poorer, indigenous species which are unlikely to be the most productive or nutritious.
All permanent pasture and most leys contain a large number of grasses, clovers, weeds, and herbs.
Some short leys, mostly sown as fertility-breads in arable rotation or for silage, contain only one or two species of grass or clover.
Each species has its own growth habit and ideal environment; and will thrive in some conditions and fail in others.
Grazing by different animals, mowing for hay or silage, treading by stock and machinery each favours some plants at the expense of others.
Good management, based on a full understanding of these factors, is therefore every bit as important as cultivation and choice of seeds in maintaining economic and nutritious swards.
Such good management involves proper drainage, maintenance of a neutral pH, a balance between grazing and cutting, mixed stocking, controlled grazing and resting, the avoidance of physical damage (particularly in bad weather), and the return of organic matter to the soil to make up for hay or silage removed.
Permanent Pasture
To break a pasture makes a man; to make a pasture breaks a man.
The old saying points both to the great latent — and often unrealized — fertility stored in the root system of an old permanent sward, and to the difficulty of rebuilding this treasure should it be dug up and spent.
In good soil conditions, an old sward properly managed will develop a relatively stable composition, a strong soil structure, a prolific population of fauna and flora, and good natural drainage.
It will withstand considerable abuse by livestock and machinery, and, although not as productive in the short term as cultivated leys, nor as early growing in spring or as late in the autumn, it provides much-needed living ground for animals through the winter.
As mentioned earlier, most permanent pastures can be improved in both composition and productivity by good management.
When one considers the advantages of permanent pasture, and compares relative costs of improving old swards and reseeding to leys, it will be seen that the apparent increase in productivity of leys may be largely offset by these other factors.
Unless it is very well managed, a ley will soon tumble down to indigenous species on a poor soil structure, and the end result will be worse than the beginning.
New leys are usually very productive in the first two or three years.
They then tend to slump rapidly until about the eighth year (known as ‘the years of depression’) when the sward is considerably less productive than the original permanent pasture.
Thereafter, productivity gradually picks up, as soil life and structure are restored, until it returns to its original permanent status.
Total production in the long term is seldom higher than that of permanent pasture.
This fact would appear to reflect the land potential to which I referred in Chapter 4.
One should therefore think very carefully and far ahead before deciding to break up a good permanent pasture: it is a slow, costly, and difficult task to get it back.
An important factor in achieving high productivity in grassland is the availability of nitrogen to the plant roots.
This is generally supplied by top dressing with direct-feed artificials, and there is no doubt that with the right moisture and soil temperature, earlier and more prolific growth can thus be obtained.
A less direct method is to encourage the growth of clovers in the sward.
These leguminous plants have the capacity to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere through their specialized root nodules.
Clovers are encouraged by a neutral pH (through periodic liming), by a correct phosphate balance (through applications of basic slag), and by plenty of sunlight.
Clovers, being of prostrate habit, tend to thrive in close-cropped swards.
Close grazing encourages clovers; repeated hay crops year after year depresses them.
The inclusion of wild white clover, which is generally present in permanent pastures but does not thrive in a phosphate-deficient soil, is particularly important, and there is an old saying: ‘There must be clover seed in those slag bags.’
Both grass and clovers recover and grow more quickly when grazed hard for a short period and then rested for two to three weeks than they do under continuous nibbling.
Short leys
Short leys, down for one or two years, are generally sown as a fertility-building break in an arable rotation; the grazing, hay, or silage taken during the ley being of secondary — albeit significant — importance.
The improvement to soil structure through the addition of organic matter from the grass roots and the droppings of grazing animals, together with the corresponding buildup of soil life, reverses the extractive effect of arable cropping.
Short leys frequently consist of Italian rye-grass with or without clovers.
Through heavy dressings of nitrogen these produce bulky crops for grazing, silage, and eventually for ploughing in.
This system has inherent dangers, as forced rye-grass can grow too quickly to take up important minerals, particularly magnesium, and overdoses of some elements can lock up others in a form not available to plants.
Such sward, when grazed, can cause hypomagnasaemia in cattle and sheep with disastrous results.
Medium and long leys
Medium and long leys are put down with the object of increasing grassland production, extending the growing season and improving the nutritional quality of the herbage.
They may be designed primarily to be cut for hay or silage, for grazing, or for a combination of cutting and grazing.
Medium leys, down from three to five years, are rather like arable crops in that maximum yield during those years is generally the main objective.
The field is then ploughed up, fertilized, and resown to another crop.
The maintenance of soil structure and fertility can become a major problem, particularly when the emphasis is on cutting for hay or silage, both of which are ‘extractive’ crops.
The grasses selected for medium leys are predominantly Italian and perennial rye-grasses with small amounts of timothy, cocksfoot and meadow fescue.
The rye-grasses, particularly Italian, are very leafy and productive, but tend to be superseded by less prolific indigenous species.
Red clovers, alsikes, and trefoil, also very productive but short lived, make up the leguminous portion of these mixtures.
Long leys (often misnamed ‘permanent leys’) are designed for the long-term improvement of grassland.
It is always hoped that the superior species of grasses and clovers will flourish and last for ever, giving an earlier spring bite, more bulk for grazing or mowing, better nutritional quality, and later grazing in the autumn.
The extent to which this hope is fulfilled depends upon the land potential, and, within that limit, on management.
If the farmer could eliminate all other factors and concentrate only on managing his leys (and the soil on which they grow) he might succeed in minimizing the effect of the ‘years of depression’ and maintain the new grasses and clovers for a very long time.
But one cannot separate farming into tidy compartments: the demands of the market, livestock numbers, weather conditions, and many other variables force one to compromise.
The precious, vulnerable new ley gets neglected or misused and gradually tumbles down to a less demanding, less productive permanent pasture.
The grasses for long leys should have very little Italian (annual) rye-grass, as this is liable to die out within two years leaving gaps where indigenous grasses such as poa annua will take over.
A small amount of Italian may be included to give bulk in the first year.
The main grasses are perennial rye-grasses (for leafy bulk and early growth) with a higher proportion of timothy, cocksfoot, and fescues.
The clovers should be predominantly wild white which, though less bulky, are hardier and longer-lasting than red clover and alsike.
An important feature of long leys should be their deep-rooting ability.
As long ago as the late nineteenth century, Robert Elliot in co-operation with James Hunter, the seeds- man, had developed his Clifton Park System of farming, in which the deep-rooting, herbal ley was the cornerstone on which soil structure and fertility were built.
He added chicory and other herbs to his seed mixtures, which, through their deep roots, provided communication for water, air, plant root growth, minerals, and nutrients between the living topsoil and the lower strata.
Today, mixed herbs, including chicory, yarrow, burnet, rib grass, and sheep's parsley are becoming widely used in long ley mixtures.
Importance of management
The good management of grassland, be it permanent pasture or ley, offers probably the greatest scope for successful farming in the wetter parts of Britain.
But the mere fact that grass (of a sort) will take over and grow without effort on the farmer's part, provides a great temptation to exploit this gift of nature without considering the implications.
Good grass requires great care and understanding, as described above, and one should never forget the adage: ‘To make a pasture breaks a man.’
After ploughing and reseeding, it takes some years for the soil to recover its stable structure, and the grass roots to develop their full strength.
During this time overgrazing and treading by stock, particularly in wet conditions, will damage the root system, break down soil structure, and cause gaps in the new sward.
These gaps will be filled by indigenous species such as poa annua which can form seed at any time during the year.
When attempting to establish a long ley, the greatest care should therefore be taken to limit grazing and treading to times of good weather and soil conditions.
Extractive hay or silage crops should not be taken in the first year, although the ley may be topped if necessary.
Grass and clover seeds need fairly warm conditions for germination and are more sensitive to drought or excessive moisture than cereals.
Thus herbage seeds cannot be sown as early or as late in the year as the cereals so frequently used as cover or nurse crops.
It is only possible to lay down general rules, perhaps the most important of which is that grass, and more especially clover, must always be sown early enough in the growing season to have become fairly established before the continuous wet conditions of winter set in.
Thus although it may be quite safe to sow grasses and clovers on dry soils in the regions of low rainfall in the South and East of England in August, and in exceptional years even later, in regions of high rainfall such as prevail in Wales and most of the North and West of England it is likely to be somewhat risky to defer sowing later than about the middle of June.
Although excellent results may follow from sowings in March, yet in many districts the soil is then likely to be too wet and cold, particularly for the smaller seeded species like timothy, rough-stalked meadow-grass, white and alsike clovers to establish themselves satisfactorily.
Except in regions of very low rainfall April should be regarded as the safest month for sowing herbage seeds.
I have sown grass seeds successfully by two methods in the high-rainfall conditions of Wales.
The first is under a spring-sown crop of dredge corn, usually in April.
The ground, previously in roots, is ploughed as early as possible in February or March and the cereal crop sown as soon as a reasonable tilth is obtained.
In April, when the corn crop is showing, the ground is lightly harrowed and the seeds broadcast by fiddle or barrow.
They are then lightly pressed in with a Cambridge roller.
Stapledon strongly recommends a second harrowing to cover the seeds before rolling.
When the cereal crop is harvested in August, the seeds are quite well established and capable of standing a light grazing in September and October.
The second method is to broadcast the seeds together with not more than 1 kg. to the acre of rape and turnips in late June or early July.
The rape should be grazed off in September and October (before the ground becomes too wet) and then the crop rested until the spring.
I have found that later sowing of grass by this method is very risky and that too heavy a crop of rape smothers the seeds.
It is always wise to remember that the seeds are more important than the nurse crop.
It is necessary to have a clean seed-bed, well consolidated and with soil in good heart.
If the soil is acid or lacking in phosphate, lime or basic slag should be applied to ensure a good establishment of clovers.
Nitrogenous fertilizers should not be used on new leys (with the possible exception of one-year leys grown for hay or silage).
Grazing Systems
The simplest way to feed grass is to allow livestock to eat it where it grows, green and fresh.
The further one can extend the grazing season in spring and autumn, without damage to soil or sward, the better.
Grazing has the added advantage of returning animal manure direct to the soil.
The importance of grazing both cows and sheep over the same land (either together or in succession), both for the good of the sward and the health of the livestock, is explained at the beginning of Chapter 6.
‘Set stocking’, in which animals are given free range over a relatively large area and not moved regularly, is the most labour-saving system of grazing.
The provision of water may well be easier and shelter in foul weather more readily available somewhere in a large area than in a small paddock or strip.
The main disadvantages of set stocking are the buildup of intestinal worms and the growth of tussocks of coarse, unpalatable grass where animals have dunged.
‘Paddock grazing’, in which the grassland is divided into small paddocks, grazed hard for a short period and then rested for up to three weeks, is a very good system for the control of parasite worms, the life cycle of which is broken during the rest periods.
If the paddocks can be topped and harrowed after each grazing, a more even, tussock-free sward can be maintained.
By arranging ‘forward (or sideways) creep’ gates between paddocks, calves or lambs can graze the best, cleanest grass ahead of their dams.
Water must, of course, be provided in all paddocks.
‘Strip grazing’ behind an electric fence permits the farmer to ration his grass at a fixed rate.
If a ‘back fence’ is used, the stock is confined to its daily strip and the remainder of the grass is completely rested for a long period.
This system is laborious, and if the fencing equipment is not carefully maintained, stock can break out with disastrous results.
Single-strand fences will restrain cows; two or three are required for calves, and electric netting or a multi-strand fence is needed to contain sheep.
Strip grazing is used widely for cattle on kale, but is less popular with mixed stock or sheep on grass.
Water must always be available.
‘Foggage’ grazing in late autumn and winter, on the hay aftermath which has been allowed to grow tall in late summer, is still practised in some areas, but is a rather wasteful use of grass.
Grasses have a tendency to ‘winter burn’ more or less in proportion to the amount of herbage standing in a field at the onset of frosty weather.
It is therefore unwise to allow grass to grow up and mature in late summer.
‘Zero grazing’, where grass is cut and carried to stock in sheds or yards, is practised in commercial ‘feed lots’ and on small mixed farms in parts of Southern Europe.
This is probably the most laborious system of feeding fresh grass, but it does eliminate the uptake of intestinal worms and saves the fields from poaching.
A further disadvantage is the work involved in returning the manure to the field.
Nevertheless, I have found that limited zero grazing is a very useful way to feed grass from the orchard and garden to my house cow.
Preservation for winter feeding
Grazing, in any meaningful sense, is limited to the growing season — at best about eight months of the year.
For the remaining four months (and in some areas this may be up to seven) grass can be fed only as hay, silage, or artificially dried grass.
It follows that a significant proportion of the annual grass crop must be preserved for winter feeding.
Hay
The ultimate value of the hay harvest depends on many factors.
Soil fertility, seeds mixture, age of ley, rainfall, sunlight, wind, growth time, stage of growth when cut, harvesting methods, and storage: each can make or mar the final product.
The ideal hayfield might be grazed and mowed in alternate years, well drained, not sour (of neutral pH), carrying a well-balanced mixture of grasses, clovers, and deep-rooting herbs.
It could be dressed with compost or FYM and shut up to grow from early April (not always possible on a well-stocked farm in a cold spring!).
Given good weather it could be ready to mow by late June with a lush green butt, with heads formed but not yet ripe.
Although modern haymaking involves expensive, sophisticated machinery, it is still possible for a smallholder to make and store excellent hay with very modest tackle, and it is hay on which he is most likely to depend for the bulk of his winter keep.
It follows that no effort should be spared to ensure a bountiful harvest of top-quality hay, even when this may involve a clash with other priorities.
‘Meadow hay’ is made from permanent pasture containing a large proportion of indigenous meadow-grasses, clovers, and herbs (some call them weeds).
These meadows are slower growing than new leys, a d the herbage is generally finer and softer.
Good meadow ha is ideal for sheep, who tend to waste the coarser fibres in ‘see’ hay.
‘Seeds hay’ is produced from leys in which the herbage is predominantly introduced species including rye-grasses, alsike, and red clovers.
These mixtures are earlier growing and more prolific than meadow-grass, and can be more difficult to make into top-quality hay.
The harvesting of hay (and cereals) will be considered later; it will suffice to say here that baling is not essential on a smallholding, and if required can be done by a contractor.
More storage space is needed for loose hay than for bales, but loose hay is not so likely to heat dangerously.
Bales are more convenient for feeding, but with an old-fashioned long-tined hay fork, it is not difficult to carry a good load.
Barn-drying is a safe method of ensuring high-quality hay, and is to be recommended in the wetter parts of the country.
An electrically or tractor-belt-driven fan is used to blow air up through the bales or loose hay, which can be baled and carted quite green and at least a day sooner than normal hay.
A self-reliant smallholder with a good workshop could set himself up for barn-drying quite cheaply, connecting a second-hand electric or internal combustion motor to a suitable turbo-fan, and leading the air through ducts on the barn floor.
In dry weather (when the relative humidity is low), cold air is sufficient, but in close, moist conditions, some heating of the air is necessary.
The rising cost of power for heating and blowing air now makes barn-drying less attractive when compared with conventional haymaking.
Grass silage
Silage-making is a more complex operation than haymaking.
It involves a clear understanding of the principles of aerobic and anaerobic respiration, the catalytic actions of enzymes, the control of the balance between the various organic acids produced by respiration, the development of micro-organisms (bacteria and fungi), and the role all these play in decomposition and preservation of the silage crop.
A proper understanding of these principles enables the farmer to control the amount of air (and thus the temperature) in his clamp, thereby promoting the correct balance between the desirable lactic and other organic acids.
The principles underlying the biochemical changes in the ensiling process are clearly described by Watson and Smith in their book,Silage .
Modern silage-making on a large scale involves the use of sophisticated, expensive machinery which is beyond the economy of a smallholding and not suited to working in small fields.
It is quite possible, however, to make good silage with the simplest tools.
The crop can be cut by scythe, horse mower, binder, or normal tractor mower.
It can be put into windrows with hand rake, side delivery rake, or horse rake; collected and carted using wagon, trailer, or buckrake; and made in a tower, clamp, or pit.
The main problems in making and storing silage are the exclusion of air during fermentation and holding the clamp together under the pressure that mounts up while it is being built.
Strong side walls of earth, concrete, or sleepers are all that are needed in the way of building.
Silage can also be made in large plastic bags which must be carefully sealed so that no air can enter.
Stacks are not very suitable for small quantities, as too great an area is exposed to the air and a relatively high proportion of the crop wasted.
The chief drawback to small-scale silage-making is the extra physical work involved in handling the green crop with its high water content.
The practical making of silage using cheap and simple equipment is well described by Watson and Smith, and, if properly made, it is every bit as nutritious and more succulent than good hay.
The location of silage tower, clamp, or pit is important with relation to feeding: it can be a great disadvantage to have to cart silage some distance to the feeding-point.
On well-equipped large-scale holdings, self-feed clamps with concrete standings are generally sited close to the cattle-yards.
On a smallholding it may be more practical to carry silage to the stock in yard or cowshed.
Before embarking on silage, a smallholder would do well to master the principles and work out clearly in his mind how he is going to cut, gather, and cart the crop, where he will locate his tower or clamp, and how the silage will be fed.
Although the crop is put green into the clamp, it does not follow that good silage is easier to make than good hay.
Cereals
Cereal crops — wheat, barley, oats, rye, maize, or ‘dredge’ mixtures — may be grown for a variety of reasons: for the sale of grain for milling, malting, or animal feed; for home bread-making; for feeding one's own livestock either threshed and rolled or on the straw; for grazing as a green crop; for arable silage; for ploughing in to increase fertility; or for the sale of thatching straw.
Even in ideal cereal-growing country the sale of grain in the open market for milling or feeding is unlikely to be worthwhile for a smallholder who could not produce enough to compete on an adequate scale.
In the right location, however, he might find a very profitable market for hand-harvested and threshed wheat and rye straw for thatching and horse collars.
It should not be forgotten that any crops sold off the land are ‘extractive’ and tend to lower fertility.
Growing season
To grow grain even for home use, one needs fertile land that is ploughable and a growing season long enough to ensure ripening of the crops.
Although oats, barley, rye, and even wheat have been grown (sometimes successfully) in cold, wet areas and at high altitudes, the chances of a good harvest are very much reduced in such conditions.
The effective growing season can be extended by autumn sowing with varieties that are winter-hardy.
Such crops get away earlier in the spring and are more likely to ripen before the autumn rains.
Oats and rye are less ‘hungry’ than barley and wheat, and will ripen in a shorter, colder, wetter season.
Oats are traditionally grown in Scotland and Wales; rye is the staple grain of the cold North European plain and the higher alpine holdings, and could be a very useful bread or animal-feeding grain on a smallholding.
Crop rotations
Threshing crops are always ‘extractive’ even when the grain is eaten on the farm.
It is therefore important to refrain from continuous cereal-growing on the same land, and to put back the equivalent of what has been taken out.
This can be achieved, together with crop health and weed control, by adopting a carefully planned rotation of cereals, roots, and grass.
In the best cereal-growing areas, arable farming may dominate the scene, with animals and grass taking second place.
There, four- and even five-year rotations, with only short grass leys between to restore soil structure and fertility, are quite normal on the ploughable land; permanent grass or long leys are confined to the steeper or more difficult fields.
In the cold, wet lands of the North and West, a much smaller proportion of the land is in arable, the rotations of cereals and roots are shorter with much longer grass breaks between.
In the steepest, wettest areas, stock-rearing takes complete precedence, and little, if any, arable farming is undertaken.
Between these extremes are found the typical mixed farms with livestock, grass, and arable nicely balanced.
The traditional Norfolk four-course rotation of turnips or swedes to be grazed off by sheep in winter, spring barley for sale (undersown), red clover ley to be grazed in spring and summer, followed by winter wheat for sale, was designed to suit the strong land and dry, warm climate of East Anglia.
In recent years it has been modified to reduce labour costs and increase profits through the use of machinery, fertilizers, and chemicals.
Up to six years of cereal cash crops with a single ‘root break’ in the middle, followed by a two- or three-year ley is now typical: animals have practically disappeared from arable farms.
Some farmers even go so far as to grow continuous cereal crops indefinitely — barley on the lighter land and winter wheat on the strong clays.
In recent years the seedsmen and the chemical companies (the latter are rapidly taking over the former) have been producing new varieties of hybrid seeds, fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, and fungicides, which together have made continuous monocropping feasible.
But this system has run into severe problems of falling yields, weeds, and plant disease.
The original Norfolk rotation was used to grow cash crops on strong land, yet never were two successive cash crops taken.
Every other crop was grazed off and large quantities of well-rotted farmyard manure were returned before cereals were sown.
This system exploited good land to its full potential.
The later rotations, if they can be truly so called, burned up the fertility capital at a rate well above true potential.
The former system could still be used by a smallholder on suitable land, the latter would be disastrous.
In the colder and wetter areas, much less land is in arable, and less extractive rotations have been developed.
Typical of these is the Welsh three-course rotation: oats, either autumn or spring sown; followed by mangolds or swedes; and then barley undersown to a long ley.
All these crops are for feeding the farm stock, the swedes often being grazed in situ during the winter.
The barley and oat straw provide the main winter diet for beef cattle; the rolled oats and rolled or ground barley are fed to poultry, pigs, and bovine youngstock.
There are numerous variations on these basic themes to suit soil, climate, and the main farming enterprises.
I find that autumn-sown oats or rye ripen early and often allow me to squeeze in a catch crop of oats or rye after the main harvest to be grazed in the late autumn and spring before ploughing for roots.
But in a cold, late spring I find it difficult if not impossible to work up a good tilth in time for mangolds.
After roots (and a winter fallow), instead of barley I prefer to grow a dredge mixture of oats, barley, rye, and peas undersown to a herbal ley to be fed on the straw to young cattle in early winter.
If I had kept a sizeable pig unit, I would have grown barley for grinding into meal.
When planning a rotation, it is very helpful to draw up a long-term scheme and dovetail the various crops into the seasons, at the same time ensuring that each field comes into the rotation in its turn and is then put back in grass to build up fertility for the requisite period.
By this means it is also possible to plan in advance approximately how much of each crop will be grown to meet your needs.
On my own ten-acre farm I grow one quarter of an acre of winter wheat and one quarter of winter rye (mainly for bread), and half an acre of undersown spring dredge mixture (oats, barley, rye, and peas) for feeding ‘on the straw’.
In our cold, wet climate and on the silty red sandstone soil of South Powys, the rye yields and ripens well.
The dredge (mainly oats) grows well to be cut green and made like hay in August.
The wheat is less reliable, both in yield and quality, being much slower to get away in a cold spring and less certain to ripen and harden into high-quality baking grain.
All the dredge straw is eaten avidly by cattle; the rye and wheat straw are less palatable, but are eaten more readily when put through the chaff-cutter and mixed with chopped mangolds or swedes.
My land is heavily stocked, and one acre of cereals is not enough to provide winter keep for cattle, sheep, poultry, and horses.
But I could not row more grain without causing an even worse grazing crisis from April to July when three acres are laid up for hay.
The value of long-term rotation plan in solving this equation can hardly be overstressed (see Figure 3, p. 46).
Wheat
Wheat is a hungry crop, needing strong, neutral soil and a long, warm growing season.
Originally a native of Mediterranean lands, it has never adapted completely to cold, wet conditions.
Wheats may be hard or soft, strong or weak.
Hard wheats are easily milled into white flour; soft wheats do not separate so easily.
Strong wheats contain a large amount of good-quality gluten providing an elastic dough which rises well for baking bread.
Weak wheats do not rise and are suitable for biscuit-making.
Some wheats require a period of cold weather and short days if they are to yield well; these are autumn sown, stand over winter and ripen much earlier than spring-grown varieties.
Wheat should be sown early in the rotation when the soil is at its most fertile.
Autumn sowing gives the best chance of ripening, particularly in the colder, wetter parts of the country.
Autumn-sown wheat (and other cereals) should have a rough seed-bed to avoid soil capping, particularly on silty soils, and to provide some protection to the seedlings from icy winds.
Experiments are being carried out at Cambridge on a wheat-rye hybrid known as Triticale, which, it is hoped will have the growing and ripening qualities of rye and the baking qualities of wheat.
This could be a godsend to the smallholder, especially on poor, cold land.
I grew Triticale for three years with moderate success.
The growing and ripening characteristics were most promising and the grain made excellent bread.
Emmer bearded wheat, common some 2,000 years ago, is reputed to have a very high protein content and good baking qualities.
It is extremely difficult to thresh, but is relatively bird-proof — a significant advantage in areas where very little grain is grown.
Experiments are now being conducted near Reading to determine yields and to develop a suitable threshing technique.
I have been growing small plots for some years, but have not yet solved the problem of threshing.
Barley
Barley is grown for malting in the manufacture of beer and whisky and for animal feed, particularly the fattening of pigs and intensively reared beef.
It is less ‘hungry’ and earlier ripening than wheat, and grows well on lighter, well-drained soils provided they are not acid.
When grown on strong, very fertile land, barley tends to lodge; it is therefore grown in the later stages of a rotation when the fertility has been reduced.
The main interest of barley to a smallholder is as stock feed, particularly for fattening pigs or poultry.
For this purpose it is ground into a coarse meal.
When used in cattle rations, it is rolled like oats, but is not, in my opinion, as good as oats for milking cows, which need more protein and less carbohydrate.
Barley straw is soft and palatable, and is widely used as bulk feed for beef cattle.
Barley may be autumn o spring sown, slightly shallower and on a finer seed-bed than wheat.
If allowed to go overripe, barley ears tend to fall off the stems, and heavy losses can occur.
The crop is often cut slightly green to avoid such loss.
Oats
Oats are mainly used for feeding all types of livestock except pigs whose digestive systems cannot cope with the fibrous husks.
The best-quality oats are also used for breakfast foods and oatcakes.
Oat straw, although variable in quality, generally makes good bulk fodder for cattle.
Oats grow best in the wetter, cooler parts of the country and are much more tolerant of poor, acid soils.
Cultivation and sowing are similar to that of wheat and barley; both spring- and autumn-sown crops are common.
Winter oats may be grazed in autumn and spring before growing up to head; this practice encourages ‘tillering’ and higher yields.
Like barley, oats are often cut slightly green to avoid shedding of the grain.
The husks of oats are not separated from the grain by normal threshing, and the grain is either rolled or fed whole.
Rye
Rye may be grown as a zing crop or for threshing for human or animal feed.
It h s never been popular for breadmaking in Britain, although it is the staple diet of the cold North European plains and in the Alps.
It has long, though straw which is much sought-after by thatchers and harness-makers, and, if put through a chaff-cutter and mixed with chopped roots, is readily eaten by cattle.
Ryes and rye-wheat hybrids are sometimes prone to ergot — a fungus disease that destroys the individual grains and replaces them with black spores which look like mouse droppings.
These are poisonous, and any crop showing ergot should not be eaten.
Rye is very tolerant of poor, acid soils, is extremely frost-hardy and ripens much earlier than other cereals.
In the cold, wet northern and western parts of the country it is by far the most reliable cereal crop.
It threshes easily and rolls like oats to make a palatable stock feed.
Rye flour does not rise on its own, but may be mixed with wheat in different proportions and can be baked into a variety of tasty breads.
As rye will grow in very cold conditions, it is probably the best catch crop for autumn and spring grazing, For this purpose it is autumn sown after wheat or barley and before roots.
In a cold, late spring it may prove difficult to graze off the rye in time to work up a good tilth for mangolds.
Unlike other cereals, rye is cross-fertilized and does not remain true to type.
Fresh seed should therefore be bought each year.
Maize
Maize may be grown for human consumption (corn on the cob), animal grain, or arable silage.
It is not widely grown in Britain, as it requires strong land and considerably higher temperatures than other cereals.
Smallholders in sheltered, low areas in the south-East of Britain, may grow a little maize in the vegetable garden; otherwise the crop is of little interest to them.
Dredge mixtures
Dredge mixtures of cereals, with or without peas or beans, produce heavier yields than when the crops are grown separately.
This is partly due to the ability of pulses to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, which feeds the rest of the mixture, and partly due to the little-understood symbiosis between ‘companion plants’.
Although care should be taken to choose varieties that ripen more or less at the same time to avoid losses, dredge mixtures are generally cut green and dried like hay to be fed ‘on the straw’ or made into silage.
They may be sown in spring or autumn and undersown to a ley.
I use a spring-sown mixture of oats (60 per cent), barley (20 per cent ), rye (10 per cent ), and peas (10 per cent ), undersown to a herbal ley as the final crop in my three-course rotation.
I cut the crop quite green and dry it on a Tyrolean-type wire fence (see p. 108).
I have found the crop to be very reliable in our wet conditions, and it is relished by cattle in early winter.
If it is stored for too long in rick or barn, rats and mice can cause heavy losses.
Roots
Root crops — mangolds, swedes, common turnips, rape, and kale — are of the greatest value in the winter feeding of cattle and sheep.
They provide a succulent supplement to hay and straw which helps to stimulate and maintain the milk flow through the lean winter months until the spring grass begins to grow.
Mangolds
Mangolds are of the ‘beet’ family with the characteristic multiple seed.
They require a fine tilth with plenty of humus and moisture, and are slow growing.
They are normally sown ‘on the ridge’ as soon as the ground is ready in early May, and hoed and singled at the two-to three-leaf stage whilst it is still easy to separate the entwined stems which grow from the multiple seeds.
Mangolds must be lifted and clamped before the risk of any hard frost.
As they are liable to ‘bleed’ they should be topped with some stem left on the tuber, and the roots cleaned but not trimmed.
They are normally left to ‘sweat’ for ten days in small heaps in the field, covered with the leaves, before being carted to the clamp.
Although mangolds are not frost-hardy, they keep very well in the clamp, and are fed, after maturing, from February to June.
Swedes
Swedes, like rape, cabbages, and turnips, belong to the Brassica family and are extremely frost-hardy.
The seeds are very small, and should be drilled shallower than mangolds (about one inch), either on the flat or on the ridge, in a well-worked, humus-rich seed-bed.
They are hoed between the rows and singled by hand.
They can be heavily attacked by turnip flea beetle when in the two-leaf stage if the seeds are not dressed, but will usually outgrow the damage.
The brassicas are susceptible to a fungus disease called finger and toe, particularly in acid soil, and, if sown before mid-May, are liable to mildew.
They grow best in cool, damp conditions, and will continue growth well into the autumn.
Being frost-hardy, they a-re often grazed off in situ through the winter, although this can cause damage to the soil structure.
Alternatively they can be lifted and clamped up to mid-December, and fed to cattle and sheep until the end of February.
They do not keep in the clamp quite as well as mangolds.
When fed to cattle they should be chopped in a root-pulper and, ideally, mixed with chaffed straw.
They are generally fed whole to sheep, although this can cause older ewes to shed their incisor teeth prematurely and thus shorten their useful lives.
Kale
Kale is grown for feeding dairy cattle.
A member of the Brassica family, it requires the same fine, neutral, humus-rich seed-bed as swedes.
It may be strip-grazed behind an electric fence, cut and carted to the cattle-yard, or made into arable silage.
For the smallholder kale is a rather laborious crop to feed.
I have occasionally grown a field of kale and swedes in alternating six-row bouts for strip grazing.
The kale (frost-hardy thousand-headed variety) acts as a wind-break to protect the swedes, and is relished by sheep as well as cattle.
The thousand-headed and dwarf thousand-headed varieties are the hardiest; the marrow-stemmed are more palatable but not so frost-resistant.
Turnips
Common turnips are quicker growing than mangolds or swedes, but are not frost-resistant and do not keep so well in a clamp.
They are generally broadcast with rape in midsummer as a nurse crop for a grass ley, and grazed off before Christmas for fattening lambs.
The white-fleshed varieties are the quicker growing and heaviest croppers, but are the least hardy and poorest keepers.
The yellow-fleshed, ‘hardy green’ turnips are more frost-resistant and better keepers, but slower to mature.
Forage rape
Rape is an open-leaf brassica which yields a quick, heavy crop of palatable foliage.
It is most frequently sown with turnips (see above) as a nurse crop for grass.
The most common mistake is to broadcast too much seed producing such a heavy crop that the grasses are smothered.
For a nurse crop ½ kg. (or at the most ¾ kg. plus ¼ kg. of turnips) to the acre is ample; it is not easy to broadcast such a small quantity by itself, but mixed with the grass seeds, it can be sown successfully by fiddle or seed barrow.
Potatoes
Few smallholders will be interested in growing potatoes as a cash crop.
In a few upland areas, however, it might be profitable to grow a small patch for certified seed.
Most smallholders will grow enough for their own use in the vegetable garden or plant a few rows with the swedes or mangolds in their roots field.
Potatoes need soil with plenty of humus, which should be worked into a good fine tilth.
The ground is normally ridged, the tubers are planted in the furrows and the ridges are then ‘split’ to cover them.
The smallholder, growing only a few rows, will probably ‘dibble’ the tubers into the original ridges by hand, thereby saving the subsequent ridging operation.
If possible the crop should be lifted when the ground is reasonably dry, the potatoes are then spread on a dry barn floor before sorting into ‘are’, ‘seed’, and ‘chat’ sizes — the latter for animal feeding.
They should be clamped in reasonably dry conditions with adequate protection against frost.
I store potatoes in sacks under straw in a loft.
A note of warning: do not be tempted to wash the mud off potatoes with a hose, as they will not store well in the clamp if you do.
Other root crops
There are several other crops which may be of use to you to suit particular conditions.
If you are near the right markets, you may concentrate on horticultural crops for sale, but that is beyond the scope of this book.
Cabbages and other brassicas may be sown in specially prepared seed-beds and transplanted into the fields, or may be sown like swedes direct and singled later.
The ‘headlands’, where the horses or tractors turn at either end of the ridges, constitute too large a proportion of a smallholder's roots field to be allowed to lie fallow, but they cannot be cultivated and sown until the inter-row hoeing is completed.
To overcome this waste, I sow several hundred extra brassicas in the greenhouse in March (cabbage, red cabbage, brussels sprouts, cauliflower, and broccoli), bed them out at four-inch spacing in the vegetable garden in early May and then transplant them at two-foot intervals into the headlands after horse-hoeing in June.
Waste of land is thus avoided, and there is a surplus of top-quality produce for sale in late autumn and winter.
Any unsold can be fed to cattle or sheep.
Cow cabbage is a useful, frost-hardy crop that can yield as much or more fodder than swedes.
It can be grazed in situ or cut and carted.
It does not store in the clamp.
Catch Crops
Catch crops, which are grown as a bonus between the main courses of a rotation, can be very worth while provided they do not interfere with the cultivation and growing of main crops, cause undue proliferation of weeds, or form a ‘disease link’ between susceptible main crops.
Catch crops are usually sown in late summer or early autumn immediately after harvest, for grazing in early winter and again in the spring before ploughing for the next main crop.
They may also be grown to plough in as green manure.
Forage catch crops include rye, oats, rape, turnips, and Italian (annual) rye-grass.
Mustard, tares, and vetches are very quick growing and make good green manure; mustard is also useful as a tonic when grazed by sheep before ploughing in.
Catch crops should be sown after minimal cultivation of the stubble as soon as the harvest is cleared.
In the North and West it may not be worth while sowing a catch crop after a late harvest, particularly if the ground is wet.
In a late spring, the catch crop may not be ready to graze off in time to prepare a good tilth for the ensuing main crop.
Field cultivations
Cultivations are carried out for three reasons: to improve the soil crumb structure and so create an ideal seed-bed for the crop; to uproot and kill weeds; and to bury turf or crop residues where they will rot down and not compete with the ensuing crop.
The methods used vary enormously with the type and depth of soil, the climate, and the crop to be grown.
Every held operation using tractors or horses inevitably causes some compaction and damage to soil structure; it should therefore be the farmer's aim to create the desired effect with the minimum of passes at exactly the right time.
This is an art which can be mastered only with experience.
Every operation will cause the loss of some soil moisture; in dry conditions, therefore, cultivation should be kept to a minimum.
The danger of working wet land has already been mentioned in Chapter 4.
Mechanical tillage (apart from rolling) is designed to turn over soil or break down clods into tilth crumbs of a suitable size.
Overdone, it can create an unstable, flour-like tilth which will turn to porridge and pan in wet weather, preventing water from percolating to the subsoil.
Carried out in the wrong weather conditions it can produce the opposite to the desired effect.
The ideal structure is created by plant and animal life in the soil: man's efforts to produce it mechanically are, at best, a poor substitute for nature.
Nevertheless, where land is cropped regularly, there are bound to be times when the soil life is reduced or inhibited to a point where it fails to rebuild the damaged structure.
Cultivations are then the only alternative until a grass break or green manure can allow soil life to regenerate and resume its proper role.
Ploughs
To bury turf or stubble, one must turn the topsoil over, either with a spade or a plough.
The living topsoil is seldom more than six inches deep; if one digs or ploughs deeper, one inevitably puts subsoil on the surface and buries the active flora and fauna below the level where they can thrive and do most good.
For burying, a long-boarded general-purpose or lea plough does the cleanest job, turning up an unbroken, shiny furrow.
To break up clods, aerate the topsoil, and create the beginnings of a crumb structure, a semi-digger or digger plough is preferable.
It has a shorter, more abrupt mould-board, which breaks the furrow but does not bury rubbish so cleanly.
Ridging ploughs, with double (left and right) mould-boards, are used to set up ridges for potatoes and roots.
They vary in size from hand-operated garden tools to three-bodied tractor-mounted implements.
Cultivators
For stirring the topsoil without inverting it, and for breaking down half-rotted turf and clods, a wide range of cultivators is available.
Disc harrows consisting of gangs of concave steel discs are dragged at an angle to the line of draught.
They are used to cut up turf and consolidate a seed-bed, particularly after ploughing an old sward.
Some highly skilled farmers, particularly in dry areas, prefer disc harrows to the plough, believing that it is never wise to invert the topsoil.
In wet areas, weeds and turf re-root and grow quickly and it is not easy to work up a clean tilth unless they are well buried and allowed to rot.
Chisel ploughs are heavy rigid- or spring-tined cultivators which break up and stir the topsoil.
They can work at speed, and make several passes in less time than it would take to plough the same area with mould-board equipment.
Like discs, they do a cleaner job in dry than in wet conditions.
They require a powerful tractor, and are unlikely to be used on a smallholding.
Nevertheless, the principle of chisel ploughing has much to recommend it in the right conditions.
Rigid-tined cultivators or ‘grubbers’ are very useful for breaking up consolidated or panned soil (for instance, in the spring after a root crop), and can often replace the mould-board plough in the first stage of working down a tilth.
They require considerable power, and are easily damaged on stony ground.
Spring-tined cultivators with tines at about six-inch spacing, are much lighter than chisel ploughs.
They can work down an excellent tilth after ploughing so long as there is no unrotted turf.
They do not readily penetrate a panned surface.
Rotovators and other cultivators driven by the tractor power take-off can produce a fine tilth in one pass, and are sometimes used to replace all other implements.
They are particularly useful when preparing a seed-bed for roots, but can destroy soil crumb structure by reducing it to ‘flour’ causing desiccation in dry weather and panning in wet.
They also have a tendency to chop up the roots of couch grass and docks, causing the spread of these weeds.
Tractor-mounted rotovators are expensive to buy and to operate, but small, manually controlled machines are useful for garden and inter-row field cultivations on a smallholding.
Spike harrows come in many shapes and sizes; the zig-zag, with staggered rows of spikes, being the most common.
They are used for the final stages when working down a tilth and levelling the surface once the large clods and turf have been broken.
Heavy spikes can be useful in breaking a surface pan in grassland or in growing cereals, and for aerating and reducing moss in swards.
I use light spike harrows for covering cereal seeds sown direct onto freshly ploughed land.
Chain harrows generally have spikes on one side and are plain on the other.
They are used to cover grass seeds and for final levelling of a tilth, but their main use is for spreading dung and molehills and scratching the surface of grassland after grazing or before shutting up for hay.
Hoes
Hoes are used for the control of weeds between the rows of root crops.
Various blades or discs can be fitted to uproot the weeds either between ridges or on the flat.
Great care must be taken to set the hoe up and steer it accurately so that the blades run close to the crop without damaging the seedlings.
Accurate ridging and drilling make hoeing much easier.
Inter-row hoes may be single-row (horse-drawn) or multi-row tractor-mounted implements.
Hand hoes of the Dutch or triangular pattern are used for singling roots and weeding in the row.
This task is straightforward in a fine, well-worked tilth, but can be a nightmare in badly cultivated soil containing unrotted turf, and if inter-row hoeing has been inaccurate.
Rollers
Rollers are used for consolidation of the surface to conserve moisture and press seeds into contact with the soil.
They are also used, on occasions, to break large clods.
They should be used with care to avoid over-consolidation and destruction of soil structure, and never used in wet conditions.
Flat rolls are used for levelling grassland and burying small stones before shutting up for hay.
Cambridge rolls, with independent ribbed rings, are ideal for pressing cereal and grass seeds into the soil.
The ridged surface that results tends to prevent panning.
To acquire the art of field cultivation is a lifetime's work.
You must know your soil intimately in every corner of every field and at every stage of its structure through the seasons.
You must understand the climate and how it affects the soil.
You must master the characteristics of your implements and power sources until you can handle them instinctively in all conditions, and you must keep them well maintained so that they are always ready to be used when the right moment occurs.
Direct drilling
Direct drilling is a new technique in which seeds are drilled direct into the ground without previous cultivation.
Special drills have been developed with heavy discs or modified rotovators instead of the usual light coulters.
These cut slits in the turf or stubble into which the seeds and fertilizers are dropped.
There are enormous advantages to this system: the saving in time, the preservation of soil structure, the conservation of moisture, the buildup of organic matter in the topsoil and the maintenance of the earthworm population (normally reduced by conventional cultivations).
There are also disadvantages which could, on balance, rule the system out for organic farmers and smallholders: turf or trash are not buried, so stubble must be burnt or grass destroyed by a herbicide before drilling takes place.
It is claimed that the herbicides used (including paraquat, delapon, aminotrazole, and glyphosate) are neutralized on contact with the soil and do not harm soil life, and that earthworms actually increase under this system.
If this could be proved beyond doubt , direct drilling would fit in well with the organic philosophy.
The drills are too expensive for a smallholding, and even in the hands of a contractor, the technique (including spraying) is not cheaper than conventional tillage.
Perennial weeds such as couch or coltsfoot are more difficult to control, and slugs, which shelter and multiply in the deep, hard-sided slits, can become a serious pest.
Winter cereals are slow to establish, and must be sown earlier: this is apparently because there is a tendency for stubble or killed turf to be pushed down into the slits with the seed where it can create anaerobic conditions leading to the formation of toxic substances such as acetic acid.
But one might be forgiven for doubting if this is the most likely cause of the toxic side-effects of direct drilling!
Harvesting hay and cereals
The value of all crops, but particularly hay and cereals, can be greatly reduced by bad luck or bad management at harvest time.
The weather can upset the best laid plans, but the man who is ahead on his work and has his equipment ready in good order can take quick advantage of short spells of good weather and keep his losses to the minimum.
The farmer's prayer is to have good weather when his crop is at just the right stage to reap; the ability to judge the state of a crop can come only with considerable experience.
Hay
A hayfield is normally cut in swathes in a clockwise direction, starting one swathe in from the hedge and finishing in mid-field (see Figure 6).
The butt of the first swathe is then raked about 9 inches inwards (towards mid-field) to clear the edge of the final or ‘back’ swathe.
This back swathe is then cut in the opposite direction.
This system is used whether the field is cut by scythe, cutter bar, or rotary mower.
After cutting and initial drying of the exposed surface the swathes are turned over by hand or mechanical rake to expose the wet under-surface and to move the whole windrow onto dry ground.
It is then shaken out with fork or machine to aerate the hay and allow the wind to pass through it.
As the edges of the field are normally the most shaded and sheltered from the drying wind, the outside four to six rows are first raked towards mid-field and the rest towards the hedge.
This provides one double row four to six rows in from the hedge and this row requires specially careful tedding.
The second turning starts at the outside edge turning the whole field including the double row towards the hedgerow.
The third turning starts in the resulting gap in mid-field and turns the whole field towards the centre, and so on.
Getting the cut hay fit to cart or put on tripods may take anything from two days (in ideal conditions) to several weeks.
A typical day's turning and tedding could start as soon as the dew is off the ground.
The windrows or swathes are then turned over onto dry ground.
This turn is followed immediately by tedder or hay forks and the swathes fluffed up and aerated.
If the day is windy without much sun, the swathes should be high and narrow; if very sunny and without wind a wide row is better.
Particular attention should be paid to the double row, to hay lying in the shadow of trees and hedges, and to the inevitable lumps at the corners.
The hay may then be left until mid-afternoon and the whole process repeated.
Before sunset (and particularly if a shower is expected) each row can be raked into a large number of small cocks, or rowed up into narrow swathes.
This reduces the surface wetted by dew or shower and exposes a greater area of bare ground to the early sun the following morning.
It is then possible to start the next day's turning a bit earlier than would otherwise be possible.
When the hay is fit to cart, bale, or tripod (and only experience can tell you when it is ‘singing’) it may be raked two rows into one (and possibly four into one).
If it is to be baled or carted it is most important that it is well and evenly dried.
It is often possible to bale the centre of the field a day before the edges and double row.
Tripodding of hay and cereals is practised widely in the Alps and Scandinavia where good drying conditions are rare.
The principle is to support the crop above the ground and to allow the air to circulate freely through it.
The crop settles onto the tripod and forms a natural ‘thatch’, which sheds all rain except in a severe gale.
The outside thatch is bleached by sun and weather, but the crop inside dries green and succulent, providing very high feed value.
Hay may also be put into cocks on the ground.
If it is already well dried and can be carted in a few days, this method involves less work than tripodding.
But cocks cannot stand much bad weather, and the portion on the ground is usually spoiled.
Crops can be safely cocked or loaded onto tripods at least a day before they are fit to bale or cart: a most important factor in unsettled weather conditions.
Although tripodding involves an additional operation (and unnecessary extra work in good weather), in high-rainfall areas it will often reduce the need for extra turning and tedding and the risk of crop loss or damage.
Once on tripods the crop is safe until help is available and conditions right for carting.
There are many designs of tripod varying from interlocking A-frames to simple uprights made from the tips of larch or spruce trees.
Thin crops on exposed hillsides are better on the smaller supports.
A good general purpose tripod using the minimum material for the maximum load is illustrated in Figure 7.
You will need about ten tripods per acre.
Spruce trimmings from forestry plantations are cheap, and with the heavy wire triangles make a strong and effective structure.
These tripods can be dismantled and stored in the minimum space and used without maintenance for many years.
The method of loading (see Figure 8) is simple; you start at one corner of the loading poles and work clockwise around the tripod, keeping the corners well built up.
The hay is laid across the poles (which are supported on the trestles) and lower wire triangle, leaving a small air space where the hay meets in the middle of the tripod.
Similar loading continues onto the upper triangle (no space can be left in the middle), still keeping the corners well built up, and finally a cap is built over the tripod tips.
The final shape is as shown: the top is narrow and the sides slope steeply.
The trestles and loading poles are removed and the entire weight then rests on the tripods and wires.
Finally a continuous length of baler twine is threaded under the legs and over the top, pulled quite tight and tied halfway up the load.
This can be tightened daily as the load settles, and will protect the stack against wind.
Figure 9 shows how to set up a tripod on a slope.
Cereals for threshing
On medium-sized and large farms, cereals are normally harvested by combine, which cuts, threshes, and winnows the grain in one operation.
The straw (and weed seeds) are left on the field to be burnt or baled later.
The crop must be cut before it is dead ripe to avoid shedding of grain, and because it does not stand in the sheaf to harden, it usually requires artificial drying.
a combine, which only works for a few days or weeks in the year is far too costly for a smallholder, who must either rely on a contractor or work with simpler equipment.
The mowing of cereals for threshing involves binding into sheaves with the grain heads at one end.
This may be done with a reaper and binder or by scythe fitted with a special cradle.
Cutter-bar and rotary mowers are rather unsuitable because they leave the swathe lying in the direction of cut with heads and butts mixed; it is then difficult to pick up, sort, and bind the sheaves.
Old binders can still be found at farm sales, but few are in good working order and spare parts and canvases may cost more than the machines themselves.
On a smallholding the scythe is still a sensible, economic proposition in the hands of a skilled workman.
A razor-sharp edge is essential; by the time the operator has achieved this, he will also have acquired the basic mowing swing and overcome the inevitable backache.
There is no substitute for practice and experience.
The normal swing of a scythe (when mowing hay) is a circular sweep from right to left.
This cuts most crop for least work but leaves the windrow in a continuous ‘rope’ with heads and butts mixed.
A modified swing, straight across the line of the windrow leaves the butts to the left but this is harder and slower work.
By fitting a light wooden cradle to the scythe (see Figure 10) the normal circular swing leaves the crop lying with butts to the right ready to pick up and bind.
The binder can then shuffle down the wide row gathering a sheaf onto his insteps; he then picks it up and binds it with straw or twine (see Figure 11).
The sheaves can then be ‘stooked’ into fours, sixes, or eights, or loaded onto tripods to dry and harden.
In an exceptionally dry year (when straw is already dried out at mowing time) the corn may be carted without stooking, but normally it should be left in the field for a week or more for the straw to dry and the grain to harden.
When carted to barn or rick the sheaves are stacked butts-out in such a way that the heads are not exposed to weather or birds.
It is then wise to thresh as soon as possible to avoid loss to rats and mice.
Dredge Crops
In wet countries, cereals are often made like hay and fed to livestock ‘in the sheaf’(in other words, straw and grain together).
Oat and barley straw is softer and more palatable than wheat and rye, and thus the most suitable for feeding in the sheaf.
Dredge crops, consisting of mixtures of oats, barley, and peas, with sometimes a little wheat, are also fed in this way.
The crop is normally spring sown and should consist of varieties likely to ripen together.
The crop is harvested a bit green to avoid the seed being cast, and made like hay.
It may be baled or carted loose: baling gives greater protection against rats and mice.
Cereal straw is much coarser than hay, and air circulates more easily through it.
You can therefore put such a fodder crop onto tripods or a fence when damp, confident that it will dry out, so long as it is not loaded too tight.
These crops may be cut with tractor-mower as the lie of the straw is unimportant.
A Tyrolean fence is most suitable for drying dredge crops (see Figure 12).
After first construction and adjustment it can be erected and dismantled quickly: provided anchorages and connections are well made, it is trouble-free.
It is loaded from the bottom wire upwards and the natural settling of the crop makes big air tunnels under each wire.
It is better than tripods for a really wet crop since the crop may be put up the day it is cut even in rainy weather.
Fences may also be used for hay, but are not suitable for corn-bound in sheaves.
You will need about 150 yards of fence per acre.
The foundation of a successful fence is its anchorage.
If trees or solid gate posts are not available — and they are seldom found in the right places — strong artificial anchorages must be provided.
These may be made from fencing stakes driven at an angle, the top of the first being windlassed back to the bottom of the second, and so on.
It is well worth spending time to get the anchorages securely placed in line with the fence.
It can be infuriating if an anchor gives when the fence is loaded.
It is equally important to ensure that all joints and connections between the wires, uprights, and anchorages are properly made and strong enough for the job (see Figure 13).
When first setting up a fence it takes time to adjust the three wires at the tackle end so that they are under equal tension (the far end having already been secured to a strong chain link, which in turn is fastened to its anchorage).
When approximately equal tension has been achieved, with no load on the fence, the three wires can be marked at the correct length and fastened securely to a similar chain link which will eventually receive the hook of the straining tackle.
The fence is then strained fairly tight and is ready to load, the block and tackle being left in place.
The weight of the load will tighten the wires and put a tremendous strain on the whole system.
It is equally important to see that the fence is well braced laterally with tripods at the ends and every 30 yards along its length.
A gale may otherwise blow the whole fence over.
The standard tripod used for haymaking (as earlier described) is ideal for this purpose; the middle leg is dropped into a one-foot-deep hole and the other two spread at right angles to the line of the fence.
The crop is raked towards the fence from either side and loaded onto the wires with a fork, starting with the bottom wire, until there is no room beneath the second wire.
It will settle and drape itself on either side forming a natural, water-shedding thatch.
The same procedure is followed on the second and top wires, the latter taking a bigger load than the first two.
The following day the whole fence can be raked down from both sides to make it shed rain better, and the rakings piled on top.
Before dismantling the fence, it is wise to number the three wires as they are of slightly different lengths.
They may then be rolled onto a simple reel, which may be made from a 5 — gallon oil drum, and are ready for next year.
This type of fence is very quickly and easily erected in the second and subsequent years if the materials are carefully put away; it is the initial preparation and setting up that takes the time.
Harvesting by simple methods, and drying crops on tripods and fences, may seem, at first sight, a wastefully laborious business.
At the other extreme, modern, mechanized methods would make economic nonsense on a smallholding.
The secret is to find the right balance in which the safety and high quality of the harvested crop is of paramount importance.
If you can get the crop off the ground and impervious to weather quickly, it hardly matters if the subsequent carting and storing are laborious — wait until you have guests to help.
In a good year you may have done unnecessary work; in a bad one the harvest could be safe whilst others are still struggling with their expensive machinery.
Storing hay and straw
It is possible to store hay, straw, and corn in the sheaf in ricks outside.
Good drainage and foundations are needed in the rick-yard to keep the crops above the wet, and a skill — rare these days — is needed to build and straw-thatch a stable rick.
Feeding is difficult and laborious, and it is not easy to keep the rick waterproof, even with a plastic sheet, as it is used up.
Until you have time and money to build a barn, a rick-yard may be the only alternative.
If you have no permanent buildings, probably the quickest and cheapest temporary expedient is a plastic sheet with a sisal net to hold it down.
A second-hand railway tarpaulin is stronger but more expensive.
It is difficult to feed hay from a rick so covered because the shape is constantly changing and the top cannot be kept convex.
A simple Dutch barn on a steel, timber, or concrete frame is relatively cheap to erect.
If it is sited in a sheltered spot there may be no need for side cladding; on a windy site the rain will blow in horizontally from the eaves, particularly when the barn is nearly empty.
Such a barn is easy to load and unload and may be adapted for other uses when empty.
The old-fashioned three-bay barn — the centre bay with doors each end for loading — has much in its favour.
It offers more protection from wind and the centre bay can be used as a cart or tractor shed.
In Wales one empty bay is normally used as a holding and catching pen and the centre bay becomes the shearing shed.
On my smallholding, I have lofts above the cow-byre and have built a traditional-style three-bay barn of concrete blocks and slate roof.
The concrete walls are six feet high and from there to the eaves spaced timber cladding breaks the wind and gives good ventilation.
Granary
Threshed grain and other concentrate feeds must not only be kept dry, but also be protected from birds, mice, and rats.
They may be stored in bins or sacks, loose on the floor, or in silos.
On my farm I use three methods; most of my bulk oats are stored in a ferrocement silo which is completely weather- and vermin-proof.
Any surplus is stored in bags on the wooden loft floor above the cow-byre.
A cat and the occasional use of warfarin keep the rats and mice more or less in check.
Rolled oats, bran, and other ready-to-feed cereals are stored in 44-gallon drums with lids.
It is most convenient to have a relatively small room near the byre for mixing and storing feeds in the short term.
Harvesting roots
The harvesting of roots is not as critical as that of hay and cereals: apart from the risk of frost, the crop will not be damaged by bad weather.
Nevertheless, there can be serious problems carting in a wet autumn.
When stored, roots and potatoes need protection from frost, waterlogging, and farm animals.
So long as they are on a well-drained surface above ground-water level, moisture from above will not harm them, and clamps may be built outside anywhere sheltered from strong winds.
For ease of access and feeding, it may be more convenient to store in a building or under a lean-to roof.
Mangolds are very sensitive to frost, and must be lifted, carted, and clamped by November.
Like all the beet family, they bleed easily, and should therefore be topped leaving some of the stalk on the bulb and the roots should be cleaned but not trimmed.
I use an old butcher's knife; the sharp edge for topping and the back of the blade for cleaning the roots.
The mangolds are piled in small ‘tumps’, covered by their leaves and left for a week or ten days to sweat before they are carted.
These tumps should be placed in rows with plenty of room for a tractor and trailer to move between them.
They are later carted to a ‘clamp’ which should be sited on free-draining ground, and covered with up to a foot of straw or bracken.
This, in turn, may be covered with a layer of earth or a tarpaulin, and the clamp surrounded by a shallow ditch to prevent waterlogging.
The mangolds will remain alive in the clamp, and the stalks will be sprouting by March.
They mature in the clamp, and are normally fed from February to June.
Common turnips grow very quickly, but are neither frost-hardy nor good keepers.
They should either be grazed in situ in the autumn or early winter or, if clamped, fed before Christmas.
A tougher variety known as ‘hardy green turnips’ are generally sown with rape for autumn and winter grazing.
Swedes, which are much more frost-resistant, can be left in the field until Christmas and grazed in situ .
They will continue to grow wherever the ground is slightly above freezing.
They may be lifted and topped whenever convenient, using a sharp topping knife to trim stalks and roots quite drastically to get rid of surplus soil.
They may be carted as soon as they are lifted.
In the clamp they last well until February, but tend to rot when the weather warms up in the spring.
They are normally chopped and fed from December to mid-February.
I usually lift and clamp the best swedes and leave the smaller and damaged roots to be grazed in situ by sheep.