

Carn Mor Dearg to Ben Nevis
Carn Mor Dearg; 1223m;(OS Sheet 41; 177722); M7.
Ben Nevis; 1344m;(OS Sheet 41; 166713); M1.
THE THOUGHT OF ASCENDING BEN NEVIS ON A SATURDAY FILLED ME WITH dread.
Not because it is difficult.
Far from it.
People, for reasons best known to themselves, regularly push wardrobes or pull pianos up the motorway that calls itself the tourist path.
The only technical difficulty therefore is getting past those carrying a flat-pack fitted kitchen, or getting stuck on the path blocked by a group descending with an attractive Liberty-print sofa bed and a nest of tables.
The feature that makes it dreadful is that it is crammed with unattractive tourists throughout the summer months, shambling around 50 feet above sea level in a state of exhaustion, asking everyone if they're near the top yet.
Perhaps it's mountain snobbery to wish to avoid such a crowd, and if so then I am a mountain snob.
It's precious meeting the odd soul on a high top and passing the time of day with them, knowing that no matter who or what they are, you share the same interests in wildlife, wilderness and solitude.
It's quite another thing to share a summit with 60 people who express disappointment that there is no hot-dog stand.
However, if those who successfully gain the top, with or without the burden of living-room furniture, feel blessed with the exhilaration and wonder of their surroundings then I am happy for them, and glad they are able to share an emotion I regularly enjoy on the hills.
It's merely that if there's more than 50 of them feeling it simultaneously on the same summit then I'd rather be somewhere else.
But the Ben must be bagged, and happily it can be combined with the ascent of another massive Munro, Carn Mor Dearg, which will steer you away from the tourist path and into some grander territory.
Rashly, I chose a Saturday in early summer to pick off the two peaks.
The Ben is quite a different place in winter, equally as magnificent, but free from Pac-o-macs, folding aluminium chairs, and people who want to know who Benjamin Nevis was and why the mountain is named after him.
But once you have unfolded an ordnance survey map and made the cheese and pickle sandwiches, it's hard to change your mind, and so on a hot June day I set off up the zig-zagging tourist path from Glen Nevis at ten o'clock in the morning.
The path was built to serve an observatory that functioned at the top of the Ben at the turn of the century.
One trusts that its astronomers weren't quite the size of Patrick Moore or getting to work could have been problematic.
Easy path or not, a climb of over 4,000 feet every Monday morning would certainly make me phone in with a headache.
The track has been immaculately maintained considering the pounding it takes from trainers, brogues and sling-back stilettos, but being Britain's highest peak has elevated Ben Nevis above mere Munro status to tourist attraction.
A wooden bench a short way up strewn with cigarette ends tells you something about those who only make it that far, but then the path is a long, steep ascent for anyone unused to hill-walking.
To pass the heaving multitudes on the track, I raced up like a fell runner, unhappily only to find each time I successfully overtook what looked like a queue for an Andrew Lloyd Webber musical that there were further extensive crocodiles of people ahead.
By this time I was frothing at the mouth like a rabid dog in walking boots with the effort of running in the heat, so I gave in and resumed normal speed.
There is no course of action that will help you lose the cacophony of teenagers yelling, adults whining and children screaming, until the turn off for Carn Mor Dearg, which joyfully appears at Lochan Meall an t-Suidhe.
It's advisable therefore to assume a sociable demeanour and tolerate the company of your fellow man, rejoicing in his plain humanity all over the path.
The nice beer-bellied English gentleman with the Union Jack T-shirt and shorts, a can of lager in one hand and a cigarette in the other, has just as much right to be there as you do.
He probably thinks you're a plonker for carrying a rucksack and wearing hefty boots with gaiters when the temperature is in the eighties.
So smile, be charming, and resist the temptation to elbow small children off the path to their doom for the crime of carrying a ghetto-blaster up the hill.
From the lochan you turn north-east, back into some semblance of peace.
A cairn marks the crossroads, and although the outrageously boggy path will cover you in peat to the armpits, you may hug yourself in delight to be walking in empty country again, as the cries of ‘Look, Mam.
Why is that man pushing a bed up the hill?’ die behind you in the breeze.
However, beware of becoming overexcited that you are now on the path heading straight towards Carn Mor Dearg.
It leads only to the Charles Inglis Clark mountain hut, a prestigious private hut owned by the Scottish Mountaineering Club and hence frequented by respectable rock-climbing doctors, lawyers and accountants.
The hut is in a most peculiar situation, perched perfectly as the map would imply, to receive the maximum effect of the avalanche loading slopes behind it.
Not only that, but one imagines such huts to be found in the very heart of the wilderness, where one cannot ascend a peak and walk out in a single day, and must take shelter for the night.
Hardly the case here.
A resident at the C.I.C. hut could easily do a spot of rock-climbing, nip into Fort William to indulge in some leisurely shopping for tartan gonks and still be back in time for a sing-song round the primus stove.
Still, as long as the occupants are happy huddling in a spartan hut with the fantasy that they are men of the wilds, while people read the Daily Record under a golf umbrella and pass round the digestives a few thousand feet above them on the Ben then who can criticise?
Each to their own.
So the path must be abandoned here while you strike down to cross the Allt a' Mhuilinn and start a relentless slog to attain the ridge of Carn Mor Dearg.
From down in the corrie, the first view appears of the Ben's mighty cliffs and the spectacular Carn Mor Dearg Arête, which must be crossed to link the two peaks.
Don't imagine you can walk easily straight up on to the Arête from the bottom of the corrie, as you may get into difficulties near the top unless you've a head for heights.
It may look easy from the safety of the burn's heathery banks, but you would be wringing out your underpants if you found yourself clinging to near-vertical rock at the crest of the ridge by pursuing such a daft route.
There are of course one or two ways up the face of the Arête but personally I wouldn't advise it.
And you would miss Carn Mor Dearg which, after the relentless pull to climb on to its broad back, rewards you with the most fabulous views, and an easy walk to its summit.
From here the cliffs of Ben Nevis are at their most dramatic, a sight sadly denied to those who take the tourist path.
They approach the Ben from its wide whale-backed side, and hence stand at the top of these cliffs without being able to view them.
As you stroll or stumble along the ridge, you are presented with a vista of deep gullies, rarely without snow, and terrifying chimneys slicing up through the rock.
To the east are the Aonachs, the brooding big beasts tamed to a degree now by poor old Aonach Mor's ski-tows, which it wears uncomfortably like a lorry driver sporting gold neck chains.
It's tricky, as someone who skis and mountaineers, to whine about the encroachment of ski developments in Scotland, especially when the developers of Aonach Mor spilt so much ink about how they were ‘conservation friendly’, they could have made a major motion picture out of their press releases.
Unfortunately, all the bleating in the world about being green can't conceal the fact that a previously wild, virgin hillside now resembles Gateshead.
They run the Gondola in the summer months too, which provides an additional worry that groups of sweet little old ladies in overcoats, support tights and patent shoes, could find themselves wandering aimlessly on top of a mountain over 4,000 feet high, without any concept of the dangers.
The next danger for me was the Arête.
Carn Mor Dearg's cairn provides a perfect view of the remaining route, with the Arête sweeping elegantly off to the south-west.
To those of us with vertigo, it fortunately reveals that the southern side of the ridge is not nearly as precipitous as the northern.
This, in plain terms, means that apart from one small section of scrambling, you can chicken out and walk along the Arête with your head bobbing safely below the crest.
Constantly at war with my vertigo, I decided not to be pathetic and strode off on the flat, step-like slabs that top the crest of the ridge.
After a spot of scrambling below the summit of Carn Mor Dearg, the only intimidating section is at the other end, just below the boulder field that will take you to the summit of the Ben.
Crampon marks on the ridge are a little disquieting.
Not because you wonder if you need them in June, but because they are long white scars instead of neat little puncture marks.
Call me suspicious, but this implies that the crampon, far from adhering steadily to the spot upon which its owner has chosen to commit his or her weight, has decided it prefers an altogether different rock and has gone for a bit of a slide.
Written in stone all along the ridge therefore are visual records of people going ‘Whoooaaargh!’ with every step.
This was not something upon which I wished to dwell, as I approached the narrowest section of the ridge.
Being Saturday, there were a number of burly walkers picking their  way over the granite from both directions which, unlike the presence of the bermuda-shorted brigade puffing their way up the other side of Ben Nevis, was curiously comforting.
As I gingerly stepped on to one last narrow slab, I met someone I knew walking the other way.
Delightful as it was to meet pleasant company in such an unlikely place, I very badly wanted to exchange our fell citations on the other side of this rock.
There, I felt, we could chat for hours without the fear of stepping back absentmindedly and continuing the conversation from a hospital bed in Fort William.
He was having none of it, so I concealed my vertiginous anxieties.
We made some small talk as I tried to fix my eyes on his face to forget that my palms were sweating and my peripheral vision was registering only sky.
The fact we were chatting about a programme on Radio 4 while standing on a dainty platform hundreds of feet tall seemed not to bother him.
It was bothering me immensely.
So I wrapped up the conversation as rudely as someone on Newsnight trying to silence a politician, just as he dealt me a social body blow.
Would I mind taking his photo on this slab with the ridge spreading out behind him?
‘Not at all,’ said my mouth.
‘LET ME OFF HERE!’ screamed the rest of me.
So pressing his camera to my eye I tried to focus on this tanned, happy man, standing with one boot over the edge of a 200- or 300-foot drop, and the other on the edge of thin air.
Who knows how the picture turned out?
So prolific was my perspiration I steamed up the viewfinder, and I imagine my acquaintance now possesses a fine set of prints featuring the edge of my thumb and some clouds.
We said our farewells and I leapt gratefully off the ridge and on to the safe path with the elegance of a stunned ox.
From here the last leg is a simple but muscle-tearing walk up a large boulder field to the summit of Ben Nevis.
The posts stuck into the rock to your right as you ascend are markers for winter to stop people going off the edge; they also double as abseil posts for a quick escape route.
There are those who think it rather offensive to erect such permanent climbing aids on a wild mountain, although we're not exactly talking a carved mahogany banister with brass handrails.
It's also somewhat perverse to complain about a few innocent posts when the top of Ben Nevis is a lofty scrapyard.
Reaching the summit from the boulder field is a strange experience.
From a steep ascent you emerge on to a surprisingly large plateau the     size of a football field, covered with cairns, memorial plaques, the ruined observatory, and of course the people you left behind on the tourist path.
The ruins of the observatory are of interest but the rest of the summit could do with a hoover.
But if you ignore the commemorative debris and assortment of international litter you Drill enjoy the most exhilarating views that can include over 100 Munros when visibility is good.
Fort William, Loch Linnhe and Loch Eil from Carn Mor Dearg
I arrived breathless, to find a large crowd and a respectable covering of snow on the summit.
The snow in June was a revelation which seemed to astonish and dismay some girls in bikini-tops with a cold-box full of beer and a shoulder bag full of Jackie Collins novels, who had clearly hoped to picnic at the top.
Britain's highest peak is not to be taken lightly.
Although mountaineers will not need reminded, the less experienced need to be constantly alerted to the fact that a hot, sunny car park does not necessarily mean a benign hill-walk.
The summit may be, and more often than not is, like Ice Station Zebra.
Never feel uncomfortable warning people you encounter halfway up a mountain who are dressed for the beach that they are taking a great risk proceeding without extra clothing and food.
You may sound like a Victorian headmaster, but how much worse would you feel to read of those people being injured, lost or  killed when you could have prevented it?
So what if they tell you to sod off and mind your own business?
At least your conscience will be clear.
Since nobody on the summit of the Ben required a ticking off, except perhaps by the fashion police, it was back on to the tourist path for the descent.
Not only can you feel smug that you bagged the Ben the hard way, you will also be handsomely rewarded by the views across Loch Linnhe as you descend.
Even depressed Fort William takes on a magnificence from this height as it glitters and reflects the late evening sun.
I avoided the mob on the path by descending 200 feet sledging on my rucksack on a long snow bank.
I hasten to add before I am taken to court by mountain men with beards that this is highly irresponsible behaviour and extremely dangerous.
Bloody good fun though.
Safety pundits will be pleased to note that I received my just desserts that evening, on unpacking my rucksack and discovering that the action had mashed a forgotten egg sandwich into my hat.
The whole walk took in excess of nine hours, so not one to consider if you want to make it home in time for Blind Date .
Don't let the volume of traffic discourage you from this superb walk.
I was thrilled by it, delighted not only by the unsurpassed views in all directions, but by the physical challenge that a walk with so much climbing and descending presents.
There is no denying that even in summer Ben Nevis is a magnificent peak, and a winter ascent for those well equipped and prepared will be a doubly stirring experience.
For those who wish to claim the peak with a selection of walnut dining-room furniture, try to avoid the hottest months of the year.
Direct sunlight plays havoc with the varnish.
Rambler, Scrambler or Dangler?
I'VE ALWAYS SAID I CLIMB MUNROS EVERYONE I GO CLIMBING MUNROS WITH
says they climb Munros.
We phone each other and say, ‘Do you want to go and climb a Munro tomorrow?’
It seems a logical thing to say if you fancy climbing a Munro, but apparently we are living a lie.
We don't climb Munros because we are not climbers.
Now you might think that a little strange, after all the Concise Oxford Dictionary defines ‘climb, thus: ‘ascend, mount, go up (often with help of hands)’.
Yep, that just about sums up what we do on the way to the cairn, hence the use of the word climb in trying to convey to a companion exactly what it is you expect them to do when they get out of the car.
We don't say we writhe the Munros because we don't slither up them on our bellies, nor would we invite friends to hop, swim, float or jitterbug up a Munro on a Saturday.
The term ‘climb’ has done us proud for years.
The reason it is now unacceptable to say it is that at some point in recent history, rock-climbers held a secret annual general meeting and decided to keep the word to themselves.
They climb, we merely walk.
Climbers also like to call themselves ‘danglers’.
This, I trust, has no connection with the  fecal matter we are used to seeing hanging around the back end of a sheep, but instead refers to the fact they spend most of their weekends dangling from a rope.
The problem is that rock-climbers do all the hardest stuff in this game.
Instead of meandering up a path to the top, chatting amicably to a pal about how George Michael used to be good in Wham and passing round the butterscotch, they choose a cliff and try to reach the summit by slowly inching their way up vertical rock, pushing their fingers into tiny fissures and standing with one toe on a ledge the size of a pebble.
As you might imagine, this takes some time and is also completely mental.
So on gaining the top, where the walkers are tucking into their second  pork pie, the rock-climber needs some way to distinguish him or herself as greatly superior.
This is hard.
After all, the walkers got to the top first.
The walkers have already had their lunch.
The walkers still have some finger nails left and don't have skid marks in their boxer shorts.
The rock-climber is powerless to inspire respect.
But the revenge comes later in the pub.
Walker to rock-climber —‘So, were you out on the hill today?’
Rock-climber smiles sardonically, wiping his mouth with the back of a hairy arm.
‘Yeah.
Did an E7.’
Walker is confused.
‘Oh.
The Easains.
Nice.
A bit far away from Torridon though.
Well we did Liathach.
A lovely day's climb.,
Rock-climber chokes on beer.
Splutters through ale-soaked beard.
‘Climb?
Climb did you say?
You're talking walk in the park, matey!
I mean I did a climb — A CLIMB!
Comprende?’
Walker starts to regret starting conversation.
Looks round for escape from this man who is obviously a few co-ordinates short of a bearing, and starts to back away slowly.
‘Well, we certainly thought we were climbing, the wife and me, you know with all that pulling ourselves up over the rock and all, and what with the fact we were, well, in a manner of speaking, how can I put this, em, climbing up to the top.’
Rock-climber lunges at walker and tries to force-feed him his Yeti-gaiters until restrained.
A nasty, but not uncommon incident.
So how can the simple walker make sure he avoids such an unpleasant confrontation with a dangler?
Perhaps the most important lesson is to be able to recognise a rock-climber when you see one.
Rock-climbers make sure they have lots of metal implements swinging from them at all times.
This, I must confess, is quite sexy, in the same way that young, handsome joiners with their belt of tools strung low round their hips can make an impressionable adolescent girl want to have shelves erected.
The rock-climber is held on a rope by clipping himself on to a harness thingy (if you've come to this book for technical information, boy are you going to be disappointed) that straps round his thighs and crotch, so as a quick guide to who the climbers are in the pub, just watch for those who seem to be constantly fiddling around in their genital area.
I've noticed climbers do this a lot.
They are always hitching up underpants, scratching away happily at unspeakable things in their breeches and, with one finger, boldly trying to free their underpants    that have become lodged somewhere dark and irretrievable that we can only guess at.
Before any girls get excited at the prospect of all these crotch-obsessed men packing out Glencoe bars, and rush off to join a climbing club, I should point out they also smell like a circus tarpaulin and regard ten pints of Guinness as an aperitif.
So if we must accept that these climbers, or danglers, are kings of the mountains, then who comes next in this rigid pecking order?
It's the scramblers.
I, apparently, am a scrambler.
That means that in addition to walking up the hill with my hands in my pockets, sometimes I scramble up rocks using my hands.
Kind of obvious really.
I can't imagine I would try and scramble up over rocks using my nose, but the use of hands in the mountaineering hierarchy seems to be of prime importance.
Scramblers probably make up the majority of Munro-baggers, since to do them all you can't avoid scrambling, and will also be obliged to dangle once on the Inaccessible Pinnacle on Skye.
There's noticeably less equipment hanging from a scrambler, but pound for pound there will be more fleecy material visible.
Climbers like to break away from the usual uniform of breeches and warm top, favouring instead old tracksuit bottoms and rancid T-shirts, but the scrambler usually likes to be well turned out.
However, the easiest way to distinguish the two groups is that the walker/scrambler will stand at the bottom of a difficult and dangerous mountain looking for a safe and easy way up, and the climber/dangler will stand at the foot of a safe and easy mountain looking for a difficult and dangerous way up.
Luckily for us scramblers, there is a group even further down the mountain social scale.
They are known as ramblers.
Unfortunately I am unable to advise you how to spot a rambler in a pub, since ramblers don't go into pubs.
They either brew up tea on a little gas stove beside their car, or pop into a coffee house for a bun and a flick through The Observer Book of Birds .
Ramblers are keen on things like ‘rights of way’, even though everywhere in Scotland is a right of way to those who cause no damage.
This is because quite a lot of them are English and can't see the difference between Knoydart and Chipping  Sudbury .
They will write pamphlets and go on protest marches to keep open a path running from a new Barrett housing estate through a farmer's potato field to a scrap yard on the banks of a canal.
They seem like terribly nice people, concerned with wildlife, erosion, litter and rights of way through potato fields, but a dangler or scrambler caught in a confined space with a tenacious rambler will end up either committing an act of violence or huddling in a foetal  position in the corner, dribbling saliva from a defeated face as the rambler concludes his theory about red deer numbers.
Mountain Rescue get little trouble from ramblers, since their rambles rarely take them off a bus route, and you can sometimes spot them at the sides of the road, gazing into a hedgerow as their leader tells them a little about the history of couch grass.
Climbers make a great mistake, however, in imagining that each of these groups aspires to the dizzy heights of dangling.
This is not true.
I don't want to rock-climb.
Unlike a sport like skiing, the considerable risks are not matched with sufficient exhilaration to kindle my interest, although I wouldn't say no if a boyfriend were to slip naked into one of those clanking climbing harnesses after a hot bath and a glass of wine.
Neither do ramblers wish to scramble.
They are happy rooting around for Fly Agaric toadstools in a farmer's back garden until he sets the dogs on them, and would be miserable if you dragged them up anything taller than a caravan.
What is in dispute is who is allowed to say they went climbing.
I shall carry on using the term regardless, and any hairy man who wants to challenge me about it is welcome to a wrestle.
As long as he wears his harness.
The South Glen Shiel Ridge
Creag a' Mhaim; 947m;(OS Sheet 33; 088078); M214.
Druim Shionnach; 987m;(OS Sheet 33; 074085); M155.
Aonach air Chrith; 1021m;(OS Sheet 33; 051083); M107.
Maol Chinn-dearg; 981m;(OS Sheet 33; 032088); M166.
Sgurr an Doire Leathain; 1010m;(OS Sheet 33; 015099); M116.
Sgurr an Lochain; 1004m;(OS Sheet 33; 005104); M126.
Creag nan Damh; 918m;(OS Sheet 33; 983112); M268.
EVEN THE MOST DEDICATED MUNROIST CAN BE SIDE-TRACKED BY THE WICKED pleasures of city life.
The temptation to stay in town for a curry or a Schwarzenegger film, or both, can seriously disrupt that urge to carry on the journey up the 277 summits.
You can spot the symptoms of Munro fatigue immediately.
Gradually a long lie on a Saturday comes to mean rising at 5 p.m. in time for the Brookside omnibus, your rucksack quietly grows grey mouldy bits at the back of a dark cupboard, and The Face seems more interesting than Tom Weir's ‘My Month’.
It's healthy, of course, to have more than one burning interest in life, but weekends are precious.
To waste them cleaning out a drawer of plastic carrier bags instead of scrambling up lofty pinnacles is something you may regret.
So should you discover that you are spending more time in Safeways than on the north-bound carriageway of the A9, it's time to tackle the South Glen Shiel Ridge.
In a single day, without leaving the ridge, a fit walker can pick off seven Munros and stagger back home to an orgy of peak-ticking at the back of the Munro book.
There's no better inspiration for shrugging off slothfulness than Glen Shiel, which rewards with such a high score of tops and something worthwhile to brag about to those  who spent Saturday and Sunday vacuuming the car with a cordless hoover.
The ideal place to start this heavenly 14-kilometre trek is from the equally lovely Cluanie Inn, a hotel at the western end of Loch Cluanie.
I spent two nights there one.
summer, giving myself the immeasurable luxury of being able to start early from the hotel, still burping porridge and bacon, and return to a hot dinner, a steaming bath and a cosy bar full of fellow hill-walkers.
You can camp nearby and use the Cluanie Inn for a hot bar-meal and somewhere to consume beer beside a log fire until they throw you out, but if you have the money why deny yourself a bed for the night?
The Cluanie Inn is a fine hotel in a splendid old building, which has been extended in recent years so sensitively, soon it will be difficult for passers-by to tell the old from the new.
The new accommodation is on one floor, set round a pretty courtyard which echoes the traditional details of the existing structure.
Of course this kind of thoughtful extension is alien to most Highland hotel owners.
Their mission in life appears to be competing with one another in a race to remould their ancient and historic rural buildings into approximations of Birmingham town centre.
If only such offenders were punished by having a Radio One DJ surgically joined to them at the hip, perhaps they would understand the crime of incongruous and pig-ugly extensions.
It's a stroke of great fortune that the Cluanie Inn's proprietors are more enlightened, since the building dominates the eastern end of the glen.
As you wander along the ridge, it's a long time before you lose sight of its neat white contours, and if you take a strong pair of binoculars on your walk, you can keep an eye on how the housemaid is turning your bed down.
A long ridge-walk requires an early start, and a companion and I set off from the hotel at 8.30, toast crumbs still trembling on our lips, to attain the ridge by the first peak, Creag a' Mhaim.
It's an easy walk up a tarmac estate road to the south-east of the hotel, which gently gains height until it's time to strike up the hillside towards Munro number one.
There is no conspicuous path, but in fine weather the route could not be more obvious.
I had looked forward to a leisurely ramble amongst the hills, since we had started early and the days were long.
But as we left the tarmac road and headed up the hill I made a grave error.
We came across a small party of people sitting innocently on a rock enjoying the sunshine.
Obviously  they had risen even earlier.
They said hello cheerily as we passed, and for no particular reason other than mindless banter I concluded our exchange with some hopeless attempt at humour, which happily has been blacked from my memory.
I recall the gist of it implied that they couldn't sit there sunbathing too long if they wanted to get through all seven tops.
Not exactly side-splitting, but not grounds for assault either, one would think.
One of the men bristled visibly as the others smiled their pleasant responses.
The race was on.
Although ten full minutes passed after leaving his party swigging juice happily and pointing at the loch, a casual glance backwards revealed that they were gaining on us quickly.
This was very strange.
To have closed such a gap the niggled gentleman must have swiped the juice from his companions' lips the moment we passed and kick-started them into a sprint.
It may be a childish response, but when you have overtaken someone on a hill, it is very uncomfortable to be overtaken by them.
We stepped up the pace.
So did they.
The ridge is quickly gained and on this peach of a day was absolutely magnificent, with the hills retaining sizeable patches of spring snow that sparkled in the hazy sunshine.
Although there are no technical difficulties on this walk, the ridge rarely disappoints, and the terrain varies from narrow, dramatic sections that thrill with their mantle of cliffs, to huge grassy plains pitted with tiny alpine flowers.
The ridge presents its craggy face to the north and rolls away in steep, but somewhat tamer, banks to the south.
Unlike a ridge like the Aonach Eagach where escape is impossible until the end, it is not only feasible, but very tempting to come off the ridge and wander into the wild land of the Glenquoich forest that appears so inviting from the tops.
On a summer's day, the sun glitters on Loch Quoich, back-lighting the lonely bridge that takes a single track road to the remote Kinloch Hourn.
You can just make it out as you cross from Aonach air Chrith to Maol Chinn-dearg, with Loch Quoich sparkling behind Gleouraich, another fabulous mountain.
Slicing through Gleouraich's slopes are some incredibly well-constructed stalkers' paths.
My heart sank when I first viewed them, since huge paths marching across wild hills usually signal the coming of insensitive forestry.
But I was comforted to discover that these highways are antiquities, built by some unfortunate landowner who expected a visit from the king.
The king never turned up and the laird was left with paths on which he could hold a formula one race.
I say unfortunate laird, but of course it would have      been the unfortunate estate workers who would have hauled the pick-axes up the hill and toiled away for weeks, just so that somebody with a crown could sit on a pony that didn't stumble on his way up a mountain to shoot something.
Hard to feel sorry for the laird, who would have watched the sweating workers from his window, hands in pockets, listening for the doorbell in case the king changed his mind and dropped in for a scone.
OVERLEAF: Looking east along the South Glen Shiel Ridge
We completed the first four Munros with relative ease, since there is little rising or dropping between peaks, and cruised along a gloriously flat section of the ridge having fantasies about lunch.
There were a number of walkers now, all taking their time and drinking in the view, but the chap at our heels had now resorted to breaking away from his party to try and close the gap so obviously gnawing at his soul.
I had never done anything as crass as race on a hill-walk before, but it was starting to amuse.
Although it hardly seemed fair racing a man at least 15 years our senior, who could resist going just a little faster every time we saw his face contorted with exertion, glaring up at us like Charles Laughton in Mutiny On The Bounty ?
A lunch break would give him his chance, forcing him to make a decision whether or not to delay his own sustenance in order to overtake us as we crammed fruit cake into our faces.
We decided to halt the nonsense and stopped for a sandwich on a picturesque rocky outcrop that provided views east and west along the glen, and over to spectacular Knoydart.
The running man took his opportunity, and as he passed, followed by his less competitive, wheezing companions, clearly suffering agonies by his pace-setting, he gave us a triumphant, knowing nod.
What is more enjoyable than silently consuming chicken sandwiches surrounded by scenery that immobilises any other emotion but wonder?
Once gained, the ridge never disappoints.
The best route is east to west, as following the sun results in the treat of trying to glimpse the sea and watching the sun set.
It brings a hazard too.
Even though the wind kept the tops cool, the sun was relentless, and I foolishly changed out of my breeches into shorts for the remainder of the route.
I wonder when I will learn that on a long walk in a single unchanging direction, one will automatically go home with a left leg sporting first-degree burns and a right limb like a piece of white Italian veal?
However, elation at the beauty of the surroundings meant tandooried legs were far from my thoughts, and as we continued to the shapely Sgurr an Lochain, towering as it does over a tiny dark blue lochan, we agreed it couldn't get much better.
Although there is no mention of it on the map, I could swear that the   tiny loch has a crannog in it.
I'm sure archaeologists will rush to correct me but, from the vantage point high above it, there does seem to be a suggestion of a circular structure beneath the water, joined to the banks by a walkway.
If it is a crannog, it's in a strange place, stuck high above the glen in a corrie.
It would have taken its occupants hours to get to the Cluanie Inn for a pint from there.
Just as we stepped over a rise, we nearly fell over the boy racer and party having their lunch.
The others acknowledged us cheerily, clearly relieved to have been allowed 30 seconds for a sit-down.
He looked catatonic with rage.
As we parted, we could hear our man force-feeding his companions their scotch eggs, hurrying them along like a rowing cox.
He didn't catch us until the last peak, Creag nan Damh, where a number of ridge-walkers were gathered, basking in the delight of the afternoon and resting on their laurels after a mammoth expedition.
If you had any energy at all, you could keep height and continue to Sgurr na Sgine and on to The Saddle, but you would need thighs like Graeme Souness's.
It's here you come to realise three things.
1.
The South Glen Shiel Ridge is fabulous.
2.
You have seven miles to walk back to the hotel as you haven't got two cars.
3.
You're knackered.
Very gingerly, everybody started to question each other about transport.
No, nobody had left a car at the bottom of this hill, and, yes, everybody was looking to cadge a lift.
OVERLEAF: Looking west along the South Glen Shiel Ridge
By this time our pursuer had joined the merry band on the peak, and we could hear his companions gasping not far behind him.
We had beaten him, but he played a final trump card.
He had two cars.
They were at the bottom of the hill.
He was going back to the Cluanie Inn.
Yes, there was probably room for us all.
Normally, walking along tarmac is a piece of cake after the rocky excursion along a ridge.
But in summer the A87 is crammed with caravan-dragging buffoons who drive as though wearing strait-jackets.
The choice for the pedestrian is either a leap into the ditch for safety, or a nasty death smeared over their ridiculous tin box like a dripping red caravan-club sticker.
There was nothing else for it.
It was time to give in and do a bit of grovelling.
All the way down we listened with feigned interest to our man's proud record of clock-beating on other hills.
We tolerated his hilarious English mispronunciations of the Scottish hills that had taken him less than three hours, keeping in mind the thought of that comfortable car seat at the bottom of this rough heather slope every time we felt like killing him.
At last we arrived at his car, where several other walkers were hanging around looking dolefully along the road.
Looking South towards Loch Quoich
I couldn't do it.
I just couldn't take a journey in a confined space with a man who pronounced Sgurr na Ciste Duibhe as Sisty Dub and didn't think it was as good as the Lake District.
Just as this realisation dawned, a luckless couple drew into the parking space to read a map.
Before they knew what was happening we had opened their door, asked for a lift, said thank you and got in.
A good tip in hitching is to approach your intended lift when stationary.
It's practically impossible to say no to someone who's actually loaded their rucksack into your boot and clipped on their seatbelt.
With little choice they drove us sullenly to the hotel.
As you drive, or walk, God forbid, back along the road, it's hard to believe you have travelled all that way at a lofty 3,000 feet.
The ridge seems massive from the road, and when we tried to tell our driver where we'd been, he grunted in disbelief.
Well it may have been a grunt of irritation that his lovely hire-car was steaming up with two sweaty, stinking hill-walkers who had forced their way in uninvited, but I prefer to think disbelief.
The cold pint at the Cluanie Inn was nectar and, as we polished it off, our man and his party arrived.
Not only had we beaten him on the ridge, but without cars we had unwittingly beaten him back to the hotel.
The walkers who had wangled the lift with him looked as if they had been told they had a week to live, suggesting the car conversation must have fulfilled my expectations.
We bought him and his friends a drink which gave him a chance to quiz us on our movements for the next day.
My companion's eyes glittered impishly as he said we would be combining The Five Sisters with The Saddle and Sgurr na Sgine, hoping to be finished by 5 p.m.
‘It'll take an early start,’ he said.
We retired to a hot bath and glimpsed them only briefly over a sweet trolley later at dinner.
The next morning was drizzling, damp and miserable and our man and his party were not at breakfast.
‘You're not first up this morning,’ said the waiter.
‘That other lot left at 6.30 to do The Five Sisters and The Saddle.
We ate a leisurely breakfast and then drove to Skye to have some scones.
Creag Meagaidh
Creag Meagaidh; 1130m;(OS Sheets 34 and 42; 418875); M26.
SOMETIMES EVEN THE EASIEST OF MOUNTAINS CAN DEFEAT YOU.
THERE IS nothing particularly difficult about Creag Meagaidh, unless it comes up in a spelling test, yet it took me three attempts to get to the top of the damned thing.
It's only in recent years that I've learned to use the weather forecast before contemplating a hill-walk.
Millions of pounds spent on satellite technology is wasted when people like me ignore Michael Fish yelling on television from behind some sandbags, ‘For God's sake take cover!’ as we set off to claim a Munro with a song in our hearts.
It was just such foolhardy behaviour that enabled me continually to miss the summit of Creag Meagaidh.
The first attempt was in winter, precisely at that dark, depressing period when the sun can barely be bothered rising for more than 20 minutes before it packs in and hands over to nightfall.
The weather on this occasion seemed ideal.
A heavy snowfall left the hills deliciously inviting and the sky was clear and bright.
Two of us set off up the long path from Aberarder at the mind-bogglingly stupid time of 11.30 a.m.
In the mists of time I cannot recall why we started so late.
Perhaps there was a party the night before, maybe we hung around in bed too long doing moist wicked things, or more likely I just slept in.
Whatever the excuse, we reached Lochan a' Choire at 3 p.m. when the sun was starting to remember it was needed elsewhere.
Simple arithmetic told us that even if we gained the summit we would be stumbling back down in the dark like late cinema-goers trying to find their seats.
As we sat at the loch eating a cold lunch, deciding who could first pin the blame on the other for messing up the day, we heard voices from the cliffs surrounding the lochan.
A third of the way up a vicious-looking  ice-climb were two men, slowly hacking an unenviable route with axes and crampons.
By this time it was past 3.30, the light was fading fast, and the blizzard that the ignored weatherman had warned would sweep the Highlands was whipping into action.
That's odd, we thought.
Perhaps they're going to spend the night on the mountain.
Maybe they're top mountaineers training for a Himalayan expedition that requires constant overnight bivvying on icy rock faces.
So we ignored them and went home.
Unfortunately they turned out to be two fools who didn't realise the time, and brought Mountain Rescue out combing the hill for them next morning.
Luckily, they had survival gear and were found alive and well, albeit a trifle sheepish, at the top of the climb.
I felt rather guilty after that episode.
When should you tell Mountain Rescue that you think there might be somebody in danger?
After all, if those two boys had died, it would have been on our consciences that we saw them get into difficulty and did nothing.
On the other hand, imagine the embarrassment of calling a full-scale search out for somebody who is not only not in peril, but is mightily cheesed off to be awoken from a deep sleep by an RAF Sea-King helicopter blowing the filling out of their sleeping-bag?
Not to mention the danger you put the members of the Mountain Rescue team in by expecting them to stagger about in the snow with sticks when they should be back home with their slippers on watching McGregor's Scotland .
I feel the same way about the police.
When two men tried to break into my kitchen via a skylight window at midnight while I was at home, I made the grave error of dialling 999.
Not only did the street fill with sirens and blue lights like an episode of Kojak, the cops that piled up the stairs were too fat to get through the attic space and pursue the men.
That left me with dozens of portly gentlemen in blue who spent the rest of the night eating my shortbread, drinking my coffee and asking me if I knew Terry Wogan.
Next time I will simply invite the burglars in.
I'm certain they at least would refuse a second slice of cake.
Even though the plight of those two climbers should have released me from my fear of calling for help on behalf of others, I'm still wary unless I come across someone whose legs are a few hundred yards from their body.
Reminding others that they don't have much light left, or are not equipped for the top, is quite different.
But I live in fear of calling out the rescue team for a solitary figure glimpsed high on a darkening summit, only to find it's Hamish McInnes nipping back up to fetch a dropped mitten.
That was the first attempt at Creag Meagaidh.
The second, on a blustery Sunday in October, was more frustrating.
Ignoring the weather forecast yet again, a number of us packed our rucksacks and headed up that interminable path to Coire Ardair.
Meanwhile, canny Munroists who paid attention to satellite technology, which indicated a depression deeper than Christmas in Barlinnie, were sitting at home by the fire eating cheese on toast.
We should have taken some heed from the birch trees halfway up the track which were bending double in the gale, and from the fact that five minutes after leaving the car, we were wetter than the Scottish Sub-Aqua team.
This, however, was a determined pack and we were not going to be put off by small obstacles like being unable to stand up or walk forward.
This time I at least got past the lochan and up on to the boulder field that leads to the window.
The window is a  col neatly dividing Creag Meagaidh and another Munro, Stob Poite Coire Ardair but, more significantly, it acts as a highly efficient wind tunnel.
As we lurched up the soaking, slimy boulders towards it, like a team of wet-look mime artists walking against the wind, one of our party stopped and said, ‘Let's go back.’
At least we all hoped that's what he said.
In the gale it sounded like, ‘Ehh... oaaah... aaaack.’
We were back in the car with the heater on before you could say ‘Who finished the soup?’ and another attempt was foiled.
The last failure was human.
I made the mistake of telling two non-hill-walking friends that they could easily manage Creag Meagaidh.
The day was perfect.
A crisp winter morning greeted us with snow quilted in twinkling ice crystals.
The time was 9 a.m., the sky was clear and blue, and nothing was going to stop me this time.
What I failed to realise was that to those who never walk up mountains, visiting the bank, the post office and the dry cleaners on the same day is considered a triathlon.
My friends had to have their first sit-down in sight of the car.
I was heartbroken.
By 12.30 we had just made the birch wood and had to admit defeat.
Friendship is more important than mountaineering, and so for their sakes I told them they'd done very well and we turned back to the prospect of a more leisurely Sunday afternoon, with colour supplements, cats, coffee and carpets to lie on.
I cast one longing glance up at the cliffs of Coire Ardair, where the sun was glancing off the icy tips of gleaming rock, and I knew that next time I'd get the sucker.
It was therefore with a fit companion that I tackled the brute for a       fourth attempt.
This time we planned to take in two other Munros on the northern ridge of the corrie, Carn Liath and Stob Poite Coire Ardair, before dropping down to the window and back up on to Creag Meagaidh's vast plateau.
OVERLEAF: Looking east along Loch Laggan
It was an amazing frosty morning, with a strange, silent mist hanging only a few hundred feet high.
My heart sank at the prospect of yet again missing the top in the thick fog, but we had a great treat in store.
We left the path, shrouded in a beautiful and eerie veil of mist, coloured pink with the rising sun, and clambered up the hillside towards the ridge of Cairn Liath.
My friend was about 50 feet above me and almost out of sight in the fog, when I heard him yell at me to ‘come and see this’.
Those who have never been up a mountain when temperature inversion is at work have missed the most splendid sight.
We were standing above the clouds, which formed a thick, bulbous ocean at our feet, out of which in every direction rose mountain tops like islands.
The mist was breaking against the peaks like waves, the sun was radiant in a perfectly clear blue sky above us, and I was awe-struck.
Ahead of us we could see our ridge, standing clear of the cloud, brushed purple in the strange early light.
The ridge-walk was one of the most wonderful I can recall, as the sea of cloud broke up   only on gaining the Creag Meagaidh plateau, and the day remained crystal clear until the last.
The Window, Creag Meagaidh
Some may find the summit of Creag Meagaidh a little disappointing after the drama of its cliffs and corrie.
The top is not visible from the road, and were it not for a sizeable cairn you could miss it altogether.
The plateau is huge, flat and featureless, and tests the map-reading ability of those who arrive in anything but perfect visibility.
A common error is to think that the large cairn first encountered when gaining the plateau from the window is the true summit.
It is in fact something called Mad Meg's Cairn and nobody knows what the hell it's doing there.
The Nature Conservatory Council, who thankfully own Creag Meagaidh, have a couple of suggestions, including it being a monument to a lost lover or an old protection for a rowan tree.
Gardeners amongst you will doubtless argue that piling a ton and a half of rubble on top of your sapling is a somewhat off-beat method of protection, so I'll take the old lost love yarn, thanks.
I'm pleased the NCC bought the mountain, since a commercial forestry firm had plans to cover the whole area in vile rows of sitka spruces to help chat-show hosts and snooker players in England make a killing on their tax  bills.
Thankfully it's now a nature reserve, which has the added advantage of offering free access during the stalking season.
After so many attempts, that day could not have been more rewarding, and I've since been back at its summit twice.
So don't let bad weather discourage you from claiming a targeted peak.
It's not a defeat to turn back and return on a better day.
You can look forward to some sort of land away to quarry gravel for motorways, like someone I can think of a view and, let's face it, the mountain will still be there when you come back.
That is unless it's sold to the sort of person who blasts half of his land away to quarry gravel for motorways, like someone I can think of on the west coast.
If he buys your Munro, best get it bagged before the deeds change hands.
The Grey Corries
Stob Choire Claurigh; 1177m;(OS Sheet 41; 262739); M14.
Stob Coire an Laoigh; 1115m;(OS Sheet 41; 240725); M37.
I HAVE A PHOBIA ABOUT BEING CAUGHT DRIVING MY CAR ON A PRIVATE road, although I have no idea where this unreasonable fear emanates from.
Perhaps when pregnant with me, my mother was hit on the head by a ‘No Vehicular Access’ sign, and her understandable anxiety transmitted itself to my foetal subconscious.
One day I will pluck up the courage to quiz her.
In the meantime I must live with the fact that I sweat like a Sun reader at a philosophy lecture every time my wheels crunch over someone else's gravel.
For this reason I was apprehensive about the approach to The Grey Corries, a fine ridge-walk to the south of Spean Bridge.
The Scottish Mountaineering Club's Munros book mentioned a private road that ‘at the time of writing’ no objection was made to vehicles being taken along to the base of the walk.
British Aluminium own the land, and as soon as I realised I would have to trespass with a car, my imagination started its fevered travail.
I would drive a few yards through the gate marked ‘private’ and instantly be set upon by men wielding knobbly aluminium clubs, or I would return from the walk to find my car had been smelted into a set of folding tubular garden furniture.
There was only one thing for it.
Go in someone else's car.
All I could offer was a hatchback whose tyres puncture as soon as it catches sight of anything other than motorway.
My friend, however, possessed a Toyota Hilux four-wheel-drive pick-up truck, and there can be no better vehicle in which to trespass than one that looks as if it would get your daughter pregnant and drink all your beer.
A feeble little hatchback in the Highlands  deserves to be towed away.
After all, when have you seen a hatchback contain anything other than daft city folk ‘out for a run’?
At least country bods use pick-ups to carry dung and move sheep.
With the pick-up truck, if we learned to smoke roll-ups and wore denim jackets over our fleecy tops, we might be mistaken for locals.
We set out from Spean Bridge, where numerous coach parties enjoy real Highland hospitality in the Little Chef, before choosing from a rich selection of tartan travel rugs and heather-perfumed candles in the gift shop, and chugged our way up past Corriechoille farm.
Nobody stormed us with pitch forks, or even shouted ‘hoi, you’, as we opened and closed gates along the private section of road.
My fears were unfounded.
After such victory, an annoying revelation was that the starting point was crammed with hatchbacks, unquestionably owned by people who would never share my trepidation.
The temptation to park on top of them rather than beside them was overwhelming, but then jacked-up pick-ups do that to you.
Instead, we left the truck conventionally positioned, and headed up through the forest leading to the slopes of the first top, Stob Coire na Ceannain.
The grassy hillside steering you up on to the ridge starts off as a benign little stroll, until you realise it is going to continue forever.
In the time it takes to get the better of this slope, you could raise a family and marry them off.
Keeping a constant muscle-tearing gradient, there is no pity until the very top, and on such slopes it is handy to have a prop to allow yourself resting time.
A camera can do the trick, letting you catch your breath before your lungs explode through your chest like The Alien , as you pretend to take a photo of an interesting stone.
A change of clothing also lets you off the hook.
Simply take something off or put something on, and your companion will never know the real reason you stopped.
He or she will be obliged to wait politely as you go about your task, which you can time to complete at the same moment you recover the skill of breathing in and out.
At least at the top of this incline is a sight that makes the work worthwhile.
Without warning, you emerge over a crest and stand before the magnificent grey scree, Coire na Ceannain, sweeping round a circular lochan that nestles in its lap.
The relief of reaching the ridge is only matched by the excitement of the view.
As you walk up to the first Munro, Stob Choire Claurigh, the whole complexity of the Aonachs becomes clear.
This was a joy for me as I had puzzled often on the jumble of tops visible from  the A82 and in the mass of high peaks this area contains.
The Grey Corries ridge offers an uncomplicated viewpoint.
The vista is superb, presenting the fertile, genial great glen and Loch Lochy to the north, and the wild Mamore forest to the south, lurking behind pointy Stob Ban, a delicious little peak.
This has to be one of my favourite mountain areas because of its variety and scale, and amazing accessibility from Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Despite the ominous row of trespassing hatchbacks, we saw nobody on the ridge at all, and luxuriated in the surprising solitude that one shouldn't expect so near a town like Fort William, which grows more like a Highland Gorbals every day.
As a spotty student, I worked in a large hotel in Fort William for four months, and grew extremely fond of it.
But I still retain sympathy for the misguided foreign tourists who read about its properties as a ‘gateway to the beautiful western Highlands’ and end up wandering in dismay down streets that make the Bronx look like Disneyland.
After a couple of abortive attempts to reach the side of Loch Linnhe through dismal, litter-strewn lanes, over car parks and a dual carriageway, they return to abhorrent 6Os' concrete abominations masquerading as hotels.
There, they presumably drink themselves into a stupor on black PVC bar stools before the coach comes and takes them somewhere even worse, like Aviemore.
Fort William has its charms, like a couple of good supermarkets, a fascinating hardware shop, a fine shinty team and a great Indian restaurant.
But in a contest to offer old rustic Scots charm, East Kilbride would beat it into the final.
However, urban squalor was not high on our list of topics as we picked off the last Munro, Stob Coire an Laoigh, oddly not marked on the ordnance survey map.
From here you should descend along a northerly spur that will include two further tops, Stob Coire Easain and Beinn na Soacaich, and head for a dam, which you will find where the Allt Coire an Eoin meets the trees.
The dam is in a heavenly spot, situated at the end of a steep gorge, where the river above it tumbles down in a series of delightful waterfalls.
The obvious thing to do is strip off and dive into the clear, green water, but I wouldn't advise it.
Apart from being cold enough to remove your skin, there is a sinister tunnel sweeping water away on some underground journey, and although a metal grid may stop you from joining it, I have visions of diving in naked with a happy yell, only to emerge in the urinals of the aluminium smelter in Fort William.
Besides which, on our visit we were rather discouraged from bathing by the sight of a dead lamb lying      innocently at the bottom of the pool.
Just imagine jumping in and putting your feet through it.
OVERLEAF: Looking towards the Grey Corries from the Commando Monument at Spean Bridge
From here there is a path back to the car along a disused tramway.
This is a thrilling construction, and if you fancy an interesting low-level walk you can follow it all the way from the Aonach Mor ski-area car park, through the Leanachan forest to the start point for The Grey Corries.
It's a narrow rail that sometimes disappears altogether into rough path, and occasionally delights with perfectly intact Indiana Jones-style bridges over gulleys.
Although warning signs shout at you not to cross these fragile constructions, as you're bound to fall off and die and don't say they didn't tell you so, you'd have to be a boring old git not to want to do a balancing act over them for thrills.
However there's not too many of them from the dam as the section back to the car park is a tame ramble running through a clearing in the trees.
We unfortunately missed it, and returned by the longer forest road, although a small compensation is the view looking back of Stob Coire an Laoigh framed perfectly by the pines.
It's always essential to view the ridge you've just conquered, for the serious purpose of hugging yourself with glee, and a wonderful view of The Grey Corries can be savoured from the war memorial on the A82 north of Spean Bridge.
Another wonderful view was the truck, showing no signs of having been surrounded by angry aluminium workers attempting to tow it away.
So it was an immediate retreat to Fort William for celebratory pakora and a chicken breast curry, where I changed out of my walking gear into some jeans to look like a local.
Yes, I thought, they've seen me get out of the pick-up truck, I look wind-blown and ruddy, there's mud on my hands, they're bound to think I'm a crofter's wife.
The waitress approached.
‘If that's your Capri outside you'd better watch and not get a ticket.
It's a double yellow.
Any side dishes with your curry?’
Cutting a Dash
IF YOU INTEND TO ESCAPE FROM THE TEEMING FOLLY OF CITY LIFE AND hightail it to the freedom of the hills, does it really matter what you wear?
Of course it matters.
You might think you're safe nipping out for a hill-walk in a Parka with nylon fur round the hood, and a pair of trawlerman's oilskin trousers you bought at a life-boat fund-raising stall, but that's the day you'll bump into Sean Connery and Christopher Lambert with a film crew making Highlander 3 .
If you're a male reader, you can reverse this law of probability, and be sure that you will meet Madonna doing a nude shoot for the Pirelli calendar on Ben Vorlich.
Unlikely as it seems, mountain vanity is rife.
It's not enough any more to have comfortable boots and something waterproof to slip over a jumper.
Your attire must tell other walkers and climbers how serious you are, indicate the status you enjoy in the world of mountaineering, and not make locals in the mountain's nearest bar fall dangerously silent when you pop in for a pint on the way back home.
For instance, let's take grey anoraks.
The lust for grey anoraks is a profound sickness.
The garments are usually shapeless, not very waterproof, and can be worn only with an olive-green acrylic hat, long, brown woollen slacks, and a pair of stout shoes from British Home Stores.
Displayed in this manner, the grey anorak will serve its purchaser well, by having him ordered off the hill by Mountain Rescue before his car boot is slammed shut.
If the owner is unfortunate enough to have a fall, the grey anorak will help him resemble a large rock when the RAF hover above, thus rendering him practically invisible.
One can only assume that the purchasers of these lichen-grey accoutrements are members of EXIT, and that anyone attempting to rescue them would receive a bloody nose for their trouble.
What other explanation could there possibly be for going into a shop, flicking through rails of attractive fuchsia, cobalt and  aquamarine outer-garments, and saying to the assistant, ‘Have you got any grey ones?’
Perhaps the shopkeeper should have a panic button under the counter to press during such a confrontation, and while humouring the shopper by pretending to go and look for some grey ones, stout men could rush in and restrain the customer before he can make it to his Access card.
It's not as if grey anoraks are cheap.
Since they are hard to find, except in odd little shops that specialise in big underpants and sheepskin slippers for old people, they cost a pretty penny.
A certain firm famous for their ‘bags’ trouser suits, used to do an extensive line of grey anoraks, but they obviously had a visit from the style police and were made to put bits of navy blue and red in them or face a lengthy jail sentence.
Not exactly Jean Paul Gaultier, but it's a start.
Of course it's possible to go too far the other way, a natural but perilous reaction to grey anorak anxiety, in fact a sort of anoraksia nervosa.
Such hill-walkers are uncomfortable unless they look like the remnants box in an Indian wedding-sari shop.
Every item of clothing, down to their underwear, is in designer day-glo and vibrant clashing tincture.
They will happily walk about in the drizzle with a pink ice-axe, lime-green gaiters, a purple, yellow and turquoise rucksack, blue and orange kagoul, red breeches and a hat with the Union Jack on it.
It's one thing to be seen on the hill, but quite another to be seen and have other climbers throw rocks at you.
I, sadly, am not blameless.
If there were bouncers on mountains I would have been refused entry to the crags on more occasions than I care to recall.
It's the inappropriate nature of my clothing that has consistently let me down through the years.
I've already revealed that I started out in a donkey jacket, but I should add that it took me at least ten years to get a decent kit.
A friend knitted me a fabulous Nordic jumper, which immediately took on the status of security blanket.
During heat waves, companions walked beside me in shorts and a T-shirt, while I lurched along in two tons of wool, certain in the knowledge that removing the jumper for 30 seconds would result in instant death by exposure.
My boots were three sizes too big for me, since the man in the shop had convinced me it was necessary.
I know now he was just trying to make a sale and didn't have my size in stock, but since he was wearing a fleecy top and tracksuit trousers I believed him, and bought these huge leather edifices that a young married couple could quite comfortably live in and bring up a family.
This meant that not only did the boots weigh more than    a small car, but I was obliged to wear four pairs of socks to stop my feet moving about in them and turning my heels into chilli con carne.
You should always be very careful when dealing with persuasive equipment sales people.
If I'd stayed any longer with the villain who sold me those QE2 boots, I'd have walked from the shop with a case of tent pegs and a canoe.
As Christmas and birthdays brought more Gortex, my confidence grew and developed into mild snootiness about people who didn't wear the right things on the hill.
I would tut at people trying to climb in wellingtons, and roll my eyes at those in jeans.
Didn't they realise that mountaineering was a serious business?
I certainly did, and I had the magenta bum-bag to prove it.
Of course I was due for a humiliation.
A friend and I were driving in spring to Crarae gardens near Inveraray so I could salivate over the rhododendrons, but we grew tired of travelling at seven miles an hour behind clods in caravans and on reaching the Rest And Be Thankful pulled into the side to wander about at the base of Beinn an Lochain.
This is an interesting mountain, previously a Munro, but had its stripes ripped off when the tables were cruelly revised with more accurate measurements.
Since I was wearing posh garden visiting attire — a pair of thin striped leggings, white leather ballet pumps, a halterneck top, a cute bolero cardigan and dangly earrings — we were only planning to leave the car for some air.
However, we climbed up a little way, just to get off the road.
Then we thought we should nip over the next craggy bit to get a better view.
But up there we could see an even nicer spot a few hundred feet above, so we scrambled up it.
In no time at all we were standing on a huge patch of snow at the summit of a mountain only a few feet short of a Munro.
There were some hill-walkers with ice-axes coming towards us from the other side of the hill, and I was trying to look as though I meant to come hill-walking dressed like a hairdresser's receptionist.
Oh the disgrace and dishonour, not to mention the danger and stupidity.
Another piece of divine retribution for all those hours spent ticking others off came relatively recently.
I interviewed Donald Watt, the leader of the Lochaber Mountain Rescue Team, and one of the things we talked about, both nodding sagely in agreement, was that people sometimes wear very stupid things on the hill.
We swapped a few anecdotes about buffoons we had encountered and then went our separate ways, hands thrust deep into our respective double-thickness, Gortex, all-weather, storm-force shell  outers.
A few weeks later I met him in a wild part of Laggan.
He was in his climbing gear, had an ice-axe, crampons, and a double-thick, Gortex, all-weather, storm-force shell outer.
I was wearing a nylon fun-fur leopardskin coat, a hat with funny floppy bits for ears, pink fluorescent lipstick, and a pair of short sailing wellingtons.
I am not even going to attempt to tell you why I was so attired, or guess at why fate should have made Donald and his equally well-equipped companions walk across that particular piece of wilderness at precisely the same time as me.
All I can say is that I doubt I will be asked to join the Lochaber Mountain Rescue Team.
It's the fleecy top that has really revolutionised outdoor gear.
Ten years ago everything had to be natural.
Wool was big, not just for jumpers but for breeches.
Never mind the fact they were as comfortable as wearing two fibre-glass tubes filled with iron filings, and stank like an incontinent old sheep dog when wet, they were natural wool and so considered correct.
The fleecy top was radical.
Not only was it light, warm and washable, it also made grown men, previously never out of a brown jumper and khaki woollen breeches, dress for the hills in something pink and fluffy.
To witness these bearded hard men suddenly zipping into pastel-coloured smocks was like watching Rome burn.
But despite the laugh it has given us girlies at the expense of the hairy brigade, the material has its disadvantages.
When you peel off your fleecy top from your  fuchsia thermal underwear, the static electricity is sufficient to heat and light Linlithgow for a week.
In fact I hear that several Outward Bound schools are offering fortnight-long residential courses on the safe removal of the fleecy top.
It's only £800 per person, but you must provide your own top and the school takes no responsibility for injuries.
Manufacturers, flushed with success over their pink fluffy man campaign, and greedy with the realisation that they can make hill-walkers wear anything as long as it's described as a technological breakthrough, are sitting in their factories dreaming up new and more ridiculous things to sell us.
Hoping to make some money, I have taken the liberty of submitting an idea to several of their research and development departments, and I should warn you that a patent is pending.
Recognising that a lot of women are taking to the hills, and that they may feel a little intimidated by such a male-orientated sport, especially since they all dress in the same fluffy things as us now, I have come up with a startling new innovation.
The thermal beard.
The beards come in a range of attractive colours; pink to match your top, green, surfing blue, day-glo yellow and natural brown for those who desire a more rugged countenance, and once strapped on to the face with its Gortex-coated elastic strap, the beard provides the wearer with complete all-round chin exposure protection.
There is also a safety beard, which has a sewn-in whistle, and ten feet of extra thermal beard material which can be unrolled from the chin and used as a survival bag.
The beards were tested on a recent NASA space mission, where astronauts took ten-hour shifts putting the beards through their paces in a number of varied situations.
Walkers who already have real beards need not despair.
There will be a range of thermal beard extensions which will simply clip on to or over the existing facial fur, providing the customer with that little bit of extra insulation.
In addition, an anti-static spray will be for sale to allow the customer to pull his or her fleecy top over the head without first removing the beard, in complete safety.
I have priced the beards and can offer them for only £237.99 plus VAT each.
You can laugh.
I'll bet you get one for Christmas.
Schiehallion
Schiehallion; 1083m;(OS Sheet 51; 714548); M57.
PEOPLE GET EMOTIONAL UP MOUNTAINS, WHEN I SAY PEOPLE, I MEAN IT'S me that gets  emot1onal up mountains.
I don't recall ever seeing a big beardy climber lying down in the heather having a tantrum, or a party of Outward Bound students holding their heads and crying into their gaiters, so one is forced to conclude that I am alone in my hill hysteria.
You will have twigged by now that Schiehallion was the scene of a melodramatic incident.
The only excuse I have is that I was very young, a marvellous justification for most reprobate behaviour, and that I was wearing an uncomfortable vest.
Such a shame really, since I was so looking forward to the day.
My boyfriend at the time, two friends and I, decided to kick around the Loch Tay area for a few days between Christmas and New Year, since the only decent hotel we could find open was the Ledcreich Hotel at Balquhidder.
It's a strange thing the way hotels in Scotland close down for the winter.
Not strange at all, of course , in economic terms, since the slacks and Pringle jumper brigade who make up the bulk of business in summer wouldn't take the Austin Maxi out of the car-port if there was even a remote chance of frost.
The few hill-walkers and climbers that fancy a weekend away in February certainly don't bring enough custom to keep the hotel owners in beaten copper coffee tables and onyx standard lamps.
But I can't help wondering what the owners do with all that spare time in the winter, when they could be making our sandwiches and drying off our boots by the fire.
Do they sit for hours making up ridiculous French translations for tomato soup and spam?
Or perhaps they sort through the plastic bag of pubic hairs they keep specially to place on the side of your bath before you check in?
Whatever they get up to is their own business, but I wish more of them would stay open.
We arrived at our open and welcoming hotel in thick snow, excited at the prospect of Schiehallion under a blanket of white.
We travelled on Friday, hoping for an early night and a crisp, prompt start the next morning, and so far everything was under control, right down to having remembered that all-important flask.
A flask is a great source of comfort and solace on a winter walk, no matter what it contains.
Even were it to be filled with the rinse water from a nappy wash, as long as it was hot it would be shared round with glee and noises of appreciation.
So the flask was handed over to a nice woman who would fill it with soup, probably ‘potage de Jean-Claude speciale au tomat de can’, in the morning.
Then we found the bar.
Not a great place to spend five or six hours if an early start is required, but it was Christmas and we were in celebratory mood.
At 1.30 a.m.
I was lying on my room carpet wearing a balaclava back to front, pinned down by my friend with her knees on my shoulders, while she made whooping noises like a submarine diving.
At leat that's as much as I can remember until the next morning when I woke up with my head in an invisible, sealed gold-fish bowl of pain.
Breakfast was difficult, bringing with it the aroma of kippers and the sight of poached eggs quivering on plates, but by the time our lunch flask was delivered, people were perking up and looking forward to the task ahead.
Not me.
I still looked like an extra from Les Miserables .
We drove to Schiehallion along snowy roads, under a grey and ominous sky.
Now the scholars amongst you will quickly realise that staying in a hotel near Balquhidder would lend itself to terms of geographic convenience to tackling Ben More, Ben Vorlich or even Ben Lawers.
Schiehallion is actually quite far away.
Heaven knows who it was who set their mind on heading for that pointy wee soul but, like most hill-walkers, once a route is planned we would sooner see the laws of physics change before our itinerary did.
So we motored past delightful mountains while I occasionally whined from the back seat, ‘Why aren't we doing that one?’ or ‘’That one looks nice’, or ‘Can we stop for a minute please?’
There were plenty other walkers fumbling around their vehicles in the car park when we arrived, but then Schiehallion is such an easy walk  its popularity is assured.
The wind was strong and bitterly cold as we prepared ourselves and I tried in vain to put my boots on without leaving the car, until I cracked my forehead on someone's ice-axe in the back seat.
That, I am sure, was the start of it.
I was in a terrible mood and somebody had to suffer.
The most obvious person to take it out on is your boyfriend, and so I settled for that.
We set off at a rattling rate, presumably to put some distance between us and the dozens of others still ponderously selecting items of clothing from their car boots, and I commenced my belligerence with a few barbed remarks about the pace-setting.
We were the first up the hill and had to break a path, so although a summer walk up Schiehallion is simple and quick to the point of disappointment, winter is a trifle harder.
An odd aspect of the mountain is that although its relative isolation from other hills makes it one of the most prominent peaks to pick out from other far distant tops, the views are rather more limited than one might expect.
In summer a combination of that, plus a huge ugly path eroded deep into the hillside could make a Munroist's heart sink.
But the views in winter are rather more spectacular, and although we were starting to feel that snow was coming on the strengthening wind, we at least enjoyed the open sweeping aspect to the south and east as we walked.
I would have enjoyed them even more had I not been about to faint every ten yards, but I was in far too bad a mood to tell my colleagues to slow down and wait for me.
I would sulk instead.
There are a couple of false summits on Schiehallion, and by the time we arrived at the first, the beginnings of a blizzard were forming.
It was no use, I was going to have to stop.
These days, of course, now that I am a grown woman, I would have little problem with saying I was feeling ill and suggesting we take a break for a few minutes.
In those dark days I was that uncomfortable mixture of martyr and guilty inadequate, which made me alternate between the guilt of holding people back and the fury that they didn't offer to stop without being asked.
So I did the unforgivable, which was to suggest to my boyfriend that they go on to the summit without me.
How did I know that they would say yes so readily?
Before I could say, ‘You bastards’, they were specks in the mist as I huddled from the blizzard behind a boulder wondering if I wanted to be sick yet.
The embarrassment increased as hoards of people who had been behind us passed me with odd, pitying looks, clearly curious as to what the hell I was doing squatting down by a rock on my own some considerable distance from the summit.
Of course all I needed was a two-minute sit-down and in two and a half minutes I was not only fully recovered and ready to carry on, I had adrenalin pumping out the top of my hat in anger that my man  had left me to die.
The fact that it would have been tricky to die on a hill with more people around than at a Harrods sale, unless I'd packed a gun and some razor blades, was irrelevant.
He wanted me dead, I was convinced.
I got up and raced after them.
With a new lease of energy I reached the top only a minute or two after them.
My temper was further inflamed to find them happily eating the sandwiches.
My boyfriend made a big mistake.
‘Ah good,’ he said cheerily, trying in a manly way to calm the frenzy of my wrath, ignoring the foam at the corners of my mouth.
‘I'm glad you made it.
We just realised you had the flask.’
I pulled off my rucksack, fetched out the flask and smashed it over his head.
There must have been at least 30 people at the summit that day, and at the sound of plastic and thin glass striking skull through wool, every head turned to see what would happen next.
My fury dissipated.
The tomato soup was lost, and there can be no greater crime on a mountain than wilfully to destroy the tomato soup.
The atmosphere was tense.
At any moment, I thought, these people will remove their green hats to reveal powdered wigs, and I will be sentenced to life imprisonment or a job with British Rail.
Their faces said it all.
I was in the wrong.
The greatest pity was that the top was clear enough for a view and as we were perched at the broad gable end of the mountain we could see some fabulous sights.
However most walkers were enjoying the view of me with a glove covered in steaming soup and a face streaming with tears.
The walk that defeated me on the way up seemed to take about five minutes coming down, and despite the forced cheery countenance of my friends, I knew I had ruined the day.
Of course some may say he ruined the day.
What would have been so difficult about saying, ‘No, darling, we'll all wait here until you feel up to going on’, or ‘Let the others go and we'll wait here, holding each other tight in the snow’.
But then the wind had turned my face into a pizza and my waterproof trousers were two sizes too big for me.
Girls who look like that get left behind.
It was not a happy journey to the car and I sat silently and unhappily in the back as we drove away, despite my friends' jolly attempts to think up song titles with the word ‘flask’ in them.
The next Christmas I received a present of a metal unbreakable flask from my friends, which I cherish as a reminder not to be a grumpy bag up hills.
I am currently in therapy to enable myself to hear the song Schiehallion, Schiehallion without the scent of tomato soup filling my nostrils and the overwhelming urge to murder.
My shrink says it's my parents' fault.
He could be right.
We only ever had cream of mushroom.
Beinn Alligin
Beinn Alligin; 985m;(OS Sheets 19 and 24; 866613); M160.
FOR YEARS, SOME FRIENDS AND I HAD A HABIT OF HIRING A COTTAGE somewhere deep in the Highlands at New Year.
For around £20 each we enjoyed the simple pleasures of being able to dance the Gay Gordons round a bonfire at midnight, vomit into a loch instead of on to a pavement, and stumble up hills for the remainder of the week walking off hangovers.
The city alternative was too horrible to contemplate.
Friends clamoured to escape the trauma of walking endlessly up and down Glasgow's Byres Road with a bottle of Hirondelle looking for a party to gatecrash, and so these Hogmanay house parties swelled in numbers yearly until the queue for the bathroom in the morning rivalled McDonald's in Red Square.
We found a cottage in Torridon that was idyllic.
It nestled on the southern shore of Loch Torridon, with a view that would make a bouncer turn poet, since the living-room windows were filled with Beinn Alligin and the western tail of Liathach, both reflected breathtakingly across the water.
The plan was that everyone would meet at the cottage on Boxing Day, making their own way there and hopefully bringing enormous amounts of expensive food and drink if they didn't want to be turned back at the gate.
It's important as a hostess that you conduct a thorough search of your guests' cars for malt whisky, smoked salmon and interesting cheeses before you let them undo their seat-belts.
Don't invite smelly boys from climbing clubs.
They just turn up with family-sized tins of baked beans, some Ambrosia creamed rice and a sweet German wine box.
As luck would have it, my best friend is the most wonderful cook in the world, and her contributions to any cottage holiday more than compensate for those who come with a tin of sardines in tomato sauce and a Pot Noodle.
As others produce a packet of Hob Nobs from a plastic carrier bag, she is  revealing a foil-covered dish containing lobster marinated in apricot juice that took two days to prepare.
Such a performance ensures she need never do the dishes.
I mention the food stores because on this occasion they were to prove important.
Snow had started to block all roads north on the morning we left, and as the last car slithered into the driveway of the cottage, with its white-faced traumatised occupants, Torridon became sealed from the outside world in a spectacular blizzard.
There are few more poignant sights than a group of people who are desperate to walk up a mountain, standing with their hands in pockets and feet in slippers, gazing out the window at weather that looks like television interference.
The snow continued for days, until the print had been worn off every ordnance survey map in the house by impatient fingers constantly tracking imaginary routes up Torridon's thrilling peaks.
The delicious things in the foil-covered dishes had long gone, we were getting drunk nightly on sweet German wine and tins of creamed rice were starting to look attractive, when we finally awoke to a day of brilliant sunshine.
If you are a summer-only walker, then you need a slap.
Scotland's mountains surpass themselves under snow, magnifying their grandeur and intensifying their beauty until the beholder runs out of language and is left making small bestial gasping noises.
We ran outside and made an astonishing variety of small bestial gasping noises at the sight of Beinn Alligin and Liathach blanketed in white and framed by azure blue sky.
The roads, though, were completely blocked, giving us the problem of at least a six-mile walk through the snow to reach the base of either mountain.
So we made the decision to go up Beinn Damh, not a Munro, but nevertheless a divine mountain of 902 metres situated conveniently behind the cottage.
The starting point is from a bridge opposite the Torridon Hotel on the A896, and a path takes you through a delightful forest, past an incredible waterfall, and up to the ridge that runs south towards the summit.
From the top, the views south are awesome, proving the nonsense of ignoring a mountain just because it falls a few feet short of Munro status.
There is a wide open aspect all the way to Kishorn and the hills of Applecross, and the western slopes fall dramatically away to Loch Damh, a loch that tumbles theatrically into Loch Torridon via a series of waterfalls called the Falls of Balgy.
It's on the way back when you face north across the loch that you know you will have to climb Beinn Alligin.
If the mountain is beautiful from the  shore, it is mouth-watering from the top of Ben Damph, and as we retraced our steps through the snow, elated at having finally swapped slippers for boots and crampons, we knew that nothing would keep us from it.
Sharing a cottage with a lot of people on a hill-walking holiday is a revelation.
Not only do you get to know your friends much more intimately when you're out on the hill, the true test of character is how they behave when they come home.
The obvious advantage is that they provide sack-loads of fun and laughter, and the disadvantage is that you sometimes have to wait three hours for them to find their boots in the morning and finish flossing their teeth.
One cottage I stayed in without electricity or water saw 11 of us standing eagerly over a one-ring Calor gas burner in the morning waiting for a kettle to boil for coffee, when one of our party came into the kitchen, picked up the kettle and took it into the bathroom to wash his face.
Strangely, nobody said anything, but the culprit has been notably absent from subsequent holidays.
The other difficulty is trying to get into the toilet in the morning.
Of course in rural situations this can be overcome by merely peeing outside, a course of action not open to you in the city, unless of course you live in London where it doesn't matter much what you do in the street.
But even in remote situations I would strongly advise against this, after doing as much in a cottage in Appin only to be greeted by the landlord who had popped in to see if we were alright.
It's extremely hard to explain why you are squatting on his lawn with your pyjamas round your ankles.
The same unfortunate landlord returned a few days later as we were playing forfeits, and made no mention of the fact that one person was in a bra and panties with a colander on his head, another had wellingtons on filled to the brim with curdled milk and the rest of us had false moustaches drawn on with an indelible black magic marker.
He said he hoped we were having a nice time and could we leave the keys with Mrs Stewart please.
Oddly the cottage was fully booked when we tried to take it again at Easter.
But Torridon was a raging success, and after a spectacular Hogmanay with only one person burnt and two with slight bruising, we were ready to tackle Alligin.
The snow ploughs had been through and so we were able to drive to the starting point on the northerly shore of Loch Torridon.
This is also the place to begin or end a magnificent low-level walk that continues all the way round the base of Liathach.
Here you can see the castellated peaks from       an amazing angle.
We completed it once with two groups of people, one starting from either end, with the ingenious plan to meet and exchange car keys half way along A marvellous scheme, except when we met, finished lunch and moved off in separate directions, we forgot the all-important handover.
The others realised the error at precisely the same moment, and the subsequent racing back along the track towards each other could have been useful in Doctor Zhivago if someone had shot it in slow motion.
OVERLEAF: Beinn Alligin from the western end of Liathach's ridge
However, Beinn Alligin provides no such logistical problems and it's a fabulous start to the walk up the Abhainn Coire Mhic Nobuil through a forest, again passing close to some splendid waterfalls, before you veer off to the left and head towards the dauntingly steep corrie that is the most direct route to the summit.
Don't torture yourself with feelings of inadequacy because you can't even begin to guess at the correct pronunciation of Abhainn Coire Mhic Nobuil.
Even native Gaelic speakers bloody each other 's noses about how best to verbalise these wild and obscure names for burns and rivers.
What chance have we lowland city folk got when we're confronted with maps covered in names that look like anagrams?
Indeed deliberately making all the tricky names into anagrams may be an easier way to work through the map for non-Gaelic speakers.
For instance, Abhainn Coire Mhic Nobuil could become A Bun In Chili Can Be Hi Or Mo.
No, I know it doesn't make much sense, but then does Abhainn Coire Mhic Nobuil if you come from Partick?
Looking towards Kishorn from Ben Damph
So you leave the A Bun In Chili Can Be Hi Or Mo, and start to follow the Allt Toll a Mhadaidh, an anagram of A Mad Tall Litho Lad, into an ever steepening gradient.
Since we had complete snow cover, A Mad Tall Litho Lad was buried deep beneath a white mantle, and cutting steps up through the soft snow was becoming increasingly difficult.
The corrie looks terrifying from its base, and indeed I would hazard a guess that avalanches are pretty fond of rumbling down the upper reaches of it after spring snow.
But, oddly, snow can be quite comforting on long, steep slopes, especially if the slope widens at the base and doesn't culminate in a 100-foot drop over cliffs.
It's hard to fall anywhere but on your face when the snow is reaching your thigh, and you know it won't hurt.
It's the thin covering of snow over sheet ice that's the real killer, and slithering about on that without crampons is like driving at 100 mph on the wrong side of the M8 with your eyes closed.
The haul up the corrie takes you to the first peak, Tom na Gruagaich, from where you must drop down and follow the ridge to the summit of Beinn Alligin, and although that's where we packed it in, the walk could continue along a stunning ridge to cross the famous horns of Alligin, two pointy crags that stand like gateposts over a terrifying gully.
Because Beinn Alligin is owned by The National Trust For Scotland, there's no access restriction in the stalking season which means you don't have to worry about disturbing rich, fat dick-heads out to kill things for fun.
So perhaps the luxury of a crisp autumn day would provide more suitable conditions for the complete ridge traverse if snow and ice make you nervous.
The view from the summit gives a fabulous gable-end perspective of  Liatach , although you miss seeing the true nature of that massive mountain's pinnacles from the west, the eastern approach giving the best angle.
We retraced our steps and treated ourselves to a rucksack sledge down the corrie, taking great care not to end up with an ice-axe up the bum.
It's only when the peak has been conquered that thoughts turn to the delicious things that used to be in the foil-covered dishes, and the question of how best to prepare the spam.
But the hunger generated by a snowy hill-walk is insatiable, and our tea of beans, Hob Nobs, Pot Noodle and sweet German wine was exquisite.
That night a full moon shone in a completely clear sky, lighting up the landscape so efficiently it would have been perfectly feasible to climb.
Instead, we played some strange game that culminated in cavorting naked in the snow except for boots, underpants and balaclavas.
I blame the wine box and the fact that the landlord lived 200 miles away.
Wild Things
AMONG THE MANY EXCUSES FOR TAKING TO THE HILLS IS THE CHANCE to see wildlife.
Every hill-walker dreams of seeing a wildlife drama unfold in front of them as they peer over a crag, hoping that the next rise will reveal an osprey fighting off a wildcat which it returned to find attacking the nest, forcing the great bird to drop its intended dinner, a pine marten, which runs for its life, stopping only to catch and eat a grounded, flapping, pipistrelle bat.
Unfortunately, a glance over the rise will usually reveal a fat sheep chewing vacantly at some grass.
In fact the chances for viewing exciting wildlife are getting rarer every day, as hundreds more people take to the hills, bringing dogs and children and wearing colours that can be seen as far away as Belgium.
Most hill-walkers' wildlife experiences take place as they mow down interesting species caught in the glare of their XR2's headlights on the way home from a hill.
In fact the volume of traffic on Scotland's mountains is making the sighting of anything more exotic than a slug increasingly difficult.
People become so desperate to make contact with beasts and fowl that they resort to going on nature trails.
Walkers pour over National Trust, Forestry Commission and Nature Conservancy information leaflets showing nature trails, with growing scepticism, not realising that they themselves are the problem.
‘Daaaaad!’ one Kit-Kat smeared infant will yell, from 20 yards ahead of its parents., How come there's no polecats like the picture says?’
A tiny grubby finger will be pointing at a poor pen-and-ink line drawing of a ‘polecat with young’, set against a blue number seven.
The infant spots a corresponding blue number seven on a post by the path.
Putting two and two together, junior quite rightly expects there to be polecat with young hanging around post number seven, waiting to be petted by the children  and providing the adults with a photo opportunity.
The fact that the polecat with young was sighted three years ago by a grumpy shepherd looking for a lost lamb at 5.30 a.m. on a March morning, two miles away from post number seven, is irrelevant.
The child has come in search of nature and is thwarted.
The polecat and its grown family will know to keep as far away from the path and its numbered posts as possible, except in the dead of night when they can sniff around and pick up some bits of Kit-Kat.
The chances of seeing wildlife on a wildlife trail are about as good as seeing Frank Sinatra play a gig at The Milton Motor Hotel in Fort William.
But there's lots of wildlife around, if you happen to be in the right place at the right time, and not singing a Betty Boo number at the top of your voice.
The Highlands are teeming with fascinating creatures, and witnessing any of them going about their daily business is an exciting privilege.
It's sometimes hard to explain to a person who doesn't share your enthusiasm for the plant and animal kingdom why watching three ptarmigan walking about on a clump of moss is exciting, but take my word for it that it is.
A comforting aspect of wildlife watching in Scotland is that nothing is out to eat you.
Adders are the only poisonous serpents in the British Isles, and they're such lazy sods all they do is sunbathe beside or sleep underneath rocks after a meal of small frogs.
If you're lucky enough to see one at all it will slither off to find a more peaceful rock to sleep under, and since as yet they haven't organised themselves into packs, roaming around looking for people to bite, we can safely say that there's nothing you will encounter that threatens humans in any way.
A lot of walkers take this fact for granted, striding about in the sure and certain knowledge that nothing will drop from a tree and start to devour their head.
Try walking about in Asia, Africa or South America.
An appreciation of the unspeakable dangers that could face us if we didn't live in a country full of cuddly things interested only in eating each other helps put our fear of midges into perspective.
In some other far-flung continents not even the plants can be trusted to leave your flesh intact, and exotic colourful insects that would make us reach for our cameras here land on your arm and lay eggs in it.
Of course we weren't always so lucky in Scotland.
There were brown bears here as recently as the 10th century, and the last wolf was hunted down and killed in the 18th century.
How would hill-walkers cope these days, I wonder, if they had to contend with predatory wildlife as a natural part of mountaineering?
No doubt the outdoor equipment industry would rub its hands in glee at the thought of such a lucrative threat to its customers.
Since there are already hundreds of useless insect repellents on the market, how much more scope would there be for removing money from wilderness lovers, if the product was essential to beat off things with teeth and claws?
Product development departments could come up with fluorescent wolf-repellent bum-bags for £80, and high-tech one-size bear-survival suits, built to withstand the claws of an angry grizzly for up to three minutes, and available in a range of attractive designer colours for only £350.
Some would argue that a few predators would only increase the excitement of climbing and walking, and that we should reintroduce some extinct species among our hills and glens.
On the island of Rhum for example, there was talk of introducing a pack of timber wolves when sufficient tree cover to support them was achieved at the end of an extensive planting programme by the Nature Conservancy Council.
Wildlife experts working on Rhum were very keen indeed to introduce all sorts of things to the island, including sea eagles from Norway.
The thought of ‘introducing’ timber wolves to the island and its inhabitants may have seemed rash at first, but then I introduced a boy with ‘hate’tattooed on his knuckles to my parents once.
Mind you, he kept his gloves on.
The thinking behind the wolf plan was to discover if they could regulate the deer numbers and live in harmony with the rest of the island's wildlife.
Quite naturally, the islanders wondered if harmonious timber wolf existence included picking off one or two tasty schoolchildren as a light snack between main meals of venison, and strangely the idea has been put to one side for the moment.
Rumours also abound about a herd of wild boars on the less frequented side of Ben Wyvis, that run snorting out of the mist without warning, charging with long vicious tusks at walkers unfortunate enough to step into their territory.
I suspect this has been made up by the Friends of Ben Wyvis Society, who are making an attempt to liven up the image of one of the dullest Munros.
It wouldn't really matter if dinosaurs roamed the round, flat flanks of Ben Wyvis.
You would still need to take some Travel Scrabble to make the walk more interesting.
So we must accept that the creatures we will encounter in the Scottish hills are not the stuff of big game hunters' after-dinner bragging, but they are varied and thrilling in their discovery nonetheless.
Over the years I've been lucky enough to see pine martens, golden eagles, otters, blue hares, foxes and a huge variety of birds, including a snowy egret at Torridon, wildly off course from its African and European haunts.
I don't count all the deer I've bumped into since it's taken for granted you'll see a few of the elegant beasts galloping away over the heather no matter which hill you're on.
That is except Ben Wyvis, where the deer lie around playing cards to pass the time.
The lochans of Scotland are teeming with interesting things too, and I confess to a penchant for peering into dark, peaty puddles at every opportunity in the eternal search for frogs and newts.
Girls on mountains tend to come into contact with more amphibious life than our men folk, on account of our toilet arrangements.
Men, standing nobly upright on two feet as they take their bladder relief, tend to look all around them, focusing on a glorious horizon and fantasising about being master of all they survey.
We, however, are required to crouch in the heather, and so the attention is drawn through necessity to the things sharing that heather with you, in case any of them might take a fancy to your bottom and jump into your pants.
Hence we see frogs, newts, slow-worms, toads and so on, where men have seen none, and for this reason it seems women have a greater bonding with slimy things that hang about pools.
It could just be that some of us get married to creatures that fit that description, so perhaps there's a mysterious kind of genetic memory involved here.
Whatever the reason, it's certainly all my female friends that stand gazing into the black puddles with me.
Men tend to be up ahead, gaining a rise, stopping suddenly and hissing ‘Shooosh!
Over there!
Look!’
By the time we arrive on tip-toe to the spot, whatever it was has either gone or revealed itself to be a log.
At least with newt searching you can pick one up and share it round if you find one.
Birds of prey cause a lot of argument on a walk.
Not admittedly as much as the argument about whether you can see Schiehallion or not, but certainly enough to end in tears.
It is extremely difficult to spot a species from below.
Books tell you how, with diagrams and illustrations explaining wing span and feather patterns, but everybody always gets it wrong.
The most common exclamation is ‘Och, it's only a crow’.
I'm not sure how crows feel about this.
If I were a member of a species, highly evolved and perfectly adapted to a life among craggy rocks, pecking out the odd lamb's eye, devouring a few mice, picking through a nice gamey carcass occasionally, but mostly just hovering gracefully around on thermals below cliffs, I would take great exception to being described as ‘just’ a crow.
But  there is a real class system in spotting wildlife.
Crows may do much the same sort of thing as buzzards and eagles but, since there are so many of them, the luckless crows are ignored.
An eagle is greeted by sharp intakes of breath from those who spot them, as they reach for their binoculars and cameras.
Crows, like the ones that hover round the summit of Buchaille Etive Mor, could fly in a pyramid formation and play the trumpet and walkers would still look the other way.
Deer ruin their chances of being awesome beasts, providing a rare and special experience to those who spot them, by standing in massive herds all along the verge of the A9 looking glum, and grouse lose points for frightening you half to death by crashing out of the heather from under your feet screeching like banshees.
This can be multiplied manyfold in its unpleasantness, if you are a woman emptying your bladder at the time.
However, I adore the chance to see wildlife in Scotland and am only too acutely aware of how fragile its future is.
I have been lucky enough to stroke porpoises from a rowing boat in Loch Torridon, swim in a deep burn with a baby otter in Ardnamurchan and help clear somebody's cottage loft out of a deep pile of pine marten droppings.
OK, the last one wasn't so lucky.
The more you walk, especially alone, the more chance you have of wildlife encounters, and you will hopefully realise what a precious pocket of wilderness the Scottish Highlands provides.
What a sad creature I'd be if I couldn't promise future children black, peaty lochans full of newts, hillsides teeming with deer, hares and stoats and skies full of soaring majestic birds.
No matter what the future holds for the next generation and the delicate trembling wilderness, at least we can promise our children and grandchildren one sure thing.
There will be no polecat with young at post number seven on the nature trail.
Another busy day for an adder
Beinn Eibhinn to Carn Dearg
Beinn Eibhinn; 1100m;(OS Sheets 41 and 42; 449733); M47.
Aonach Beag; 1114m;(OS Sheets 41 and 42; 458742); M38.
Geal-Charn; 1132m;(OS Sheet 42; 471745); M25.
Carn Dearg; 1034m;(OS Sheet 42; 504764); M95.
THERE'S SOMETHING PARTICULARLY DELICIOUS ABOUT MOUNTAINS THAT ARE hidden away far out of sight from any road, and Carn Dearg, near Loch Pattack, is a prime example.
Although its giant neighbour, Ben Alder, can be viewed from the A9 at the top of Loch Ericht, and the peak further west along its ridge, Aonach Beag, can be seen briefly from the A86 if you're not fishing about for an extra strong mint in the glove compartment, Carn Dearg reveals itself only to those prepared to sweat a bit.
I'd lusted after these peaks for some time, but a decision has to be made about how to get at them.
To start from Dalwhinnie means a huge walk along the northern shore of Loch Ericht, and possibly an overnight stop at Culra bothy at the base of Carn Dearg, not a pleasant thought when you remember that bothies are always full of smelly men, in even smellier sleeping-bags.
Of course this is where a mountain bike could come in handy, but you'd have to put up with walkers pointing at you and shouting ‘tosser’, and landowners chasing after you with a stick as another slice of expensive path slides into the burn after being cut neatly away by fat tyres.
Then there is the Corrour option.
A train will take you to Corrour halt, where a Youth Hostel can be found, leaving you with miles to walk up Loch Ossian before you can even see the ridge.
Finally you can walk in from the A86, an eight- or nine-mile hike, and then start the climb.
Not looking good so far, you might think, but then I'm a lucky lass.
I've been friends for a few years with the head stalker of  Corrour estate, Ted Piggott, and his wife Theresia.
That means not only do I get a glass of beer and a scone by the fire, and the chance to pat one of their huge pack of gorgeous shiny dogs, but if I ask politely and don't step on the Jack Russell, I also get permission to bring my car along the private road.
Not much help to you, I know, but why should I fib and say I walked in?
It's pretty good knowing someone who lives and works on a big Highland estate if you want to sort out your attitude to the big debate on stalking and access.
Ted and I will never see eye to eye about his clients, whom he likes, respects and positively enjoys dragging over hills to bag stags, whereas I loathe these numbskulls who think killing is ‘sport’.
Ted's killing is of quite a different nature.
Far from being sport, it's his job to keep herds in check and make sure these ‘sportsmen’ don't leave an animal wounded and in pain from their hopeless attempts to shoot it, and his respect for living things is acute.
He'll do daft things, like making all the stag ponies step aside on the path to avoid treading on a slug.
This gives me the terrible dichotomy of knowing that during the stalking season I would dearly love to ruin the day for the fat boors crawling all over Scotland, puffing in their tweeds, but I would hate to disturb Ted and his colleagues at their job, which pays their grocery bills and is their only source of income.
So I respect the access restrictions for the sake of Ted and those like him, but I reserve the right in the pub to stick out my tongue and make rasping noises at those men with wallets instead of penises, who think that pulling the trigger and gleefully watching a beautiful stag's legs buckling beneath it as it dies is somehow a sign of manliness.
Of course you don't have to keep off land during the stalking season if you don't want to, since trespass in Scotland is contained within the civil and not the criminal law.
That means that it's practically impossible for a landowner to enforce restrictions unless you're setting fire to his house or driving a JCB over his grouse moor.
But let's not be stupid about the freedom we enjoy.
If you knew Ted, and you probably do judging by the amount of Christmas cards he gets, then you would think twice about being wicked and disruptive for the sake of it.
There are plenty of mountains with no stalking to keep you busy during autumn.
Of course sometimes landowners get wildly out of hand and need a bit of a spanking (other than the one that some already pay for in their strange London clubs).
For instance there is one chap in the Kintail area who tries to keep the Mountain Rescue team off his land, not just during  their exercises but also in times of actual rescues.
Behaving like that, he can hardly be surprised if walkers are tempted to march on to his land in the height of the season playing the bagpipes and accompanied by a 70-strong male voice choir.
The sad thing is such behaviour will only end up getting the poor stalker or ghillie the sack so it's not worth the trouble.
If a ‘keep out’ sign annoys you, stop and think of the stalker and his family before you do anything silly, and even if the whole issue of land use and access in Scotland enrages you, remember the place for a protest is not on the hill, but in the ballot box.
Anyway, being in the fortunate position to be able to drive along the road to Corrour, although my car suspension didn't agree it was so fortunate, a companion and I set off for the first peak, Beinn Eibhinn from halfway along the road, above the river Ghuilbinn.
We were in a perfect position to attack the mountain from its north side once we had dropped down and crossed the river.
For most of the year the river is deep, wide and impossible to cross without stripping off, but the ordnance survey map showed a bridge exactly in our path.
Don't always rely on the bridges marked triumphantly on your map.
This structure was only the remains of a bridge, and necessitated a crossing hanging on to one piece of rusty wire while balancing on another single line swinging perilously below.
Of course you really shouldn't use such a dangerous structure, and if Ted Piggott spotted you at it he'd doubtless give you a row.
But the alternative of taking our clothes off on this nippy morning, and wading across a fast-flowing, icy river with our clothes on our heads, was not an attractive one.
So we swung across like two trapeze artists failing an audition for Billy Smart's circus, and headed gratefully up the glen towards the ridge.
It's a long, slow trudge up to Beinn Eibhinn, but with the pleasure of experiencing a sense of space quite unlike anywhere else.
This is wild, open country with sweeping views across forests and rivers to the peaks of Creag Meagaidh and Beinn a' Chaorainn in the north, and the hills that surround Corrour and Loch Ossian to the west and south.
Loch Ghuilbinn is particularly beautiful and, as we climbed, a herd of deer miles below ran splashing across the neck of the loch, throwing up fountains of water that sparkled in the sunlight.
If Ted is reading this, they didn't see or smell us, honest!
On attaining the summit, it's a bit of a shock to see how far down the ridge drops round the lip of the corrie before climbing back up to Aonach    Beag, but it snakes invitingly away to the east, presenting an irresistible walkway into untamed terrain.
Looking south towards the ridge from Creag Meagaidh
It has to be said that this is a massive walk, particularly for you if you don't know Ted, and you could certainly fill a day with only these two peaks.
However, once up there the temptation to carry on is too strong, so choose a day early in the summer if you have no will-power to stave off the seduction of the tops.
At least you'll have enough light to return, even if you've worn your legs down to a stump.
From the crest of Aonach Beag is a rare and spectacular view of Ben Alder.
This is a hugely complex hill that's seen many a Munroist stand vacantly at Dalwhinnie trying to puzzle out what the hell is going on up there.
From this vantage point it becomes clearer, showing its rounded back to the west and a steep series of crags, cliffs and gullies to the north and east.
An even better view of it is a later reward at the summit of Carn Dearg, when you can clearly see the sharp high gully that slices Ben Alder in two, with a remarkably large high-level loch nestling between the summit and the top of Beinn Bheoil.
Ben Alder has always seemed as impenetrable to me as a hi-fi magazine, but from up on the ridge it gives away its secrets and reveals a relatively simple ascent from the west up a long, inclining slope.
There's an astoundingly dark deep gorge dividing Ben Alder and Aonach Beag called the Bealach Dubh, through which runs an eerie stalkers' path.
If there hasn't been an historic massacre there, then somebody ought to organise one, or at least a bit of a tiff, to do justice to its shadowy, sombre sentinels of cliffs.
Perhaps someone could lure some, sportsmen, in tweeds into its tenebrous depths, where we could leap down on them from a great height to tweak their noses and fill their plus fours with cornflakes.
That would do the trick.
Although we were walking on a sunny, but chilly Saturday in early June, the ridge was completely deserted, a great bonus considering the weekend traffic on most Munros.
But as we continued on to the broad plateau of Geal-Charn, not named on the ordnance survey map, we saw a figure in the distance.
I have already mentioned my contempt for those who don't say hello on hills, so as this soul was alone I prepared to greet him or her heartily.
The tricky thing is to judge at what point to raise a hand in salutation.
Too soon and both parties are left grinning at each other soundlessly for a quarter of a mile, unsure as to what happens next.
Too late and the greeting  is grunted as an afterthought as you both pass only feet away from each other.
This walker solved the problem.
He altered his course to avoid us altogether.
Finding myself mildly offended, and not to be denied contact, I shouted and waved from at least half a mile away.
A hand was raised limply although he didn't appear to look up.
A thin line, I think, between a man in total harmony with peace and solitude and a grumpy, unsociable, old sourpuss.
It's at the top of Geal-Charn that you must make the decision to go back or carry on to Carn Dearg.
The problem is that while the previous three Munros are all close together, Geal-Charn is bloody miles away.
We decided that although we were tired we might never be given another chance to get at it so easily.
Ted might decide he doesn't like me any more, that I laugh too loudly or drink too much of his beer, and then we'd have to get a tent.
So we set off down the steep easterly flank of the mountain, alongside a spectacular waterfall that incredibly was still partially frozen in June.
It drops into Lochan an Sgoir over steep cliffs and a path of sorts zig zags its way in tandem, until you reach a rounded ridge between two scrumptious corries.
This is a magical place, and fatigue is suppressed by wonder, especially if you had a pork pie before the descent.
A long pull up to the summit, Carn Dearg pays a dividend of an uninterrupted view north and east, to Loch Pattack, the snaking gash of Loch Ericht and, as I mentioned, south to offer a clear perception of the hanging valley of Ben Alder.
Below nestles the Culra bothy, surrounded by a thick green fog emanating from its occupants' underpants, and to the north-west is the astonishing side of Beinn a' Chlachair.
Astonishing to me at least, since it's a mountain I'm intimate with from its friendly north face, and had little notion of its dramatic cliffs lurking sneakily behind me all those times I sat innocently chewing chocolate at the top.
Instead of retracing our steps, we dropped down into An Lairig, the glen between the ridge and the deceitful Beinn a' Chlachair, mainly because Mr OS map assured us with a neat dotted line that there was a stalkers, path there.
Forget it.
It barely exists, and gives up completely after Dubh Lochan, leaving the hoodwinked walker to stumble back through huge peat hags, and over miles of outrageously rough ground.
Crossing the shoogly bridge back to the road, we looked like two  carcasses hanging from an abattoir refrigerator hook.
I've seen more energy in a darts champion.
We were exhausted.
Since we could barely stand up or speak there was little point in dropping in on Ted and Theresia, although perhaps they wouldn't have noticed much difference in my case, given as they are to ply me with drink.
But the day was a stunner, with only one sighting of a human being in 13 miles of walking.
It was only later that I came up with a theory for his reticence to stop and speak.
Because we had the car, something other walkers couldn't do, we were approaching Carn Dearg just after lunch.
This would have been impossible unless we camped at the foot of Beinn Eibhinn, or had started from Loch Ossian at dawn, or were two gold  medalist fell-runners.
Maybe he was cheesed off meeting people so far along the ridge without explanation as to their start point.
My companion had a more plausible theory.
He said I waved at the poor man like a loony.
Sgurr Nan Coireachan to Sgurr Thuilm
Sgurr nan Coireachan; 956m;(OS Sheet 40; 903880); M202.
Sgurr Thuilm; 963m;(OS Sheet 40; 939879); M189.
THOSE WHO LEAVE THE WEST HIGHLAND LINE AT FORT WILLIAM ARE MISSING possibly the most beautiful section of railway in Europe, that is the line that runs westward to Mallaig.
Ha!
I can hear critics cry.
How can I award it such heady status when there are railway links snaking between the mighty Alps that make the West Highland line look like Clapham junction?
The fact is that nowhere on earth sketches such a dramatic and romantically loaded countenance like the north-west of Scotland, and believe me, I've poked around the world a bit.
Heavy precipitation sets it aside from its bone-dry Alpine and Himalayan rivals, lavishing a verdure on Scotland, and a primeval quality to its light that is quite unique.
And where else on earth would a through train from Glasgow to Mallaig unhitch the guard's van at Fort William that contained your bike, without breaking the news to you until Lochailort?
My jaw was on the carriage floor the first time I took the train to Mallaig.
Even though my bike and rucksack were miles away on the platform of Fort William station, I cannot remember being so profoundly moved on public transport, unless you count the time I thought I saw Sean Connery on the Piccadilly Line.
One of the many highlights is the view down Loch Shiel from Glenfinnan, a vista that has been reproduced many times on gaudy retouched 60s' postcards, and on calendars handed out at Christmas by firms who manufacture ball-bearings.
The landscape is rugged and savage, despite a preponderance of caravans, aluminium chairs and fat people with flasks cluttering up the winding road that runs parallel to the railway for the majority of the journey.
Readers hardly need me to remind them that the simple but  magnificent monument at the head of Loch Shiel is to commemorate the 1745 Jacobite rebellion against English domination.
English tourists might like to be reminded that the ghastly visitor centres, the scant toilet facilities and the gruesome catering in the West Highlands of Scotland are there to get you back for the fact you won.
I fell madly in love with this area of Scotland the first time I set eyes on it, and subsequently crawled all over it for years, marvelling at how many caves Bonnie Prince Charlie managed to occupy in his escape from the Redcoats.
Old Charlie must have had a bit of a penchant for potholing judging by the amount of time he spent in every rock crevice north of Carlisle, but I prefer to suspend my scepticism and believe that the great man did indeed peel off his powdered wig and roll out a sleeping-bag in all the places that maps and local handouts would have us believe.
I can picture the romantic scene now.
Prince Charlie's servants ushering him urgently on to a boat, looking anxiously over their shoulders to check that no traitor has deceived them and given away the location of the Prince's departure, when suddenly the Prince spies a dark hole some miles away on the side of a hill.
‘’ Attendez!’he will say.
‘Voilà un autre cave.’
The luckless servants trudge resignedly towards the recess.
By this time, the Prince's obsession with caves has grown to such a fever pitch that his servants are barely given time to unpack his toothbrush before he spies another gash in the rock, this time many countless miles away.
‘Voilà!
Un autre cave là-bas!’
Perhaps it's just as well we lost the battle.
If you believe all the tourist literature, Charlie, had he come to power, would have made it compulsory to live in rock fissures.
Still, a better solution than Mrs Thatcher's legacy, where a mock Georgian red brick house on a speculative builder's estate, with bottle glass windows and a mock doric columned portico is considered desirable.
Give me Charlie's cave any day.
Given the rugged nature of the area, I was shocked, indeed horrified, to find that although it contained several hundred of Prince Charlie's caves, it only boasted three Munros.
How could Mother Nature have dealt such a savage blow?
It's claimed, perhaps unsurprisingly, that the Young Pretender also spent a night out on one of the three, Sgurr Thuilm.
Mind you, if the tourist board thought they could get away with it, they'd probably claim he spent an afternoon at the local petrol station, buying some anti-smear windscreen wash and a fan belt, before moving on to a  gift shop to purchase a handmade stuffed velvet Loch Ness monster and having an appreciative sniff at the perfumed candle display.
When such a large area reveals it has very few tall peaks then you can bet your last Mars Bar they'll be stunners.
As a birthday celebration some time ago, I set off with a companion to conquer the two more accessible ones, Sgurr Thuilm and Sgurr nan Coireachan.
The starting point is very conveniently from the visitor centre's car park in Glenfinnan.
A malinger round the monument is worth your while, if only for the extraordinary view down Loch Shiel and to reassure yourself that you will soon be leaving behind all the people milling idly around their coaches, to whom 1745 means quarter to six.
The first part of the walk kicks off up a private road gliding beneath a fabulous railway viaduct, the very one from which I had gazed in my bike-less train down the length of Loch Shiel for the first time some ten years earlier.
There is a package holiday that runs steam trains up and down the line during the summer, carrying rich tourists dressed in dinner-jackets and gowns, who scowl sternly from their carriage windows when the train is stranded at obscure little Scottish stations.
Dozens of people with rucksacks glare back at them from the platform as they wait for their substandard ‘Sprinter’ to turn up; wet, cold and miserable perhaps, but at least secure in the knowledge that they will eventually travel through the same scenery without parting with their life savings.
As we passed under the viaduct that day, one of these steam trains passed overhead, in a cloud of champagne and Chanel fumes.
Some find this special reproduction steam train moving and nostalgic.
I find it to be an irritating reminder that the solid rail service taken for granted by this part of the country, the one that provides an essential lifeline spring, summer, autumn and winter, is eventually going to be lost to these seasonal theme-park trucks full of florid, truffle-guzzling lounge lizards.
Judging by the amount of Kodak film expended by watching tourists in the seconds it took the train to cross the viaduct, I was alone in my seething contempt for the caviar wagon.
It's a pretty sight alright, even if sparks do set fire to the dry grass on either side of the track, enraging landowners.
But a prettier sight would be more frequent diesel trains packed with local people returning from shopping trips and visits to Glasgow and Fort William.
The road is a Land-Rover track, and makes easy going and scenic walking alongside the River Finna until you reach Corryhully Lodge.
The Scottish      Mountaineering Club's Munros book very politely describes this building as ‘extraordinarily out of character with its surroundings’.
As understatements go, it's a beauty — a bit like saying the Sun newspaper is not quite as good as The Independent .
Why a laird would build such a strange, suburban, concrete monstrosity in a remote and beautiful glen is open to debate.
Perhaps an agricultural supplier was giving them away free with every 200 gallons of sheep dip.
Just ignore it if you can, and follow the river up the glen until you see and understand the nature of the impressive Coire Thollaidh.
From here you can choose either peak as your first, complete the ridge and return to the same point at the river, but it's recommended that you traverse east to west taking in Sgurr Thuilm as Munro number one.
OVERLEAF: Looking west to Loch Morar from Sgurr Thuilm
It's not a hard walk up the spur that leads to the summit, and the lust to be able to see far into the rough bounds of Knoydart hiding behind Sgurr Thuilm will motivate even the most indolent hiker.
The view is astonishing.
The northern slopes of Sgurr Thuilm sweep down to Glen Dessarry, a favourite Knoydart walk-in route from lovely Loch Arkaig.
And indeed, from this lofty site Loch Arkaig itself is a vision to make you burst into song.
I'm not sure why Knoydart has ‘rough bounds’, any more than any other wild area.
It may be remote and staggeringly beautiful, but there's no need to show off.
Letterewe forest doesn't exactly have ‘smooth edges’, nor does Rannoch Moor have ‘tame perimeters’.
So what if Knoydart's bounds are a bit rough?
I suspect somebody invented the macho tag to keep out people who buy  stripey picnic wind-breaks from the Argos catalogue.
‘Ooh, I don't think we should go in there, dear.
They say it has very rough bounds.’
Whatever the reason, its landscape fascinates, with unrelenting ripples of rugged hills and deeply pitted glens rising to a clutch of mighty Munros.
Knoydart is a delight, looking mouth-watering from the Glenfinnan tops, and you can keep gazing at it longingly as you walk west from Sgurr Thuilm, round the rim of its heroic corrie towards Sgurr nan Coireachan.
The treat here is a view that encompasses a glimpse of Loch Morar, that deep narrow gash of water that snakes from the foothills of Sgurr nan Coireachan to the loch's namesake settlement of Morar on the coast below Mallaig.
It's only the eastern end of Loch Morar that deserves a visit for aesthetes, since the coastal end is, like all the lovely settlements on this divine coast, completely ruined by ugly estates of hideous bungalows and caravan sites that turn the stomach.
Greater peace could be found on a  boating pond in Regent's Park than at the populated end of poor Loch Morar in summer, with speed boats raping its once enigmatic waters and queues of cars waiting for senior citizens in their caravans to unblock the single track road where they have parked in a passing place to brew up a cuppa.
But from the peace of your Munro, all such regrets at its passing as a place of tranquillity vanish and it unveils its wilder delights at the east to those who come by foot and not by a knob-head's speed boat.
What a place to spend a birthday.
I was elated by the two peaks, but forgetful of how long the walk out would be.
The descent from the second Munro was knee-wrenching, and although it's a relief to regain the track in the glen, it's not such a relief to remember how far away the starting point is.
Ugly as Corryhully Lodge is, you wouldn't say no to being asked in for a cold beer as you passed, as long as no one you knew saw you go in.
I'll wager the Young Pretender was invited in for a Grolsch on his way back from a cave.
My beer was to be in a posh hotel where I was being treated for my birthday, and after the heaven of getting out of a T-shirt that was generating its own new species of life in the arm pits, and into a hot bath, I looked forward to discussing the day eagerly with my companion.
I was asleep after the crême brulée g.
Another authentic Prince Charlie's cave!
An innocent bothy conceals stinking climbers
A Roof Over Your Head
MUNROS, THEY'RE ALL OVER THE PLACE.
THAT MEANS THAT NO MATTER where you live, you're going to stop overnight from time to time.
If you have already rejected hotels as too pricey, and youth hostels as too lugubrious, then two further types of accommodation spring to mind when we consider the problem of finding accommodation in the wild and lonely Scottish hills: bothies and tents.
I have nothing against tents.
I spent most of my childhood holidays chasing our tent along the tops of cliffs in the middle of the night as gale-force winds carried it towards the sea.
Of course we had a rather unsuitable contraption, described as a ‘continental’ tent.
That means it was for use in climates and countries so benign that the natives require no shelter at all, and where a tent is more or less a decorative affectation.
Pitched on the machair in Sutherland, however, it proved to be as useful as holding a tea towel over your head.
The concept of these ‘continental’ Wendy Houses with little canvas porches, plastic see-through windows and PVC-checked curtains could only have been dreamed up by someone who has never been two degrees north of the equator.
Still, it provided the Gray family with regular exercise, so often did we pursue it over large tracts of Scotland as the tent tried to escape home to warmer climes in the south, flapping its PVC accessories like the wings of a large, wounded goose trying to take off.
Serious walkers and climbers, however, have no such problems in their neat storm-force tents.
These little units boast they can withstand even the fiercest tempest, allowing the owner to remain snug and comfortable inside as the elements rage outside.
At least that's what the catalogue says.
My idea of being snug and comfortable is sitting in an armchair by a log fire, with a pair of slippers on and someone to bring me soup.
A damp sleeping-bag on a lumpy ground sheet, under canvas that drips and flaps like the sails  of a round-the-world yacht, falls pretty short of the mark.
Yet camping is often the only way to get near the mountain of your choice, especially when you choose to ascend some of the more remote peaks.
Since this is the case, it's important to make the best of it and follow some basic rules that will aid you to master the art of castrametation.
Travel light.
This means sacrificing the crate of export and the three pounds of reheatable madras curry in a Tupperware box, and replacing them with objects for your more immediate use, like the tent.
The spartan nature of camping requires that you live on dehydrated food, and since at the time of going to print no manufacturer has come up with dehydrated beer, enforced sobriety will be a big feature of your expedition.
This perhaps, is a blessing in disguise.
Emerging from a tent at 6.30 in the morning, desperate for the toilet, but too cold and stiff to move from your reeking sleeping-bag, the last thing you need to deal with is a hangover.
Mind you, a hangover is pretty similar to the way you'll feel anyway, so you won't notice the difference.
If you're camping in the wilderness on your own, don't let imagination get the better of you.
It's remarkable how similar an owl hooting can sound to a homicidal, horny-clawed, hairy, fanged demon from the bowels of hell about to rip through the canvas and tear your throat out with a gurgling, raspy cackle.
Easy mistake.
A good tip to avoid the terrors of the night is simply to imagine where you are in the daylight, and by picturing the pleasant surroundings of your tent in brilliant sunshine, the dark night will hold no satanic secrets.
This tip does not apply if you are camping at Aviemore however, where imagining your surroundings in daylight is worse than anything Hell can come up with.
You must take a pair of fine-denier stockings with you.
This is not so you can cross-dress in the privacy of wild open country, or perform a stick-up on a youth hostel and rob them of the night's takings of £14.95, but to put over your head when the midges come out.
There are no words to describe the profound horror of these beasts, but ‘aaaaaargh!’ will do for now.
The perfect weather for camping — a still, warm night with a gigantic pastel-coloured moon reflecting dreamily in a glassy loch — is coincidentally the perfect night for the midges to chew your ass off.
Grown men buckle under the fear that these relentless, dancing grey clouds bring.
Men who can cling to overhanging rocks thousands of feet above their companions, men who climb into perilous situations in the knowledge they are inches from death, men who are strong enough and man enough to meet any  physical challenge, these are the men who call for their mum when they find they left the jungle Formula back in the car.
Your canvas shelter has no defence against the midge, and the only course of action is to spray the inside of the tent with the strongest insect repellent on the market, preferably something banned in all other European countries, and then dive into the sleeping-bag and cover your head, trying hard not to inhale the toxic gases.
Of course you will wake up in the morning with a nervous disorder and a slightly lower IQ, but at least you won't have any itchy red lumps.
The only other piece of important advice is that, although you can walk anywhere in Scotland, you are not entitled to camp without permission.
I suppose this is sensible.
After all a walker is probably unlikely to take an axe to some prime woodland, build a fire, get a guitar out and sing Kumbaya my Lord all night.
The law therefore is there to protect the landowner.
Not because of his trees, you understand, but because no one can be expected to put up with someone singing Kumbaya .
So choose your site carefully.
If you knock at the door of the gamekeeper's house and he comes to the door wearing an antler head-dress, a black satin robe with a pentangle on it, and is holding a headless bleeding chicken in one hand, then even if he gives you permission to camp, think about going to a B & B. Some country folk are best left to their own devices.
A bothy is supposed to be easier.
For those who have never had the experience, a bothy is a hut, either a renovated ruin or a specially built shack in the heart of the wilderness that walkers can use if they need shelter.
The drawback is that lots of people use them and that lots and lots of people will want to use it on precisely the night you require to be there.
Nothing wrong with that, you may say.
A bit of companionship with fellow climbers and walkers is just the job at the end of a hard day.
A sing-song round the fire perchance, a few spooky tales to swop, and then a friendly round of goodnights before slipping off to dreamland on a clean and functional bunk.
Nice theory.
Try coping with a party of underprivileged schoolchildren from a housing estate in Manchester with a near-hysterical social worker, a ghetto blaster and some crisp bags to sniff glue, two glum shaven-headed squaddies with flatulence, and a computer programmer from Maidstone who wants to tell you about why his promotion fell through, and then with one eye twitching, accuses you of having stolen his processed cheese.
Used properly, bothies are places of great convenience and delight, but  do remember a couple of important points.
Don't assume you will find shelter in a bothy and walk into the wilderness without an alternative.
Sometimes bothies are locked, particularly during the stalking season, and very often you open the door to find there are 75 people crammed into a shack built to accommodate 15.
If you do manage to find a place in one, you must tidy it up when you're ready to leave and remember to take your litter with you.
People treat this last request in a very strange way.
They take almost everything home with them except whisky bottles.
These bottles are left with a candle rammed into the neck and therefore presumably considered useful.
However, when the summer is over and the bothy is left with 200 whisky bottles, each sporting a candle stump in the neck, their usefulness has to be questioned.
Why do people think that inserting a candle into something they have no further use for renders it an indispensable household utensil instead of litter they should be taking home in their rucksacks?
Perhaps to avoid taking anything home from the bothy at all, you could stick a candle in some old bacon fat, or a UHT milk carton.
How about a candle on a piece of toast or in half a grapefruit?
Of course to avoid digging latrines, you could also stick a candle in whatever drips out of your bottom.
That should at least get the point over to the whisky bottle interior designers.
Don't expect to have sex in a bothy either.
If you've just done a 12-mile ridge-walk then I'm sure nothing will be further from your thoughts, but if you plan a weekend away with a person you've fancied for ages and somehow end up heading for a bothy, unless you are totally alone any thought of a fumble in the sleeping-bag should be out of the question.
There is nothing more anti-social than other people at it when you are trying to get some kip.
It's also rather annoying if you're on your own, a bit like watching someone eating a three-course meal when you have some dry toast and a pickled onion.
So stick to your own tent if you want a snog.
As a final word, for those who are novices in the world of finding somewhere to sleep in the wilds, I can be of some assistance.
I have a ‘continental’ tent for sale, complete with stylish porch, PVC window and curtains.
Simply send me a large cheque and I will provide you with the ordnance survey co-ordinates of its last sighting.
An Gearanach to Sgurr a' Mhaim
An Gearanach; 982m;(OS Sheet 41; 188670); M162.
Stob Coire a' Chairn; 981m;(OS Sheet 41; 185661); M165.
Am Bodach; 1032m;(OS Sheet 41; 176651); M96.
Sgor an Iuhhair; 1001m;(OS Sheet 41; 165655); M49.
Sgurr a' Mhaim; 1099m;(OS Sheet 41; 165667); M133.
PLANNING AN EXPEDITION OF SEVERAL MUNROS IS AN EXCITING BUSINESS.
IN fact planning any route that you've made up yourself across wild land is fun, unless you're doing so to escape from someone who is trying to kill you or lock you up.
Mind you, Richard Hannay in John Buchan's The Thirty-Nine Steps planned his route because people were trying both to kill him and lock him up, and he still seemed to have some fun.
But then right-wing, upper-class fictional characters would have fun even if tentacled Martians were chasing them through sewage.
There's always a girl of good breeding to marry and a wise old servant to welcome them home and run them a bath on page 342.
But since none of that applies to you, you will know what I mean and probably share my fondness for Munro window-shopping.
Mine takes place in my flat, all over the living-room carpet, with maps spread out like prayer mats and cats lying triumphantly and with great precision on the co-ordinates that are of particular interest.
Such is the entertainment value of working out your own routes that I remain baffled by those who think the West Highland Way is a good idea.
There are lots of ways to walk to Fort William if that's what you fancy, except now one of them is littered with lots of wooden posts with painted thistles, and hundreds of people trudging about who never thought of walking to Fort William until someone gave them the West Highland Way    guide book for their Christmas.
Live and let live I say, but unless I want to be certain of constantly bumping into parties of rambling Rotarians, I think I will keep off these organised highways.
Some of the larger groups of Munros demand personal route planning, since the permutations of how one may bag them are endless.
The Mamores are just such a group of mountains, containing 11 Munros placed magnificently between Loch Leven and Glen Nevis, and since there is easy access from both north and south you have all manner of decisions to take about where to start and finish, how many to do and in what order.
A friend and I spread the maps out, moved the cats, and decided to pick off five Munros that form a horseshoe ridge culminating in Sgurr a' Mhaim, and including something ominously titled the Devil's Ridge.
This route begins from Glen Nevis and you can take your car up to the head of the Glen and leave it in a packed car park, if you can find a space between the ice-cream vans and hot-dog vendors.
You have the choice of being snooty and tutting at people sitting in their cars, packing their faces with hot dogs, or you can pack your own face with a hot dog before you set out.
I recommend the latter.
There is a huge sign here below the Allt Coire Giubhsachan, a steep, slabby waterfall cascading down to the edge of the car park, that yells, ‘WARNING!
This is not the path to Ben Nevis.’
It goes on at some length to persuade people not to climb up this waterfall and muck about in it.
It may not be the path, but of course it is perfectly possible, although steep and hard, to get to the summit of Ben Nevis via this corrie although I can think of no mountaineer who would imagine a gushing, torrential waterfall to be the path, take off their socks and shoes and start trying to wade up it.
‘Oh look, John!
It's a big, deep, fast flowing river.
That must be the path to the top.
Glad I brought my waterproof trousers.’
‘No, Laura, I think you're mistaken.
There's a huge deep loch over there.
I vote we walk into it and look for the summit under the water.’
Hardly likely.
So one can only surmise that this rather authoritarian sign is aimed at people whose knuckles scrape the tarmac.
I'm not complaining.
It's a free country and everyone has the right to be mind-numbingly stupid if they want, and subsequently I suppose it's better if they can avoid killing themselves as a direct result.
So if the sign saves lives I'm all in favour of it.
I just don't want to see similar signs appearing up mountains as   hill-walking grows more popular Where would it all end?
A sign up on the narrowest section of the Aonach Eagach perhaps reading ‘WARNING!
This is not the way to the ladies room in the Kingshouse Hotel.
You are on a mountain.’
Or one on top of the Inaccessible Pinnacle on Skye urgently declaring, ‘WARNING!
This is not the way to the ladies room in the Kingshouse Hotel either.
In fact this is an even worse mountain and it's on Skye, you imbecile!
Glencoe is that way.
Mind how you go now, have a nice day!’
Let's leave the mountains wild and dangerous and just make sure we know what we're going to face when we tackle them, and go fully prepared.
The whole point is adventure and calculated risk taking.
If signs start going up we'll have wrought-iron railings and flowerpots round the trip points next.
A track runs east from the car park, alongside the magnificent Water of Nevis, starting off benignly enough to lure bored coiffured teenagers in high heels along it until they come a cropper as it climbs through the woods and becomes rocky.
The river is impressive, tumbling down through a deep gorge, from which it has cut weird and wonderfully shaped holes in the smooth rock.
These sparkling crystal green pools look ideal for swimming, but beware dangerous undercurrents, the fact that they are deeper than the look, a temperature cold enough to freeze-dry your internal organs, and an audience of 50 tourists who will stand and watch as you try to get out of the water and back into your underpants with some dignity and without swearing.
Although the path at this stage is packed solid with shuffling picnickers, it's a beautiful little track, especially when it emerges from the gorge and opens up into a wide glen where the Allt Coire a' Mhail tumbles to the Water of Nevis via a narrow and dramatic waterfall.
Were you to continue on this path it would take you to Corrour Station on the edge of Rannoch Moor, and judging by the brutal erosion, something exciting and irresistible must be going on up there to lure so many boot-clad walkers along the track.
Maybe they're having Acid House parties or car boot sales.
All right then, it might just be a fabulous walk, but whatever the reason it's helped wear a deep wide scar up the glen that the scenery could well do without.
But it would be hard to ruin this part of the glen completely.
It's almost Himalayan in character, possessing that combination rare in Highland topography, of rugged drama twinned with pastoral tranquillity.
It's also  alive with midges, which stands in the way of it being a Scottish Shangrila.
Hard to picture happy mystical Tibetans dancing mysteriously in their bright robes in a place where two inches of bare skin turns black with the little schmucks in seconds.
The only exotic mysterious dance this glen will witness is one where walkers run wildly about in circles waving their arms in alarm, screaming, ‘Get them off me!’
Oh no, it's the Devil's Ridge
There's a bridge across the river consisting of three ropes of thick wire in a V-shape.
The crosser is required to tight-rope walk on the single strand below and hold on to the two other lines for balance.
There's no need to use it if the river's not in spate, since you can just as easily hop over some stones in the shallows a few yards further upstream.
But when the snow melts in spring this crossing is essential, so it's worth trying just for the fun of it.
As we approached, a party of surly children were being taught how to traverse this wire contraption by an Outward Bound teacher from the Midlands.
The poor poppets were being forced to attach lifelines to the upper cables and edge across as though their lives depended on it.
This odd instructor shouted at them constantly in a tone of voice that suggested they were clinging to a ledge hundreds of feet above a lava-filled crater, being pursued by leathery-skinned trolls.
In fact they were on a bridge hanging innocently above two feet of pleasant, placid water, that on this balmy summer afternoon looked inviting enough to jump into anyway.
But this man's job was the creation of adventure where clearly none was available.
There's definitely money to be made by running an Outward Bound course.
All you have to do is grow a beard and look rugged, take a bunch of gullible kids from good homes, make their parents pay through the nose to let them sleep in bunks and eat beans, and then pretend that mundane things are difficult or unusual.
It wasn't as if they were heading for the hills.
After their terribly exciting bridge crossing, they hopped back over the shallows and headed back to their mini-van.
I'll bet he made them rope up to do the dishes.
I think I may start up a course.
For only £500 a week all inclusive, I'll show you how to put on walking boots, where the zip on your kagoul can be located, how to prepare a salami sandwich, and what to do if you should come across a gate.
Course members will sleep in a tent while I take a suite at the Inverlochy Castle Hotel, and at the end of the week everyone gets an official hand-written certificate to say they can put on gaiters without
assistance.
OK, some courses are good.
Don't sue.
When safely across the river, remembering of course to unclip your lifeline, take off the safety helmet, undo your life jacket, and slip out of the survival suit, the route passes beneath the splendid waterfall and starts to climb up to An Gearanach, not marked by name on the ordnance survey map.
It's a steep ascent but the compensation is a swift gaining of the ridge.
From the first top there is a breathtaking panorama back across the glen to the southern slopes of Ben Nevis and Aonach Beag, but perhaps more thrilling, across the corrie westwards to the goal of Sgurr a' Mhaim.
On a curving ridge-walk like this, the last Munro staying within sight all the way can either be immensely heartening or terrifically dispiriting, depending on your state of exhaustion.
At the start, when you still have enough energy to argue if you can see Schiehallion or not, and your first piece of chocolate has yet to be unwrapped, the distant peak beckoning on the far side of the ridge is sensational.
After a non-Munro top, An Garbhanach, it's a short pull up to the second peak Stob Coire a' Chairn.
Here, the shapely Am Bodach makes you ache to carry on, and although it looks sharp but simple, there is quite a vertigo-inducing section of easy scrambling at the top that may catch those without a head for heights unawares.
You will gather I mean it caught me unawares, and in fact it disturbed me that having a bit of a wobbly on something as simple as this did not bode well for the Devil's Ridge, which The Munros book described as a section where ‘some may welcome the security of a rope’.
I blame the fact that a crow chose to hover below me as I scrambled up a tricky bit of path, made more perilous by loose shifting gravel.
I wish crows wouldn't do that.
It's on Am Bodach that a lot of people's routes converge.
Those who came up from the Kinlochleven side may climb Am Bodach with the plan to turn east and do Na Gruagaichean, or carry on westwards for Stob Ban.
Or indeed they could be heading for the two peaks we had just thrashed.
So much choice, and so many different ways to traverse this superb maze of peaks and ridges means that there is sometimes a bit of a scrum at these crossroad peaks.
It's an amusing game however, as you struggle for a seat out of the wind at the cairn to eat your peanut butter sandwiches, trying to guess which way everyone will go when they smack their lips, wipe their hands on their breeches and get up to leave.
Some may even have come up from the West Highland Way which runs below Am Bodach in a secluded glen parallel to Loch Leven.
But they're easy to spot.
They'll be searching for a wooden stick with a thistle  painted on it, and discussing the minutes of the last Rotarians' whist drive subcommittee meeting.
I doubt if our route caused any speculation in others at all, and so we finished lunch and turned west towards Sgor an Iubhair.
There is a tremendous feeling of comfort when you finally change direction on such a walk.
Since the final Munro has been with you all the way along, it's only here that you feel you are now finally making your way towards it and the conclusion of the walk.
But of course there was still the Devil's Ridge to come.
Would I or would I not welcome the security of a rope?
Would I perhaps welcome the security of a helicopter, or welcome the security of waking up in bed to find that it was all a dream and I hadn't actually gone hill-walking at all because I had a date with Gerard Depardieu?
Who could say?
There was no sign of this Devil's Ridge and by the time we reached the summit of Sgor an Iubhair I was imagining a knife edge of rock, hanging above an abyss full of red scaly demons, holding pitch forks and hissing to one another, ‘She hasn't got the security of a rope.’
At the summit, however, the ridge reveals all.
Rather disappointingly there is not too much to be scared of in summer.
It's certainly a narrow  aréte , but I found the tiny loose stones of Am Bodach's unstable path far more disquieting than this ridge, with its well-worn, solid path snaking comfortingly across to the last top between us and our goal of Sgurr a' Mhaim.
However, winter would transform it into something perilous in the extreme, even with crampons and an axe, and I'd give it a miss during that season unless you're an experienced mountaineer.
If anything, by this time I would have welcomed the security not of a rope, but of seeing Sgurr a Mhaim about a mile closer.
It had been a long walk so far, and it wasn't over.
The last great pull up the final top was agony.
Sgurr a' Mhaim was my 5Oth Munro, but as I hauled my dejected little body up the last few hundred feet, I was thinking only of rest, not triumph.
But priorities shifted once on the summit.
What a place to view not only the entire ridge-walk we had completed, but the majesty of Ben Nevis, the tips of the Glencoe mountains peeking over the edge of the Mamores to the south and the most perfect eagle's eye view up to the head of Glen Nevis.
I was an emotional morsel as we headed back.
The minor irritation on returning to the car is that it is directly in front of you as you descend to the north, but there is nowhere to cross the river.
You could try of course, but after a colossal, tiring ridge-walk you would be a dingbat even to think of it.
So you are  forced to swing east again and stumble down through a dense birch forest until you reach the wire bridge, and retrace your steps back along the tourist path.
It was an evening of celebration for me, and after a pint and a half of draught Becks, I would have welcomed the security of a rope.
Looking north along the Devil's Ridge towards Sgurr a' Mhaim
Meall a' Choire Leith to Ben Lawers
Meall a' Choire Leith; 926m;(OS Sheet 51; 612439); M257.
Meall Corranaich; 1069m;(OS Sheet 51; 616410); M65.
Beinn Ghlas; 1103m;(OS Sheet 51; 626404); M45.
Ben Lawers; 1214m;(OS Sheet 51; 636414); M9.
JUST AS I LOATHE THE WORD ‘WORKSHOP’, I FEEL QUEASY WHEN PLACES include the word ‘centre’.
Shops are not shops any more, but ‘furniture centres’, or ‘DIY centres’.
The problem is that there is nothing remotely central about these places at all.
More often than not they are located ten miles outside town under a tin roof, in wasteland surrounded by a car park the size of Brazil.
Sadly, country folk have caught on.
Heritage Centres compete with Visitor Centres, while Gift Centres crop up next to Heather Centres.
It's only a matter of time before we will see a Centre Centre, where the visitor can enjoy a fascinating audio-visual presentation of the large varieties of Centres throughout Scotland.
It will, of course, be located somewhere so obscure that Dougie Donnelly will be required to voice-over a map on a television commercial explaining how you can get there with the family this Sunday.
The only centre I have time for is the Sea Life Centre near Oban, on account of a circular tank of herring you can stand under, and that it has a moray eel.
But even it would do itself a favour if it took the Tippex to its business stationery and removed that redundant word ‘Centre’.
The fact that the ordnance survey map of Ben Lawers proudly declared a Visitor Centre at the base left me no choice in the route I was to take to the top.
To avoid it, it meant climbing up from the Glen Lyon side and attacking the Ben via the three westerly Munros that share its ridge.
Ha!
That would show them!
No one 's going to make me buy a postcard with a baby otter on it, or pick up a leaflet on alpine lichens.
OVERLEAF: Ben Lawers
So a male companion and I drove up to the starting point in Glen Lyon, a few miles east of Bridge of Balgie where a bridge crosses the River Lyon to a cattle farm.
The horseshoe ridge that Ben Lawers dominates can be knocked off in a single day if you have legs of iron, but for a more leisurely exploration of the hills, Glen Lyon is where to pick off Meall a' Choire Leith, Meall Garbh, and the more distant Meall Greigh that turns the horseshoe into an S-shape.
All the guide books insisted that ‘fit walkers’ could certainly complete the five Munros that loop round from Glen Lyon, and so vanity compelled us to try.
The beauty and clarity of our spring day was forgotten momentarily when we lumbered through a mighty ocean of dung and mud, caused by a recent and substantial visitation from the farmer's cows.
Who'd be a cattle farmer?
At least sheep trot about doing their own unpleasant things well out of sight of the farmhouse kitchen window, and can be brought home by a couple of mad, slavering collies and a man with a whistle.
Cows, on the other hand, saunter around in large malodorous herds, bumping into the Land-Rover, farting and crapping all over themselves and each other, and turn previously walkable paths into evil, bubbling quagmires that leave the unsuspecting trekker caked in cow dung for the remainder of their day.
Perhaps that's the reason farmers keep them.
A bit of bother with walkers trudging through his land can soon be sorted out by nipping along to an agricultural auction and purchasing some huge stinking cows.
The happy landowner can then stand at the window smoking a pipe and wave cheerily at the unwelcome hill-walkers, secure in the knowledge that in a few minutes they will be heading back to the car, steam gently rising from them as they blink in distress from behind grisly face-masks of dung.
I was lucky.
The dung only penetrated as far as my upper thigh as we struck up the devastated hillside towards Meall a' Choire Leith.
The ascent on to the ridge evolves in easy stages, taking you up over a number of small, craggy knolls until you reach the commodious upper slopes of the Munro.
Ben Lawers looks very far away from here, possibly because it is in fact very far away from here, but the walking on this lofty green ridge is so agreeable that the distance still to cover becomes an irrelevance.
On gaining the ridge we walked behind a large group of sprightly, if somewhat sturdy, women well into their 50s, an unusual and inspiring sight to someone like myself who feels like a wizened wheezing old hag at 32.
We discreetly discussed who they might be, and finally placed our  bets on either a WRVS rambler's club from Perth, or a group of senior women's prison officers on an Outward Bound course.
As we overtook them, they revealed themselves instead to be German tourists.
Perhaps gangs of older women up hills is quite the norm in the Fatherland, and if so it could do with being aped here.
It's the old chaps in this country who get to pull on their boots and leave the women behind to a fate of wearing beige coats, having their hair permed and choosing a new tartan plastic cover for the Radio Times from the newsagent when they pick up their People's Friend .
If I can't still clamber up a mountain when I'm 55, subject to health and having both legs of course, I want to be put down humanely.
The rampant sexism of the climbing and walking fraternity over the last 50 years has left a whole generation of older women with the legacy of being expected to have the white-bearded, old sod's tea ready for him on the table when he comes home from a fabulous day out on the hills.
She will have spent the last 30 years of their marriage sitting in the passenger seat of the car which she is still unable to drive, disappearing into the kitchen when his climbing friends call round for a beer, and laughing dutifully at his mountain anecdotes over a dinner she has made for his boss.
I wish I could give these women their time again, to take them to the hills and show them what they could have shared with their selfish husbands, show them how a ridge-walk compares to a coffee morning in a draughty church hall, and how they could have become more in tune with their spirit and feelings up here than stuck down there watching television soap operas.
At least my generation of women is safe.
If you guys think that in our middle age we'll be at a Tupperware party while you do the Skye Ridge, you can roll your tartan shirts up and shove them.
Anyway the argument is academic, since by the time I'm 55 the Skye Ridge will be a London-owned Sport And Leisure ‘Centre’, with most of Glen Brittle bulldozed to provide the car park.
Leaving our Teutonic heroines behind, we carried happily on along the grassy ridge to Meall Corranaich, although a small matter of some concern was that Ben Lawers had started to cloud over.
The summit was already in cloud and things weren't improving.
It's a long walk to Meall Corranaich and just before the top, the ridge splits away to the west which causes some confusion in poor visibility.
At least we reached the summit before the weather slipped across the glen from Ben Lawers to get at us, and we thrilled to the views south and  west, with the seductive moss-green hills still sporting small patches of snow.
Because of the closing weather, an element of urgency entered our expedition, and my companion started to speed up his pace so dramatically that within five minutes conversation between us was only possible by semaphore.
Not wishing to be a pansy, I stepped up my pace too, but I was no match for the male legs I was pursuing since both of my spindly little limbs could fit into the right leg of his breeches.
The drop down from Meall Corranaich and back up to Beinn Ghlas was a great deal more substantial than I would have wished at this point in the walk, keeping in mind that I was hallucinating from the effort of the chase and the subsequent lack of oxygen managing to get anywhere near my lungs via a mouth full of clenched teeth.
When I finally caught up with my sprinting friend, who was standing innocently taking a swig from his water bottle, the needles on all my body dials were twitching into red.
We hadn't stopped for lunch yet, but decided that food would be a great
incentive to get us up this last steep pull on to the summit of Beinn Ghlas.
I was on my knees by the time we unpacked the sandwiches and tried to find the energy to chew, and I recall making small high-pitched squeaking noises in reply to any attempt at a chat.
Not only was it getting cold and windy, but it was getting very busy at the top of Beinn Ghlas.
People dressed in slacks and trainers kept walking by, saying jolly things to me like, ‘Don't worry.
Not long ‘till the top’ and ‘It doesn't get any easier, you know!’
Who were these people and what had my state of collapse got to do with them?
Anyway, we were at the top already.
It was only then I realised that these were the Visitor Centre people on their way to Ben Lawers, pockets stuffed with postcards of eagles and leaflets on natural birch forest regeneration.
As soon as I realised they thought I was knackered from the same route they had just walked, I was speechless with indignation.
But it's hard to reply to some sweet, well-meaning English family who are making the effort to be sociable, by throwing your tomato at them and yelling, ‘What do you know, you lazy bastards?
I've already done three Munros.’
I think that may have been construed as impolite, so I smiled and replied that, yes indeed it was still a bit to go before the top, and wow, certainly it was proving mighty tough.
But the day was past its best.
Not only was the weather becoming ghastly, with wind and rain starting to turn to gales with snow, the mountain was now full of people walking dogs and putting up umbrellas.
We dragged ourselves up the wide, eroded mess of a path that leads to Ben Lawers and up into the storm.
I thought the top would never come, but then it's easy to forget this mountain is nearly 4,000 feet.
Someone who couldn't forget that it was nearly, but not quite, that height, was one Malcolm Ferguson who in 1878 became so incensed by Ben Lawers being declared officially under the 4,000-foot mark by means of new surveying techniques, he decided to do something about it.
He organised a band of local workers to build a gigantic cairn 20 feet high, thus putting the summit safely above 4,000 feet again.
For this promethean task the workers were each paid with a handsome bound volume of Gaelic poetry.
Regional councils should take note.
When the navvies turn up for their wages on a Friday afternoon after a hard week of digging up roads, try presenting them with a handsome bound volume of Gaelic poetry.
Please could I be there when you try it?
Needless to say, the cairn crumbled, probably sabotaged by a disgruntled worker who got home to find he'd already read this particular volume of Gaelic poetry, and Ben Lawers remains at 3,984 feet.
For all we knew it  could have been 12 feet, since the weather was so bad at the top we could see no further than someone wearing a ski anorak and wellingtons sitting beside us.
We still had one Munro to go in our master plan, which was Meall Garbh to the north of Ben Lawers, but two minutes of huddling behind a rock reminded us that plans can be changed.
We abandoned the last Munro, especially as it's a top that can be combined with Meall Greigh to be bagged another day, and staggered down into the long glen that would take us back to our morning starting point.
Once down out of the wind, the weather was bearable again and we could enjoy the intriguing glen pitted with the ruins of ancient shielings either side of the Allt a' Chobhair.
There is a profusion of these ruins in this area, a testimony to how heavily and successfully populated it once was.
It's eerie walking silently between these ghost summer villages that must have once echoed to children playing, women gossiping and men complaining about being paid for their labours with books of Gaelic poetry.
Of course since the shielings were here to provide summer grazing for their cattle, the villages must also have echoed to people splashing about in mud and dung, and laments of, ‘Dad, I hate these smelly big things.
Why can't we have sheep like the neighbours?’
‘Hush, child.
They keep the walkers away.’
The whole Loch Tay area has a fascinating and rich history stretching back to prehistoric times, none of which I'm prepared to share with you.
Buy a history book.
Mainstream Publishing happen to offer a very fine selection, so hurry now while stocks last.
There is a small dam to pass, and then it's plain sailing all the way back to the car park to live with the shame that we failed to live up to the term ‘fit walkers’.
On the way home we stopped off at an alcohol centre and had a pint.
Oh for Pity's Sake, What Now?
SCOTLAND'S MOUNTAINS MEAN SO MANY THINGS TO DIFFERENT PEOPLE.
To the crofters who scraped a meagre living at their base they were acres of near-vertical land that couldn't support a turnip.
Battling clans and pursuing Redcoats cursed them for presenting huge obstacles denying fast military movement around the Highlands, whereas the Victorians regarded them as sporting playgrounds and background subject matter for romantic oil paintings of the fat, unattractive aristocracy and their useless families.
The modern perception of the hills, however, seems to be that they are one gigantic Butlin's.
Our mountains have survived for millions of years, bearing witness to a history of violent, volcanic activity, glaciation and erosion, but ironically it's the invention of the internal combustion engine and lightweight waterproof clothing that has put them under the most severe pressure yet.
The problem is not necessarily just the massive increase in numbers of walkers and climbers, but the fact that people are daily dreaming up new and more ridiculous things to do on the hills for fun.
Of course there has traditionally always been the kind of individual that will view any large feature in the landscape as something to jump off, slide down or swing from on the end of a piece of elastic.
They are usually wealthy ex-public school boys, who, since they will never need to work for a living, have little else to occupy them except the  pursual of cheap thrills.
Unfortunately, their penchant for the invention of bizarre new ways to tempt the grim reaper has filtered down to us, the lower orders, and we now follow their example.
If climbers hugged themselves in delight in the knowledge that they had the monopoly on daft, death-defying behaviour, their hearts must have sunk to see people above them launch themselves off cliffs, strapped to a parachute.
These are paragliders; mad fools who climb to the top of Munros  and jump off.
Inspiration no doubt came from the Alps, where handsome, tanned young men float around below bright silk parachutes, framed by the sunlit, benign, windless, snow-covered Alps.
How the Scottish paragliders imagined this sport would adapt to the arctic, savage, gale-torn mountains of home is anybody's guess, but they appear to be quite happy flapping around in the rain before plummeting out of the sky like Icarus and skidding to an inelegant halt face first in small lochans.
Perhaps my notion of wilderness is romantic and hopelessly out of date, but I have to say that I find paragliding an intrusion.
It causes no pollution, either in terms of fuel consumption or noise, yet finding yourself suddenly cowering in the shadow of a huge coloured parachute at the top of a hill where you imagined yourself to be alone, bursts the illusionary balloon of solitude and remote wilderness for me.
Perhaps it's because the sport seems ironically so urban that I find it less than thrilling.
It belongs somehow with those who hang around speed-boats and water skiers, and who think that Loch Lomond's Duck Bay Marina is ‘sporty’.
I'll admit it must be thrilling, but like most thrilling sports the downside is a lot of standing around.
You can always tell when people are preparing to partake in a thrilling sport from the small pack of men standing around with their hands in their pockets.
this happens on the beach where there is windsurfing, in the car parks and lift stations of ski resorts, when people are hang-gliding or ice-climbing, but most certainly when there is a paraglider about to take off.
Perhaps the band of ponderous chaps come with the equipment and can be selected in the shop along with harnesses, clips, body-braces and lightweight aluminium frames.
‘Right, sir, that's one parachute, a harness, a safety helmet and a group of five men to watch you with their hands in their pockets.
Would you like yuppie windsurfing men, bearded grim-faced mountain men, or the model aeroplane men with flat caps and quilted waistcoats?’
‘Well which would you recommend?
This'll be my first time.’
‘Oh certainly the model aeroplane men.
A bit pricey perhaps but they're very good value for money.
They'll stand and watch anything for hours.’
So many things can go wrong when you paraglide.
Apart from the obvious one which is to jump off the mountain incorrectly and kill yourself, the possibility for public humiliation is delightfully endless.
I sat eating my sandwiches in a grumpy sulk at the top of a mountain recently, while the pack of men surrounding a paraglider prepared him for take-off.
With a shout and to a chorus of ‘Go for it, Kevin!’ he ran    towards the edge and leapt into the air.
Seconds later he was struggling under yards of silk only 20 feet down the other side of the hill, wrestling beneath the parachute like an actor in a soft porn film.
Since that was my route home I could glance back every so often and see how the untangling process was going.
They took nearly an hour to sort him out.
A mountain bike at its most useful — as something to pose on a photograph
My only other close encounter with a paraglider was finding one grounded in a quagmire in the Arrochar Alps, where the poor man had come down in the wrong glen, leaving him miles to walk back to any road.
To add to his dismay, both his clothing and parachute were so clogged with peat and mud after an interesting landing that I would have paid money to have witnessed, that packing his gear up and walking out with it was out of the question.
The luckless creature, who confessed to coming from Leeds as though it were an explanation of the folly, abandoned it all and trudged home like a beaten cur.
No doubt his pack of men would have returned later to retrieve it, but it did strike me as a rather unsatisfactory way to spend a day in the hills.
A more significant intrusion into the wilds, certainly in terms of numbers, is the fashion of mountain biking.
I've always ridden bikes off the road on to trails to get far into the heart of the country, but they were big, creaky, clanking old things that had to have a puncture repaired every 20 minutes.
So I, foolishly, welcomed the invention of the tough trail bike, designed as it is to handle exactly the kind of unmetalled forest trails and dirt tracks I had previously navigated on something the grocer's boy in a Hovis advert would have ridden.
I began to get nervous when these new fluorescent vehicles started being referred to as ‘mountain' bikes.
Obviously they couldn't be ridden on a mountain, but magazine articles and newspaper features began treating them as a status symbol, and so every airhead on a salary of over £20,000 a year rushed out to buy one and take it up a mountain.
The glowing consumer reports about cycling the peaks and television commercials for aftershave showing hunky men rattling down sheer slopes of scree on bikes made me suspicious.
I hired one and went to try it on a mountain.
Of course you can't ride it up trackless slopes of heather, peat hags and boulder fields — in fact you have to carry it on your shoulder as soon as you leave any kind of track at all— but it performed brilliantly on the rocky Land-Rover track back down from the hill.
I was reassured that the nonsense would stop, and that people would use the bikes merely to get to the base of mountains, where the walk in was prohibitive of completing the hill in a  day without some means of transport.
I was wrong.
A man completed all the Munros with a mountain bike.
You'll notice I say ‘with’ a mountain bike rather than‘on’a mountain bike.
I can't imagine he enjoyed much of a free-wheeling, look-no-hands cycle along the Skye Ridge.
But why anyone would want to carry a bike up a mountain on their shoulder for the pleasure of being able to bump about on it for tiny, short stretches of flat ridge was completely beyond me.
It was their problem, I thought, and they could do what they liked.
Then the invasion started in earnest.
Walkers would find themselves diving out of the way on paths, escaping from runaway mountain bikes careering towards them on a mission to deposit their riders in a ditch.
Landowners started to complain that the bikes were chewing up their paths, raising the whole ugly debate about access up on to a new plane, and ridge-walks lost some of their grandeur by displaying fat tyre tracks on their grassy sections.
There is one great consolation, however, which is the fact that on a mountain nothing looks stupider than someone on a bike.
If paragliders can at least get away with their sport when safely airborne, since they then take on some element of grace and beauty, the mountain biker will always look a clod.
Part of the cause for derision is the accessories that go with mountain bikes.
Everything is day-glo, from pumps and pedals to the funny little helmets the riders wear to stop any further brain damage when they inevitably hit their heads on a rock.
Water bottles are sold to clip on the front of the bikes in emulation of the racers in the Tour De France.
This is to imply to a bystander that the biker is an athlete in training, with no time to stop and take a drink in a punishing schedule.
In fact they spend so much time flying head first into burns, one would have thought they could save even more time by simply opening their mouths and taking on water without the inconvenience of having to reach for the day-glo bottle.
Instead of dressing warmly for the elements, the bikers end up at the summit of popular hills dressed like Paul Weller in a Style Council video.
Not only should cycling shorts only be seen on people over six feet tall with perfect bodies, they should never be seen on Ben Lawers in October.
Happily, at the time of going to print the craze is dying a death, as consumers realise that £500 is a lot to pay for something you carry about on one shoulder, and that as a social status symbol it is as impressive as a 1979 Cortina without wheels propped up on bricks.
But since there is obviously a market for the invention of new mountain pursuits, I have been giving it some thought.
I am launching my new sport soon in a blaze of publicity.
It's called mountain skateboarding.
The sports man or woman simply walks to the top of a hill, carrying a special mountain skateboard, and when at the top climbs on the board for a thrill-of-a-lifetime journey down the hill.
Already I have been approached by a leading soft drinks manufacturer to host the world mountain skateboarding championships down a terrifying course on Sgurr Alasdair.
The skateboards are specially designed for the tough mountain conditions of Scotland, which is why they will retail at £600 each.
Well, they're certainly painted pink and say ‘mountain' on them in attractive graphics.
No doubt you will see an article in GQ magazine and The Face soon enough.
You can say you read about them here first.
Cairn Gorm
Cairn Gorm; 1245m;(OS Sheet 36; 005041); M5.
I DON'T KNOW WHY THE CAIRNGORMS HAVE NEVER TURNED ME ON.
MAYBE IT was a reaction to seeing too many Ford Fiestas with back window stickers pleading ‘Save The Cairngorms’ just above the one with a rainbow saying ‘There Is Hope’.
Perhaps it could also be blamed on having flicked past hundreds of dull photos of them in The Scots Magazine over the years, showing old men with their shirt sleeves rolled up, pointing at some rolling, lumpy, big hills with the caption reading, ‘The mighty Cairngorms are a sight for sore eyes in any rambler's book’.
I'm sure the sticker pleading with us to save them is connected with these photos.
It's asking us to save them from being depicted in overexposed snaps, and from being constantly pointed at by male senior citizens.
They just didn't seem very exciting.
Why would I want to go and wander around on these featureless big sods at the weekend, when I could be rollicking along a precipice on a terrifying, craggy west-coast mountain?
It would be a bit like choosing to go and spend all Sunday afternoon discussing skin diseases with your 75-year-old deaf aunty in Coatbridge, instead of taking up your boyfriend's offer of a day in bed at an expensive country house hotel, drinking champagne while he gives you a bit of a seeing to.
I was a girl who liked my mountains pointy, so I foolishly and ignorantly snubbed the Cairngorms.
I was also rather put off by the fact I had inadvertently climbed to the summit of Cairn Gorm from the restaurant at the top of the chairlift one drizzly afternoon years ago.
There were lots of people in plastic rain hoods puffing their way up a huge, cobbled stairway, complaining at how wide apart the steps had been laid.
It was no fun, and the putrid bridie at the restaurant, thrown across the counter at me by a  young waitress who clearly blamed me personally for the shortcomings in her life, was little consolation.
But friends assured me there was more to this grand range of mountains than my experience had suggested, and so to give it a chance I went back to climb Cairn Gorm properly, giving the bridies as wide a body swerve as possible.
The other main obstacle in the way of enjoyment is Aviemore, but unless you need to buy some chips, or have to come by train then you can just close your eyes as you pass by it.
Of course this is tricky if you're driving, but ask your passengers to distract you with an Ossianic ballad to keep you from thinking about the importance of Santa Claus Land and The Happy Haggis takeaway to our great Scottish heritage.
Heads should roll for the creation of modern Aviemore, but a public bottom-spanking of the jerks who built it still wouldn't solve the problem of how to get rid of it.
The difficulty is that some people actually like Aviemore.
Not only do they tolerate the fast-food shops serving up nutriment that top breeders wouldn't recommend for Fido, they go as far as purchasing two expensive weeks in a gruesome timeshare apartment, and sit smoking all day on a balcony overlooking the A9.
It seems also to have a special magnetism for their children, who look forward to spending all day playing video games until it's time to try and get served by a barman who doesn't notice they are 15 and only four feet ten.
It was notorious when I was a teenager in Glasgow.
For some reason I was unable to fathom, all the girls in my class at secondary school headed for Aviemore each weekend with the singular task of losing their virginity.
At least that's how it seemed.
They would trip off from school at four o'clock on a Friday, bright-eyed and singing Marc Bolan hits, and return glassy-eyed and forlorn on a Monday, having woken up on Sunday morning in a ditch with a bull-necked squaddie from Preston called Steve, with tobacco breath and boils on his neck.
After a few days recovering, they would skip off to get the bus north and have another go.
I was bamboozled as to the town's attraction, and I still am.
The only positive aspect is that since it attracts the seediest sort of tourist, it keeps them all in one place like a gigantic concrete fly-paper, and stops them wandering all over the unspoiled parts of the Highlands looking for go-cart tracks and timeshare chalets.
Yes, I am a snobby old ratbag, and please spell my second name with an A when you write to complain.
But I wish I'd been a snobby old  ratbag with some power on the Inverness-shire County Council planning committee in the 60s.
Driving to Cairn Gorm is a bit of a cheat, since you drive all the way up to the car park at 640 metres, but then a sea-level start in the Cairngorms is a bit tricky unless you don't mind parking the car in Aberdeen and walking in.
Loch Morlich must have been stunningly beautiful once, before the picnic tables and dinghies arrived, and at least the wonderful Scots pines that surround it have survived and are now protected.
How I adore Scots pines.
There is a modern commercial strain grown for timber that is tall, straight and unremarkable.
But these old self-regenerating woods are full of twisted and gnarled specimens, flaunting delightfully shapely canopies, like trees in a 19th-century Japanese silk painting.
Who would complain if landowners intent on forestry covered their land with such exotically random foliage instead of the tight rows of lugubrious, tax-avoiding sitkas they are fond of splattering over their hillsides?
The Scots pine allows a wealth of wildlife to exist in and under its branches, and it doesn't poke you in the bottom like a sitka if you nip into the woods for a pooh.
There is a splendid view out over this forest of pines from the car park at the base of the Coire Cas chairlift, and it's soothing to be reminded from here how small Aviemore is in the great scheme of things.
There is no need to walk up to the summit of Cairn Gorm underneath the chairlift, since there is a route that runs west from the car park, and takes you up on to the Fiacaill ridge, a world away from the frightful clanking kingdom of the ski-tows.
If only someone would invent ski-tows that could be folded up and packed away after the season.
People who both ski and mountaineer, like myself, are fickle creatures.
When I go skiing I want dozens of fast tows to whisk me to the top of runs and ensure I don't have to queue for 20 minutes behind a junior racing team, trying to unclip each other 's bindings and seeing how far they can spit.
But when I pack my skis back into the hall cupboard behind the vacuum cleaner, I want my hills unsullied by pylons and snow fences.
I suppose if I had to make the choice, I would sacrifice skiing for the sake of the hills.
After all, skiing in Scotland isn't exactly top class.
It usually means clattering over ice and rocks down a three-foot-wide piste, in gale-force winds and horizontal rain.
And the après ski is less like a Martini commercial and more like an episode of Colditz.
Who would pay a small fortune to come and spend a week in a draughty Highland hotel      miles away from the slopes, when they could get a package holiday to somewhere snowy, romantic and convenient in the Alps for half the price?
There is nothing uglier than a redundant ski-tow out of season, with its pylons marching up a scarred, broken hillside.
The Cairngorm chairlift people are obviously making a great effort to try and limit the damage caused by erosion, by constantly replanting the worn areas with grass seed.
But jumbo signs shouting ‘Keep Off.
Re-seeding in process!, don't do much to help renew the atmosphere of wilderness.
OVERLEAF: The  Fiaciall Ridge
Leave it all behind you and cross the bridge beneath the restaurant that will help you escape south-west towards open country.
It's a wonderful surprise to turn the corner, just yards away from the mayhem of the chairlift, and find yourself in wide, sweeping moorland, gently inclining up to the ridge.
There are a number of deep paths here, since this is a route to many other peaks and low-level walks, but cross the Allt Coire an t-Sneachda and start to ascend the craggy spur that hugs the western side of the corrie.
My preconceptions about the Cairngorms being dull were shattered by this splendid ridge.
The crags along here are heroic, offering sections of exhilarating scrambling if you want to keep to the crest.
Down in the corrie, two sparkling blue-green lochans perch beneath the steep cliffs, and it's hard to imagine that just over the next two gullies, people in golf jumpers are tucking into sticky buns.
The scale of the boulders is extraordinary, and piles of massive rounded rocks create magical little grottos that beg to have lunch eaten in them.
From here you can see the summit of lofty Braeriach to the south-west, iced with a mantle of snow for the majority of the year, and you start to understand what made the old men in shirt sleeves point.
I counted myself lucky to be able to see that far, since on this cold October day the weather was starting to turn hostile, with squalls of rain bursting from fast-moving clouds without warning.
It's so irritating having to constantly stop and put your kagoul on, and then stop 40 seconds later to take it off again.
How many times have you been walking with someone who does that all the time, regardless of climatic considerations, and wanted to deliver a rabbit punch to the back of their neck when they stop for the tenth time that day and begin the ponderous unclipping of their rucksack?
I'm going to work on a revolutionary kagoul that pulls itself on like the hood of a Chevy convertible, and then recedes at the touch of a button.
I'll be a millionaire.
After the theatrics of the ridge, it's a strange experience to emerge up  on to an enormous flat plateau — a bit like climbing the ladder up to your loft and discovering it leads to an American Football stadium.
This is a featureless big plateau, and I arrived on it in a blizzard.
It's small wonder that this plateau has claimed lives, since in the weather that I experienced it's impossible to have any sense of direction at all without the constant use of a compass and map.
The dangerous thing is that cliffs fall away to the north without warning, and someone getting lost in thick mist could easily come a cropper.
The added danger is that turning east instead of west will take a lost party deep into the wild region and away from help, with no prominent features on the hill to help make them realise their error.
I was a little unsettled by the fury of the blizzard, and hugged the top of the ridge all the way along, but avoided taking in the top due west of Cairn Gorm in case I was blown off my feet.
Although I left the car park wearing a long-sleeved T-shirt with my warmer clothes packed away in the rucksack, the walk was now a serious business and I was wearing everything I had with me.
By the time I stumbled to the summit of Cairn Gorm, it was hard to stand up straight, and the snow driving into my face stung like shotgun pellets.
It became important to get off the top quickly.
When the weather turns on you like that, you don't have time to stop and curse the fact you're missing the view.
All you can do is to keep moving, and hope they still have some bridies in the Ptarmigan restaurant.
As soon as I dropped about 70 feet down towards the restaurant, via the tourist runway with its ridiculous little suburban garden fences bordering the steps, the wind ceased and I stepped out of the snow.
It's a bit embarrassing to come staggering out of the mist, with a purple face, eyes lost in swollen, battered tissue, gasping for breath, to find people wandering around the path in cardigans and slacks.
The Ptarmigan was closed, and so I walked down beneath the ski-tow towards the road.
This is a short-cut walkers are not supposed to take, to prevent erosion, but it would have taken a man with a  Rotweiler and a machine-gun to stop me, so desperate was I to get back to the car and home.
I admit I was wrong about the Cairngorms, and I didn't even have the chance to see what was going on behind the plateau to the south.
Since I've done most of the really sexy west-coast mountains it's time to start exploring the interior of the Cairngorm range, especially now I've overcome my abhorrence of the ski-77tows and scone consumers.
But I draw the line at a car sticker.
Going Into an Outdoor Shop
AS SOON AS YOU HAVE COMPLETED YOUR FIRST HILL-WALK, A NEW CITY hobby opens out to you.
You can now go into an outdoor shop.
Outdoor shops are just sports shops, but instead of a seedy man with a moustache selling you nylon football strips and tennis balls, outdoor shops stock only merchandise connected with hill-walking, climbing, skiing and sometimes canoeing, all of which will be offered to you by rosy-cheeked young sales people in fleecy tops.
Visiting them becomes an addiction.
No matter how pressed for time or strapped for cash you may be, should you pass by one of these shops, with a window display of dummies wearing neatly ironed kagouls and ice-axes arranged in a fan shape round a rucksack, you will go inside and not leave until you have purchased a pair of thick socks.
This is mainly the fault of the shop assistants, all of whom climb mountains and will stand discussing Munros with you for 45 minutes, which makes it impossible to leave without buying something.
The job of a good outdoor shop sales person is to make the customer feel stupid.
You may have already decided what sort of walking boots to buy, but the shop assistant will, with barely disguised contempt, correct you, telling you how foolish you would have been to buy such footwear, how lucky it was you came here first, and convincing you that for only an extra £65 you can have the boot you really need.
This is not something one would expect in a normal shop.
Imagine the newsagent snorting with contempt when you ask for today's Scotsman .
‘The Scotsman ?’ he would sneer.
‘Do you do a lot of newspaper reading, or are you more a weekend reader?’
You would stutter a reply that you just wanted to read some news today.
‘Well, fine, if that's what you really want, it's up to you.
It's just that  most newspaper readers, the serious ones that is, would certainly opt for something a bit thicker, like The Independent .’
‘Well I'll take an Independent then, thanks.’
‘Have you read one before?’
‘Yes, I think so.’
‘Well I'm not keen on selling you one if you're not used to it.’
‘No, no, I'm sure I'll be fine.
Just give me The Independent .’
‘Hang on.
I'll have to ask the manager.’
(Calls to back shop.)
‘Joe, there's a grackle in here wants to buy The Independent .
Have we changed our policy on selling to amateurs?’
(Voice from back shop.)
‘Has she bought one before?’
‘No, doesn't look like it.’
‘OK then, but just this once.’
Of course you wouldn't put up with such nonsense, but you do in an outdoor shop.
Just remember that sometimes they can be wrong.
I recall going into such a shop a few years ago to replace my survival bag.
I fingered a few and then picked out a shiny foil bag that folded neatly down into a tiny pack.
At the till the man looked at me and said, ‘Used one of these before?’
I replied I had not, since I had been lucky enough so far not to have been forced to fight for my survival.
The point, so I thought, was to have one in case of emergency, and hope that it never came out of its pouch.
In that case, he told me with a grim expression, there was something he had to warn me about.
I listened intently.
These foil bags, unlike the plastic ones, were very dangerous.
How could this be, I wondered.
Suffocation perhaps, or not enough insulation?
He told me.
These bags have been known to give people first-degree burns.
I stared at the innocent little square of foil on the counter.
Yes indeed, he said, the problem is that people just don't realise the incredible temperature of the sun, and how hot a body can get inside one of these things.
I'm sorry to report that I behaved rudely at this point.
Throwing my head back and laughing in the man's face was not, on reflection, the correct or polite response.
I was not planning a trip to Alice Springs, I pointed out.
The survival I had in mind was more huddling with a broken leg under a rock in the snow, trying hard not to die of exposure until some pals bring the Mountain Rescue team.
First-degree burns would seem an unlikely hazard.
‘I don't like your attitude,’ he informed me, and then went on to say  he would feel irresponsible selling me the bag since I displayed such a devil-may-care response to his safety lecture.
I bought it regardless, but have been watching ever since for scorch marks on the rucksack pocket where it lives.
At the other end of the scale, good advice in these shops is sometimes very expensive.
If you can't afford a new waterproof shell, then don't let an assistant near you.
Everything they have in that shop is better than the one you've been wearing for ten years.
They will be correct when they explain the advantages of new fabrics, they will also be correct to laugh when you explain what you already use, and you will be bewitched when you try on something fantastic, comfortable and attractive that they slip surreptitiously from a hanger while they talk.
But you will be sorry when the Access bill comes in next month if you fall for it.
You'll notice that everything for sale has the capacity to breathe.
‘This of course breathes,’ the sales person will say, showing you a jacket.
‘And the fact that this can breathe makes it all the more comfortable,’ they will continue, indicating a hat.
When these shops close down for the night, the sound of heavy breathing from their stock must rival that of a porn cinema.
But then grandiose claims are made for most things you can buy connected with mountaineering.
My boots are supposed to ‘give’.
I've had them for over three years now and they haven't remembered a single birthday or Christmas.
In fact the only thing they've given me so far are heels like ungrated Parmesan cheese.
A shop assistant promised me that a head torch would ‘bring me down off the mountain after dark’.
Imagine my disappointment when I staggered down a hill in murky twilight after its purchase to find that not only had it been lying in the back seat of the car for the duration of my climb, but that it had failed to come up and get me when the daylight failed.
Of course all this must be much worse if you are a climber rather than a hill-walker.
There are only so many things you can sell to someone who merely requires to be kept warm and dry as they walk up a hill.
But imagine the delights of selling to a group of people who need serious equipment.
Equipment is a wonderful term.
In the vocabulary of people in the retail trade, equipment means wallets being emptied into tills, especially if the purchase of that equipment is the only thing that will ensure they will live to come back and buy more.
The climbing section of these shops is bewildering, and is out of bounds to walkers.
You may think that in a  democracy you too can flick idly through ice-screws and ropes, but the moment you prod anything with an inquisitive finger, an assistant will leap on you with a quiz as to your standard of rock-climbing.
The game is up and you must skulk back to your own area, full of socks and thick hats, and leave the mysterious, metallic things to people who can answer such a query with a number and a knowing smile.
Don't be too disheartened however.
You also leave these people to a rail of hideous nylon tights, with pictures of lions and words like ‘climb’ in block capitals transferred inexpertly on to the fabric.
These are for the climbers, and when you feel puny as a walker you can sidle over to someone looking through this rail and look them straight in the eye, secure in the knowledge that nothing in hill-walking requires you to dress in such a gruesome fashion.
Don't be fooled into thinking that the shop assistants are unconcerned about appearances, that they are just a kooky bunch of crazy kids who live hard, play rough and dress casual.
The manager would have had them all in at 8 a.m., forcing them to try on the latest zipper tops over their Iron Maiden T-shirts, and making them practise slouching around the sales floor trying to look cool in clothes designed to save lives in sub-zero temperatures.
The customer is supposed to enter the shop, see a young man or woman in a front fastening, reversible, all-weather, windproof, machine-washable smock and think to themselves, ‘Hmmm, that guy/chick looks pretty groovy in that smock.
Daresay I might splash out and buy one myself.’
This is unlikely if those wearing the smocks are in the process of arguing about the lunch-break rota, or sniggering over who will go and frighten away the walker from the climber's rope display.
But these are of course the modern city centre outdoor shops.
If you look hard you can still find old shops with window displays like an undertaker's, where a single navy-blue woollen glove on a metal stand would be considered a showy Christmas display.
Entering such a store is to enter an intriguing musty lair containing rows of cheap clothes in either blue or olive green, and where you will be greeted by a stab in the eye with an ice-axe that has hung behind the door since the 60s.
One might imagine that this is where the real expertise is to be found, where the proprietor might be a famous retired climber scratching a meagre living from the sale of a few anoraks to fuel his or her continuing interest in the hills.
In fact it usually turns out to be owned by a used-car dealer and staffed by elderly women who used to work next door at the cake shop and who know as much about mountaineering as goldfish know about pre-Cambrian pottery.
This is the shop that your friends and relations will go to to buy you a present.
They will not go into the store where the eager young men and women modelling their smocks will sell them something expensive, attractive and useful that you have long tossed and turned at night in the lust to have in your possession.
These kindly present-buying people will be set upon immediately by the old cake-shop lady, who will convince them that what all ‘the young people’ are going for are these lovely olive green PVC capes that fit nicely over a rucksack.
Shops like these are the only outlets for such abominations, and the only way you can stop the terrors of opening horrible gifts and feigning delight is to become rich enough to buy them out and turn them into cake shops.
I am considering a helpline for those who simply cannot stop going into outdoor shops and buying aluminium water bottles.
I need volunteers to help me man the phones.
They will need to have the skills to talk someone out of another pair of loopstitch socks or convince a lost soul that a key-ring with a thermometer measuring wind-chill factor is not going to change their lives.
Unfortunately, anyone phoning who wants to buy shiny tights with the word ‘climb’ on them must be referred to The Samaritans.
Some cases are beyond our help.
Beinn Dorain
Beinn Dorain; 1076m;(OS Sheet 50; 326378); M62.
SOME HILLS FORMED AN IMPORTANT PART OF MY CHILDHOOD.
THIS IS NOT because I climbed them as a child.
Far from it.
My brother could make me cry just by lifting me on to a five-foot-high garden trellis and leaving me there, so I was hardly a miniature Chris Bonnington.
The mountains of my youth were able to influence me only through the back window of a Ford Anglia, as we drove north for camping holidays in the rain.
Camping holidays were always in the rain, but my parents would constantly remind us throughout the fortnight that the sun was ‘trying to come out’.
It was rather disappointing to grow up and find out that the sun didn't give a monkey's testicle whether it came out or not, but was in fact a non-sentient mass of  gases radiating heat and light to earth, except in Scotland.
I kept this news to myself when I found out.
We had such happy family holidays in the drizzle waiting for the sun to try and come out that it seemed churlish to spoil things with science.
I have the sneaking suspicion, fuelled by the clothes my parents packed, that they knew anyway.
Tempest or not, I was in a constant state of ecstasy, huddled in the back seat between the sleeping-bags and wellingtons, pressing my nose against the steamy window to get a better view of these monsters that disappeared into the mist above us, as we drove to our moist destination.
They were full of magic and mystery, even when feeling car sick.
To a child, the scale of the mountains is awesome, and I was never convinced that those white dots on the hillside were really sheep.
How could anything be that far away?
Mind you, I still think that now on the way back from a long hill-walk when I can just make out a dot that is the car.
I desperately wanted to be out there with the sheep, hiding behind boulders and sprinting through the heather.
That is until we stopped for  a toilet break in a lay-by, when the howling gale and torrential rain lashed our naked bottoms like a Cabinet minister in a Soho sauna, and made me glad to be back in the car beside the sleeping-bags.
One of the mountains that most fascinated was Beinn Dorain.
As my father would try in vain to overtake ‘a bloody idiot’ on the A82 between Tyndrum and Bridge of Orchy, there were two spectacular things to look at before we were wiped out as a family.
The first was the incredible viaduct that carried the West Highland railway line over Auch Gleann in an uncompromising, almost perfect horseshoe.
The other was the huge and spectacular sweep of Beinn Dorain's west slopes that towered above the railway line giving scale to its forbidding gradient.
We rarely saw its summit, lost as it would be in thick mist, but its mystery made it all the more attractive and seductive.
My brother and I would imagine all manner of things to be lurking at the top, from demons' castles to wizards and fairies.
Touching to think that as we did so, the reality was probably a few bits of orange peel and a walker in a woollen hat eating a cheese sandwich.
So it was naturally with great affection and nostalgia that as an adult I laced up my boots on a damp October morning at the starting point in the station car park at Bridge of Orchy, in preparation to find out what really lurked at the top of Beinn Dorain.
I've always found the settlements on the A82 between Crianlarich and Glencoe most peculiar.
Crianlarich, Tyndrum and Bridge of Orchy are melancholy, stranded little hamlets that the internal combustion engine has mutated into service stations for coach parties and crumpled, travel-weary motorists.
A gift shop, a snack bar and a petrol station is not exactly a model, thriving Highland community, and the disquieting feeling that these places now exist only to empty the contents of your wallet if you so much as slow down is not a pleasant one.
Nobody expects Brigadoon with tartan-skirted villagers singing softly as they fill your arms with sweet heather and invite you in to their fireside.
But we could all do with a few less stuffed velvet Loch Ness monsters and dismal cafeterias that smell of incontinence.
However, Bridge of Orchy station is a very convenient starting point, and after crossing beneath the railway line a prominent path leads you up the hill in the direction of a gully that divides Beinn Dorain from its sister Munro, Beinn an Dothaidh.
It goes without saying, unless you're a reader with severe learning difficulties, that this is a corker of a hill to do if you don't have a car.
The West Highland line from Glasgow runs  regularly and you can easily plan a day by the train timetable, unless of course you live in Ullapool.
However, the Conservative Government, at the time of writing, are trying in the most unsubtle ways to destroy the rail network in Scotland, a crime that generations to come will curse them for if they succeed.
When I first started to explore Scotland by train, there were long spacious carriages, first and second class, with a restaurant and buffet, a guard's van where bikes could be carried free of charge, and a service that transported you to the Highlands through snow drifts that would bury a car.
Now there are two-carriage abominations called ‘Sprinters’ that are so basic and degrading a form of transport for a long journey that adequate toilet facilities are considered an unnecessary luxury.
Scotrail cannot be so terminally stupid that they are unaware of the numbers of people wanting to use the train in the summer, and therefore a train that accommodates more than four people at a time may well be required.
So one is forced to conclude that the reason hundreds of dismayed tourists and walkers are stranded on stations up and down the length of the West Highland line at the height of the season, unable to squeeze into an already packed ‘Sprinter’, if it arrives at all, is that somebody is doing this on purpose.
The thought of all the ingenuity and hard Scottish toil spent on the line's construction being deliberately discarded by a bunch of greedy, sly, ignorant English Conservatives in London that nobody up here voted for makes my rage barely containable.
Sorry.
Back to the hill.
The path up the gully from Bridge of Orchy is certainly the shortest route to the two peaks, but for a longer and more spectacular walk there is a deliciously tempting circuit round the back of the mountains via Auch Gleann.
The beauty of that trail is that you have the thrill of walking beneath the railway viaduct and carrying on up alongside the Allt Chonoghlais into Coire a' Ghabhalach, the mirror eastern corrie of the one gained by the Bridge of Orchy route.
A route not to take unless you know no fear, is to walk straight up the sweeping southern flanks of the hill, which will leave you giddy and hanging on to craggy, near-vertical terrain with your teeth.
The sweeping contours of the hill at that point have always reminded me of a huge wave about to break, and it's an uncomfortable thought trying to imagine where you might stop for lunch, and what would happen if you dropped your orange.
But by walking up to the eastern corrie, Coire an Dothaidh, fear is not an issue; only leg  muscle.
It's a fast ascent on to the bealach, and then a right turn takes you on to a surprising flat little plateau sporting a tiny circular lochan.
In accordance with my usual run of luck, I climbed up into thick mist, and being too lazy and smug to take a bearing I followed what seemed to be a well-worn path heading in the right direction for Beinn Dorain.
The mist looked as though it had been created by the BBC special effects department for a studio play about Jack the Ripper, and yards away I could hear voices without being able to see the humans making the sound.
It's a strange voyeuristic sensation to hear people talking when they have no idea you are there, and the temptation is strong to make frightening bellowing noises and then hide behind a rock.
This party, oblivious to my presence, were arguing over whether or not they had found the summit, which depressed me somewhat.
The Scottish Mountaineering Club's Munros book had warned of a false summit cairn, and if I had longed to see the view from Beinn Dorain, and look down on that road from which the young Gray had gazed upwards 25 years ago, I was going to be disappointed unless the mist lifted.
Following the path with my thoughts wallowing in nostalgia, I soon found myself back where I started and crashing into the people I had heard through the mist.
Since they hadn't spotted me earlier, there was no embarrassment attached to my circuitous ramble and I hailed them with a tone of voice that sounded as if I knew what I was doing.
They asked me if this was the way down, which given my navigational skills thus far was a bit like asking a page three girl to compare  Bertold Brecht with Harold Pinter.
I said I believed them to be following the correct route and then crept off into the mist surreptitiously to whip out my compass.
I found the deceptive cairn and followed the instructions to find the real summit over a slight drop in the ridge.
However, it barely mattered if this was the summit or not since the view barely extended to my feet.
It's at such times, as you sit eating a damp sandwich as water drips from your nose, as you scour the map for all the things you can't see, that you wonder why the hell you do it.
But then the majority of hill-walking is done in less than satisfactory weather, and somehow, no matter how foul and inclement it is, you cannot wait to get back up the hills and do it again.
Sometimes, when a party of you are trudging through boggy ground, battered by wind and rain, you catch somebody's eye and the whole thing seems ludicrous.
I can't begin to explain why such a pursuit should be enjoyable.
Perhaps it's the moaning you can do at the top, or the relief of getting down and into the warmth.
Whatever the reason, you will  have to take my word for it that a hill-walk is still an exhilarating day out even when you can't see a thing.
Some of the things I couldn't see included Loch Lyon to the east with Ben Lawers beyond, Ben More to the south, Ben Lui to the south-west and lovely Glen Orchy to the west leading to Ben Cruachan.
Some of the things I could see were some sheep droppings, a stone or two, my rucksack and an aluminium ring pull from someone's can of juice.
So I headed back, realising that plans to combine Beinn an Dothaidh should be abandoned since the view would be remarkably similar from its summit, although it might not boast a ring pull.
Mist is a swine, and on arriving back at the little lochan I started to become confused again.
I dropped down from the loch only to find that the terrain was considerably steeper than I recalled on the way up, although the compass said I was doing fine.
The last thing I wanted was to find myself slithering down the steep craggy section above the corrie, having mistakenly bypassed the Y-shaped gully that led back to the car, yet I could sense I was getting it all a bit wrong.
Then I heard voices.
The same party of people I had encountered earlier were still sitting having lunch on the edge of some rocks above me.
There was nothing for it.
I was now going to have to ask them if this was the way down.
This was not how I had imagined the conquering of my childhood dream peak, and I was muttering and tutting under my breath as I clambered up towards them.
They looked expectantly towards me.
‘Excuse me,’ I said in as casual a voice as I could muster, and as the words left my lips a strange and wonderful thing happened.
Below me the clouds parted with alarming speed, revealing the glen below in astonishing clarity.
So dramatic was its timing and swiftness I paused to see if angels with trumpets would slide into view with some glad tidings.
I could see the railway line, the road, Bridge of Orchy, and practically read the tax disc on my car.
I was standing in absolutely the correct place for my descent.
Then I remembered the party of walkers above me.
‘Could you tell me the time please?’
I said, completing my unfinished enquiry.
Asking the way down with the glory of sight restored would have been stupid in the extreme, and I gave secret thanks for my ego salvation.
I was told it was 2.30 and I started home without blushing.
I wonder if there really are time traps, where events and people from the past remain locked in a moment that can be revisited by those in the      future.
If so, it would have been splendid to have seen a small blue Ford Anglia spluttering along the road as I descended, with a tiny white face peering from a condensation-covered back window.
I would have waved happily but kept the secret of the summit to myself.
No demon's castle, no wizards or fairies.
Just a wet walker in a woollen hat, eating a cheese sandwich in the rain.
OVERLEAF: Beinn Dorain