

Time in Antiquity and the Middle Ages
Time at the Dawn of History
Prehistory
Consciousness of self is a fundamental characteristic of human existence.
It involves a sense of personal continuity through a succession of different states of awareness.
This sense of personal identity depends essentially on memory, but a sense of the past could only have arisen when man consciously reflected on his memories.
Similarly, purposeful action involves at least implicit recognition of some future achievement, but a general sense of the future could not have resulted until man applied his mind systematically to the problem of future events.
Man must have been conscious of memories and purposes long before he made any explicit distinction between past, present, and future.
The famous palaeolithic paintings found in caves such as that at Lascaux in the Dordogne have been interpreted as evidence that, at least implicitly, people were operating 20,000 or more years ago with teleological intent in terms of past, present, and future.
From what we know of primitive races it is highly probable that the incentive for producing these paintings was magical, the object being to fix in paint on the wall or ceiling of a cave an event — usually the slaying of an animal — which it was hoped would be effected in the future elsewhere.
It may be that those responsible for the well-known picture of the so-called ‘Dancing Sorcerer’(on the wall of one of the innermost recesses of the Trois Frères cave in the department of Arriège in France), which represents a man in the skin of an animal and wearing the antlers of a stag, may have felt that the actual performance of the dance was insufficient, since they were concerned about the conservation of the magical efficacy of the dance after it had ended.
If correct, this hypothesis might explain why these people so many thousands of years ago went to the trouble and danger of penetrating so deeply into the cave for this purpose.
In making these pictorial representations people must have relied on their memories of past events, and so all three modes of time were involved.
But this no more implies a conscious awareness of the distinctions between past, present, and future than the use of language  necessitates an explicit knowledge of grammar.
Indeed, it must have required an enormous effort for man to overcome his natural tendency to live like the animals in a continual present.
Moreover, the development of rational thought actually seems to have impeded man's appreciation of the significance of time.
In his classic work Primitive Man as Philosopher , Paul Radin argues that among primitive men there exist two different types of temperament: the man of action who is oriented towards external objects, interested primarily in practical results and comparatively indifferent to the stirrings of his inner self, and the thinker — a much rarer type — who is impelled to analyse and ‘explain’ his subjective states.
The former, in so far as he considers explanations at all, inclines to those that stress the purely mechanical relations between events.
His mental rhythm is characterized by a demand for endless repetition of the same event or events, and change for him means essentially some abrupt transformation.
The thinker, on the other hand, finds purely mechanical explanations inadequate.
But, although he seeks a description in terms of a gradual development from one to many, simple to complex, cause to effect, he is perplexed by the continually shifting forms of external objects.
Before he can deal with them systematically he must give them some permanence of form.
In other words, the world must be made static.
Belief that ultimate reality is timeless is deeply rooted in human thinking, and the origin of rational investigation of the world was the search for the permanent factors that lie behind the ever-changing pattern of events.
As Radin stressed in his discussion of the thought of primitive man, ‘as soon as an object is regarded as a dynamic entity, then analysis and definition become both difficult and unsatisfactory.
Thinking is under such circumstances well-nigh impossible for most people.’
Indeed, language itself inevitably introduced an element of permanence into a vanishing world.
For, although speech itself is transitory, the conventionalized sound symbols of language transcended time.
At the level of oral language, however, permanence depended solely on memory.
To obtain a greater degree of permanence the time symbols of oral speech had to be converted into the space symbols of written speech.
The earliest written records were simply pictorial representations of natural objects, such as birds and animals.
The next step was the ideograph by means of which thoughts were represented symbolically by pictures of visual objects.
The crucial stage in the evolution of writing occurred when ideographs became phonograms, that is representations of things that are heard.
This conversion of sound symbols in time to visual symbols in space was the greatest single step in the quest for permanence.
The distinction we make between past, present, and future refer to the transitional nature of time.
Although dependent on memory, our sense of personal identity is closely associated with the durational aspect of time.
Man's discovery that he himself, like other living creatures, is born and dies must have led him intuitively to try to circumvent the relentless flux of time by seeking to perpetuate his own existence indefinitely.
Evidence of ritual burial goes back at least to Neanderthal man and possibly even earlier.
A Neanderthal burial of about 60,000 years ago, at a cave in northern Iraq, even appears to have included flowers.
As for our own species, the oldest evidence, going back to possibly about 35,000 BC, reveals that the dead were not only equipped with weapons, tools, and ornaments but also with food, which must often have been in short supply among the living.
In some cases bodies were covered with red ochre, which may have been intended to simulate blood, in the hope of averting physical extinction.
The care taken over the disposal of the dead indicates a deeply held conviction that, provided the appropriate steps were taken, death could be regarded as a transitional state.
The idea of death as a transition from one phase of life to another that could only be satisfactorily effected by performing the appropriate rituals became the pattern for dealing with other natural changes.
The principal transitions from one phase of people's life to another were thought of as crises and as a result the community to which they belonged assisted with the appropriate rituals.
Similarly, the principal transitions in nature were also regarded as occurring suddenly and dramatically.
In the palaeolithic period men were already aware that at certain times of the year animals and plants are less prolific than at others, and seasonal ritual observances to maintain an adequate supply of them were therefore deemed necessary.
With the change from a nomadic and food-gathering to an agricultural and more highly organized form of society, man's anxiety about himself and the animals that he hunted merged into a wider anxiety about nature.
At the critical seasons a ritual response was required to overcome the unpredictable factors that might otherwise interfere with the regular growth of crops.
The succession of natural phenomena and phases became evidence for a dramatic interpretation of the universe.
Nature was seen as a process of strife between divine cosmic powers and demoniacal chaotic  powers in which humans were not just spectators but were obliged to play an active part in helping to bring about the required phenomena by acting in full unison with nature.
This meant performing a given set of rituals at the appropriate times.
In recent years the study of megalithic remains such as Stonehenge in terms of hypothetical astronomical alignments has led to various interesting speculations concerning prehistoric man's knowledge of the calendar.
A careful assessment of these views has been made by D.C. Heggie.
It has even been suggested that many of the markings found on upper palaeolithic artefacts and in caves are probably calendrical or astronomical in nature.
Ancient Egypt
In the oldest civilizations we find definite correlations between social and natural events.
In Egypt, where everything depended on the Nile, the coronation of a new pharaoh was often postponed until a new beginning in the cycle of nature provided a propitious starting-point for his reign.
It was made to coincide either with the rising of the river in early summer or with the recession of the waters in autumn when the fertilized fields were ready to be sown.
The royal ritual was closely associated with the history of Osiris, the divine prototype on whom the pharaohs modelled themselves by re-enacting his traditional deeds.
Osiris represented the life-giving waters and the soil fertilized by the Nile.
After the Nile had receded the land eventually appeared to die, but on the reappearance of the waters it revived again.
The Osiris myth embodied this cycle of birth, death, and rebirth and gave the promise of immortality.
At death a series of rites enabled the pharaoh himself to become Osiris and thereby safe from the depredations of time.
At first this way to immortality was essentially a royal prerogative, but eventually similar rites were thought to confer immortality on anyone who could afford to imitate them.
As S. G. F. Brandon has pointed out, the great popularity of the cult of Osiris meant, in effect, the adoption by the Egyptians of a definite concept of time, although this may not have been consciously recognized.
For, since the Egyptians believed that Osiris had actually lived in their land long ago, his cult signified that a particular historical event, in this case the death and resurrection of Osiris, could be perpetually repeated by magical simulation so that its supposed good effects could benefit those persons on whose behalf the rites were performed.
Although the Osiris cult was a striking instance of what Brandon called the ‘ritual perpetuation of the past’, it was concerned only with personal immortality and generated no interest in the past as such.
On the contrary, by trying to re-create on specific occasions particular events associated with Osiris thought was concentrated on the present rather than on the past.
The Egyptians regarded time as a succession of recurring phases.
They had very little sense of history or even of past and future.
For, although there was an absolute past, it was normative and was not regarded as receding.
They thought of the world as essentially static and unchanging.
In the beginning the gods created the world with everything in it organized on a permanent pattern.
The cosmic balance, which involved the regular recurrence of the seasonal phenomena, could, however, only be maintained by an unceasing control.
On earth this was the function of the pharaoh.
Historical incidents were no more than superficial disturbances of the established order or recurring events of unchanging significance.
This idea of a perpetually repetitive pattern of events inspired a sense of security from the menace of change and decay.
If some crisis occurred to disturb the customary order of things, it could not be something really new but was foreseen at the creation of the world.
The priests would therefore examine ancient writings to find out if the event had already occurred in the past and what solution had then been applied to it.
This evaluation of the Egyptians' attitude to time is borne out by their attitude to chronology.
The years were not numbered in a linear succession but according to a particular pharaoh's reign, each mounting the throne in the year 1, and also according to the levy of taxes.
The treasury officials numbered the royal possessions every two years, so that the years of a given reign were designated as the Year of, say, the Third Numbering, or the Year after the Third Numbering, and so on.
This absence of a continuous sense of time made an exact computation of past centuries extremely difficult, particularly because of co-regencies, parallel reigns and fictitious reigns.
When they said, for example, ‘in the reign of the King Cheops’ they thought of a distant event situated in time in a rather vague way.
Furthermore, the idea the Egyptians had of an eternal and immutable world meant that they never imagined any evolution of social conditions.
There were periods of considerable social disturbance, particularly at the end of the Old Kingdom, but only the literary texts mention them.
The historical texts were confined to enumerating the kings who lived in those troubled years and do not give any indication that something important was occurring at that time.
For  nearly 3,000 years the recording of historical events by the Egyptians was characterized by a preoccupation with royal lists and a lack of precise dates.
Only one Egyptian historian is known to us, the priestly scribe Manetho who compiled the list of all the pharaohs and conveniently divided them into the particular groups or dynasties which Egyptologists still employ today.
But Manetho, who lived in the third century BC, wrote in Greek and his work must be regarded as Hellenistic in character rather than Egyptian.
Nevertheless, in one respect the Egyptians made an outstanding contribution to the science of time.
For they devised what Otto Neugebauer has described as ‘the only intelligent calendar which ever existed in human history’.
Their civil year consisted of twelve months, each of thirty days, with five additional days at the end of each year, making 365 in all.
In Neugebauer's view, it originated on purely practical grounds by continual observation and averaging of the time intervals between successive arrivals of the Nile flood at Heliopolis, the rising of the Nile being the main event in Egyptian life.
At first the Egyptians did not realize that the astronomical year does not consist of exactly 365 days but contains an extra fraction (about one-quarter) of a day.
The discrepancy was soon recognized and another calendar was then introduced which kept more closely in phase with astronomical phenomena.
It was noted that the rising of the Nile occurred when the last star to appear on the horizon, before dawn obscures all stars, was the dog star Sothis, or Sirius as it is known to us.
This ‘heliacal rising’, to use the term employed in Greek astronomy, thus came to be regarded as the natural fixed point of the ‘Sothic’ calendar.
Astronomical computations show that the first day of the two calendars agreed in the year 2773 BC, and it has been concluded that this was when the Sothic calendar was introduced.
There is reason to associate this with the Minister of King Zoser of the Third Dynasty known as Imhotep, later deified as the Father of Egyptian science.
The Sothic calendar kept pace with the seasons, but the civil calendar did not.
The two coincided at intervals of 1460 (= 365 × 4) years.
The civil year was divided into three conventional ‘seasons’— called time of inundation, sowing time, and harvest time — and each of them was divided into four months, these being of course conventional too and not connected with the moon.
Despite the linguistic anomaly that the season called ‘the time of inundation’ would in due course fall in one of the other seasons, the Egyptians retained the 365-day calendar right down to the Roman period because of its convenience as an automatic record of the passage of time in an era, each  year containing the same number of days, unlike our years.
This calendar Was just what was needed for astronomical calculations.
It was taken up by the Hellenistic astronomers, became the standard astronomical system of reference in the Middle Ages, and was even used by Copernicus in his lunar and planetary tables.
The Egyptians also had a lunar calendar to regulate festivals by phases of the moon.
They found that 309 lunar months were almost equal to twenty-five civil years.
In a nearly cloudless country such as Egypt observation of the sun was a useful way of telling the time and it is therefore not surprising that the earliest known solar clock has been found there.
A fragment of an Egyptian sun-clock dating from about 1500 BC is now in a museum in Berlin.
Shaped like a T-square, it was placed horizontally with the crosshead laid towards the east in the forenoon, thereby casting a shadow along the stem which was graduated with marks for six hours.
As the sun rose higher in the sky the shadow shortened until noon, when it disappeared at the sixth hour mark.
Then the instrument was relaid with the crosshead towards the west so that the lengthening shadow gradually moved back along the hour marks to the twelfth.
The earliest clocks of this type were correct only at the equinoxes, and not until much later was it possible to take due account of the seasonal changes in the position of the sun.
Eventually a series of hour scales, seven in number, was devised to accommodate these changes, but even then this timepiece was seldom accurate.
The warrior pharaoh Tuthmosis III referred to the hour indicated by the sun's shadow at a critical juncture of one of his campaigns in Asia, and it would therefore seem that he carried with him a portable sun-clock.
Another form of sun-clock employing the direction rather than the length of the sun's shadow was the sundial, but the Egyptians who invented it were far from understanding the subtleties involved in making an accurate instrument of this type, which must be calibrated for the latitudes of the different places where it is to be used.
To provide a means of measuring time at night the Egyptians also invented the water-clock, or ‘clepsydra’ as the Greeks later called it.
Two main types were developed, depending on whether water flowed out of or into a graduated vessel.
Whereas inflow clocks were usually cylindrical, outflow clocks were in the form of inverted cones with a small hole at or near the bottom, the time being indicated by the level of water.
Clepsydrae were also used by the Greeks and Romans.
Vitruvius, writing about 30 BC, described a number of types.
To make them indicate seasonal hours, either the rate of flow or the scale of hours had to  be varied according to the time of year, and considerable ingenuity appears to have been applied to achieve this.
The Egyptians also used a plumb-line, which they called the ‘Merkhet’, to determine the time at night.
They observed the transits of selected stars across the meridian as they came into line with two Merkhets.
A Merkhet is on permanent exhibition in the Science Museum, London.
It is thought to date from about 600 BC.
According to the inscription that it bears, it belonged to the son of a priest of the Temple of Horus at Edfu, in Upper Egypt.
As mentioned in chapter 2, we are indebted to the Egyptians for our present division of the day into twenty-four hours, although the Egyptian hours were not of equal length, since at all times of the year the periods of daylight and darkness were each divided into twelve hours.
The end of the night was marked by the heliacal rising of a particular star.
However, because the sun not only participates in the daily rotation of the heavens from east to west but also has its own slow annual motion relative to the stars in the opposite direction, different heliacal risings occur throughout the year.
Instead of choosing a different star daily, the Egyptian priests, who were primarily concerned with the timing of the nightly service in their temples, made a fresh choice every ten days, a period of time (and stellar constellation) known as a ‘decan’.
The oldest astronomical texts now known are found on the lids of wooden coffins dating from the Ninth Dynasty (c.2150 BC).
They are called ‘diagonal star-clocks’, or ‘diagonal calendars’, and they give the names of the stars associated with the respective decans.
These star charts were provided to enable the deceased to tell the time of night or the date in the calendar.
Incidentally, the twelve signs of the zodiac did not appear in Egypt until the Hellenistic period, nor is there any trace of astrological ideas there before then.
Since the Egyptian civil year contained 365 days, there were thirty-six decans in the year (plus the five extra days at the end of the year), and the sky was divided accordingly.
During the summer, when Sirius rises heliacally, only twelve of these divisions of the sky can be seen rising during the hours of darkness, and it was this that led to the twelve-hour division of the night.
As for the period of daylight, a simple sundial on an obelisk of Seti I, about 1300 BC, indicates ten hours between sunrise and sunset, to which two more were added for morning and evening twilight.
As previously mentioned, these divisions of the day and night led to the twenty-four ‘seasonal’ hours of the complete day in Hellenistic and Roman times.
In antiquity only the Hellenistic astronomers used  hours of equal length, these being the same as the seasonal hours at the date of the spring equinox.
Since, following Babylonian practice, all astronomical computations involving fractions were conducted in the sexagesimal system, instead of our current decimal system, these ‘equinoctial’ hours were divided by the astronomers into sixty firsts, or minutes, and each of these was subdivided into sixty seconds.
Thus, as Neugebauer has succinctly remarked, our present way of dividing up the day into hours, minutes, and seconds ‘is the result of a Hellenistic modification of an Egyptian practice combined with Babylonian numerical procedures’.
Sumeria and Babylonia
Although there was always the possibility of drought or flooding, the Nile seldom brought disaster to Egypt.
Mesopotamian civilization developed in a very different environment.
The Tigris and Euphrates are far less uniform in their behaviour than the Nile.
The inhabitants of ancient Mesopotamia had to contend with variations of climate, scorching winds, torrential rains, and devastating floods over which they had little control.
The mood of Mesopotamian civilization reflected this element of force and violence in nature which gave no grounds for believing that the ravages of time could be surmounted by a ritual cult like that of Osiris in Egypt.
Although there was evidence of cosmic order in the motions of sun, moon, and stars and in the cycle of the seasons, this order was not regarded as securely established but had continually to be achieved by the integration of conflicting divine wills or powers.
The basic framework of society in Mesopotamia remained the same for 2,000 years or more, but at different times Sumerians, Babylonians, and Assyrians were dominant and the order of society was far less static than in Egypt.
Whereas in Egypt the pharaoh symbolized the triumph of an invincible divine order over the forces of chaos, in Mesopotamia kingship represented the struggle of a human order with all its anxieties and hazards to integrate itself with the universe.
The sense of insecurity which affected the city-states of Mesopotamia led to a rudimentary interest in the history of social order.
This is revealed in texts going back to about 2000 BC, notably in the ‘Sumerian King List’ which begins with a sequence of eight kings, presumably fabulous, whose reigns add up to a total of 241,200 years!
The sequence was then interrupted by a flood that was so devastating that a new start had to be made and again kingship had to be ‘lowered from heaven’.
Archaeological evidence has revealed that a cataclysmic flood overwhelmed the Sumerian plains about 4200 BC.
Despite their interest in this past event and the compilation of chronological lists of kings with grandiloquent accounts of their achievements, the Sumerians and their successors were not really historically minded.
They were mainly interested in themselves and were content to leave historical matters relatively indefinite.
Their reason for perpetuating the memory of the Flood was most probably magical.
A destructive flood was an annual possibility, and the god of Heaven Anu and the storm-god Enlil, who were believed to have been responsible for the decision to destroy mankind, were invoked in the incantation passages of the legend of the Flood.
Similarly, although libraries were established in temples and palaces in order to conserve records of the past, there is no evidence of any interest in history, except in so far as it was a guide to action in the present.
Indeed, the general conception of the cosmic process envisaged by the ancient inhabitants of Mesopotamia precluded the possibility of history having any ultimate significance or purpose.
The apparent lack of any meaning in its repetitive pattern is expressed in the following passage from the Epic of Gilgamesh : ‘There is no permanence.
Do we build a house to stand for ever, do we seal a contract to hold for all time?
Do brothers divide an inheritance to keep for ever, does the flood-time of rivers endure?…
From the days of old there is no permanence.’
Although in Mesopotamia kingship was never so important as in Egypt, its function was the maintenance of harmony between earth and heaven.
There were at one time a number of city-states, each with its own god.
Unified rule was ultimately achieved by Hammurabi towards the beginning of the second millennium BC, with its centre in Babylon.
In cosmic terms this implied the ascendancy of Marduk, the god of Babylon, over the other gods.
As a result, the most important ritual in Mesopotamia was the spring New Year Festival at which the epic of the creation of the world by Marduk was recited.
The significance of this epic was not as a record of the past, but rather as a means of ensuring the theologico-political supremacy of Marduk in the present.
For Marduk was not the most ancient of the gods, and his lordship over the other gods was meant to justify the political supremacy that Babylon had acquired.
Although the New Year Festival symbolized the inauguration of a new solar cycle, the renewal of fertility, and victory over chaos, its celebration provided no guarantee that the social order would continue undisturbed.
The king and his counsellors therefore watched for  portents that could be interpreted, so that disasters might be foreseen and, if possible, averted.
There was assumed to be a counterpart in human events to every celestial phenomenon.
This belief led the priests to make careful and systematic observations of the heavenly bodies.
Celestial omens began to be used as portents on a considerable scale in the first Babylonian dynasty (eighteenth to fifteenth centuries BC), although lunar eclipses may have been regarded as ominous previously.
The prediction of this so-called ‘judicial’ astrology referred to the royal court and the state and not to ordinary individuals.
Horoscopic astrology, according to which the positions of the planets at the time of birth determines the fate of the individual, did not develop until much later.
The oldest known horoscope goes back to 410 BC when Babylonia was part of the Persian empire.
In Hellenistic and Roman times the Chaldeans, as the Babylonians were called, came to be regarded as the great experts in astrology.
Both the older judicial astrology and the later horoscopic astrology were based on a fundamentally deterministic, or fatalistic, view of existence.
People who believe that history and the destinies of men are controlled by the stars are not likely to entertain the idea of historical progress.
Instead, they are more inclined to adopt a cyclical view of time, in accordance with the periodicity of the motions of the sun, moon, and planets.
To what degree, however, such a view of time was developed in Mesopotamian thought is not revealed by the cuneiform records, although according to Seneca the late Babylonian astronomer-priest Berossus (c.300 BC) believed in the periodic destruction and re-creation of the universe.
The heavens were studied not only for omens but also for the sake of the calendar.
The basis of the Babylonian calendar seems always to have been lunar.
The month began when the new lunar crescent was for the first time visible again after sunset.
Consequently, the Babylonian day began in the evening.
A lunar month defined in this way must contain a whole number of days, but sometimes this was twenty-nine and sometimes thirty.
To solve this problem the motion of the sun had to be investigated.
The late Babylonian astronomers of the fourth and later centuries BC studied the motions of the sun and planets with great care and mathematical ingenuity, but their most detailed investigations were of the moon because the calendar was moon-based.
They invented harmonic analysis, in the sense that they introduced the idea of breaking down a complicated periodical effect into a sum of simpler periodical effects in order to make the mathematics tractable.
They did not use trigonometrical methods but linear ‘zigzag functions’.
The lunar ‘year’ normally comprised twelve months, but this is less than the solar year.
In order to prevent the seasons getting out of phase, a thirteenth month was inserted from time to time, but there was no regular system for the intercalation of this additional month until the fifth century BC, when seven of these months began to be inserted at fixed intervals in a cycle of nineteen years.
Previously it is probable that the state of the harvest decided the need for the additional month.
The nineteen-year cycle depends on the discovery that nineteen solar years are very nearly equal to 235 lunar months.
It is usually known as the Metonic cycle, after the Athenian astronomer Meton who introduced it in 432 BC (see Appendix 2).
Whether the cycle was discovered first by the Babylonian astronomer-priests or independently by them and Meton is uncertain.
The use of such a cycle by the late Babylonians shows that a fairly precise astronomical definition of a year was adopted by them.
This was probably based on careful observation of the summer solstice.
The invention of the zodiac, the belt round the sky in which the sun, moon, and planets lie, also occurred about this time.
The twelve zodiacal signs, of equal lengths of thirty parts each, are known to have been in use from soon after 500 BC.
This division of the sky was eventually carried over to the division of the circle and so led to our present habit of dividing the complete (two-dimensional) angle around a point into 360 degrees.
The nineteen-year luni-solar cycle became the foundation of the Jewish and Christian calendars, since it solved the problem of establishing the dates of new moons for religious purposes.
In particular, the origin of the problem of the dating of Easter can be traced back to the Babylonians.
The rituals performed by the king-priest, particularly at the New Year Festival, were regarded as the repetitions of divine actions and were meant to correspond exactly in time as well as in character with the rituals on high.
From this primitive idea sprang the belief that it was important to celebrate Easter at the correct date, since this was the crucial time of combat between God (or Christ) and the Devil, and God required the support of his worshippers to defeat the Devil.
The Babylonians paid particular attention to the seven-day periods associated with successive phases of the moon, each of these periods ending with an ‘evil day’ on which specific taboos were enforced so that the gods could be propitiated and conciliated.
These prohibitive regulations were similar to those that many other peoples in different parts of the world have observed at changes in the appearance of the moon, but the Babylonians influenced the Jews, who in their turn  influenced the early Christians and eventually ourselves.
The ultimate origin of our seven-day week and the restrictions for long imposed on Sunday activities can thus be traced back to the Babylonians.
Ancient Iran
From 539 to 331 BC Babylonia was a part of the Persian empire.
It was during this period that horoscopic astrology was invented, probably in the fifth century BC.
For the casting of horoscopes one needs to know the positions of the planets for a given date.
Often a horoscope is required for a date for which no observations are available, and horoscopic astrology therefore needs methods for computing the positions of the planets.
The oldest known system of Babylonian planetary theory is thought to have been invented not earlier than 500 BC.
It is possible that the motive was astrological and that the invention of horoscopic astrology at about this time was due to the influence of Iranian doctrines of the immortality and celestial origin of the soul.
The Iranians who conquered Babylonia were a branch of the Aryan race.
Their native land consisted of a central plain surrounded by mountains.
This plain was largely desert and was subject to extremes of climate.
It was in this harsh and inhospitable land that one of the great religions of mankind originated.
This religion, known as Zoroastrianism, involved a teleological interpretation of time.
The date of its founder, Zarathustra (Zoroaster is the Greek form of his name), is uncertain but it is thought that he flourished in the first half of the sixth century BC.
The Iranians already had a considerable religious heritage and it is difficult to decide how much of Zoroastrianism is due to the reforms introduced by Zarathustra.
Zarathustra belonged to a pastoral tribe in northern Persia.
As a young man he had a prophetic revelation that led him to preach a new faith in place of the prevailing polytheism.
He denounced the old religion as the Lie and called on men to worship the deity whom he called Ahura Mazdah, the wise Lord, who stood for the Truth.
Zarathustra's monotheistic religion can be regarded as a response to the social conditions of his time, an age of transition when a settled agricultural and pastoral community was being threatened by predatory tribes who still followed the nomadic way of life.
Zarathustra interpreted the struggle between good and evil forces in ethical terms, and he believed that it pervaded the whole universe.
Although evil could not be attributed to Ahura Mazdah, its existence had to be accounted for, and Zarathustra explained it in terms of free will.
At the beginning of time two spirits were created  by Ahura Mazdah, the good spirit Spenista Mainyu (later called Ohrmazd) and the evil and destructive spirit Angra Mainyu (later called Ahriman).
The later, although his existence was due to God, became evil by his own free choice.
Zarathustra believed that man was involved in this cosmic struggle of good and evil and that he was compelled to choose one side or the other through his own conduct.
This meant that man has an inescapable moral responsibility for his own actions.
Zarathustra declared that at death God passes judgement on man and that this decides his fate when the world is finally transformed into the same state of perfection as when it left the hands of the Creator.
At the last, immortal glory will be the reward of those who adhere to the Truth, whereas the followers of the Lie will be condemned to ‘a long age of darkness, foul food and cries of woe’.
This doctrine of ‘last things’ was the first systematized eschatology in the history of religion and it profoundly influenced Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
After Zarathustra's death his religion was taken up by the old priestly class known as the Magi and eventually became the faith of the Achaemenid dynasty.
The first Persian king who seems to have accepted its basic doctrines was Darius (522–485 BC), but Achaemenid Zoroastrianism departed in certain respects from the original teachings of Zarathustra.
There was some reversion to polytheism and the religion became more magical and ritualistic than ethical.
Following the overthrow of the Achaemenid dynasty by Alexander of Macedon in 331 BC there was a confused period in the history of Zoroastrianism until its revival as the state religion under the Sassanian dynasty (AD 226–651).
Most of the extant documents relate to this last period, which ended with the conquest of Persia by the forces of Islam.
Long before this happened there was a tendency to identify Ahura Mazdah with the good spirit Ohrmazd.
This development gave rise to a perplexing problem.
For Zarathustra had spoken of the good and evil spirits as twins and thereby implied that they had a common origin.
A solution of this problem led to an important heresy associated with the idea of time, personified by the ancient god Zurvan.
The significance of time was, of course, implicit in the eschatological character of Zoroastrianism.
In the Zurvanite heresy it became the supreme deity.
The reasoning that led to this development was clearly expressed in a remarkable passage in a late writing known as the Persian Rivayat:
Except Time all other things are created.
Time is the creator; and Time has no limit, neither top nor bottom.
It has always been and shall be for evermore.
No  sensible person will say whence Time has come.
In spite of all the grandeur that surrounded it, there was no one to call it creator; for it had not brought forth creation.
Then it created fire and water; and when it had brought them together, Ohrmazd came into existence, and simultaneously Time became Creator and Lord with regard to the creation it had brought forth.
Throughout Iranian thought there was a tendency to dualism, and it is therefore not surprising that two distinct forms or aspects of time were recognized: indivisible time, that is the eternal ‘now’, and time that is divisible into successive parts.
The former represented the creative aspect of time and was fundamental.
It was called Zurvan akarana, or infinite time, and was the progenitor of the universe and of the Spirits of good and evil.
Associated with the universe was the other form of time called Zurvan daregho-chvadhata, that is time of the long dominion, or finite time.
This was the time that brought decay and death.
It dominated the world of man and was represented by the celestial firmament.
Presumably under Babylonian influence, the life-span of time of the long dominion was set at 12,000 years, the number twelve corresponding to the twelve signs of the zodiac.
This cosmic ‘year’ was divided into four periods, each of 3,000 years, Zarathustra's life occurring at the beginning of the final period.
The whole reason for the existence of finite time appears to have been to bring about that conflict of good and evil which eventually leads to the triumph of the former.
A question that puzzled some followers of Zarathustra in later times was that, if Ohrmazd was all-powerful and so destined to overthrow Ahriman, why did this not happen immediately, so that the world would have been spared all the suffering caused by the conflict between them?
An attempt to answer this question, and one which in the opinion of S. G. F. Brandon shows some consciousness of the significance of the factor of time, was made by a late Zoroastrian priest renowned for his orthodoxy.
He argued that Ohrmazd, because his nature was good and just, could not destroy Ahriman until the latter had, by his evil deeds, provided just cause for his destruction.
Finite time begins and ends with the rule of Ohrmazd.
At a given moment finite time came into existence out of infinite time.
It goes through a cycle of changes until it finally returns to its original state and then merges into infinite time.
There is no evidence for any repetition of the cycle.
In later Zoroastrianism the emphasis laid by Zarathustra on the role of individuals and the character of their life was replaced by concern for the  general fate of mankind.
The unfolding of the divine purpose was not, however, identified with the course of human history as known to the inhabitants of Iran.
Indeed Zoroastrians never attempted to relate the history of their nation to the cosmic struggle of Ohrmazd and Ahriman.
A problem concerning time and the calendar that has attracted much attention in recent years is the precise date when the Iranians adopted the Egyptian ‘vague’, or civil, calendar of 365 days.
The Achaemenid monarch Cambyses conquered Egypt in the year 525 BC (his predecessor Cyrus had conquered Babylon in 539 BC) and so the replacement of the ‘Old-Avestan calendar’, as the one formerly used by the Iranians is now called, presumably occurred after that.
The new calendar, now known as the ‘Young-Avestan calendar’ appears to have been adopted in the reign of Cambyses' great successor Darius I. The most thorough and plausible investigation of the date of its introduction is that made a few years ago by the distinguished historian of ancient astronomy the late Willy Hartner of Frankfurt University.
He came to the conclusion that the Young-Avestan calendar was introduced on 21 March 503 BC. (21 March is the ‘Gregorian’ date; the corresponding ‘Julian’date would be 27 March.)
In this calendar the year consisted of twelve months, each of thirty days except the eighth month, which comprised thirty-five days.
The most important point, however, that emerged from Hartner's investigation was that by 503 BC the Babylonian astronomer-priests had discovered that the tropical year (the year of the seasons) is not of exactly the same length as the sidereal year (the ‘true’ astronomical year).
This was an essential step towards the determination by the Hellenistic astronomer Hipparchus (C .
150 BC) of the precession of the equinoxes, with its eventual important implications for the reform of the calendar in AD 1582 (see ch. 8).
According to the Iranian scholar S. H. Taqizadah, a correction was made to the Young-Avestan calendar in 441 BC to link it more closely with the seasons.
It took the form of an intercalation of a full month of thirty days once every 120 years.
The Zoroastrians still reckon dates by the years of the last Zoroastrian king of Iran, Yazdgard III of the Sassanian dynasty (who was assassinated in AD 651 after the Arabs had overrun his kingdom), thus prolonging his imaginary reign through the centuries.
In this way we know that the Persian New Year in AD 632, the year in which he ascended the throne, fell on 16 June.
The era and the Zoroastrian calendar are followed to this day by the parsees of Bombay.
Time in Classical Antiquity
Classical Greece and Hellenistic civilization
About 1200 BC the late Bronze Age civilization of Mycenae, which had dominated the Aegean world since the destruction of Knossos some 300 years before, itself collapsed under the invasion of the Dorian Greeks from the north.
The early Iron Age that followed lasted until about 800 BC, when the first city-states emerged.
It was a dark age similar to the Dark Age of Western Europe following the final collapse of the Roman Empire.
The Mycenaean past remained a folk-memory of the Greeks that was preserved orally, culminating in the epics of Homer.
In them the one certain thing about man is his mortality, and this temporal restriction was the decisive factor that distinguished men from gods.
Since the Greeks looked back on the Mycenaean past as a ‘Golden Age’ of gods and heroes, they tended to regard history as a decline from this ideal state and not as an ultimate order of reality.
Consequently, for the Greeks, unlike the Persians, time was not a god.
It only became a god in Hellenistic times when it was worshipped under the name ‘Aion’, but that signified a sacred, eternal time which was very different from ordinary time,chronos .
Different thinkers had different ideas concerning the nature and significance of the temporal mode of existence.
At the dawn of Greek literature two contrasting points of view are found in Homer and Hesiod.
In the Iliad Olympian theology and morality are dominated by space-like rather than time-like concepts, the cardinal sin being hubris , that is, going beyond one's assigned province.
The whole conception, in the words of Cornford, is ‘static and geometrical; everything has its limited field with bounds that must not be passed’.
Homer was not interested in the origin of things and had no cosmogony beyond the idea that water is the origin of all things.
This was expressed mythologically by calling Oceanus, the river which encircles the world's disk, the origin of all things (Iliad , xiv.
246).
W. K. C. Guthrie, who has drawn attention to this, makes the interesting point that it was probably an Ionian idea, since ‘it reappears in Ionian philosophy and in the eastern peoples to  whose influence early Ionia lay particularly open’.
It will be recalled that Thales, the first Greek philosopher, was Ionian, and he maintained that the first principle (arche ) of all things is water.
Hesiod, unlike Homer, in his Works and Days gave an account of man's decline from a primeval Golden Age; his poem was based implicitly on the concept of time, although the word ‘time’ never actually appears in it.
The main purpose of the poem was to offer advice concerning the regulation of the activities of the year, particular days being of good or evil omen, appropriate or inappropriate for different activities.
In short, time was regarded by Hesiod as an aspect of the moral ordering of the universe.
Two centuries or more later, in the sixth century BC, the first Greek philosophers speculated, without invoking mythology, on how the world was generated.
They regarded the world as being based on a single live space-filling substance from which all things developed spontaneously by the interplay of opposed processes such as separation and combination or rarefaction and condensation.
The first explicit statement in Greek literature that, although individual things are subject to change and decay, the world itself is eternal appears to have been made by the philosopher Heraclitus about 500 BC.
He regarded perpetual change as the fundamental law governing all things — a view which is summarized in his famous aphorism, ‘You cannot step twice into the same river’.
He also believed that there is a perpetual strife of opposites: hot and cold, wet and dry, and so on, are each necessary complements to the other and their eternal conflict is the very basis of existence.
This world of change and conflict, however, is not just a chaos but is governed throughout time by a principle of order or balance of opposites, keeping them within their due bounds.
This principle was based on an idea that was accepted by other Greek thinkers of this period — the concept of Time as a judge.
For example, Anaximander, in the only surviving fragment directly attributed to him, said that all things that are created must also perish, making atonement to one another for their injustice according to Time's decree.
This idea was no doubt suggested by the cycle of the seasons with its alternating conflict of the hot and the cold, the wet and the dry.
Each of these advances in ‘unjust’ aggression at the expense of its opposite and then pays the penalty, retreating before the counter-attack of the latter, the object of the whole cycle being to maintain the balance of justice.
The fundamental assumption was that Time will always discover and avenge any act of injustice.
The concept of Time as a judge can also be attributed to the great Athenian statesman Solon (sixth century BC) who, according to Werner Jaeger, ‘defends himself ‘before the bench of Time''’.
(In this context it may be mentioned that in Athenian law courts it became the custom to have a clepsydra to ensure that most speeches were limited to half an hour.)
This was an age when the state was being founded on the concept of justice.
The original Greek word for ‘justice’,themis , signified ‘divine law’.
Although in the Iliad the word dikē denotes a judgement given by a judge or an assertion by a party to a dispute of his rights, in the Odyssey it signifies ‘right’ or ‘custom’.
Later it became the slogan of those struggling for equal justice for all.
Anaximander and Heraclitus extended the concept of justice to the whole universe:
In the life of politics the Greek language refers to the reign of justice by the term kosmos ; but the life of nature is a kosmos too, and indeed this cosmic view of the universe begins with Anaximander's dictum.
To him everything that happens in the natural world is rational through and through and subject to a rigid norm.
Emphasis on the role of time characterized the Pythagorean idea of the kosmos .
According to Plutarch, when asked what Time (Chronos)was, Pythagoras (sixth century BC) replied that it was the ‘soul’, or procreative element, of the universe.
The extent to which Pythagoras and his followers may have been influenced by oriental ideas has long been a subject for argument.
The Orphic idea of Chronos , which may have had an influence on Pythagoras, seems rather like the Iranian idea of Zurvan akarana .
In particular, both were depicted as multi-headed winged serpents.
Similarly, the dualism which played an important role in Pythagorean philosophy appears to echo the Zoroastrian cosmic opposition of Ohrmazd and Ahriman, although these two ultimates were regarded as personal gods and not as abstract principles like the Pythagorean ten basic pairs of opposites, such as limit versus unlimited, good versus bad, male versus female, odd versus even.
The most fruitful feature of Pythagorean teaching was the key idea that the essence of things is to be found in the concept of number, which was regarded as having spatial and also temporal significance.
Numbers were represented figuratively by patterns similar to those still found on dominoes and dice.
Although this led to Greek mathematics being dominated by geometry, time was no less an important element in early Pythagorean thought.
Indeed, even spatial configurations were regarded as temporal by nature, as is indicated by the role of the gnomon .
This was originally a time-measuring instrument — a simple upright sundial.
Later the same term was used to denote the geometrical figure that is formed when a smaller square is cut out of a larger square with two of its adjacent sides lying along two adjacent sides of the latter.
Eventually, the term came to denote any number which, when added to a figurate number, generates the next higher number of the same shape (triangular numbers, square numbers, pentagonal numbers, and so on).
The generation of numbers was regarded by the early Pythagoreans as an actual physical operation occurring in space and time, and the basic cosmogonical process was identified with the generation of numbers from the initial unit, the Monad, which may have been a sophisticated version of the earlier Orphic idea of the primeval World-egg.
It is well known that Pythagoras' belief in the significance of numbers was supported by his alleged discovery, with the aid of a stringed instrument, that the concordant intervals of the musical scale correspond to simple numerical ratios.
This led many later Greek thinkers to regard musical theory as a branch of mathematics (together with geometry, arithmetic, and astronomy it constituted what eventually came to be called the quadrivium), although this view was not universally accepted, the most influential of those who rejected it being Aristoxenus of Tarentum (fourth century BC).
He emphasized, instead, the role of sensory experience.
For him the criterion of musical phenomena was not mathematics but the ear.
Long before the time of Aristoxenus, some of the most acute Greek thinkers had found that the concept of time was difficult to reconcile with their idea of rationality.
Indeed, Parmenides, the founding father of logical disputation, argued that time cannot pertain to anything that is truly real.
The essence of his difficulty was that time and change imply that the same thing can have contradictory properties — it can be, say, hot and cold, depending on the time — and this conflicted with the rule that nothing can possess incompatible attributes.
His basic proposition was ‘That which is is , and it is impossible for it not to be.’
From this he argued that, since only the present ‘is’, it follows that past and future are alike meaningless, the only time is a continual present time and what exists is both uncreated and imperishable.
Parmenides drew a fundamental distinction between the world of appearance, characterized by time and change, and the world of reality which is unchanging and timeless.
The former is revealed to us by our senses, but these are  deceptive.
The latter is revealed to us by reason and is the only true mode of existence.
The difficulties involved in producing a logically satisfactory theory of time were emphasized by Parmenides' follower Zeno of Elea in his subtle paradoxes concerning motion.
The most famous is the one generally known as the paradox of ‘Achilles and the tortoise’.
(The identification of Achilles' competitor as a tortoise is due to later commentators.)
The tortoise is given an initial lead over Achilles, and the argument asserts that however fast Achilles runs he will never reach the tortoise.
For, when Achilles reaches the point from which the tortoise starts, the tortoise will have advanced to a farther point.
When Achilles reaches that point, the tortoise will be at a still farther point, and so on ad infinitum .
Consequently, as Aristotle puts it in his account, ‘the slower will always have a lead’, in contradiction with experience, that is, the world of appearance.
This argument assumes that space and time are infinitely divisible, but not all of Zeno's arguments involve this assumption.
The problems that his paradoxes raise concerning the mathematical structure of space and time are still being discussed today.
The difficulties discussed by Parmenides and Zeno do not occur if the concept of time is rejected as ‘unreal’.
Their influence on Plato (427–347 BC) is evident in the different treatment of space and time in his cosmological dialogue the Timaeus .
Space exists in its own right as a given frame for the visible order of things, whereas time is simply a feature of that order.
In Plato's cosmology the universe was fashioned by a divine artificer imposing form and order on primeval matter, which was originally in a state of chaos.
This divine artificer was, in effect, the principle of reason, which by imposing order on chaos reduced it to the rule of law.
The pattern of law was provided by an ideal realm of geometrical shapes which were eternal and in a perfect state of absolute rest, like the real world of Parmenides.
Unlike the eternal ideal model on which it is based, the universe is subject to change.
Time is that aspect of change which bridges the gap between the universe and its model, being ‘a moving image of eternity’.
This moving image manifests itself in the motions of the heavenly bodies.
Plato's intimate association of time and the universe led him to regard time as being actually produced by the revolutions of the celestial sphere.
A permanent legacy of his theory of time is the idea that time and the universe are inseparable.
In other words, time does not exist in its own right but is a characteristic of the universe.
Plato's conclusion that time is actually produced by the universe was not accepted by Aristotle (384–322 BC), who rejected the idea that time can be identified with any form of motion or change.
For, he argued, motion can be uniform or non-uniform and these terms are themselves defined by time, whereas time cannot be defined by itself.
Nevertheless, although time is not identical with motion or change, it seemed to be dependent on them.
He remarks that when the state of our minds does not appear to change we do not notice that time has elapsed.
It is by being aware of ‘before’ and ‘after’in change that we are aware of time.
He came to the conclusion that time can be regarded as a numbering process associated with our perception of before and after in motion and change.
He realized that the relation between time and change is a reciprocal one: without change time could not be recognized, whereas without time change could not occur.
‘Not only do we measure the movement by the time, but also the time by the movement, because they define each other.
The time marks the movement, since it is its number, and the movement the time’(Physica , iv.
220b).
Aristotle recognized that movement can cease whereas time cannot, but there is one motion that continues unceasingly, namely that of the heavens.
Clearly, although he did not agree with Plato, he too was profoundly influenced by the cosmological view of time.
He rejected the identification of time with the circular motion of the heavens, but he regarded the latter as the perfect example of uniform motion.
Consequently, it provides the perfect measure of time.
Although for Aristotle physics meant the study of motion and change in nature, the main emphasis was placed by him on the states between which change takes place rather than on the actual course of the motion itself.
Thus the static form rather than the dynamic process became the characteristic concept in his philosophy of nature, and form and place were more fundamental than time.
His natural philosophy was dominated by the idea of the permanence of the cosmos.
He rejected all evolutionary theories and stressed instead the essentially cyclical nature of change.
Belief in the cyclical nature of the universe found its apotheosis in the concept of the Great Year, which the Greeks may have inherited from the Babylonians.
The idea had two distinct interpretations.
On the one hand, it was simply the period required for the sun, moon, and planets to attain the same positions in relation to each other as they had at a given time.
This appears to be the sense in which Plato used the idea in the Timaeus .
On the other hand, for Heraclitus it signified the period of the  world from its formation to its destruction and rebirth.
According to him the universe sprang from fire and will end in fire.
This idea was probably transmitted from Iran, where it originated.
the two interpretations were combined in late antiquity by the Stoics, who believed that, when the heavenly bodies return at fixed intervals of time to the same relative positions as they had at the beginning of the world, everything would be restored just as it was before and the entire cycle would be renewed in every detail.
As Nemesius, Bishop of Emesa in the fourth century AD, later put it:
Socrates and Plato and each individual man will live again, with the same friends and fellow citizens.
They will go through the same experiences and the same activities.
Every city and village and field will be restored, just as it was.
And this restoration of the universe takes place not once, but over and over again — indeed to all eternity without end.
Those of the gods who are not subject to destruction, having observed the course of one period, know from this everything which is going to happen in all subsequent periods.
For there will never be any new thing other than that which has been before, but everything is repeated down to the minutest detail.
Nevertheless, as Ludwig Edelstein has pointed out, even in late antiquity there were philosophers, as well as historians and scientists, who regarded time as non-cyclical.
Cosmological recurrence involving the complete destruction of the universe and its exact re-creation, as believed in by the Stoic philosophers, must be distinguished from historical recurrence involving only the repetition of the general pattern of events, as believed in by the historian Polybius, for example.
Greek civilization not only gave rise to philosophy but it also produced, in the fifth century BC, the first real historians.
Until then the Greeks believed that recent events were unimportant compared with the exploits of the heroes in Trojan times.
Historiography arose when an event occurred which in its magnitude matched the greatest events celebrated in legend.
The whole complex of events in the Persian wars from the fall of Sardis to the retreat of Xerxes was seen as a unity and formed what Robert Drews has called ‘one Great Event of awesome proportions’.
Originally, the Greek historian's task was not to explain the present in terms of the past but to ensure that significant actions and events would not be forgotten in the future.
Consequently, in its origins Greek historiography was more closely affiliated to epic poetry than to philosophy, and in its development it retained a commemorative function.
Greek historians, for example Thucydides, tended to  concentrate on the recent past, their object being to put in writing those significant actions which were remembered but had not yet been recorded.
The difficulties against which the ‘fathers of history’, Herodotus and Thucydides, had to contend were formidable.
The Greeks of their time knew astonishingly little about their own past.
Not only had they no documents going back more than a century or two, but much of what they ‘knew’ was merely myth and legend.
Since their interest in the past was primarily moralistic, precise knowledge of actual events and when they happened was not required.
Herodotus was able to establish some kind of time-sequence for the two centuries before his time, but he was a more diffuse writer than Thucydides, who was concerned with many events occurring in a shorter time interval.
As Sir Moses Finley has pointed out, Thucydides, in writing about the Peloponnesian war (History of the Peloponnesian War , ii.
1), actually had to invent an appropriate system of dating, since each Greek city had its own calendar.
In his time the year was usually indicated by the name of an official, for example at Athens the first archon and at Sparta the first ephor.
Thucydides fixed the beginning of the war and dated subsequent events by counting how many years had elapsed from the start.
Each year of the war he divided into two, which he called summer and winter, respectively.
‘Simple enough,’ Finley comments, ‘yet the scheme was unique and the difficulties in making it work are nearly unimaginable today.’
Whereas Herodotus transformed ‘history’(historia)from a general enquiry about the world into an enquiry about past events, Thucydides believed that serious history could be concerned only with the present, or the immediate past.
Although he did not succeed in imposing his strict standards of reliability on later Greek historians, he effectively discouraged the idea that one could do genuine historical research about the Past.
Nevertheless, by the latter part of the fifth century BC there was a greater general awareness of the significance of time than there had been previously.
Although Homer dealt with allegedly historical subjects, his was ‘aristocratic’ history, involving no chronology, no temporal continuity with later ages, and no real sense of the passage of time.
For example, despite Odysseus' twenty years' absence from home, on his return neither he nor Penelope appear to have grown any older.
In short, for Homer it made no difference that year follows year.
On the other hand, by the time of Herodotus and Thucydides life in the polis did not consist of isolated episodes covering heroes but depended on the  continuity of institutions, laws, contracts, and expectations.
The passage of time had become more relevant.
In particular, problems of the calendar were the driving force that led to the initial development of Greek mathematical astronomy in the last decades of the fifth century BC.
Most Greek religious festivals occurred at or near full moon, but since they were associated with agricultural activities they had to take place at the appropriate times of the year.
It therefore became necessary to adopt a luni-solar calendar in which the months were measured by the phases of the moon but which also kept in step with the sun.
Since the length of the lunar month is about twenty-nine and a half days and a calendar month cannot contain a fractional part of a day, it was arranged that the calendar months were alternately of twenty-nine and thirty days.
As in Babylonia, this calendar was adapted to the sun by intercalating a thirteenth month from time to time, but this was left to local officials in the different cities to decide, and they did this individually and arbitrarily.
Astronomers, on the other hand, sought to introduce a regular intercalation by means of a cycle of fixed period.
According to Geminus, the author of a manual of astronomy of about 70 BC, the first such cycle obtained by the Greeks was an eight-year solar cycle containing ninety-nine months (three of which were intercalary), but there is considerable doubt about the origin of this cycle, known as the ‘octaeteris’.
The first well-attested cycle of this type was introduced in 432 BC by Meton.
As previously mentioned (ch. 3), it was a nineteen-year solar cycle of 235 months (see Appendix 2).
Astronomically based cycles such as the Metonic were used, however, only in scientific texts and had no influence on the various local civil calendars.
Meton lived in Athens and appears as a character ridiculed by Aristophanes in The Birds , produced in 414 BC.
Besides historiography and mathematical astronomy another great innovation by the Greeks of the fifth century BC was the art of tragedy.
Jacqueline de Romilly, Professor of Greek Literature at the Sorbonne, in her Messenger Lectures at Cornell University in 1967 on ‘Time in Greek Tragedy’, has argued that it was no coincidence that Greek tragedy was born at the same time as historiography.
Tragedy involves the past, and it arose when the Greek awareness of time was becoming clearer and stronger.
Greek tragedy concerns a single problem that becomes more and more urgent until it culminates in crime.
A short continuous crisis, the origins and consequences of which cover a long period, seems to be the double requirement of tragedy and its double relationship to time.
‘Its strength rests on a contrast between before and after; and the deeper  the contrast the more traffic the event.’
Nevertheless, as Professor de change her decision within a short time, Aristotle was shocked!
Contact with other nations (Egypt in the case of Herodotus) led to a greater awareness of the past, because of the evidence for long periods of time presented, for example, by the pyramids.
Consequently many Greek writers of the fifth century and later realized that their own society was the end-product of a long period of advance.
The more sophisticated Greeks were thus made to regard man in pre-Trojan times as much the same as his distant offspring, and this tended to demythologize the Greek legends, thereby placing the past in quite a new perspective.
After the fifth century, however, few, except writers on scientific subjects, had any belief in the idea of progress in the future.
Indeed, the typical Greek tended to be backward-looking, since the future appeared to him to be the domain of total uncertainty, his only guide to it being delusive expectation.
As for the philosophers, Plato thought that all progress consisted in trying to approximate to a pre-existing model in the timeless world of transcendental forms and Aristotle believed that it was the realization of a form which was already present potentially.
Thus, for both of them the theory of forms excluded all possibility of evolution.
Even in the sciences it was thought in later antiquity that all wisdom lay in the past.
As E. R. Dodds has remarked, ‘where men can build their systems only out of used pieces the notion of progress can have no meaning — the future is devalued in advance’.
Consequently, it is not surprising that in this period the main philosophical schools tended to reject the idea of progress and to hold cyclical views concerning the nature of time.
Aristotle himself believed that the arts and the sciences have been discovered many times and then lost again.
For example in the Meteorologica (339b27) he asserts: ‘We must say that the same opinions have arisen among men in cycles, not once, twice, nor a few times, but infinitely often.’
Nevertheless, Arnoldo Momigliano has warned us that many Greek historians, as distinct from philosophers, paid little attention to the cyclical concept of time.
He has also pointed out that the future did not loom so large for them as it did for the Roman historians, who were anxious about the fate of their empire.
Instead, the Greeks were more concerned with the present and the past.
Writing c .
40 BC, the historian Diodorus Siculus said of his predecessors:
Two views about the origin of mankind have been current among the most notable scientists and historians.
One school, premising that the cosmos is ungenerated and indestructible, declares that the human race has always existed, and there was no time when it began to reproduced itself.
The other holds that the cosmos has been generated and may be destroyed, and that men similarly first came into existence at a definite time.
As regards the cyclical view, Momigliano says that the principal upholder of it in Greek historiography was Polybius (c .
202–120 BC), but this opinion is based only on the constitutional chapters in his history of the world, for elsewhere he shows no sign of it.
For example, he did not treat the Punic wars as repetitions of events that had already occurred in the past and would occur again in the future.
His main theme was the increasing power of Rome in the Mediterranean and this, as Momigliano points out, Provided him with a new historical perspective: ‘Just because Fortune made almost all the affairs of the world incline in one direction, it is the historian's task to put before his readers a compendious view of the ways in which Fortune accomplished her purposes.’
The concept of Fortune (i.e. Fate or Destiny) played a crucial role in later Hellenic thought, but different views were held.
Aristotle criticized Democritus (c.460–390 BC) for believing only in efficient and not in final causes, that is, in strict determinism rather than in teleology.
Aristotle believed that strict determinism must be rejected because it destroys the natural basis for distinguishing between voluntary and involuntary actions.
For the purposes of law some actions must be regarded as voluntary, since only these can be justifiably punished.
For Aristotle this argument was decisive.
Similarly, although Epicurus (342–270 BC) unlike Aristotle accepted Democritus' atomism, he too rejected Democritus' belief in the strict determinism of all human actions.
Instead of teleology, however, Epicurus advocated the existence of chance and free will, partly because, like Aristotle, he argued that you cannot blame or punish a man for something he cannot help doing, but also because he believed that there is a kind of spontaneity in men (and possibly in animals) that is manifested in our apparent freedom, to originate actions.
Epicurus introduced the famous ‘swerve’ into the chain of strict causality, so as to account both for human free will and also for the existence of random motion in the universe; for otherwise all bodies would, in his opinion, fall with the same speed downwards.
It was by stressing the chance element in destiny that he was led to the hedonistic philosophy of ‘eat, drink and be merry for tomorrow we die!’
A very different point of view was advocated by the Stoics, beginning with Zeno of Citium (335–263 BC).
Zeno and his followers rejected Plato's two-worlds theory of ideal forms and sense data.
Instead, they believed in the organic unity of the whole universe, and they regarded intelligence as a refined material substance with a fiery nature.
Unlike the Epicureans, the Stoics were strict determinists who advocated a philosophy of resignation in the face of worldly difficulties.
For them Fate had a cyclical, or eternally recurrent, character.
It was identified with Necessity and was symbolized by the unceasing rotation of a wheel, like the mythical wheel of Ixion.
Since Fate was the power that kept order in the universe, as revealed particularly by the stars and planets, the prevalence of Stoicism influenced the growing belief in astrology in Hellenistic times and in the days of the Roman empire.
The cyclical nature of events was regarded by many thinkers as inevitable, because it was thought that otherwise they would be deprived of both ‘rationality’ and ‘legality’.
In late antiquity, both Plutarch (c.
AD 46–120), the famous biographer and moral philosopher, and Alexander of Aphrodisias (fl. c..
AD 200), an important commentator on Aristotle, criticized the views of the Stoics, as well as those of the Epicureans.
Although he did not completely discard the astrological concept of destiny, Plutarch argued that there was a place in it for contingency.
He formulated explicit definitions of ‘necessity’ and ‘contingency’that are somewhat like the modern definitions of ‘analytic’and ‘synthetic’: ' The necessary is a possibility, the contradiction of which is impossible, but the contingent is a possibility, the contradiction of which is also possible.
This distinction applies particularly to the future.
Like Plutarch, Alexander of Aphrodisias argued that not everything is the product of inevitable destiny, since things that are produced by reason and by artists in the exercise of their craft ‘do not seem to be produced by them through necessity, for they make each one of them indeed, but they are equally at liberty not to do so’.
Just as there was no unique Greek idea of time, the history of the human race also presented itself to the Greeks in various forms.
Besides the cyclical view and the progressive, there was the important tradition concerning a Golden Age in the remote past.
The earliest extant account of this is to be found in the Works and Days of Hesiod (c.700 BC), who sought to account thereby for man's present condition and, in particular, for his need to work.
According to Hesiod, in the ‘good old days’ before the lordship of Zeus when his father Kronos was king, there was a  Golden Age.
Strictly speaking, Hesiod refers to a golden race rather than to the golden age of later writers.
The idea of a primeval golden age can be traced back to the Sumerians (c.2000 BC).
For them its most significant feature was freedom from fear.
According to a Sumerian poet: ‘Once upon a time there was no snake, there was no scorpion, /There was no hyena, there was no lion, /There was no wild dog, no wolf, /There was no fear, no terror, /Man had no rival.’
According to Hesiod the age of idle luxury was followed successively by an age of heroes, a silver age, an age of bronze, and finally by the present iron age.
Contrary to our knowledge today, this last was considered to be less civilized than the bronze age that preceded it.
The original decline from the primeval Golden Age was explained by the myth of Prometheus, which has points of resemblance to the Hebrew myth of ‘The Fall’ described in Genesis.
These include not only the creation of woman (Pandora corresponding to Eve) and the alleged evils that followed there from, but also the acquisition of ‘forbidden knowledge’, which in the Greek case included the discovery of fire.
By the classical period of Greek thought the myth of the Golden Age had partially given way to the opposite idea that man's early condition was ‘nasty, brutish and short’.
According to Moschion, who lived about the third century BC but wrote in the spirit of a century or two earlier, it was due to Time —‘the begetter and nurturer of all things’— that ‘The earth, once barren, began to be ploughed by yoked oxen, towered cities arose, men built sheltering homes and turned their lives from savage ways to civilized.’
Some writers on cyclical theories explicitly held out the hope that, although the world was in decline, the wheel would turn again so that eventually another Golden Age would repeat the idyllic conditions of the remote past.
In his Politics Plato put forward a myth of cyclical change in which the creator imparts rotation to the universe and keeps it under his rule until, at the end of an era, he releases control.
Thereupon the world reverses its rotation and everything starts to deteriorate until God reasserts his control and lets the universe rotate once again in the same direction as before.
W. K. C. Guthrie, who has drawn attention to this myth, also points out that what Aristotle particularly deplored in the recurrent world catastrophes was the loss of accumulated knowledge and wisdom that they entailed.
Aristotle also doubted whether there could be time without thinking beings, since he regarded time as not merely succession but ‘succession in so far as it is numbered’, and nothing can be numbered unless there is someone to do the counting.
The germ of this idea can be traced back to the sophist  Antiphon (c.480–411 BC), one of whose fragments contains the earliest Greek definition of time.
According to this definition, time has no substantive existence but is a mental concept or means of measurement — a point of view that strikes us today as being remarkably modern.
Finally, in surveying the role of time in ancient Greece, brief mention must be made of the instruments available for its measurement.
Besides the gnomon, or sundial, and the clepsydra, or water-clock, an improved version of which with a more constant flow was invented by Ctesibius of Alexandria c.270 BC, there is evidence of more elaborate instrumentation, such as the ‘Tower of the Winds’ which can still be seen in Athens, north of the Acropolis.
Designed and built by the astronomer Andronicus Kyrrhestes of Macedonia in the second quarter of the first century BC, with a wind vane and complicated sundials on each of its eight walls, its most interesting feature is a reservoir in a smaller building that stood next to its south side.
Water from a nearby spring kept it filled.
This is a requirement for water-clocks of the inflow type.
With a constant head of pressure, the flow of water from a tap near the base of the reservoir could also be kept constant.
The tap could be regulated so that the water flowing from it filled another tank in exactly twenty-four hours, while raising a float inside the tank a fixed distance.
With a water-clock inside the tower and sundials outside, visitors could observe the time both by day and by night and also when the sky was cloudy as well as when it was clear.
To cope with the traditional use of variable hours, so that the period of daylight always comprised twelve, Andronicus is thought to have used a system that is described in detail by his Roman contemporary, the architect Vitruvius.
The clock's float was connected by a line to a counter-weight and this line passed round a horizontal shaft.
As the float rose the shaft rotated and so did a circular metal plate attached to the end of it.
On this plate was depicted a map of the heavens, and holes along the line of the ecliptic made it possible for a representation of the sun to be moved at intervals of a day or two in imitation of its annual motion.
A complete rotation of the map every twenty-four hours simulated the daily rotation of the heavens.
A grid of reference wires in front of the rotating map presented the hours, and as the solar image passed each wire it indicated the time as well as any sundial could.
J. V. Noble and D. J. de Solla Price, who have described this Tower of the Winds in detail, believe that the interior must have been a dazzling sight.
(Price has called the Tower of Winds ‘a sort of Zeiss planetarium, of the classical world’.)
They conjecture that Poseidon was a central  figure between two fountains and that Hercules and Atlas held the wire grid before the bright disk which simulated the motion of the heavens.
‘We live in an era in which we accept science and technology as commonplace,’ Noble and Price conclude, ‘and we expect them and our architecture to be efficient and functional.
Athens…was a place of wonder and beauty, and it was a time to marvel at the achievements of mathematicians and astronomers — a time to build and admire a Tower of the Winds.’
Ancient Israel
It has for long been held that our modern idea of time derives from that of early Christianity, which in turn can be traced back to that of ancient Israel and Judaism.
Instead of adopting the cyclical idea of time, the Jews are said to have believed in a linear concept, based in their case on a teleological idea of history as the gradual revelation of God's purpose.
Although there is much to support this view of the origin of our modern idea of time, it is now realized that it can only be adhered to with some reservations, as we shall see.
Following the Exodus from Egypt and the Settlement in Canaan in the latter part of the second millennium BC, the Jews found themselves in a region which was on the main line of communication between Egypt and Babylonia.
Some time after the reigns of Saul, David, and Solomon the Jewish realm split into two.
In 722 BC the northern kingdom, Israel, was overthrown and its capital destroyed by Sargon II.
Two years later its people were deported to Assyria.
In 586 BC the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem, including the Temple, and many of the inhabitants of the southern kingdom, Judaea, were deported to Babylonia.
According to Theodore Vriezen, Professor of Old Testament Studies at the University of Utrecht, the Babylonians deported mainly the upper classes and left perhaps 20,000 of the lower classes behind, so as not to let the country fall into total decay.
The reaction of the Jews to these vicissitudes of fortune was profound.
Appeal was made to the past for evidence of divine providence, current misfortune being explained as punishment for unfaithfulness to Yahweh, or God.
It was believed that, if the nation were to become more zealous in its service of God, there would be more hope of deliverance.
Although this was predicted to occur at some unspecified date in the future, belief in it was strengthened by the promise of a Messiah who would defeat Israel's enemies and restore the nation to its former glory.
Consequently, the essential aim of the Jewish God in history Was the salvation of Israel.
The definitive account of this belief was presented in the Book of Daniel, written long after the return from the Babylonian Exile under the stress of danger from the Seleucids just before the Maccabean rising in the second century BC.
The appeal to the past was thus developed into a forward-looking philosophy of history.
It has therefore frequently been maintained that for the ancient Hebrews time was a unidirectional linear process extending from the divine act of creation to the ultimate accomplishment of God's purpose and the final triumph, here on earth, of the chosen people, Israel.
According to the theologian O. Cullmann in his book Christ and Time , ‘the symbol of time for primitive Christianity as well as for Biblical Judaism…is the upward sloping line , while in Hellenism it is the circle’.
On the other hand, the historian of political philosophy J. G. Gunnell has argued that, although the Hebrews were more oriented towards the future than the Greeks, who tended to look more towards the past, ‘the concept of linear progression is a rationalization of the Hebrew experience of temporality’.
More recently another historian, G. W. Trompf in his study The Idea of Historical Recurrence in Western Thought , has drawn attention to the prevalence of what he calls ‘notions of re-enactment’ in the Old Testament which formed an ideological basis for the great Israelite festivals.
Trompf also cites examples of reenactment in Hebrew historiography, such as the crossing of the Jordan in Joshua, which was consciously likened to the traversing of the Red Sea in Exodus, and the similarity of the Babylonian exile to the earlier Egyptian bondage.
Moreover, even in eschatology and its presentation in terms of history, the idea of the future that dominated Hebrew thought involved a return to the primeval state that the Jews believed they had lost.
In other words, although they transferred their own Golden Age from the past to the future, a quasi-cyclical factor was involved.
Gunnell has pointed out that, unlike the Greeks, the Hebrews never tried to analyse the ‘problem’ of time as such.
They seem neither to have conceptualized their experience of time nor formed an abstract idea of history.
‘History was the space in which the drama of individual and social life unfolded according to the purpose of Yahweh, and cosmic time simply attested to the works of Yahweh and His power over the universe.’
One of the most significant features characterizing the Hebrew experience of time was the ‘contemporaneity of past and future’.
In other words, for the Hebrews the present was never a clearly delimited unit with precise boundaries but was part of a continuum  stretching from the beginning to the end of time and was continually influenced by both past and future.
It is significant that the Old Testament contains no numbered dates, despite its concern with an intricate historical record.
The covenant was not just an important past event preserved by tradition but was the theme of what Gunnell calls ‘a communal drama played out between Yahweh — He who will be there — and His people in time’, for in the words of Deuteronomy 5: 3, ‘The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.’
The outstanding feature that distinguishes Hebrew thought from Greek thought (particularly that of Aristotle) was the idea of the cosmos as a creation of God that actually had occurred in history.
In Hebrew thought, unlike Greek, nature was not divine, and God transcended all phenomena.
The sun, moon, and stars were all God's creatures and served to show his handiwork (Psalm 19).
Unlike the Egyptians and Babylonians, the Hebrews did not regard kingship as ‘anchored in the cosmos’.
In Hebrew religion, and in that religion alone, man was joined to God by a quasi-legal covenant, as a result of which the ancient bond between man and nature was destroyed.
Because of this, the Jews have sometimes been regarded as the ‘builders of time’, whereas the Greeks were the ‘builders of space’, the Romans the ‘builders of empire’, and the Christians the ‘builders of heaven’.
Eric Voegelin has emphasized the fundamental difference between what he calls the ‘cosmological’ civilizations, which presupposed the political symbolization of the cosmos typified by Babylonia with its epic of Marduk, and ‘eschatological’civilizations such as the Hebrew — but first exemplified by the Iranian — based on the religion of Zarathustra.
Although the main emphasis in Jewish eschatology has always been on the fate of the nation, the doctrine of personal immortality (which originated with Zarathustra's passionate belief in the justice of God) seems to have been adopted by the Jews during or after their Babylonian exile.
Belief in this doctrine was the greatest innovation of post-exilic Judaism.
Irrespective of the precise role of linearity in the Hebrew notion of time, it was for long assumed that the eschatological nature of that concept greatly influenced, by way of Christianity, the development of our modern idea of time's unidirectional non-cyclic nature.
In recent years, however, there has been a growing tendency to question the assumption that, prior to the advent of Christianity, Israel was unique among the nations of antiquity in the significance it attached to history and the non-repeatability of events.
For, not only did the  explicit recognition of forward movement in time and the rejection of the idea of endless recurrence originate with Zoroastrianism, but in the last twenty years or so Old Testament scholars have drawn attention to the similarity between some passages in the Old Testament and certain Mesopotamian texts.
As a result, J. Van Seters, Professor of Biblical Literature in the University of North Carolina, and others have argued that the idea of there being a unique ‘divine plan of history’ in the Old Testament has been ‘greatly overstated’.
In other words, the conviction of the Israelites that they were ‘God's chosen race’ is now generally regarded by scholars as not greatly different from the fundamental belief on which the Sumerian and Babylonian city-states had been based, namely, that the king was divinely elected.
The Hebrews were influenced by the Sumerians and Babylonians in other ways too, including the measurement of time.
Consequently, their calendar was based on the moon.
As among other peoples who count by lunations, the Hebrew month begins when the moon's slim crescent is first visible in the evening twilight.
As early as the time of Saul the festival of the new moon was celebrated with great solemnity.
Later, when Jerusalem was the capital, as soon as the appearance of the new moon had been proved by credible witnesses before the Sanhedrin, messengers were dispatched from there to announce the commencement of the new month.
Originally the Jewish year commenced at the autumn equinox.
The Jewish civil year still begins at this time, but since the exodus from Egypt the Jewish ecclesiastical year has begun with the month Nisan at the spring equinox.
By using years of different lengths, depending on the insertion or not of an intercalary month, reasonable agreement with the sun was maintained.
Not only the new moon but the full moon too was regarded by the Hebrews as being of great religious significance, and the timing of Passover was determined by the first full moon on or after the spring equinox.
As regards the numbering of their years, the Jews used the same era as the Seleucids of Syria from the time they came under their rule, in the second century BC, until the destruction of the Temple by the Romans in 70 AD.
In some of the older parts of the Bible, particularly in those concerning the earlier prophets, the moon is frequently mentioned in connection with the Sabbath, which commemorated the seventh day, of creation, when the Lord rested from his labours.
In his book Rest Days Hutton Webster has drawn attention to the passage in 2 Kings 4: 23, describing how, when the Shunammite woman wanted to go to the prophet Elijah  to beg him for her son's life to be restored, her husband objected, saying ‘Wherefore wilt thou go to him today?
It is neither new moon nor Sabbath.’
As Webster goes on to point out, when study of the cuneiform records revealed that the Babylonian shabbatum (full-moon day) also fell on the fourteenth (or fifteenth) day of the month, we were presented with another survival of what must have been the primary meaning of the Hebrew term shabbath .
Although the Hebrew seven-day week ending with the Sabbath (the only day to which a name was given) resembles the Babylonian seven-day period ending with an ‘evil day’, there are important differences.
For the latter cycle was always directly associated with the moon, whereas the Hebrew week was not but was continued from month to month and year to year regardless of the moon.
Moreover, the Babylonian evil day was observed only by the king, priests, and physicians, whereas the Hebrew Sabbath was observed by the whole nation.
As Webster points out, ‘To dissever the week from the lunar month, to employ it as a recognized calendrical unit, and to fix upon one day of that week for the exercises of religion were momentous innovations which, until evidence to the contrary is found, must be attributed to the Hebrew people alone.’
By the time that Israel became part of the Roman empire, the idea was already widespread among the various religious sects that the ‘End of the World’ was at hand, although it was only for the Essenes of Qumran that this belief assumed a definite form; that, whereas the First Judgement at the time of Noah had been destruction by water, the Last Judgement would be destruction by fire.
The Essenes, an extremely ascetic sect who withdrew to the desert region of Judaea near the Red Sea, appear to have originated in the middle of the second century BC at the time of the Maccabean revolt against the misguided Hellenizing reforms of the Seleucid ruler of Palestine Antiochus IV.
He had recently taken over this region, which had previously been subject to the Ptolemies in Egypt.
The Essenes were not only greatly inclined to apocalyptic views and legalism, but they were frantically anti-Hellenistic.
Following the conquests of Alexander, Egypt and the rest of the area that we now call the Middle East were dominated by Hellenistic customs and views.
Greek became the lingua franca of this region and remained so during the time of the Roman empire.
Because of this, the books of the New Testament appeared in Greek, although the language spoken by Jesus and his disciples had been Aramaic.
Many Jews, especially outside Palestine, became Hellenized, but inside  that country only the Sadducees were sympathetic to Hellenic culture.
As the most intellectually enlightened of the sects, they were on the side of the ruling power.
Their name signified ‘sons of Zadok’, the high priest at the time of David who was thought to be a descendant of the younger son of Aaron.
They were the main enemies of the predominant sect, the Pharisees, who believed that salvation would only come if they adhered strictly to the Mosaic law, as originally set out in Deuteronomy where it was made clear that the chosen people must be a ‘clean’ people.
The Deuteronomic standpoint was later canonized in the Torah and in the books of the prophets and became central in Jewish life.
Indeed, of the books of the Old Testament so far found to have been in use among the Qumran sect, with the exception of Isaiah and the Psalms, most are copies of Deuteronomy.
It is of particular interest to us today that the rivalry of Pharisees and Sadducees extended to their differing views concerning the way time should be measured.
For, whereas the Pharisees adhered to the lunar year (with intercalary months so that the agricultural year kept pace with the sun), the Sadducees adopted the luni-solar year used by the Greeks.
Each sect accused the other of wishing to observe the prescribed religious festivals at the wrong times, although in practice they had to keep to the same dates.
Because the Pharisees were the predominant sect, few, Sadducee writings have survived.
Among those that have, particular interest attaches to the Book of Jubilees, which was probably composed about the year 110 BC.
The basis of this calendar of jubilees seems to have been the famous Pythagorean right-angled triangle of sides three, four, and five.
The sum of the first two gives the number of days in the week, the sum of all three gives the number of months in the year, and the sum of their squares gives the number fifty.
According to Philo of Alexandria, a first-century Graeco-Judaic philosopher who wrote many works that still survive, including commentaries on the Old Testament, fifty was regarded as the holiest of numbers and ‘the principle of the generation of the universe’(De vita contemplativa , 65).
The significance of a fifty-year cycle in Jewish life, with the remission of debts, the release of slaves, etc., was eventually responsible for the practice that has been followed by successive Popes, since 1300, in declaring a Jubilee of the Roman Church every fifty years.
Imperial Rome and early Christendom
Because of the way in which it began, Christianity inherited the peculiar Jewish view of time with its hope of redemption from successive  oppressors.
At first Christians looked upon the risen Jesus as the Messiah whose return was imminent and would bring to an end the existing world-order.
Gradually, as time passed without this return occurring, Christians had to cope with a world that continued to exist, its end being postponed to an indefinite future.
If Jesus were the Messiah, then he had already come and a new interpretation was necessary.
The birth of Jesus thus came to be regarded as dividing time into two parts, because it ended the first phase of the divine purpose and initiated the second.
Unlike adherents of other contemporary religions in the Roman empire, except Judaism, Christians regarded their religion as expressing the purpose of God in history; but whereas Judaism was concerned primarily with the fortunes of Israel, Christians considered their faith to be of universal significance.
The crucifixion was considered by them to be a unique event not subject to repetition.
Consequently, time must be linear rather than cyclic.
This essentially historical view of time, with its particular emphasis on the non-repeatability of events, is the very essence of Christianity.
It is brought out clearly, and even contrasted with the Hebrew view, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, 9: 25–6: ‘Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with the blood of others; For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world; but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.’
The world in which Christianity originated was that of the Roman empire.
The age was one in which a variety of religions flourished, many of oriental origin.
In general it was an extremely superstitious age.
On many days of the year the traditional religious calendar forbade business of any sort.
In particular, on days of ill-omen ships could not set sail.
Thus, no Roman skipper would move off from a port on 24 August, 5 October, or 8 November, and it was thought bad to be at sea at the end of the month.
As Sir Ronald Syme has pointed out, the Romans had a special veneration for authority, precedent, and tradition, and they greatly objected to change unless it was thought to be in accord with ancestral custom, which meant in practice the sentiments of the oldest living senators.
The Romans tended to be suspicious of novelty, and the word ‘novus’ had for them a sinister ring, although their memory of the past reminded them that change had often come about, although at first resisted.
As Syme has remarked, ‘Rome's peculiar greatness was due not to one man's genius or to one age, but to many men and the long process of time.’
One of the main inspirations of Roman historians was the cult of ancestors and the propensity of noble families to commemorate their deeds.
Unlike the Greek historians, they made it their business as patriots to present a comprehensive survey of their country's past.
The first history of Rome was, however, written by a Greek, Polybius, who lived in Rome in the second century BC.
Later historians of note include Caesar, Sallust, Livy, Tacitus, and Suetonius.
Livy (c.59 BC-AD 19) gave his history the title Ab urbe condita (‘From the Foundation of the City’) and began with Aeneas.
Omens and prodigies abound in his work, so that compared with him Herodotus seems almost modern.
The only Roman historian who can be compared to Thucydides is Tacitus (c.
AD 55–117).
Both were great stylists and for them history was the ultimate tribunal before which the actions of rulers and others can be judged, ‘but where Thucydides was a magistrate, Tacitus was an advocate — the most brilliant, perhaps, who ever sought to determine the judgement of Time, but an advocate all the same’.
Although much of his historical writing depended on oral testimony, he is of all ancient historians the one who most frequently cites the authors and documents that he has consulted.
He had an exalted idea of history that is well illustrated by his claim (Annals , iii.
65) that the historian's duty is ‘to rejudge the conduct of men, that generous actions may be snatched from oblivion, and that the author of pernicious counsels, and the perpetrator of evil deeds may see, beforehand, the infamy that awaits them at the tribunal of posterity’.
The Romans tended to regard the course of history as alternating between defection from and adherence to traditional values.
As E. R. Curtius has pointed out, the pious attitude of the Romans to their past and their tendency to regard it as if it were a part of the present signified a kind of timelessness that excluded a genuinely historical view of the world and was very different from our sense of temporal perspective.
Although the Romans respected the literary and other cultural achievements of the Greeks, they were puzzled by the importance assigned by them to mathematics.
The outstanding exception to the general conclusion that the Romans were not really interested in science was Lucretius (c.94–55 BC), whose De rerum natura is nowadays regarded as the greatest philosophical poem ever written.
Although it impressed both Cicero (106–43 BC) and Virgil (70–19 BC;), the Epicureanism on which it was based made little impression on the Romans, except for its hedonistic aspect.
As regards the concept of time, the poem is remarkable for its modern point of view: ‘Similarly, time by itself does not exist; but from things themselves there results a sense of what has already taken  place, what is now going on and what is to ensue.
It must not be claimed that anyone can sense time itself apart from the movement of things or their restful immobility.’
Unlike Epicureanism, Stoicism had a considerable appeal for the more educated citizens.
A famous passage in Virgil's Fourth Eclogue gives expression to the concept of the ‘Eternal Return’: ‘Now is come the last age of the song of Cumae; the great line of the centuries begins anew…
A second Tiphys shall then arise, and a second Argo to carry chosen heroes; a second warfare, too, there shall be, and again shall a great Achilles be sent to Troy.’
The stoical attitude of philosophical resignation replaced the old Roman polytheism which had become more and more a meaningless formality.
In so far as Jupiter survived he was the personification of Providence or Destiny.
The deification of the Emperors, introduced by Augustus, was not taken too seriously and signified little more than in later ages was implied by the adjective ‘Holy’ in the title ‘Holy Roman Emperor’.
Although for the upper classes the Pax Romana in the age of the Antonines (second century AD) came as a great opportunity to concentrate on and uphold the customs of their local town or district, for humbler men it Provided wider horizons and unprecedented opportunities for travel.
As a leading authority on late antiquity has pointed out, ‘merchants were constantly on the move, seeking opportunities in the underdeveloped territories of Western Europe, often settling far from their native towns’.
Indeed, one merchant from Phrygia is known to have visited Rome no fewer than seventy-two times.
This new freedom to travel safely far and wide had a profound effect not only on men's lives but also on their thoughts and beliefs; these men who were being uprooted provided ‘the background to the anxious thoughts of the religious leaders of the late second century’.
It was from them and no longer from the humble and Oppressed, as in the previous century, that the converts to Christianity were now mainly recruited.
At this time, however, Christianity was only one among a number of competing religions in the Roman empire which were coming increasingly under the cosmopolitan influence of Hellenistic civilization.
Stoicism had declined, the last prominent exponent of its philosophy being Marcus Aurelius who ruled from 161 to 180.
His Meditations , with their emphasis on the vicissitudes of perpetual change, exude an air of world-weariness.
The following century saw the spread of Gnosticism, the believers in which laid claim to secret, or privileged, knowledge and so were called gnostikoi (‘knowers’).
It was a way of thought based on  the general Hellenic idea that salvation is obtained by knowledge.
Besides Christian forms there were others such as Hermeticism and Manichaeism.
One of the most characteristic features of Gnostic thought was the fundamental dualism of God and the world, the Deity being regarded as completely transcending the world which, so far from being his creation, was the realm of the Devil and consequently irredeemably evil.
Gnosticism can be looked upon as a revolt against Greek science.
Although dualistic it was quite different from Platonism: cosmic time was not the moving image of eternity but ‘at best a caricature of eternity, a defective imitation far removed from its model’.
Similarly, Gnosticism was opposed to orthodox Christianity by its hostility to history, for instead of being based on the idea that God prepares for the future by way of the past it regarded the world as one from which God was absent.
Consequently, when Gnosticism was combined with Christian ideas the result was soon judged unacceptable by the Church.
Nevertheless, this peculiar combination had a long life and was destined to reappear in the Middle Ages as the Albigensian heresy that flourished for a while in southern France but was eventually crushed in the first quarter of the thirteenth century by the northern French at the command of the most powerful of the medieval Popes, Innocent III.
Among other forms of religion that flourished in the Roman empire was Mithraism.
This extremely masculine religion appealed to the Roman army.
The founding father of modern Mithraic studies, Franz Cumont, showed that Roman Mithraism was a continuation of the Iranian religion of Zarathustra and that its origins can be traced back to the Hindus, for in the Vedic hymns we encounter the name Mitra.
According to Cumont, despite the theological differences between the Vedas and the Avesta , ‘the Vedic Mitra and the Iranian Mithra have preserved so many traits of resemblance that it is impossible to entertain any doubt concerning their common origin'.
Two different iconographical images of Mithra have survived.
In one found only in the West, e.g. in the course of excavations in the City of London, he appears as a handsome bull-slaying god, signifying the renewal of the world at the time of the New Year.
In a marble group in the British Museum depicting the bull-slaying Mithra the most striking feature is that three spikes of wheat are shown issuing from the wound of the sacrificed bull.
Mithra's other form, found in the Eastern as well as the Western world, is as a lion-headed monster around whose body a serpent is coiled.
The snake is sometimes decorated with signs of the zodiac.
It therefore  represents the path of the sun around the ecliptic and indicates the connection between Mithra and the Iranian god of time, Zurvan.
This symbolism is similar to that found in many ancient cultures, including those of Mesoamerica, in which the serpent represents cycles of endless time, perhaps suggested by the fact that the snake periodically sheds and renews its skin.
In the story of the Fall in the third chapter of Genesis the destroyer of Man's primeval innocence is also depicted as a serpent.
The representation of endless time by a snake swallowing its own tail and bearing the legend ‘My end is my beginning’ occurs later in rings worn on the finger, such as that possessed by Mary, Queen of Scots.
The Mithraic lion-headed god symbolized Eternity.
This representation of Mithra appears to have been derived from Egyptian art, and it has been suggested that it may have been influenced by the bandages of mummified corpses.
There are indications that in Egypt the god of eternal time was identified with Osiris.
In some representations, in the Book of the Dead , the phoenix is depicted as arising from him.
The phoenix is also sometimes depicted in Mithraic contexts.
Since Egyptian theology was influential in Imperial Rome, M. J. Vermaseren has argued that ‘neither Iran nor Egypt alone formed the cult of the lion-headed god in Mithraism, but the Hellenistic age in general, of which Egypt was a major component, formed a concrete representation of the abstract idea of eternity.’
Besides the various religions of eastern origin that flourished in Rome during the second and third centuries AD, there was also a resurgence of philosophical speculation.
This was based on a revival of Plato's ideas and so is called Neoplatonism.
The greatest figure of this school was Plotinus (c.205–70).
Born in Egypt, he settled in Rome in 244.
In his philosophy reality is the spiritual world contemplated by reason, the material world being a mere receptacle for the ideal forms imposed on it by the world-soul.
The seventh part of his third Ennead (‘On Time and Eternity’) can be regarded as meditation on the passage in Plato's Timaeus (37–8) where time and the creation of the world are discussed.
Plotinus believed that the origin of time was to be found in the life of the world-soul.
The question as to whether time could conceivably exist if there were no ‘soul,(or mind) to apprehend it had been raised, but not answered, by Aristotle, whose definition of time as the ‘numbering’ of motion and change in relation to before and after appeared to presuppose the existence of a ‘soul’that contemplates and measures it.
For most philosophers of classical antiquity the world was both animate and divine.
Consequently, it was possible for them (but not for Christians, because  they rejected pantheism) to speak of a world-soul that could measure time, and this was, in fact, the answer given by Plotinus to Aristotle's question.
Plotinus also advanced beyond Plato by modifying the latter's famous metaphor of time as the moving image of eternity, since he was more concerned to stress the difference between, rather than the resemblance of, time and eternity.
In his opinion, although everything that exists must be like its cause, the fact that one thing is produced by another implies that they are different.
Adopting a hierarchical standpoint and preferring to speak in terms of‘life’ rather than ‘motion’, Plotinus regarded time as an intermediate between eternity (or the higher soul that contemplates eternity) and the motion of the universe which reveals time as the ‘life’(or creative power) of ‘soul’.
Although not a Christian, Plotinus was in some respects a forerunner of St Augustine, particularly because he thought of time in psychological terms.
Early in the fourth century the struggles that had occurred intermittently between the Roman state and the Christian Church ended with the latter proving the stronger, partly as a result of the military upheavals that had threatened the former in the middle of the previous century.
Two events of outstanding importance then helped to settle the fate of each; the capital of the Roman empire was transferred to Byzantium, renamed Constantinople, and Christianity became the state religion.
In his earlier years the emperor Constantine (c.288–335) had been an adherent first of Hercules and then of Sol Invictus.
His conversion to Christianity marked a turning-point in the history of both the Church and Europe.
The ‘Chi-Rho’ monogram of Christ began to appear on Constantine's coins in the year 315.
At the same time, the Bishop of Rome began to become more important in the west, partly because the Emperor no longer lived in the old capital.
Whereas Augustus had had the poet Virgil to sing his praises, Constantine had the ecclesiastical politician and historian Eusebius as the man who sat immediately to the right of his throne during the sessions of the Council of Nicaea in 325 and exercised a decisive influence on the creed and discipline of the Universal, or Catholic, Church.
Constantine was declared to be Emperor by divine right.
As a result, he ‘gained rather than lost by his willingness to exchange the style and title of a god for that of God's vice-gerent’.
Later that century the Empire was finally split up into an eastern and a western part.
Thereafter, the latter, which was the more directly threatened by invaders, could no longer call upon the stronger military forces of the former.
After the western ruler  Honorius had refused the province of Noricum (southern Austria) to the Visigothic king, Alaric, whose lands were under pressure from the Huns to the east, the latter marched with his troops on Rome in the year 410 and sacked the ‘Eternal City’.
This unprecedented catastrophe shocked the Empire profoundly.
It led the Bishop of Hippo (near Carthage) to write soon afterwards his great book The City of God , the first philosophy of history, in order to rebut the charge that the sack of Rome was punishment for the abandonment by its citizens of their traditional pagan gods.
Like Paul of Tarsus, Augustine of Hippo was a convert to Christianity, having previously been a Manichee and then a Neoplatonist like Plotinus.
His Confessions , written not long before the Fall of Rome, was an even more original form of literature than Rousseau's written more than a thousand years later, for it was the first true autobiography.
It led William James to call St Augustine, although he lived so long ago, ‘the first modern man’.
In it he gave an account of his life including his conversion to Christianity and his struggle against rival doctrines.
Even after he had ceased to be a Neoplatonist, St Augustine remained very much under the influence of Plato's philosophical ideas, in particular those concerning time.
Like Plato, he believed that the concepts of time and the universe were inseparable, each being essential to the other.
In The City of God (xi.
5, 6; xii.
16) he argued that time can have no existence unless things are actually happening, and in his Confessions (xi.
14) when replying to the question what was God doing before he made heaven and earth, ‘I answer not,’ he wrote, ‘as one is said to have done merrily (eluding the pressure of the question), ‘He was preparing hell (saith he) for pryers into mysteries’.’
In both books we find him passionately concerned with the nature of time and vigorously rejecting cyclical theories of history.
In The City of God (xii.
13) he wrote:
The pagan philosophers have introduced cycles of time in which the same things are in the order of nature being restored and repeated, and have asserted that these whirlings of past and future ages will go on unceasingly….
From this mockery they are unable to set free the immortal soul, even after it has attained wisdom, and believe it to be proceeding unceasingly to false blessedness and returning unceasingly to true misery….
It is only through the sound doctrine of a rectilinear course that we can escape from I know not what false cycles discovered by false and deceitful sages.
Like Plotinus before him, St Augustine, in Book XI of his Confessions , submitted Aristotle's concept of time to searching criticism.
He argued that time and motion must be more carefully distinguished from one another than they were by Aristotle.
In particular, he objected to correlating time with the motions of the heavenly bodies, since time would still exist if the heavens should cease to move but a potter's wheel continued to rotate.
For there would be some temporal duration represented by each revolution of the wheel and a certain number of these revolutions would still take place in the interval of time we call a day, even though the motion of the sun had ceased.
Similarly, if a body be sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest, we measure its period of rest as well as its period of motion by time.
In place of Aristotle's association of time with motion and his appeal to the uniform daily revolution of the heavens as its basis, St Augustine turned, not as Plotinus had done to the concept of the ‘world-soul’, but to the human mind for the ultimate source and standard of time.
Whereas Aristotle did not enquire into the mental process by which we perceive time, because he believed that our minds must necessarily conform to the time of the physical universe, St Augustine took the mind's activity as the basis of temporal measurement.
He considered the problem of measuring the time taken by a voice in making a single sound.
Clearly, before the sound begins we cannot measure the time it is going to take, but after it has sounded how can we measure it, since it is then no more?
Nor can we measure it in the present if we regard the present as an indivisible instant that is truly momentary and without duration.
St Augustine came to the conclusion that we can measure time only if the mind has the power of holding within itself the impression made by things as they pass by even after they are gone.
In other words, we do not measure the things themselves but rather something that remains fixed in the memory.
It is the impression that passing events leave in the mind that we measure, for only this impression remains after they have passed.
The mind has the power of distending itself into the future by means of anticipation and the past by means of memory.
In the present there is only the attention of the soul by means of which the future becomes the past, and only when the constant diminishing of the future of the sound has made it entirely past can the mind measure it in terms of some preconceived standard.
St Augustine did not explain how the mind could be an accurate chronometer for the timing of external events, but as the pioneer of the study of psychological time he stands in the front rank of those who have contributed to the understanding of our sense of time.
Whereas for most Greeks and Romans, whether they believed in  cycles or not, the dominant aspects of time were the present and the past, Christianity directed man's attention to the future.
In the words of the philosopher Erich Frank, ‘With Christianity…man acquired a new understanding of time.’
The Christian view of time directed to the future, as presented by St Augustine, differed from the ideas of time current in Classical antiquity in that it was neither cyclic nor would it continue indefinitely without anything essentially new occurring.
John Baillie has made the further point that, in his detailed criticism of cyclical views of time, St Augustine was anxious to defend the doctrine of creation and particularly its corollary that ‘through the creative power of God the course of events is characterized by the emergence of genuine novelty .’
In assessing the importance of St Augustine for the development of the Christian view of time, his writings can be contrasted with the New Testament.
Olaf Pedersen has recently drawn attention to St Paul's complete indifference to time and chronology: he never even dated his letters.
Presumably this total lack of interest was due to his belief, which he shared with other early Christians, that the Second Coming was imminent (Romans 13: 11–12).
Time for Christians began with the Creation and would end with Christ's Second Coming.
World history was bounded by these two events.
The spread of this belief marks the divide between the mental outlook of Classical antiquity and that of the Middle Ages.
Moreover, our modern concept of history, however rationalized and secularized it may be, still rests on the concept of historical time which was inaugurated by Christianity.
Although it is to Christianity that we owe our modern temporal orientation, it is to the Romans that we are mainly indebted for the form of our calendar and conventions of time recording.
Prior to Julius Caesar, however, Roman achievements in chronometry were far from impressive.
For example, when Rome's first sundial was brought to the city from Sicily in 263 BC, during the first Punic war, and was erected in the Forum it was inaccurate because it indicated the time appropriate to the place whence it came which was more than four degrees to the south.
It was not until 164 BC, almost a century later, that a public sundial was erected that was appropriate to Rome's latitude.
A public clepsydra was set up in Rome in 158 BC by Scipio Nasica.
The introduction of clocks into Roman law courts, following the practice in Greece, led some unscrupulous lawyers to bribe the clepsydra attendant to regulate the water supply in their favour.
From Caesar we learn that water-clocks were used in military camps to time the night watches (De bello Gallico , v. 13).
According to St Mark (13: 35), there were four night watches: evening, midnight, cock-crow, morning.
Writing in Imperial times, the poet Juvenal (c.
AD 50–130), informs us that in his day wealthy members of the upper class had private water-clocks and special slaves to read them and announce the hours to their masters.
Clocks thus came to be regarded as status symbols.
An example of this occurs in Petronius's Feast of Trimalchio , Trimalchio having a beautiful clock in his dining room.
Nevertheless, the unequal hours and comparative inaccuracy of Roman clocks led Seneca (Apocolocyntosis , ii.
2–3) to complain that it was impossible to tell the exact hour ‘since it is easier for philosophers to agree than for clocks’!
Our present calendar is a modification of the calendar introduced by Julius Caesar on 1 January 45 BC and since named after him (see Appendix 1).
Previously, the Romans had tried to bring their civil calendar, which like many ancient calendars was based on the moon, into line with the astronomical year based on the sun by adopting a system involving an additional or intercalary month every second year.
Since the length of this month was not determined by any precise rule, the pontiffs were left to exercise their discretion, and they frequently abused this power for political ends.
By manipulating the number of days in the intercalary month they could prolong a term of office or hasten an election, with the result that by the time of Julius Caesar the civil year was about three months out of phase with the astronomical year, so that the winter months fell in the autumn and the spring equinox came in the winter.
Acting on the advice of the Greek astronomer Sosigenes, Caesar directed that to correct this anomaly the year 46 BC should be extended to 445 days.
Although this led to it being called ‘the year of confusion’, his object was to put an end to confusion.
He also abolished the lunar year and the intercalary month and based his calendar entirely on the sun.
He fixed the true year at 365¼ days and introduced the leap year of 366 days every fourth year, the ordinary civil year comprising 365 days.
He ordered that January, March, May, July, September and November should each have 31 days, the other months having 30 days, except February which should normally have 29 but in leap years would have 30.
Unfortunately, in 7 BC this neat arrangement was interfered with in order to honour Augustus by renaming the month Sextilis after him (he believed that it was his lucky month) and assigning to it the same number of days as the preceding month that had been renamed after his murdered great-uncle by Mark Antony.
A day was thus taken away from February  and transferred to August.
To avoid having three months each of 31 days occurring in succession, September and November were each reduced to 30 days and October and December were each raised to 31.
Thus to honour the first of the Roman emperors an orderly arrangement was reduced to an illogical jumble that many people find difficult to remember but which in the course of 2,000 years has been successfully imposed on most of the world.
Although originally the Roman calendar began in the spring on 1 March (as reflected in our names for the months September to December), the consuls, who were elected for one year, in 153 BC began to take office on 1 January.
From then on the year was regarded by the Romans as beginning on that day.
Later this choice was considered to be pagan by the Church because of the festivities traditionally associated with it.
instead the Church preferred to use the Annunciation for the first day of the year, and this led to the adoption of 25 March, nine months before Christmas, although this choice was by no means universal.
(Astronomers, as a rule, kept to 1 January as the beginning of the year.
Generally, the history of the beginning of the civil year is complicated.
For example, in Venice the year began on 1 March until the fall of the republic in 1797.)
From AD 312 ‘indiction cycles’ of fifteen years' duration were introduced by the Emperor Constantine for taxation purposes and led to the Byzantine year being reckoned from 1 September, the date on which each year of an indiction cycle began.
They remained popular in the West throughout the Middle Ages and even continued to be used by the supreme tribunal of the Holy Roman Empire until its abolition by Napoleon in 1806.
The Romans made use of the idea of denominating the years by a single era count.
This idea had been put into practice in 312/311 BC by Seleucus I, the Hellenistic ruler of Babylonia.
The following century the Greek system of dating by successive Olympiads from the first in 776 BC was begun, either by the historian Timaeus of Sicily or by Eratosthenes, the famous librarian of the Museum in Alexandria and measurer of the earth, and later Greek chronology was based upon it.
The Roman system of dating ab urbe condita (i.e. from the foundation of Rome) was introduced by Varro in the first century BC and was based on the date assigned to the fabled founding of the city.
Although this system was ratified by Julius Caesar in 46 BC and was widely used, there was some uncertainty about the precise relation of the resulting Roman dates to those of the Olympiads.
According to the historian Polybius, the founding of Rome occurred at an Olympiad dating corresponding to 750 BC.
Other dates were also ascribed to this event.
In the time of Augustus the list that was compiled of magistrates of the Republic was based on counting from 752 BC.
The date that was eventually generally accepted was 753 BC, originally suggested by Varro (116–27 BC).
According to tradition, the birthday of Rome was on the festival of Parilia, 21 April.
Consequently, on that day in the year AD 247 the Romans celebrated the thousandth anniversary of the founding of their city.
Coins were minted bearing the famous inscription Roma aeterna —‘Rome, the eternal city’.
Among the conventions for the division of time that have come down to us from Imperial Rome is the seven-day week.
Its origin can be traced back to the Sumerians and Babylonians.
It was never used by the Greeks, who divided the month into three parts of ten days each, but it was employed by the Jews (see p. 55).
Originally, the Romans had a complicated system of dividing the month, with Calends (from which our word ‘calendar’ is derived) on the first, Ides on the fifteenth of March, May, July, and October and on the thirteenth day of the other months, and Nones occurring eight days before the Ides.
Originally, the Calends were the days of new moon and the Ides the days of full moon.
Initially, the year was divided into the ten months March to December, the period midwinter to spring being left out because there was little agricultural work to be done then.
Later this period was divided into the months January and February.
In the early history of Rome the only times recognized in the daylight period were sunrise, midday, and sunset.
The nights, however, were divided into four vigilae (or watches), this system being presumably of military origin.
The days were counted backwards, from the Calends, Nones, and Ides, respectively.
The day from which the Romans calculated and the day to be designated were both included, for example, 2 January was designated ante diem IV Non.
Jan .
The Nones were so named because they occurred on the ‘ninth’ day before the Ides.
The days after the Ides were reckoned as days before the Calends of the succeeding month.
This system was still in use in western Europe as late as the sixteenth century!
In Imperial times, however, the custom became popular, under astrological influence, to use the seven-day week with the different days named after the respective ‘planets’.
Inscriptions at Pompeii list the ‘days of the gods’, namely Saturn, the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus.
This order, from which our modern days of the week derive (e.g. iii French), appears at first sight to be devoid of sense, since it does not accord in an obvious way with the order in which (according to pre-Copernican cosmology) the ‘planets’ were thought to  lie in relation to the earth: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the sun, Venus, Mercury, the moon.
The explanation is that the planets were believed to rule the hours of the day is well as the days of the week and that each day was associated with the planet that rules its first hour.
The first hour of Saturday was ruled by Saturn, and similarly the eighth, fifteenth, and twenty-second hours.
The twenty-third was allotted to Jupiter, the twenty-fourth to Mars, and the first of the next day to the sun, which thus ruled Sunday, and so on through the week.
From this comes the custom, introduced in the third century AD, of indicating the most important dates according to the weekdays as well.
The Christians, because of the Jewish origin of their religion, at first adhered to the Jewish seven-day week in which the days, except the Sabbath, were numbered but not named.
In due course, however, they began to be influenced by the astrological beliefs of converts from paganism; as a result, they adopted the planetary week.
Meanwhile, the influence of Mithraism had led the pagans to substitute Dies Solis (the Sunday) for the Dies Saturnis (the Saturn-day) as the first day of the week.
This change appealed to the Christians who had long observed Sunday — the Lord's Day (Dies Dominica)on which Christ rose from the dead — as the first day of the week, in place of the Jewish Sabbath.
The planetary week was officially adopted in AD 321 by the Emperor Constantine, who also followed the Christian practice of regarding Sunday, instead of Saturday, as the first day of the week.
He formally decreed that magistrates, citizens, and artisans were to rest from their labours ‘on the venerable day of the sun’, but he permitted field work.
Already in the first century AD, under the influence of Judaism, Roman Society had begun to introduce a weekly day of rest — unlike ancient Greece where there were not even any school holidays, except on special occasions such as days in honour of Apollo, Poseidon, etc.
Tertullian (c. 155–222) was the first Church Father to declare that Christians ought to abstain on Sunday from secular duties or occupations, lest these should give pleasure to the Devil.
The first mention of Christmas Day, as far as we know, was in the Roman calendar for the year 354.
Previously, 6 January had been celebrated as the Epiphany, or anniversary of Christ's baptism, which was believed to have occurred on his thirtieth birthday.
The choice of 6 January for this purpose has been traced back to the gnostic Christians of Egypt, the corresponding date in the calendar used there being traditionally associated with the blessing of the Nile.
Christ's birthday only became important for the Church when infant baptism replaced  adult baptism.
This led to the belief that Christ's divine nature originated at his birth rather than at his baptism.
As a result, by about the year 400 Christmas Day had become a significant date in the Christian Year: 25 December was chosen so as to exorcize the great pagan festival of the solar solstice.
In the latter part of the fourth century the last great emperor of the west, Theodosius, who was of Spanish origin, finally abolished the pagan Roman calendar with its hotchpotch of festivals, thereby severing one of the most familiar links the Romans had with their historic past.
Consequently, it is to him that the European world owes a uniform calendar corresponding to the needs of a universal society and based upon the Christian year.
In 386 he reaffirmed his decree and invoked severe sanctions against those who desecrated the Lord's Day.
The view that the Lord's Day is essentially the Jewish Sabbath — a ‘taboo’ day — transferred from the seventh to the first day of the week found expression from time to time in medieval law and theology.
It culminated in the sabbatarian excesses of English and Scottish Puritanism and the Sunday legislation, much of which has been relaxed since the First World War.
Easter was introduced in Rome about the year 160, and as in Alexandria was celebrated on the Sunday following the Hebrew Passover, which for practical purposes could be reckoned as the Sunday following the first full moon after the spring equinox.
A set of Easter tables drawn up by Cyril of Alexandria (376–444) was accompanied by a consecutive set of years beginning with the Emperor Diocletian and his persecution in AD 284, but when in AD 525 a Scythian monk living in Rome, Dionysius Exiguus, prepared a continuation of Cyril's tables, at the request of Pope John I, he felt that it was inappropriate to reckon from the reign of this enemy of Christianity, and he chose instead to date the years from Christ's Incarnation.
Astronomical evidence suggests that this may have occurred in the first half of the year 5 BC.
(For astronomers, unlike historians and chronologists, there is a year 0.)
Although Dionysius' system was the origin of the AD sequence that we now employ, it was not made use of for nearly 200 years, the oldest known work in which it is employed being Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation , of the early eighth century.
The BC system, extending backwards from the birth of Christ, was occasionally, used by Bede, but after him it lapsed until the fifteenth century.
It did not come into general use until the latter half of the seventeenth century.
Time in the Middle Ages
Medieval Europe
In the year 430 the Vandals, who had crossed the Mediterranean not long before, were battering at the walls of St Augustine's home town as he lay there dying.
This can be regarded as symbolic.
For, in its great days, particularly in the age of the Antonines in the second century, the Roman empire had been primarily a civilization of towns.
These were very different from the haphazard constructions of medieval Europe.
They were deliberately planned with their streets laid out in orthogonal grid-systems like the great cities of Hellenistic times, such as Alexandria and Antioch.
The decay of the Roman empire was most clearly revealed by the decline of towns and increasing ruralization.
This transformation occurred primarily in the northern and western provinces, which were always more of a liability and less a source of wealth and culture than the southern and eastern provinces.
For example, Africa supplied Rome with two-thirds of its corn, transported in the great grain ships which must have been among the most impressive sights of antiquity.
The northern and western provinces were comparatively much less developed and the principal towns in them, such as Segovia, Arles, York, and Cologne, were primarily military camps.
Among the causes of the fall of the Roman empire were successive attacks by barbarians.
Although in the sixth century the Byzantine Emperor Justinian's great generals Belisarius and Narses succeeded in reconquering much of the west, so that for a time the Mediterranean again became a Roman lake, in the following century Europe faced a dangerous new enemy.
Fanatical warriors inspired by a new and militaristic religion, Islam, brought about the final break between East and West.
By the year 700 learning in western Europe was confined to Ireland and the coast of Northumbria.
The only centres of learning were the monasteries in those remote areas, and it is in one of these, founded in 682 at Jarrow by a wealthy Northumbrian nobleman turned monk, Benedict Biscop, that we find ‘the first scientific intellect produced by the Germanic peoples of Europe’.
The Venerable Bede (673–735) spent  most of his life at Jarrow as a Benedictine monk, praying, reading, and teaching Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.
He was ordained priest by St John of Beverley, so gaining the title ‘Venerable’, which was a rare dignity among monks, but the usual form of address for a priest at that time.
A really great scholar, he had a unique opportunity to develop his abilities, because Biscop had brought back to Jarrow some 200 to 300 antique books that he had managed to acquire in southern Italy.
Bede also had access to the library collected by Bishop Acca at Hexham.
He was thus able to acquire an unusually extensive knowledge for his day of ancient literature, including the works of St Augustine and the scientific writings of the elder Pliny.
Bede's main object in life was to transmit his knowledge in intelligible form to his contemporaries and successors, and in this he was eminently successful.
As Sir Arthur Bryant has so vividly put it, ‘That life of scholarship and labour, with the tireless hand writing amid the intervals of prayer and teaching, sometimes so frozen that it could hardly grip the pen, is one of the proud memories of England.’
In all Bede wrote thirty-five works, of which twenty were commentaries on Exodus, Proverbs, and other books of the Bible and six were works of chronology.
His most famous book The Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation was the first historical work produced in England.
Written in Latin, it was translated into English towards the end of the ninth century by Alfred the Great.
Containing a greater proportion of secular matter than the Church history of Eusebius, it was based partly on written material and partly on the memories of men still living.
A considerable part of medieval historiography was based upon it.
In particular, Bede had a direct influence on the Carolingian renaissance of the ninth century through his pupil Egbert, who became Archbishop of York and trained Alcuin, who under Charlemagne founded the Frankish schools that did so much to stimulate learning on the Continent.
Bede's writings are of considerable importance in the history of chronology.
This had already become a subject of crucial significance in England during the course of the seventh century.
Although the death in battle of Penda, the pagan king of Mercia, in 655 sealed the victory of Christianity over heathenism, this important event was overshadowed by dissension between the Roman and Celtic Churches.
The principal source of discord concerned the date of Easter.
Our present rules for its determination (see Appendix 3), as set out in the Book of Common Prayer , follow the Roman tradition whereby Easter Day is the first Sunday after the first full moon following (or on) 21 March.
But if full moon occurs  on a Sunday then Easter Day is the following Sunday.
The reason for this was to avoid concurrence with the Jewish Passover.
(The expression ‘full moon’ means the fourteenth day of the moon reckoned from its first appearance.)
The Celtic Church, founded in the sixth century by St Columba with the aid of Irish-trained monks, followed Rome in always celebrating Easter on a Sunday, unlike the eastern Churches; but owing to its remoteness the Celtic Church experienced difficulty in being kept fully informed of doctrinal and other changes decided on in Rome.
Consequently, unlike Canterbury, it failed to keep in line with the Roman practice when the fourteenth day of the moon fell on a Sunday.
As a result, by the middle of the seventh century a peculiar difficulty had arisen in Northumbria.
For, although King Oswy followed the Celtic practice, his consort, Queen Eanfleda, who had with her a Kentish priest named Romanus, adhered to the Roman practice.
Most years this gave rise to no special problem, but eventually there was an occasion when the king's enjoyment of the Easter Feast was spoilt by the absence of his queen, who was still fasting because for her it was Palm Sunday.
To resolve the problem of Easter and other points of dispute between the Churches, Oswy convened the Synod of Whitby in 664.
In chapter 24 of his Ecclesiastical History Bede gives an account of what took place.
Oswy was probably unable to follow in detail the abstruse arguments put forward, but in the end he decided to accept the Roman practice, on the grounds that at the gates of heaven the keys are held by St Peter, and against him he would not contend.
‘The king having said this, ill present, both great and small, gave their assent, and renouncing the more imperfect institution resolved to conform to that which they found to be better.’
Henceforth, the English Churches were to have the advantages of the unity and discipline that the Church of Rome had inherited from the Empire.
Bede not only compiled a detailed account of this important Synod but in another of his treatises,De temporum ratione (‘On the Reckoning of Time ’), written in 725 and generally regarded as his scientific masterpiece, he computed Easter tables for the period 532 to 1063 and also made a first attempt at a general chronology of the world down to the reign of the contemporary Byzantine emperor, Leo the Isaurian.
Chapter 29 of that work is remarkable for containing the first scientific investigation of the tides, involving the earliest ‘establishment of a port’, that is, the mean interval between the time of high water and that of the previous transit of the meridian by the moon.
It was also through Bede that the AD system of reckoning the years  from the Incarnation of Christ, that had been devised two centuries before by Dionysius Exiguus, was introduced into England.
Dionysius' cycle of the year began with 25 March, the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
From the time of Bede the Christian era became established for the dating of charters, but at first only in England.
According to R. L. Poole, ‘It passed to the Continent by the means of Anglo-Saxon missionaries and scholars.
St Boniface took it with him into the Frankish kingdom.
But it does not appear to have been regularly employed in the Royal Chancery until the last quarter of the ninth century, from which time it became a fixed element in diplomas.’
It was not until the pontificate of Pope John XIII, elected in 965, that the Papacy began dating by the year of the Incarnation, but the practice was not uniformly adopted until the time of Pope Leo IX, elected in 1048.
Chapter 35 of Bede's De temporum ratione is the locus classicus of the concept of the ‘ages of man’, the medieval division of human life into a number of distinct periods best known to us today through the speech on the ‘seven ages of man’ by Jaques in Shakespeare's As You Like It (Act II, scene 7).
Most ancient and medieval writers thought of human life not as a continuous development but instead as punctuated by a number of sudden changes from one ‘age’ to the next.
(This idea was extended to prehistory by the social anthropologist A. van Gennep who, in 1909, introduced the term les rites de passage for the rituals originally associated with such changes in the life of the individual.)
Bede was the first Englishman to describe the theory of the four ‘ages of man’.
For the source of this we must go back to the Pythagoreans of the sixth century BC, whose cosmological speculations were based on the ‘tetracys ’, that is, the geometrical symbol composed of ten discrete points symmetrically arranged in the form of an equilateral triangle with sides of four points each.
The number four came to be associated with many natural phenomena, for example the four seasons, the four cardinal directions, and the four elements of the Greek theory of matter from Empedocles to Aristotle.
For some 2,000 years great significance continued to be attributed to the number four.
for example, long after Bede, in his Boke of Nurture John Russell, who had been Marshal of the household of the great patron of learning, the youngest son of Henry IV, Duke Humphrey of Gloucester (1391–1447), described how the four courses of an elaborate fish-dinner that he had prepared for his master and guests was accompanied by appropriate ‘subtleties’, or ornamental devices.
During the first course Duke Humphrey's guests were to contemplate the  representation of a ‘galaunt yonge man’ standing on a cloud (signifying the element ‘air’) at the beginning of spring (associated with the sanguine humour).
During the next course they were faced by the representation of a ‘man of warre’ standing in fire (associated with summer and the choleric humour); and while consuming the third course they were confronted by the form of a man with a ‘sikelle in his hande’standing in a river (signifying water and the phlegmatic humour associated with autumn and harvest-time).
The fourth and final course, which came with spices and wine, ushered in a representation of winter in the form of a man ‘with his lokkys grey, febille and old’ sitting on a cold hard stone (signifying the element ‘earth’and the melancholy humour).
‘Thus,’ as J. A. Burrow remarks, ‘as Duke Humphrey's guests worked their way through this very unpenitential fish banquet, they were invited to see in it the four courses of their own life's feast.’
Although Bede discusses the theory of the ‘four ages’ and even refers to the alternative concept of the ‘six ages’, he makes no mention of the ‘seven ages’later described by Shakespeare.
He could not mention it because it was not known in the Latin West before the revival of learning in the ‘renaissance of the twelfth century’(a useful term due to the American medievalist Charles Homer Haskins, who introduced it in 1927).
The idea of the ‘seven ages’, unlike that of the four, was astrological in origin.
It goes back to the astronomer Ptolemy of Alexandria (fl. c..
AD 150), seven being the number of the ‘planets’, including the sun and moon.
This idea is fully described in Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos (iv.
10).
(A translation into English, by F. E. Robbins, was published in 1940.
An excerpt appears on pp. 197–8 of the Appendix to the book by Burrow cited above.)
Although through the efforts of Charlemagne, who was crowned Holy Roman Emperor by the Pope in the year 800, the centre of European culture began to move northwards from the Mediterranean, the Viking raids of the ninth and tenth centuries delayed the full effects of this until about the year 1000.
England particularly suffered from these raids, so that by the time of the twelfth-century renaissance it was, in the words of R. W. Southern, ‘a colony of the French intellectual empire, important in its way and quite productive, but still subordinate’.
The main creative activity of the English monastic houses was in historiography.
With the notable exception of Bede and the authors of The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , earlier generations had not, on the whole, been greatly interested in historical records, but the Conquest brought about a great transformation.
The Normans insisted on the production of titles  to estates and threatened to confiscate those for which none were forthcoming.
In these conditions, the Conquest convinced the English monasteries that corporate survival depended on the discovery and preservation of the past.
Consequently, as Southern has argued, ‘history was not simply an adornment: it was a necessity’.
One of the principal features of the renaissance of the twelfth century was a great increase in historiography, stimulated not only by the Norman conquest of England but also by the crusades and the rise of the north Italian communes, or city-states.
Moreover, men such as the great ecclesiastical architect Abbot Suger of St Denis (c. 1081–1151), who devoted his later years to composing a laudatory life of the French monarch Louis VI (1081–1137), effectively a second founder of the Capetian dynasty, wrote history with the object of producing favourable propaganda rather than documentary facts.
Suger's historical writings led the monks of his abbey to develop a taste for history and hence to compile a series of chronicles.
In the same century universal history also flourished, mainly with the object of determining the end of the world, after the year 1000 had passed without any sign of its impending occurrence.
This type of history was, of course, theologically rather than politically orientated.
The influence of the twelfth-century apocalyptic historians was destined, however, to be soon overshadowed by that of Joachim of Fiore (see pp. 81–2).
Among the technical arts cultivated in some continental schools that began to affect England soon after the Norman Conquest were those of measurement and calculation.
Haskins has drawn attention to interesting evidence for this in an autobiographical fragment written by a Benedictine prior, Walcher of Malvern, whose tomb survives there bearing the date 1125.
In it he refers to the lunar eclipse of 30 October 1091 that he happened to observe in Italy.
On returning to England, he discovered that several hours appeared to have separated the time of the eclipse in Italy and in England.
Puzzled by this, he was careful later to record the time as precisely as he could when, unexpectedly, on 18 October of the following year the moon underwent another eclipse:
I at once seized my astrolabe and made a careful note of the time of full eclipse, which was a little more than three-quarters of an hour after the eleventh hour of the night.
If this time is converted into equinoctial time, it will be found to be shortly before 12.45.
Hence, according to this rule which I have explained earlier, the lunar cycle began on 3 October at 19.30 hours.
As Southern has remarked, this passage, only part of which I have quoted, illustrates the difficulties encountered in those days of telling the time and Walcher's anxiety for precision in seeking to establish the exact correlation between the phases of the moon and the solar calendar.
To men of the Middle Ages astronomy was of particular interest because it seemed to offer the best means of understanding, and possibly controlling, terrestrial events.
An essential tool for enabling astronomers to advance beyond the stage reached by Bede was the astrolabe.
This instrument had been introduced in the West in the eleventh century from the world of Islam, which in those days enjoyed a higher degree of civilization and of scientific and technological expertise than the West.
For anyone in northern Europe to attain a proper understanding of Islamic science it was necessary to go abroad.
Among the first to do so for this purpose was Adelard of Bath (fl 1116–42).
He first went to Paris, but not finding what he wanted there, he moved on to Salerno in southern Italy and then to Sicily, where he learned Arabic.
Later he probably visited Spain.
His outstanding role in the development of science in the Latin West was due to his translations from the Arabic, which were of a crucial and seminal nature.
The Islamic World
The origin of Islamic interest in science can be traced back to the closure by Justinian of the Neoplatonic Academy at Athens in 529.
Scholars from there were invited to Iran, and they brought much Greek learning with them.
Interest in the subject having thus been aroused among learned men in western Asia, a scientific institute was eventually set up in Baghdad after the Muslim conquest of much of that region.
It attained its highest reputation during the caliphate of al-Ma'mun (813–33), son of Harun-al-Rashid of Arabian Nights fame, and himself an astronomer.
By the end of the ninth century many Hellenistic scientific and technological works had been translated into Arabic, including Ptolemy's great astronomical book Syntaxis , which is usually known today by its Arabic title The Almagest .
As a result of all this activity, Baghdad was the true successor of Alexandria, the former intellectual capital of the Hellenistic world.
Knowledge of Greek science and technology, combined with Iranian and Indian traditions and enhanced by further scientific studies and inventions, spread from there to other parts of the Islamic world, including Sicily and southern Italy and especially Moorish Spain, where by the twelfth century the main centres of learning were in Cordoba and Toledo.
Muslims in all parts of the Islamic world required mathematically educated persons who would be able to determine the astronomically defined times of prayer and the direction of Mecca.
It is, therefore, not surprising that many portable instruments for the determination of time were required, including the chief instrument used by both Arabic and Latin astronomers, the astrolabe.
This instrument was known to Ptolemy in the second century AD, and — the underlying mathematical theory of stereographic projection can be traced back at least to Ptolemy's great predecessor Hipparchus (second century BC).
The form of astrolabe used in medieval Europe, however, was derived from the Muslim type found in Spain.
A good English account of it was given by the Poet Chaucer in the second half of the fourteenth century.
It consisted of a circular metal plate (usually brass) graduated in degrees around its rim.
It was marked with a datum line (or diameter) and hinged to its centre was a rotating line (or pointer).
Portable models could be hung from a ring on the rim so that the datum line was horizontal.
By directing the pointer at a particular star, its altitude could be read off against the scale on the rim to an accuracy of about one degree.
For any given latitude the Pole star has effectively a constant altitude and the other stars Appear to revolve around it owing to the Earth's diurnal rotation.
On the front of the astrolabe there was a thin plate (the tympan) on which was engraved a stereographic projection of the lines of altitude and azimuth (angular distance along the horizon) as they would be for an observer at a given latitude.
An open-work star map in stereographic projection (known as the rete) was in front of the tympan, and could be rotated by hand over the lines of altitude and azimuth.
An early form of analogue computer, the astrolabe was primarily designed to solve problems of spherical trigonometry to shorten astronomical calculations.
From the scales engraved on it, it was possible to determine the positions of the so-called ‘fixed stars’ in relation to the horizon and of the sun, moon, and planets in relation to the stars.
Designed for the latitude of a particular place, its most important use was to determine the precise time of day or night from an observation of the altitude of the sun or one of the stars mapped on the rete, but of course by modern standards the result was not very accurate.
Moreover, although the astrolabe enabled long calculations to be avoided, the computing of planetary positions, for example, for casting a horoscope, still involved a considerable amount of work.
As regards other time-measuring instruments, extensive remains of two monumental Islamic water-clocks still survive at Fez in Morocco.
A book in Arabic On the Construction of Water-clocks , believed to be partly based on the translation of a Hellenistic treatise in Greek, preserves the idea of the invention of the basic machinery of a water-clock by Archimedes, together with later ingenious additions to the mechanism made by either Byzantine or Islamic craftsmen.
It was probably composed after 1150.
It has recently been edited and translated into English by D. R. Hill, who points out that ‘horologically, it provides an important link between the water-clocks of the Hellenistic world and those of Islam’.
Detailed discussion of some other Islamic clocks will be found in a book written in Baghdad about 850 and also translated by D. R. Hill.
One special case in which the influence of Islam made an important cultural contribution to the development of temporal concepts in Europe concerns music.
Early medieval church music was all plain chant, in which the notes had fluid time values.
Mensural music, in which the durations of the notes had an exact ratio among themselves, seems to have been an Islamic invention.
It was introduced into Europe about the twelfth century.
It was at this time too that there appeared in Europe the system of notation in which the exact time-value of a note is indicated by a lozenge on a pole.
As regards the theoretical and philosophical analysis of time, the most important and original contribution of medieval Islamic thinkers was their theory of discontinuous, or atomistic, time.
The most famous exponent of this concept, but not its originator, was the twelfth-century philosopher Moses Maimonides, who wrote in Arabic although he was a believing Jew.
In the most celebrated of his works,The Guide for the Perplexed , he said: ‘Time is composed of time-atoms, i.e. of many parts, which on account of their short duration cannot be divided….
An hour is, e.g. divided into sixty minutes, the second into sixty parts and so on; at last after ten or more successive divisions by sixty, time-elements are obtained which are not subjected to division, and in fact are indivisible.’
This atomistic view of time was associated with a drastically contingent and acausal concept of the world, its existence at one instant not implying its existence at any subsequent instant.
D. B. MacDonald has speculated on the difficult question of the origin of this view in Islam and has suggested that it arose from a Muslim heresy ‘in that dark but intense period of theological and intellectual development which stretched from the death of Muhammad for at least two and a half centuries’.
The atomistic theory of Epicurus, the methods of the Greek sceptics, and Zeno's paradoxes concerning time  and space may all have influenced the heretics concerned, but MacDonald could find no trace of any Greek theory combining material and temporal atomism and sought instead to attribute the occurrence of the latter in Islamic thought to Indian influence.
The Islamic calendar is one of the few remaining purely lunar calendars, the year being just over ten days shorter than the tropical year, or year of the seasons.
The Islamic era began on 16 July 622, the first day of Muhammad's flight to Medina.
The circumstances in which this was adopted as an epoch, instead of the time when the Prophet was either born or entrusted with his divine mission or died, are explained by al-Biruni (AD 973– c. 1050) in his great work The Chronology of Ancient Nations .
The fundamental instant in Islamic life occurs with the new moon, which must be watched for and established by two ‘witnesses of the instant’.
The ‘perfect instant’, however, is the Hour of the Last Judgement, for the ‘witness’ of this instant is the divine Judge himself.
The periodization of history and millenarianism
This type of eschatological view of time was, of course, not confined to Islam, for we find it also in Zoroastrianism, Judaism, and early and medieval Christianity.
In the Christian case, it led to the periodization of history, a chronological method that we still use, although nowadays we approach history from a purely secular point of view.
Medieval historians followed the scheme devised by St Augustine for dividing world history into six ages corresponding to the six days of Creation described at the beginning of Genesis.
Living in the troubled times of the late fourth and early fifth centuries, St Augustine regarded the Christian era as the age of senility and decay that would lead to the seventh age when time would end, although he was careful not to forecast a definite date for this.
The most important change in the Christian outlook on history between the Apostolic age and that of St Augustine was the gradual realization that the end of the world was not at hand.
He laid particular emphasis on those passages in the New Testament (e.g. Mark 13: 32) that emphasize our total ignorance of when the Second Coming will occur.
Bede too believed that the time of Doomsday is concealed from mankind.
As Beryl Smalley has said, ‘The concept of the six ages saddled medieval historiographers with a gloomy picture of their times.’
But, even though it discouraged optimism and ruled out the possibility of progress, it did not weigh too heavily on medieval historians, particularly because the year 1000 which had been awaited by many with a mixture of hope and trepidation, had passed without any sign of the  world coming to an end.
Many prophets in the tenth century believed that the world would come to an end in the year 1000, but according to A. J. Gurevich the legends concerning mass psychoses in Europe as the year 1000 approached originated at the end of the fifteenth century when people really were afraid that the end of the world was imminent.
Millenarian belief arose from combining the idea expressed in Psalm 89: 4 that ‘A day with the Lord is as a thousand years’ with the interpretation of the Sabbath, or seventh day, as a symbol of heavenly rest in accordance with Hebrews 4: 4–9.
The most influential exponent of millenarian beliefs in the Middle Ages was Joachim of Fiore (1145–1202).
He was a Cistercian monk who became Abbot of Curazzo in Calabria, in southern Italy.
This was a part of the world where Greek culture and the Roman Church met and where there was a strong Saracen influence.
Consequently, it was a region subject to many cross-currents of thought and belief.
Joachim eventually broke away from the Cistercians and retired to a lonely spot in Calabria where disciples gathered around him and he was given papal permission to found his own congregation.
Joachim's idea of a completely unworldly religious order nearly found expression in the confraternity that began to form around the followers of St Francis of Assisi shortly after Joachim's death, but the main body of Franciscans soon made concessions to the demands of everyday life.
Eventually, in 1570, Joachim's community was absorbed by the Cistercian order.
Joachim called his monastery San Giovanni in Fiore in expectancy of the new life that must come to flower.
He was a keen student of the scriptures, particularly the Book of Revelations, and while meditating in his Calabrian retreat on the mystery of the Trinity and how it related to the time-process he had moments of intense spiritual illumination that led him to formulate a new millenarian philosophy of history.
He laid great emphasis on the unity of the Trinity, arguing that root, stem, and bark together form one tree.
Joachim claimed that there are, however, three distinct ages or states: that of God and the Old Testament, which was the age of fear and servitude; that of Christ and the New Testament, which is the age of faith and submission; and the Third Age of the Everlasting Gospel, or Age of the Holy Spirit, that will supersede the Old and New Testaments and be the age of love, joy, and freedom.
His fervently expressed hope in the coming of the Age of the Holy Spirit may have had its origin in the Jewish concept of the Messianic Age, for like the latter it was regarded by him as lying essentially within history and not beyond it, being indeed the climax of history.
This belief was totally  irreconcilable with the Augustinian view that, in so far as it is possible for the Kingdom of Heaven to occur here on earth, it has already been realized in the Church.
Joachim's concept of history was far more dynamic than St Augustine's.
As an authority on the influence of Joachimism has remarked:
‘What characterizes this Christian revolutionary tradition from Joachim of Fiore to John Huss, from Thomas Münzer to the theologies of hope and political theologies of our own day, is that the Kingdom of God is not conceived as another world in space and time, but as a different world, a changed world, a world changed by our own efforts….
This means that human history is where all the issues are settled.’
Joachim had a profound influence on later prophecies down to the end of the seventeenth century.
It is difficult for us now to understand how it was that so many serious thinkers in those days were prophetically-minded.
Even Isaac Newton (1642–1727), although not directly influenced by Joachim, devoted much of his time to the correlation of prophecy, history, and the end of the world.
Granted his initial assumptions , however, he was in fact just as scientific in his calculations in that field as in his famous contributions to mathematical physics and astronomy.
The measurement of time
In his well-known book Feudal Society , the historian Marc Bloch has laid particular emphasis on the fact that in the Middle Ages men found it difficult to appreciate the significance of time because they were so ill-equipped to measure it.
For not only were water-clocks rare and costly, but in countries such as England, northern France, the Netherlands, and Germany sundials were inadequate because skies were so often cloudy.
According to Asser's Life of King Alfred , that intellectual monarch had candles of equal length lit successively to mark the passing of the hours; but, as Bloch remarks, ‘such concern for uniformity in the division of the day was exceptional in that age.’
To illustrate the point, he describes an incident recorded in a chronicle of Hainault concerning a judicial duel that was to take place at dawn.
Only one contestant appeared and at the end of the prescribed waiting period, the hour of nine he asked for the non-appearance of his adversary to be legally recorded.
The judges had to decide whether the time limit had been reached.
They deliberated, looked at the sun and then questioned the  clerics, since the practice of the liturgy and the regular tolling of church bells had accustomed them to a more precise knowledge of the rhythm of the hours than the judges themselves possessed.
As Bloch has commented, ‘To us accustomed to live with our eyes constantly turning to the clock, how remote from our civilization seems this society in which a court of law could not ascertain the time of day without discussion and inquiry!’
One of the peculiarities revealed in many surviving documents from the Middle Ages is the lack of precision with which the times of events and measurements of duration were recorded.
John Nef, in his Wiles Lectures of 1956, concluded that, if we seek the origins of our modern quantitative-mindedness, we must concentrate on the last decades of the sixteenth century.
Earlier we find little trace of it generally, and so we ought not to be surprised to find it missing from the ordinary Person's consciousness of time in those days.
In his book Time in French Life and Thought Richard Glasser has drawn attention to the fact that nowhere in the Chanson de Roland do we find any indication of time.
The epic poet ‘was aware neither of the falling of leaves in autumn nor of the passing away of generations.
These were phenomena which in no way attracted his attention.
The essential quality of the world was its transitoriness vis-à-vis God, not the visible change which went on unceasingly in the world.’
Until the fourteenth century only the Church was interested in temporal measurement and division.
Even the concept of the hour was not used as a unit of duration before the time of Middle French.
In the popular tongue it was used only to indicate a point in time.
In view of the slowness with which changes of mental outlook came about in those days, it is not surprising that even after the introduction of the mechanical clock in the fourteenth century most people, including many of the more sophisticated, were far less concerned in their daily life with the passage of time than we are.
A striking example is provided by a famous maker of astronomical instruments, Jean Fusoris, who was arrested on suspicion of treason in 1415, during the invasion of France by Henry V. Interrogated twice in a single year, on the first occasion he claimed to be ‘fifty or thereabouts, and on the second ‘sixty or thereabouts!’
In England, parish registers providing dates of birth were instituted by law in 1538.
Previously when someone's age had to be formally determined it had to be done in the presence of a sheriff of the county and a ‘jury’ composed of local people who knew the person concerned.
This procedure was followed when a minor inheriting property claimed to  have become of age, or when it was thought necessary to determine legally that someone had attained the age when he or she was allowed to marry.
Of course, the indifference to time generally attributed to medieval people was not absolute.
Already by the year 1200 there were numerous signs of economic pressure on time, and even two centuries earlier it appears that peasants and artisans near Fleury tended to ignore feast-days through a need to work in their fields.
Another indication that our medieval forebears had very different standards from ours for recording the lapse of time is revealed by the way in which they dated their letters.
As late as the fifteenth century it is doubtful whether people in general knew the current year of the Christian era, since that depended on an ecclesiastical computation and was not used much in everyday life.
They seldom dated their letters and when they did it was by the year of the king's reign.
Even when chroniclers of the period gave the year of our Lord it was often wrongly stated.
This is not surprising since different numbers were assigned to the year in different places.
R. L. Poole has given the following hypothetical example to illustrate this:
if we suppose a traveller to set out from Venice on March 1, 1245, the first day of the Venetian year, he would find himself in 1244 when he reached Florence; and if after a short stay he went on to Pisa, the year 1246 would already have begun there.
Continuing his journey westward he would find himself again in 1245 when he entered Provence and on arriving in France before Easter (April 16) he would be once more in 1244.
This seems a bewildering tangle of dates, but as a rule the traveller would take note only of the month and the day.
If, however, he did consider the year it would be that of the place where he usually lived.
In practice, only writers of documents and chronicles were concerned with the number of the year.
Months and days were, of course, more likely to be correctly stated, and letters were frequently dated in this respect but much more use was made of festivals and saints' days.
In his Introduction to the Paston Letters J. Gairdner pointed out that letters were often dated as being written on a particular day of the week, say Monday or Wednesday,before or after such a celebration.
For example, Agnes Paston even dated a particular letter (No. 25) during the week by reference to the Collect of the previous Sunday: ‘Written at Paston in haste, the Wednesday next after Deus qui errantibus .’
The modern practice of numbering the days of the month consecutively from the first to the last came to the West from  Syria and Egypt in the second half of the sixth century.
Pope Gregory VII introduced it into his chancery, but his successors reverted to the old Roman style.
The revival of learning under Charlemagne (c.800) was in the Latin tradition, and so there was an official reversion to the Roman style in the Imperial chancery too which persisted for centuries.
A far more modern attitude to time and dates was adopted in the Previous century by the famous Italian poet and reviver of classical literature Petrarch (1304–74).
Time was the theme that fired his heart as a young student and affected him for the rest of his life.
Because he kept a detailed record of the temporal milestones in his life we have more precise information about him than of anyone who lived before him.
In all his writings, Poetry as well as Prose, he maintained what has been described as ‘an attention nothing less than astounding to exactitude in date’.
Moreover, unlike most medieval letter writers — and, for that matter, even unlike most of us today when we dash off our epistles without much thought about the time — Petrarch ‘spells out the dates (including the hour) with weight and deliberation, as if to stress the importance of taking one's bearings in time’.
For example, in a letter written in 1364 he was careful to give the precise hour of arrival of the boat that brought news of the Venetian victory against Crete.
‘It was, I believe, the sixth hour of June 4, this year 1364.’
Although time seems always to have been important for Petrarch, he tended to value it even more as he got older because he realized that, as with other things, it becomes more precious as it becomes less plentiful.
In his responsiveness to temporal processes he differed from many of his contemporaries and we can look upon him as the forerunner in literature of those, like Spenser and Shakespeare in the late sixteenth century, who were greatly concerned with the irreversible effects of time on the human mind and Spirit.
Although western-European society in the Middle Ages developed no general concept of progress, many important innovations were made.
Indeed, in technology western Europe advanced far beyond the Roman empire.
The Romans were in some respects good engineers, as is evident from their sophisticated heating systems involving plumbed hot water and their networks of roads, but in other ways they were often surprisingly primitive.
Apart from those transmitted from China, medieval inventions included, for example, spectacles for reading, the spinning wheel, stronger iron tools than had been previously available, the heavy plough, and the use of coal as a fuel.
Moreover, in the building of the great Gothic cathedrals many new devices were introduced, including flying buttresses.
Some of the most important innovations in  the Middle Ages were connected with the use of the horse as a source of motive power.
A more efficient harness than the crude yoke, which had been so well suited for draught-oxen, was introduced about the ninth century.
Late that century Alfred the Great noted, with apparent surprise, that horses were used for ploughing in Norway.
This would have been impossible with the yoke-harness, because as soon as the horse begins to pull with it the neck-strap presses on the animal's windpipe and thus tends not only to restrict the flow of blood to its head, but also to suffocate it!
Another important development was the iron horseshoe that was nailed on to the hoof.
Previously, the shoe had only been tied on and this greatly impeded the animal's progress.
The first indisputable evidence of the use of nailed horseshoes goes back to the ninth century.
The development and the elaboration of metal armour for protection in warfare and jousting gave considerable impetus to the craft of the blacksmith.
This was destined to be of particular importance to the measurement of time, because the blacksmith was the forerunner of those who constructed the first mechanical clock.
It is surely significant that one of the greatest of these, Richard of Wallingford, Abbot of St Albans in the early fourteenth century (see ch. 7), was the son of a blacksmith.
Time in the Far East and Mesoamerica
India
It has already been suggested (ch. 5), that the Islamic atomistic theory of time may have been the result of Indian influence.
In discussing this possibility, MacDonald has drawn attention to an article on ‘Atomic Theory (Indian)’ by Hermann Jacobi.
In it Jacobi referred to the theory of the momentariness of all things formulated by the Sautrânkitas, a Buddhist sect which originated in the second or first century BC.
According to that theory everything exists for only an instant and is then replaced by a facsimile of itself, so that it is but a series of momentary existences like the successive frames in a cine-camera film.
The concept of entities that appear for only an instant and then disappear was used by Buddhists to prove that all is merely appearance and that absolute reality does not fall within the domain of the intellect.
But how and why this atomistic temporal concept, which Buddhism used for its own purposes, was adapted to the very different objects of Islam remains an open question.
In Classical antiquity there were connections between Europe and India even before the conquests of Alexander had extended as far as the north-western part of the Indian subcontinent.
Already in the sixth century BC, at the time when Buddha and Mahavira lived, that part of India was ruled by the Achaemenids of Iran, and Iranian influences have been important in India ever since.
As in the Zurvanite system, philosophical speculations concerning time formed the essential part of a particular Indian philosophy known as the Kalavada that was later absorbed by other systems.
The term kala was originally employed by the Hindus in the Rig-Veda to denote the ‘right moment’ in connection with sacrificial ritual.
Later it came to denote ‘time’ generally, and it was usually employed in that sense in Sanskrit writings.
In the Vedic period the abstract idea of time was regarded as the fundamental principle of the universe, but whether it was made into a deity is uncertain.
The word  kala has been associated, however, with Kali, ‘the Black One’, one of the forms of the consort of the god Siva.
Time was regarded as black and connected with Siva, god of destruction, because it is hard and pitiless.
Anindita Balslev has recently drawn attention to the subtlety of many of the Hindu philosophical arguments, for example that concerning the perceptibility of time which took place in the eleventh century.
On the one hand, the Bhatta-Mimamsaka school argued that time is perceptible, whereas their Nyaya-Vaiseka opponents claimed that it is only an inferred concept because it lacks sensible qualities, such as colour, form, etc.
The former school maintained that sensible qualities are not the sole criteria of perceptibility and that time is perceived always as a qualification of sensible objects.
In other words, events are perceived as quick, slow, etc., and these properties involve a direct reference to time.
Their opponents retorted that time per se cannot be perceived and that inference is the only means of our knowing time as an ontological reality.
Other subtle philosophical discussions concerned the contrast between the objective reality of the instant and the ideal nature of duration, because the latter is a mental construct, whereas the former is experienced (the opposite of what we think in the West today).
Indians wrote no historical books with numerical dates and regarded personal life as one of a succession of lives of the same individual repeated infinitely often in endless time.
This idea of metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls, has only occasionally appeared in the West, in particular in the school of Pythagoras, which may have been subject to Eastern influences, since he was roughly contemporaneous with Buddha — and also with Zarathustra.
Although a minor error in the recitation of the Vedas was looked upon with strong disapproval, passing events were regarded by the Hindus as devoid of real significance and so it is not surprising that no importance was attached to providing them with accurate dates.
The Hindus were much more interested in devising elaborate cosmic cycles of vast and terrifying proportions.
With their love of large numbers, they assigned to a single cycle 12,000 divine years, each of 360 solar years, totalling 4,320,000 years, and 1,000 of such cosmic cycles constituted one kalpa .
This was equal to but one day in the life of Brahma.
Hindu thought concerning the nature of time is well illustrated by the way in which causal relations were expressed in Sanskrit.
To indicate the causal relation between two notions, a compound was formed in such a way as to suggest that it is natural to begin with the effect and trace it back to its cause.
This attitude tends to eliminate time, since both effect and cause are regarded as co-present in the mind.
Any sequence of causally related phenomena is thus always regarded as complete.
This retrospective way of thinking tended to be a general feature of thought in countries such as India and China.
It can be contrasted with the thought processes of Western science, in which the march of phenomena is considered to have a definite and unique temporal direction from cause to effect.
China
The Chinese were more interested in the practical measurement of time than were the inhabitants of India.
Although the clepsydra was not invented in China, it was in use at an early stage of Chinese history.
It probably came there from Babylonia, where the simplest form of the outflow type had already been in use before the time of the early Shang period (c. 1500 BC).
The Chinese also knew another archaic type of water-clock, a floating bowl with a hole in its base that was adjusted so that it took a specific time to sink.
But from the Han time onwards, that is after about 200 BC, the inflow type predominated.
It was soon realized that more than one reservoir was required in order to avoid the slowing down of timekeeping that occurs with the falling pressure-head in a single vessel.
Various other improvements were made, including the use of mercury, which does not freeze in cold climates in winter.
Elaborate water-clocks were constructed between the second and eleventh centuries AD culminating in the remarkable instrument designed, and erected in the year 1088, by Su Sung (1020–1101), a Chinese mandarin.
Although this clock has not survived, its description by its inventor has.
It was rediscovered in the mid-1950s by the leading authority on Chinese science and technology, Dr Joseph Needham of Cambridge.
The essential feature of this timekeeping device was a linkwork escapement quite different from the verge-and-foliot system invented in Europe in the late thirteenth century (ch. 7).
Water poured continually from a constant-level tank into one scoop after another of a large waterwheel, but each scoop could not descend until it was full.
As it went down it tripped two levers or weighbridges which by means of linkwork connections released a gate at the top of the wheel so as to let it move on by just one scoop.
In effect, this machine dissected time by the weighing of successive equal quantities of fluid.
An astronomical check on timekeeping was made by a sighting tube pointed to a selected star.
Since the timekeeping was governed mainly by the flow of water rather than the escapement action, this device can be regarded as a link between the   timekeeping properties of a steady flow of liquid and those of mechanically produced oscillations.
This Chinese water-wheel clock was not only quite different from, but was a good deal more accurate than, the first European mechanical clocks and in this respect may not have been surpassed until after the introduction of the pendulum clock in the seventeenth century.
Despite its technological sophistication, the use of this elaborate clock was essentially astrological, the object apparently being to ensure that the positions of the celestial bodies would be known even if the Heavens were cloudy when any of the Emperor's wives or concubines produced offspring.
When the first European missionaries came to China in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries no trace remained of the heavenly clockwork of five hundred years earlier.
Indeed, the mechanical clocks which they presented to the Chinese rulers were received with surprised delight.
Meanwhile, a different and much more widespread tradition of timekeeping survived involving the use of fire and incense.
This tradition has been traced back to the sixth century AD.
Because incense burns at an  even rate and without flame, it is well suited for measuring the division of the religious day and for other purposes.
Indeed, incense-clocks appear to have been as extensively used by the Chinese as sundials and clepsydrae.
Both incense sticks and graduated candles were in common use for time measurement during the Sung dynasty (AD 960–1279), and both were later introduced into Japan.
Silvio Bedini has commented that ‘although the invention of the candle timepiece has been traditionally ascribed to Alfred the Great of England, it obviously had an earlier history in the Orient’.
Because it is inexpensive, burning incense-sticks to tell the time continued to be used down to the present century.
In some of these clocks different pieces of incense gave off different aromas, thereby enabling those with sensitive noses to tell the approximate time.
The Chinese attitude to history was based on the belief that the rise and fall of dynasties was controlled by the mandate of Heaven.
A man of modest birth might secure this mandate and become the Son of Heaven, or priest-king, but when his descendants displayed a lack of proper reverence for his example they lost the support of Heaven and their dynasty collapsed.
Once the sign of Heaven was clear, there was then nothing disloyal in transferring allegiance to a new emperor, for he was blessed by the ancestral spirits of China.
Thus in China the past had a definite social purpose, its use depending essentially on the concept of the mandate of Heaven to ensure continuity in a world of political change.
J. H. Plumb has raised the interesting question ‘Why did history develop in Europe, whereas in China it never extracted itself from the iron grip of the past in the service of the present?’
For, despite acquiring a mass of archival material stretching over a very long period of time, the Chinese never developed anything corresponding to the modern Western concept of history.
In Plumb's opinion, ‘What closed their minds to the historical problem was its absence .’
The European past, with its record of interaction between conflicting civilizations, religions, and cultures, lacked the unity and ‘all-embracing certainty’ of the Chinese and so presented historical problems of a kind the latter never encountered.
Moreover, in China there was nothing corresponding to the secularization of history in Europe after the domination of the Church ended with the Renaissance and Reformation.
China maintained bureaucratic control of both historical materials and their interpretation, whereas in Europe historical criticism had a much freer opportunity to develop.
As regards the philosophical concept of time, according to Needham, the Mohist school (followers of the philosopher Mo Ti in the fifth century BC) was inclined to temporal atomicity, although the hypothesis  of material atomism never played any significant role in Chinese thought, which was wedded to the idea of the continuum.
More remarkably, the Mohists appear to have been near to formulating the concept of functional dependence in the relation of motion to time, an idea that was not fully developed until the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century in Europe.
Generally speaking, however, different intervals of time tended to be thought of as separate discrete units.
The universe was regarded as a vast organism undergoing a cyclic pattern of alternation, with now one and now another component taking the lead, the idea of succession being subordinate to that of interdependence.
Just as space was decomposed into regions, time was split up into eras, seasons, and epochs.
Consequently, as Needham has pointed out, in so far as Chinese natural philosophy ‘was committed to thinking of time in separate compartments or boxes, perhaps it was more difficult for a Galileo to arise who should uniformise time into an abstract geometrical co-ordinate, a continuous dimension amenable to mathematical handling’.
China was so remote from Europe that when silk first became available for the wealthier classes in Imperial Rome no one knew where it came from, but the fact that it reached Rome shows that these two civilizations were not totally devoid of contact with each other.
In the Middle Ages a stream of inventions, such as gunpowder, paper, and the mariner's compass, passed from China to Europe.
The Maya
A civilization which paid particular attention to time but was destined, however, to remain totally isolated from both Europe and Asia until long after its decline — it reached its peak between about AD 600 and 900 — was that of the Maya of Mesoamerica.
The Maya were an agricultural people who had to contend with a capricious climate.
They must have felt the need for a farmer's almanac and so started to keep a tally of days, which they recorded with special symbols.
As regards their gods, benevolent ones were honoured, whereas those of an equivocal nature had to be appeased at the appropriate times.
It was even more important to know when evil gods would be in charge so as to avoid trouble as far as possible by doing nothing at such times.
In response to these needs a calendrical system of considerable complexity was devised.
This was facilitated by the development of a remarkable notation for numbers, the Maya being among the most numerate civilizations there have ever been.
They used the concept of place value and also had a symbol for zero.
Instead of a decimal system like ours or a sexagesimal system like the Babylonian, the Maya worked with a system of numeration based on the number twenty.
There were twenty days in the month, each being regarded as divine and of distinctive omen.
Thirteen months of twenty days gave a cycle of 260 days that formed the core of the Maya almanac.
It has been suggested that the reason for this choice may have been that the longer of the two annual intervals between successive zenith-transits of the sun in the neighbourhood of Copan (one of the most important Maya cities) at latitude 15 degrees north is 260 days.
The 260 days of the sacred year each had a number from one to thirteen attached to it and there were also twenty different day-names, arranged so that the same combination of number and name only came round again 260 days later.
The god of the day of the 260-day cycle on which a man was born was his patron saint or guardian deity.
There is evidence that it became the practice for individuals to be named after the day on which they were born and that couples were not allowed to marry if their birthdays had the same numeral.
Besides the 260-day cycle (or ‘Sacred Year’) the Maya had a solar year of 365 days, known to archaeologists as the ‘Vague Year’, composed of eighteen months of twenty days each and five intercalary days.
The next largest cycle in the Maya ‘Calendar Round’ contained 18,980 days, corresponding to the period when the 260-day and 365-day cycles meshed together.
The number 18,980 is the least common multiple of 260 and 365.
This number of years is equal to 52 Vague Years and to 73 Sacred Years.
The katun , comprising twenty years of 360 days, was the most important unit of time in the Maya view, because the events in one katun were expected to approximate to those in a previous katun that had ended on a day with the same number.
A notable feature of the Maya calendar was the era known as the ‘Long Count’, a day-count which began from a conventional starting-point believed to be 10 August 3113 BC according to our calendar.
This may perhaps have corresponded to the last creation of the world, for the Maya believed that the world had been created and destroyed several times.
It is now thought that the ‘Long Count’ was used to date historical rather than astronomical events.
Since about 1960 there has been a great increase in our knowledge of Maya history.
Many inscriptions on monuments that were previously thought to be purely calendrical are now known to commemorate specific events of historical significance, but the only three Maya books that have survived are all devoted to astronomy.
The most important of these is the so-called Dresden Codex , which  includes a set of tables for the planet Venus that is remarkable for its accuracy.
This planet was identified with Kukulcan, the Maya equivalent of the sinister Mexican feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl.
The prediction of its heliacal rising after inferior conjunction, that is, its first reappearance as ‘the morning star’ after a period of invisibility, was of vital concern to the Maya, who regarded it as a moment of particular dread.
Every Maya cycle had its re-entry stage on a unique day in the 260-day Sacred Year, the day of Venus being 1 Ahau.
The main problem was to determine after how many synodic revolutions, or reappearances of Venus as ‘the morning star’, this phenomenon would recur on 1 Ahau.
If the synodic period of Venus were exactly 584 days, the number of revolutions required would be 65, corresponding to 146 of the 260-day cycles.
This is because the least common multiple of 584 and 260 is 37,960, which is equal to the product of 65 and 584 and also to the product of 146 and 260.
The Maya priests discovered, however, that 584 days is a slight overestimate of the average synodic period of Venus.
(The correct result is 583.92 days, to the second place of decimals.)
They coped remarkably well with this discrepancy.
Despite there being no fractions in their arithmetic and observational difficulties due to frequent early morning mists and much cloud in the rainy season, they ultimately attained an accuracy in the determination of the synodic period of Venus that was of the order of one day in five thousand years, that is roughly one part in two million.
This degree of accuracy was attained in European planetary astronomy only in modern times.
It was nearly twice that of our present Gregorian solar calendar and almost forty times that of the Julian calendar of contemporary Europe.
For such a remarkable achievement the close co-operation of many generations of patient observers must have been necessary.
Of all ancient peoples the Maya appear to have been the most obsessed with the idea of time.
There is evidence that some earlier peoples in Central America, particularly the Olmec, were also concerned with time, but none to the degree that the Maya were.
Whereas in European antiquity the days of the week were regarded as being under the influence of the principal heavenly bodies — Saturn-day, Sun-day, Moon-day, and so on— for the Maya each day was itself divine.
The Maya pictured the divisions of time as burdens carried by a hierarchy of divine bearers who personified the respective numbers by which the different periods of time — days, months, years, etc. — were distinguished.
The burdens were carried on the back, the weight being supported by a tump-line across the forehead.
There were momentary pauses at the end of each prescribed  period when one god with his burden succeeded another.
A graphic description of this theme has been given by one of the foremost experts on the Maya, J. E. S. Thompson:
One god raises his hand to the tump-line to slip it off his forehead, whereas others have slipped off their load, and hold them in their laps.
The night god, who takes over when the day is done, is in the act of rising with his load.
With his left hand he eases the weight on the tump-line; with his right hand on the ground he steadies himself as he starts to rise.
The artist conveys in the strain reflected in the god's features the physical effort of rising from the ground with his heavy load.
It is the typical scene of the Indian carrier resuming his journey familiar to anyone who has visited the Guatemalan highlands.
Despite their constant preoccupation with temporal phenomena, the Maya never attained the idea of time as the journey of a single bearer with his load.
Their conception of time was magical and polytheistic.
The road along which the divine bearers marched in relays had neither beginning nor end.
Events moved in a circle represented by the recurring spells of duty for each god in the succession of bearers.
Days, months, years, and so on were all members of relay teams marching through eternity.
Each god's burden came to signify the particular omen of the division of time in question.
One year the burden might be drought, another a good harvest, and so on.
By calculating which gods would be marching together on a given day, the priests could determine the combined influence of all marchers and thus forecast the fate of mankind.
The hierarchy of cycles for each division of time led the Maya to devote more attention to the past than to the future.
For although the particular details might vary, history was expected to repeat itself in each katun , and significant events would follow the pre-ordained general pattern.
Thus, in the Maya world-view there was no sense of progress but only a blending of past, present, and future, which all tended to become one.
Classic Maya civilization appears to have collapsed some 600 years before the Spanish conquest of Central America, but even if it had survived it seems inevitable that the Maya obsession with time would have remained a historical curiosity with no influence on the modern world.
For, despite the remarkable mathematical and astronomical expertise displayed by the Maya priests, their mental outlook was magical and not scientific.
They were far more interested in time than were the Greeks, but the fact that every moment was regarded as the manifestation of supernatural forces meant that the concept of time which dominated Maya thought was purely astrological.
A civilization  that never invented the wheel was automatically precluded from inventing the mechanical clock, but in fact neither the sundial nor the water-clock appear to have been developed by the Maya for measuring the passage of time.
In short, they had the calendar but not the clock.
The author of a recent book on the history of clocks and their influence on the modern world has remarked that anyone looking at the techniques of time measurement throughout the world in, say, the eleventh century ‘would have given odds that the Chinese would develop a mechanical clock well before the Europeans’.
On the contrary, Chinese horological techniques did not advance, and when the Jesuits brought their clocks to China in the sixteenth century the inventions of Su Sung and others had long been forgotten.
Like the precise astronomical observations of the Maya, these technical achievements proved to be a dead end.
Instead, it was in western Europe that the mechanical clock first appeared and with it a new type of civilization based on the measurement of time.
Time in the Modern World
The Advent of the Mechanical Clock
The invention of the verge of escapement
In antiquity the only mechanical (or, more strictly speaking, quasi-mechanical) instruments for recording the passage of time were water-clocks.
The fundamental difference between water-clocks and mechanical clocks, in the strict sense of the term, is that the former involve a continuous process, for example, the flow of water through an orifice, whereas the latter depend on a mechanical motion that continually repeats itself and so divides time uniformly into discrete segments.
Many of the ancient water-clocks were instruments of considerable complexity, particularly as they were designed to indicate hours which varied throughout the year.
Although there were no mechanical clocks in antiquity, mechanical models appear to have been constructed to reproduce the relative motions of the heavenly bodies.
Writing in the first century BC, Cicero (De republica , xiv.
22) referred to one invented in Syracuse by Archimedes (287–212 BC).
We know nothing about the gearing devices involved, but the associated mathematical calculations may have been contained in a lost treatise of Archimedes On sphere making , that is on modelling the heavens.
One remarkable Hellenistic geared mechanism, however, has survived from the first century BC.
It was discovered in 1900 in the wreck of a Greek ship near the barren islet of Antikythera, off the south coast of Greece.
In 1974, D. J. de Solla price reported on the results of X-ray and gamma-ray radiography of the corroded remains of this bronze mechanism and concluded that it was a calendrical computing device.
It appears to have included means of determining the positions of the sun and moon in the zodiac, and it involved an assembly of wheels with fixed gear-ratios for the mechanization of the Metonic cycle, in which 19 solar years correspond to 235 lunar months (see Appendix 2).
According to our present knowledge, this machine was the nearest the artificers of antiquity came to inventing a truly mechanical clock.
Until recently the Antikythera mechanism was thought to be the sole surviving example of mathematical gearing in the Hellenistic tradition.
However, in 1983 four fragments of a geared instrument of early Byzantine origin, probably made during, or just before, the reign of Justinian I (527–65), were acquired by the Science Museum, London.
It has been possible to reconstruct the complete instrument, which  was a brass portable sundial with a geared calendar that showed the approximate shape of the moon and its age in days and may also have shown its position and that of the sun in the zodiac.
Two of the fragments involve gears of fifty-nine and nineteen teeth and of ten and seven teeth, respectively.
These correspond to parts of a mechanical calendar described by the Persian scientist al-Biruni (973–1048) about the year 1000.
A practical link has thus been revealed between the Hellenistic tradition of mathematical gearing and the medieval Islamic.
The only surviving example of the latter is a calendrical mechanism yielding the shape and age of the moon in days and the positions of the sun and moon in the zodiac.
It is attached to a Persian astrolabe of the early thirteenth century now in the Museum of the History of Science at Oxford.
The earliest surviving gearing from the Latin West is attached to a French astrolabe of about 1300, now in the Science Museum, London.
Although no definite links have yet been discovered between the first mechanical clocks and earlier geared astronomical models and automata, the way in which a surviving late fourteenth-century clock such as that of Wells Cathedral displays the phases of the moon and figures which emerge at successive hours suggests that such clocks were the product of a continuing tradition from the distant past.
There is also textual evidence to support this view.
Nevertheless, the actual origin of the mechanical clock remains a mystery, although it probably occurred towards the end of the thirteenth century.
Early that century the market for water-clocks was such that a guild of clockmakers is known to have existed in Cologne who by 1220 occupied a special street, the Urlogengasse, or Clockmakers Street.
Since, in northern climes, water-clocks must have been a nuisance in winter when they froze, in the fourteenth century sand-clocks were invented.
This invention was made following the introduction of a new and finer ‘sand, made of powdered eggshell.
Coarse sand cannot be used for this purpose, because it soon enlarges the hole through which it flows.
Sand-clocks proved suitable only for measuring short periods.
They were principally used on board ship to measure its speed by counting the number of knots paid out on a line tied to a log floating astern, while the sand-glass measured a given time that was usually half a minute.
They were also used for timing the length of sailors’ watches.
Incidentally, it was not until the end of the fifteenth century that the sand-glass was depicted as the attribute of Father Time.
The incentive to develop the mechanical clock may well have been fostered by the need for it in medieval monasteries, where punctuality  was a virtue that was rigorously insisted on and late arrival at divine service or meals was punished.
The need for punctuality was not due to any desire for ‘saving time’ but because the strict regulation of time was needed to help maintain the discipline of monastic life.
In any case, it seems inevitable that the development of the mechanical clock should have been primarily due to the Church for, although the transmission of power by rope and pulley had long been known to craftsmen, the mathematics of gear-trains (particularly astronomical trains) was known only to the highly educated, and their education was provided only by the Church.
The English word ‘clock’ is etymologically related to the medieval Latin word clocca and the French word cloche , meaning a bell.
Bells played a prominent part in medieval life, and mechanisms for ringing them, made of toothed wheels and oscillating levers, may have helped to prepare for the invention of mechanical clocks.
possible evidence for this view can be seen in the only surviving thirteenth-century picture of a Western water-clock, which seems to have been used about 1250 in Paris at the court of Louis IX.
It was essentially a device for ringing the hours.
The only visible wheel appears to have twenty-four teeth, which may signify that it rotated daily.
The driving power was provided by a slowly descending weight hanging from a cord wound round the axle, this being the earliest instance known of a weight drive in a clock.
It was followed about twenty years later, in 1271, by the forecast of a purely mechanical chronometer by Robertus Anglicus (‘Robert the Englishman,) in a commentary that he wrote on the Treatise on the Sphere of Sacrobosco.
He envisaged this as a well-balanced wheel driven by a lead weight suspended from its axle so that it would make one revolution between sunrise and sunset.
Nevertheless, he said of those clockmakers who were attempting to make such a timepiece that ‘they cannot quite perfect their work’.
Under the patronage of Alfonso X (el Sabio , ‘the wise’) of Castile a set of improved astronomical tables, known as the ‘Alfonsine Tables’, was compiled by Rabbi Isaac ben Sid of Toledo and published in the Libros del saber de astronomica in 1277.
In Volume IV of this work, republished in Madrid in 1866, various inventions are described including a ‘mercury clock’.
This is a weight-driven clock equipped with a brake consisting of a drum divided into twelve compartments with small holes in the dividing walls.
The lower six compartments are filled with mercury.
As the driving weight causes the drum to rotate, the mercury is raised until it counter-balances the weight, which can then fall slowly as the mercury  flows through the dividing walls.
The uniform motion of the drum depends on the viscosity of the mercury.
The motion can be regulated by varying the weight and/or the size of the drum.
The essential feature of the mechanical clock missing from this interesting device was the ‘escapement’.
The invention of the mechanical clock probably occurred after 1277, since if it had occurred earlier it is almost certain that it would have been included in Volume IV of the Libros del saber de astronomica .
It would seem that the date of the invention of the mechanical clock is probably some time between 1280 and 1300.
The crucial invention that made the mechanical clock possible was the ‘verge-and-foliot’ escapement.
A horizontal bar, or ‘foliot’, was pivoted at its centre to a vertical rod, or ‘verge’, on which were two pallets.
These engaged with a toothed wheel (driven by a weight suspended from a drum) which pushed the verge first one way and then the other, causing the foliot to oscillate.
The wheel advanced, or ‘escaped’, by the space of one tooth for each to-and-fro oscillation of the foliot.
The foliot carried two weights (regulators) on each side, and the speed of the oscillation could be adjusted by altering either the weights or their distance from the verge.
(In Italy the foliot was sometimes replaced by a balance wheel with a similar reciprocating action.)
The system also involved a mechanism for counting the oscillations.
No one knows who first made this ingenious invention, although as already indicated it was probably towards the end of the thirteenth century.
According to C. F. C. Beeson, the earliest European record of a clock with a mechanical escapement is that of 1283 in the Annals of Dunstable Priory in Bedfordshire.
He also cites records from Exeter Cathedral (1284), old St Paul's, London (1286), Merton College, Oxford (1288?),
Norwich Cathedral Priory (1290), Ely Abbey (1291), and Canterbury Cathedral (1292).
As J. D. North, who has drawn attention to these, remarks, ‘Taken singly, the records are easy to view with scepticism, but taking them together, and noting especially that relatively large sums of money are involved in payment for the materials used, they persuade us that the mechanical clock had indeed arrived on the scene.’
Although it is generally supposed that the first truly mechanical escapement was of the verge-and-foliot type found in various church clocks throughout Europe, the earliest escapement of which we have definite detailed knowledge is that of the clock designed for the Abbey of St Albans c.1328 by Richard of Wallingford (c.1292–1336), the son of a blacksmith, who became Abbot in 1327.
(His father's occupation is particularly significant, because the invention of the mechanical clock must presumably have depended on the co-operation of the learned man, probably a monk, who first thought of it and the blacksmith who actually constructed it.)
It was an oscillating mechanism involving an extra wheel, as compared with the verge-and-foliot system.
J. D. North has succeeded in reconstructing the St Albans escapement from the purely verbal description given in the surviving manuscript.
It was in some ways superior to the verge type.
North has also found that a similar escapement was known more than a century and a half later to Leonardo da Vinci.
Drawings of it are given in his Codex Atlanticus of about 1495, but Leonardo can no longer be regarded as its inventor.
The St Albans clock had two similar escapements, one to control the going-train and one to ring the bell each hour on a twenty-four-hour system with the number of strokes equal to the hour.
According to North, it is not inconceivable that such an oscillating striking device, triggered at suitably  chosen intervals by a hydraulic clock, pointed the way to the first mechanical escapement proper.
The oldest surviving clock in England is the Salisbury Cathedral clock that was made not later than 1386.
It has no dial or hands but strikes the hours.
The verge-period for a half-swing is four seconds.
The clock was restored to its original condition in full working order in 1956, after a lapse of seventy-two years.
Another more complete clock, believed to be by the same craftsman, that was in Wells Cathedral from at least 1392 is now in the Science Museum, London.
(Both clocks were in due course converted to pendulum clocks.)
The accuracy of all early mechanical clocks was low, because the foliot and wheel had no natural periods of their own and also because of the effects of friction.
It was, however, an age when civilization was becoming more vigorous and the number and skill of metal workers were increasing.
A tremendous craze developed for the construction of elaborate astronomical clocks.
As a leading historian of medieval technology has remarked, ‘No European community felt able to hold up its head unless in its midst the planets wheeled in cycles and epicycles, whilst angels trumpeted and countermarched at the booming of the hours.’
Outstanding among these ‘clocks’ was the astrarium of Giovanni de' Dondi of Padua, designed between 1348 and 1364.
This complex instrument with its finely cut teeth and intricate gearing was made of brass and was smaller than the clumsy early English clocks that were made of forged iron.
It was only incidentally a timepiece. primarily it was a mechanical representation of the universe, a kind of planetarium.
It was much more elaborate than the first of the famous series of astronomical clocks in Strasbourg Cathedral that was installed about the same time, 1350.
The original Strasbourg clock probably contained, besides moving figures, an annual-calendar dial, and possibly a lunar dial and an astrolabe, but the instrument designed by Giovanni de' Dondi incorporated a perpetual calendar for all religious feasts, both fixed and movable, and also indicated the celestial motions of the sun, moon, and planets, including even the motions of the nodes of the moon's orbit, which take over eighteen years to make a complete revolution around the ecliptic.
It is not surprising that this remarkably complete astronomical clock attracted the attention of princes.
It was acquired in 1381 by Duke Gian Galeazzo Visconti, an intellectual who has been described as ‘a sedate but crafty ruler with a great love of order and precision’.
He moved it to his palace in Pavia, where in 1420 it was recorded as being in the ducal library.
It was very difficult to keep in working order, and when the   emperor Charles V saw it in Pavia in 1529 it needed repair.
Charles, who had a taste for mechanical devices, commissioned Gionallo Torriano of Cremona to repair it, but owing to corrosion he found that this was impossible and he agreed to make a similar instrument.
When Charles retired to the monastery of San Yuste in 1555, with a large collection of clocks and watches, he took Torriano with him.
After Charles V died in 1558, Torriano entered the service of his son Philip II and moved to Toledo, where he died in 1585.
A few years ago manuscript evidence was discovered that Torriano's copy of de' Dondi's clock was still at his house in Toledo in the seventeenth century, and it is therefore unlikely that, as formerly thought, it perished when the convent of San Yuste with its art treasures was set on fire by the French in 1809.
In recent years a number of working reconstructions of de' Dondi's clock have been made.
In the course of the fourteenth century mechanical clocks became progressively more numerous in Europe, most of those that were not installed in churches being public clocks.
One such was a striking clock designed by Giovanni de' Dondi's father Jacopo, on whom the surname ‘del Orologio’ was conferred.
It was erected in the entrance tower of the Carrara Palace at Padua in 1344, but was destroyed in the assault on that town by the Milanese in 1390.
Although they were expensive, public clocks were generally regarded as being very useful.
Whereas church bells announced the times of the various religious offices, the communal clock was a secular instrument that struck the hours, and by the end of the fourteenth century some were made that struck the quarters, although this did not mean that they were any more accurate.
They were often unable to keep time to within fifteen minutes a day and were frequently out of order.
This is not surprising since all geared wheels had to be cut by hand.
The social influence of the mechanical clock
An important consequence of the introduction of mechanical clocks was that in much of western Europe it led to the adoption of the uniform hour of sixty minutes.
The earliest recorded clocks, such as the St Alban's clock and that erected in the Palace Chapel of the Visconti in Milan in 1335, struck up to twenty-four.
Dante would appear to have seen a striking clock at least fifteen years before the Visconti clock of 1335 was installed; he may have seen the iron clock placed in the campanile of the church of Sant' Eustorgio in Milan in 1309 — the first Italian  public clock of which we have knowledge.
In Paradiso , composed between 1317 and 1320, he made a famous reference (24. 13–15) to the striking-train of a clock:
E come cerchi in tempra d'oriuoli
si giran si che il primo, a chi pon mente,
quieto pare, e l'ultimo che voli…
(‘And even as wheels in harmony of clockwork so turn that the first, to whoso noteth it, seemeth still, and the last to fly…’)
Despite the inconvenience of counting large numbers the twenty-four-hour system persisted for centuries in Italy, but most other countries of western Europe soon adopted the system in which the hours were counted in two sets of twelve from midnight and from noon, respectively.
The uniform hour of sixty minutes soon tended to replace the day as the fundamental unit of labour time in the textile industry.
For example, in 1335 the governor of Artois authorized the inhabitants of Aire-sur-la-Lys to build a belfry whose bell would chime the working hours of textile employees.
The problem of the length of the working day was particularly important in the textile industry, where wages were a considerable part of production costs.
Despite the invention of the mechanical clock, for most people time remained uneven in quality.
Nothing had done more to encourage this belief than the Church with its ecclesiastical calendar and regulations concerning what could or could not be done on specific days.
Rules, or canons, were also established for the recital of prayers at definite times of the day.
Known as the Canonical Hours, these followed the system of seasonal hours: Matins before dawn, prime at sunrise, Tierce at 3, Sext at 6, Nones at 9, Vespers at 11 (the last four being reckoned from sunrise), and Compline after sunset.
In due course Nones was set back three hours to midday, and this is the origin of the word ‘noon’.
Devout lay folk who wished to participate in this daily programme, however, needed their own prayerbooks.
A ‘Book of Hours’ was the name given to such a prayerbook intended for private or family devotion, the term ‘hours’indicating not an interval of sixty minutes, but less precise parts of the day that were set aside for religious and other duties.
Originally, books of this type were commissioned only by kings and the highest nobility, but by the fifteenth century secular workshops had been set up, particularly in Paris and other cities in France and the Low Countries, so as to provide such books for a wider public.
They form the largest single  category of medieval manuscripts that have come down to us, and all later prayerbooks derive from them.
They usually begin with pictures of the occupations of the different months, followed by passages from the Gospels and the liturgical hours from Matins (and Lauds) to Vespers and Compline, and completed by miniatures of the life of the Virgin.
The most celebrated of all these books is the Très riches heures , painted early in the fifteenth century by the Limbourg brothers for the Duc de Berry, third son of King John II of France.
Popular superstitions concerning lucky and unlucky days, the existence of which has already been referred to in connection with the Romans, were reinforced in the Middle Ages by the recognition of black-letter days in the ecclesiastical calendar.
For example, the day commemorating the massacre of the Holy Innocents, 28 December, was regarded as a day of particular ill-omen, especially in the fifteenth century.
Moreover, throughout the year the particular day of the week on which Innocents' Day had fallen the previous year was also regarded as a black-letter day, and was also called Innocents' Day.
Those who were influenced by this belief refrained from setting out on a journey or from starting a major task on that day of the week.
An interesting example of this superstition concerns the coronation of Edward IV on 4 March 1461.
In the preceding year 28 December fell on a Sunday and as the coronation took place on that day of the week it had to be repeated on another day!
Even as late as the last quarter of the sixteenth century Queen Elizabeth's chief minister Lord Burghley warned his son to avoid undertaking new enterprises on three particularly ominous anniversaries in the ecclesiastical calendar: the first Monday in April (the murder of Abel), the first Monday in August (the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah), and the last Monday in December (the birthday of Judas Iscariot).
A class of special days (and weeks) that has survived in both the Roman and Anglican Churches is that of ‘Ember Days’ and ‘Ember Weeks’.
Associated with the four seasons, the weeks concerned begin, respectively, on St Lucy's Day (13 December), the First Sunday in Lent, Whitsunday, and Holy Cross Day (14 September).
Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays in these weeks are the Ember Days.
Traditionally, these days were set apart for special prayer and fasting.
The following Sundays, for example Trinity Sunday, are the days specially fixed for the ordination of the clergy.
This ancient custom was finally established as a law of the Church, c.1085, by Pope Gregory VII.
In England, belief in the uniformity of time was greatly influenced by  the Puritans in their strong opposition to the practices of the Roman Church, in particular to the idea of special days in the ecclesiastical calendar.
Instead, the puritans advocated a regular routine of six days of work followed by a day of rest on the Sabbath, the famous Nonconformist ethic.
During the course of the seventeenth century, despite the reaction against puritanism which followed the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, this point of view became increasingly influential, so that by the end of the century it had come to be generally accepted.
As Keith Thomas has pointed out, ‘This change in working habits constituted an important step towards the social acceptance of the modern notion of time as even in quality, as opposed to the primitive sense of time, s unevenness and irregularity.’
In France, a step towards ending the dominance of the liturgical practices of the Church was taken as early as 1370 by King Charles V when he ordered all the bells in Paris to be regulated by the recently installed clock of the royal palace, designed by Heinrich von Wiek (Henri de Vic), and to be rung at hourly intervals.
Although the practical difficulties of time measurement were such that until the middle of the seventeenth century most clocks had but one hand and the dial was divided only into hours and quarters, the abstract framework of uniformly divided time gradually became the new medium of daily existence.
This important development, which began in the towns, was fostered by the mercantile class and the rise of a money economy.
As long as power was concentrated in the ownership of land, time was felt to be plentiful and was primarily associated with the unchanging cycle of the soil.
With the increased circulation of money and the organization of commercial networks, however, the emphasis was on mobility.
Time was no longer associated just with cataclysms and festivals but rather with everyday life.
It was soon realized by many of the middle class that ‘time is money’ and consequently must be carefully regulated and used economically.
As Lewis Mumford has pointed out, ‘Time-keeping passed into time-saving and time-accounting and time-rationing.
As this took place, Eternity gradually ceased to serve as the measure and focus of human actions.’
A typical instance of late medieval anxiety about time occurs in a letter of 1399 written by the wife of the ‘Merchant of Prato’, Francesco di Marco Datini, to her ageing husband: ‘In view of all you have to do, when you waste an hour, it seems to me a thousand….
For I deem naught so precious to you, both for body and soul, as time, and methinks  you value it too little.’
Two years later we find Datini himself writing in the same vein to one of his partners in Spain, Cristofano di Bartolo, whom he wished to persuade to come home.
A similar note was struck by Chaucer in the Host's introduction to the ‘Man of Law's Tale’ in The Canterbury Tales , written about 1400:
And therefor by the shadwe he took his wit
That Phebus, which that shoon so clere and brighte,
Degrees was fyve and fourty clombe on highte;
And for that day, as in that latitude,
It was ten of the clokke, he gan conclude,
And sodeynly he plighte his hors aboute.
‘Lordinges,’ quod he, ‘I warne yow, al this route,
The fourthe party of this day is goon;
Now, for the love of god and of Seint John,
Leseth no tyme, as ferforth as ye may;
Lordinges, the tyme wasteth night and day,
And steleth from us, what prively slepinge,
And what thurgh necligence in our wakynge,
As dooth the streem, that turneth never agayn,
Descending fro the montaigne into playn.’
Before long there were many activities for which time came to be increasingly regarded as valuable.
In the early and high Middle Ages it had been possible to spend many tens and even hundreds of years on erecting a single building, be it a cathedral, a castle, or a town hall.
This was possible because human life was regarded as primarily the life of the community in which one generation quietly succeeded another, so that there was no pressing need for rapid construction.
All this was destined to change in the late Middle Ages and Renaissance period.
Even in painting the time factor made itself felt.
For although we frequently find in paintings of this period that a number of consecutive scenes are represented simultaneously in one picture, in other ways temporal considerations came to exert a decisive influence — in particular, causing painting a secco to replace al fresco , or true fresco, since the very long apprenticeship that pupils had to serve before they became proficient in fresco painting could not be maintained, and a successful painter had to work fast in order to handle all the commissions that he received.
Even as great an artist as Michelangelo (1475–1564) was unable to turn the tide.
Originally it had been planned that the Last Judgement in the Sistine Chapel should be painted a secco in oil, but he insisted on carrying out the  work al fresco since he considered oil painting to be only ‘fit for women and slovenly people’!
His point of view conflicted with the spirit of the age and, despite his example, the glorious art of true fresco died out, its practice being incompatible with the new social attitude to time.
This attitude was also responsible for a new horological invention that was ultimately to be of far-reaching social significance.
The first mechanical clocks were large and unwieldy, and there was soon a desire for smaller and more portable mechanisms.
To meet this demand springs began to be used in the fifteenth century in place of weights as the source of motive power in clocks.
This development was important because it made possible the invention of the domestic clock and also the watch.
One of the earliest references to a watch is the gold pomander ‘wherein is a clocke, that was presented in 1540 by Henry VIII to Catherine Howard, his fifth wife.
The public clock, whether installed in a church or in a town square, was only an intermittent reminder of the passage of time, but a domestic clock or a watch was a continually visible indicator.
As D. S. Landes has pointed out, whereas the public clock could be used to open and close markets, to signal the start and end of work and to move people around, it signalled only moments rather than the continual passage of time.
A chamber clock or watch, on the other hand, was an ever-visible reminder of ‘time used, time spent, time wasted, time lost’.
As such it was prod and key to personal achievement and productivity.
Nevertheless, centuries were to elapse before this invention became widespread.
Indeed, for a long while the possession of a domestic clock or a watch tended to be restricted to the wealthy and was looked upon more as a sign of affluence than as a social necessity.
As late as the middle of the seventeenth century we find, for example, that even at the age of 30 Samuel Pepys (1633–1703), already an important government official, did not possess a watch.
Instead, he lived by the church bells of London and occasionally a sundial, as did almost everyone else there.
Consequently, very few specific appointments were made.
Pepys moved around from public places to coffee houses and taverns hoping to do business.
He often went to discuss matters with the Lord High Admiral, James, Duke of York, only to find that the Duke had gone hunting.
Pepys never expresses surprise or resentment.
Time had a different significance for him and most of his contemporaries than it has for us.
Since watches were for long the toys of the rich, it is not surprising that often when ordinary folk encountered one they were extremely puzzled and were even inclined to look upon it as something evil and  dangerous.
An amusing instance of this is related by John Aubrey concerning an Oxford don, Thomas Allen (1542–1632), who owned many mathematical and other scientific instruments.
When staying one Long Vacation at a friend's place, ‘at Hom Lacey in Herefordshire’, he happened to leave his watch on the window-sill of his chamber.
According to Aubrey,
The maydes came in to make the bed, and hearing a thing in a case cry Tick, Tick, Tick , presently concluded that it was his Devill, and took it by the string with the tongues, and threw it out of the windowe into the mote (to drown the Devill).
It so happened that the string hung on a sprig of an elder that grew out of the mote, and this confirmed them that ‘twas the Devill.
[Consequently], the good old gentleman got his watch back.
When most people possessed no clocks or watches but lived more in the countryside than they do today, they took far more note than we do of the various timings associated with plants and animals.
Indeed, some plants were even named thereby, for example, the ‘day's eye’(daisy), so-called in allusion to its revealing its yellow disc in the morning and concealing it again in the evening.
Most notable of natural timings was cock-crow, and a famous tribute to the cock Chauntecleer's horological skill was paid by Chaucer in the ‘Nun's Priest's Tale’:
Wel sikerer was his crowying in his logge,
Than is a clokke, or an abbey orlogge.
By nature knew he ech ascenscioun
Of equinoxial in thilke toun;
For whan degrees fiftene were ascended,
Thanne crew he, that it mighte nat ben amended.
Although watches were extremely rare before the late seventeenth century, the influence of mechanical timekeeping had already made itself felt in a variety of ways, besides those already mentioned.
By the sixteenth century mining operations had become closely regulated by the clock according to Agricola (Georg Bauer), who in his De re metallica , of 1555, noted the precise times of shifts.
Many professional people, such as judges and teachers, commenced their duties at stated hours, and by the late Middle Ages even the often unruly undergraduates at universities such as Oxford were subjected to the discipline of fixed timetables.
Lectures often began as early as 5 or 6 a.m. in the summer (7 a.m. in the winter), and sometimes the first lecture went on for three hours, no provision being made for any food before 10 a.m.
It is interesting to  trace the way in which the times of meals have changed over the centuries, particularly because in everyday life it is not just the clock which tells us which part of the day we are in but the meals that we eat.
Thus, in common parlance, ‘afternoon’ now begins an hour or more after ‘noon, according to the clock.
Also dinner has tended to get later and later in the day.
The fascinating details of this historical trend have been described by Arnold Palmer.
Although, the rule of the clock affected most people in the sixteenth century far less than it does us today, it was already sufficient to provoke Brother Jean in the Gargantua (1535) of Rabelais to complain that ‘the hours are made for man and not man for the hours!’