

TODAY'S HORSE NO HORSE?
NO WORRIES!
Riding for the non-owner SCROOGE Saving cash when time means money MILTON At home & abroad WIN!
Fabulous complete outfits from Hydrophane PLUS RE-TRAINING THE OLDER HORSE THE CORRECT USE OF THE AIDS TRADITIONAL V. COMPOUND FEEDS AND MUCH, MUCH MORE!
CONTENTS
OCTOBER 1991
NEWS
COMPETITION
Win fabulous riding wear from Hydrophane worth over £600
NO HORSE?
NO WORRIES!
The advantages of being a non-owner
RE-TRAINING THE OLDER HORSE
How to iron out those long-term problems
SCROOGE!
Saving cash when time means money
COPPER'S COMEBACK
A reader's courageous story
EQUINE PROFILE
Event stallion — WELTON AMBASSADOR
DRESSING UP
A light hearted look at equestrian dress regulations
TO THE RESCUE
Our Agony Uncle helps to solve more of your problems
MILTON
At home and abroad
IN SICKNESS AND IN HEALTH
A look at an unpleasant and highly contagious equine disease — strangles
CAROLYN'S DIARY
The latest from Carolyn and her new horse Skipper
BODY LANGUAGE
Learn to understand your horse
HOME STUDIES
Do you have a desire to learn?
FORUM
Jennie Loriston-Clarke explains the correct use of the aids
UNDERSTANDING THE AIDS
Jennie Loriston-Clarke explains their correct use
HORSE CUISINE
Traditional v. compound feeds.
Which is best?
NEXT MONTH
and subscription offer 
Horses have always been an expensive pastime but in the current economic situation any chance to save a few pennies is more welcome than ever.
In the questionnaire we ran recently we asked for your money saving tips and the most popular was without doubt don't buy a horse!
Carolyn Henderson starts a new series this month  where she will be offering advice on how you can save cash, starting with when time means money.
If you have any tips you would like to share with our readers we would love to hear from you.
We will publish as many as we can over the next few months.
Following her excellent series on training the young horse, Jane Wallace (formerly Thelwall) now looks at the problems facing those of us who ride less than perfect horses.
This month Jane looks at re-training the older horse and over the next few issues she will be giving invaluable advice on overcoming the most common problems.
The most difficult thing when writing about Milton is to find enough superlatives to describe him.
Gillian Newsum has just written an excellent book about him and we were lucky enough to be offered an extract to whet your appetite!
Turn to the centre pages for more on the greatest show jumper of all time.
Wouldn't life be simpler if we could read horses' minds?
Jane Lucas offers some explanations about their behaviour in Body Language on page 36 which will help your understanding of the noble equine.
Following the popularity of recent competitions we have run offering riding clothes as prizes, we have arranged another super, easy-to-enter competition this month with fabulous riding gear from Hydrophane.
Find out more details on page 7.
On top of this we have all your regular favourites including information on feeding and strangles as well as the ever-popular pages by Ginny Leng and Jennie Loriston-Clarke.
We hope that you enjoy this issue and will let us know if there is anything you would particularly like to see in Today's Horse.
Want a word…?
IN DEFENCE OF FREEZEBRANDING
Dear Kate,
I feel I must write in defence of freezebranding having read the News Item ‘Hoof Branding’ in September's issue.
While I appreciate that you are quoting the system Inventor's personal opinion I feel it is irresponsible to say that freeze branding spoils a horse/pony's looks, especially as the item is in the format of a News Review not an advertisement.
Potential customers for freeze branding could well be put off by seeing this biased statement in a reputable magazine.
If you visit any horse show you will see plenty of freeze branded winners.
My own ponies are freeze branded, still beautiful and win ribbons at National shows (e.g. Ponies U.K.) both in hand and ridden.
I see from the local press that the hoof branding system was developed by a lady who keeps a thoroughbred gelding.
He presumably spends his winters in a nice clean stable but most animals live in muddy fields.
With the best will in the world I cannot imagine that a meat man would have the time, or that an un-horsy policeman would risk life and limb to scrub the mud from the hooves of every animal which roughly fits the description of a stolen one.
With freeze branding the animal is immediately recognisable and you have the comfort of a large back-up organisation if the worst happens.
Obviously I welcome any extra options for keeping animals safe and hoof branding will be the answer for some people.
I hope that I have redressed the balance regarding the usual effect of freeze branding and by the way I don't have a financial interest in either system so my view is unbiased.
Gill Collins Lutterworth Leics.
If you look at the News item regarding Hoof Branding in the September issue you will see that I recommended any form of security marking and that hoof branding was suggested as an alternative to freezebranding for those who choose not to freezebrand their horses.
It was not intended to sound biased.
Both methods have their advantages and disadvantages.
Freezebranding doesn't show up well on grey horses or when rugs are worn.
As you say, the hoof branding will not be visible when conditions are muddy.
Make your own choice, we're only here to point out what is available.
—Ed.
READ YOUR BIBLE!
Dear Kate,
Why can't we all just read and enjoy your superb magazine, without quibbling about grammatical language and sexist issues?
Do these really  mar our understanding of informative articles, aiming to make us wiser on equestrian subjects?
How wise we would be if we read and understood our Bibles — this gives us life's meaning itself, in amongst much so-called ‘sexist’ language.
I wish people would just be thankful for life and knowledge, without the moaning and nit-picking that goes on, whenever the language seems wrong.
Ruth Gray Dorchester Dorset.
A WORD OF HOPE
Dear Kate,
I read Kathy Vickers letter re Melanomas and would like to offer a word of hope.
We have a lovely 14.3 Connemara cross thoroughbred mare on loan.
When we went to see her we were shown her enormous  melanomas , two were the size of large grapefruit and there were numerous others up to golf ball size.
I was very worried so her owner said she would arrange to have the two largest removed surgically.
This was done and she came to us.
We kept the area very clean with water applied with a hose pipe.
The stitches were taken out and the wounds healed well.
We plait her tail, never pull it and she is ridden in every sort of class usually winning or being placed in working hunter pony, Riding Club Horse, show-jumping, cross-country, show hunter pony and anything else we care to enter her for.
She is now 24 years old and going as strong as ever.
Before we had her she did a lot of show jumping and has bred a foal.
We travel her with a tail bandage over gamgee and have no trouble.
Our vet says we will know if the melanomas spread internally as the mane will lose condition very quickly and in the meantime keep on using her as if nothing is wrong.
In two and a half years she has won over 40 trophies and hundreds of rosettes so don't despair, Kathy, keep an eye on the condition and just enjoy your horse.
She did rub one melanoma causing it to weep but we didn't panic just kept it very clean and it healed perfectly.
Judges have occasionally commented on her melanomas but it has never affected her placing in the show ring.
Angela Hudson Painters Forstal Faversham
Thank you for your letter Angela.
I'm sure Kathy will have found your letter very reassuring .
—Ed.
THOUGHTS ON HUNTING
Dear Kate,
I notice that you have said very little about hunting.
As the start of the season is very close I wonder if I may make a few points for other readers to think about?
I would like to point out that I do not hunt myself so feel I have a balanced point of view.
I have several friends who are farmers who regard foxes as a considerable pest.
Assuming therefore that the number of foxes must be controlled — as with rabbits or rats for instance— as painless a method of control as possible must be found.
Shooting is extremely difficult and more often than not the fox is wounded rather than killed outright.
This leaves the unfortunate animal to crawl away and die a much slower death than if hounds had caught him.
An alternative is gassing — again an unpleasant and painful death.
I think the reason people find shooting or gassing preferable is purely because it isn't as messy — without any thought to what the fox goes through.
Some anti's, as with most extremist groups, have given the movement a bad name by their own aggressive and violent behaviour.
How on earth can they protest about hunting when they are prepared to injure humans and horses in their cause?
I fear that much of the ‘anti’ feeling is really part of the class war.
Hunting is expensive and many people associate hunting with upper class sports.
I don't like the thought of foxes being torn apart by hounds but foxes are vermin, in spite of their beautiful looks, and the alternatives are much worse.
Julie Peabody, Stamford, Lincs.
Thank you for your letter Julie which raised some interesting points.
Next month we have a feature called ‘The Hunting Debate’ which will look into the question of hunting in more detail — Ed.
We received a number of letters in response to Lisa Robillard's letter on SEXISM .
Here are just a few:
Dear Kate,
I was delighted to see that you didn't bother to rise to Lisa Robillard's rather silly letter on sexism.
I get sick and tired of the feminist movement trying to undermine the English language.
Why did women ever have to become ‘Ms’ instead of‘Miss’or Mrs?
I remain convinced that only lesbians and divorcees insist on being addressed in this manner.
‘He’ is a generic term by definition, so if women would accept this and relax, life would be so much less complicated.
Keep up the good work on a splendid magazine.
Charles Greenwich London
Are you pulling my leg?
I rather hope you are.
—Ed.
Dear Kate,
I have just read Lisa Robillard's letter on sexist language (Sept. issue).
It is hard to believe that she should worry about anything as unimportant.
Everyone knows that both sexes work with horses, and according to the Oxford English Dictionary the word ‘He’ is generic, is she saying that the Oxford English Dictionary is wrong?
I wonder if she has a problem with ‘God’, it must drive her mad that so many people refer to him as ‘He’.
Lisa's letter inspired me to try to write a verse on the subject (not very good, but here it is)
The Judge didn't realise, when he called her in
That the one on the Dun, was a ‘HER’, not a ‘HIM’
The Judge said ‘That girl — the one on the Dun —
Has caught my attention — Tell her she's won
I did like her show (and her little pink drawers)
She's converted me quite, to the Feminist's cause.’
Jessica Frank Devizes, Wiltshire
P.S. I love your magazine.
Dear Kate,
I have just read the letter in the September issue of Todays Horse and have to say that I agree with the comments of Lisa Robillard on the point of using ‘he’ instead of‘she’.
I don't believe for one minute that the majority of your readers are male, nor that the majority of riders are male.
Therefore rather than using ‘he or she’, it is only fair that ‘she’ should be used.
Susan Wilkins Sturminster Newton
CUT MOUTH?
Dear Kate,
I was very distressed to see the front cover of the August issue of Ginny Leng riding Murphy Himself.
He has clearly got a cut mouth and there are flecks of blood down his chest.
I am a great fan of Ginny's but I must admit I was upset to see this picture as Murphy must obviously be in pain.
Keep up the good work.
Today's Horse is the best!
Sarah Clerkenwell, Ludlow, Shropshire
Ginny replies:Murphy Himself didn't in fact have a cut mouth, he had bitten his tongue!
It's not unusual for horses to do this and more often than not it is just a tiny nick and doesn't cause any problem or any pain.
NEWS NEWS
WESTERN DEMO
In an attempt to raise further funds for the International League for the Protection of Horses fighting fund, a demonstration and clinic has been arranged to be given by  Britain's leading Western rider/trainer and judge, Bob Mayhew.
Bob is chairman of the Western Equestrian Society.
As well as having made a video on the subject, he is also the author of ‘The Art of Western Riding’ published by Crowood Press.
For the last two years Bob Mayhew has given demonstrations at the Horse and Rider Show which have proved very popular, and this year has been requested to give a teach-in at the Olympia Christmas Show.
This is Bob's first visit to this part of the country and even those who do not ride western will find his views on training responsive, pleasurable horses both enlightening and thought provoking.
The demonstration will be held on Saturday 5th October 1991, beginning at 7.30 pm at South Causey Equestrian Centre near Stanley, County Durham.
The use of the facilities for Saturday evening has very kindly been donated free of charge by the centre.
Tickets for the demonstration are £5 per person and must be purchased in advance.
The clinic will take place on Sunday 6th October.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (091) 3857850.
HOYS
The main horsy event in October is the Horse of the Year Show to be held at the Wembley Stadium (8–12 October).
Over 60 trade stands will now be housed indoors alongside the new arena — ideal for the first of your Christmas shopping!
Tickets are still available from the Box Office on 081 902 8833 Ext 4321 or 0298 72272.
JOANNE LONG APPEAL
An appeal has been launched by Priory School, Banstead, in memory of Joanne Long, who was tragically killed after a School Fun Day in May this year.
Nine-year-old Joanne had been at the fete helping to give pony rides to help raise funds for the Longeval Animal Sanctuary Trust, which is run by her mother, Cindy.
The Longeval Animal Sanctuary rescues and cares for many animals, and also regularly visit inner-city schools taking lambs, goats, piglets, calves, rabbits etc to give the children there the opportunity to see and touch these animals for themselves.
Joanna died after being crushed under the wheels of the vehicle used to transport the animals, which understandably the family no longer want to use.
Priory School's Parents Association hopes to raise up to £5,000 to buy a second-hand horsebox to enable Mrs Long to continue raising funds and visiting schools.
Donations can be sent direct to Priory School, addressed to the Priory School Association or to Barclays Bank, Mitcham, Surrey, marked for the Trustees of the Parents of Priory School, Joanne Long Appeal.
The bank's code is 205775 and the account number is 2072390.
PI Associates, sole manufacturers of PolyPads, wish it to be known that Bridlesuite of Lanarkshire have never been supplied with or ever stocked genuine PolyPads.
We regret any inconvenience this may have caused.
PolyPads are available from recommended stockists, please contact PI Associates on 0638 717521 for details.
NO HORSE?
NO WORRIES!
Kate Finlayson explains that, with winter approaching, you may well be better off without your own horse!
There are many thousands of keen riders in Britain today who don't own their own horse for a variety of reasons.
Perhaps the main constraint is lack of money.
However you look at it, horses are extremely expensive to keep and even the initial outlay of buying the animal pales into insignificance when you start to add up feed, shoeing and vets' bills, insurance, tack, transport and livery or rent if you don't own your own facilities — the list seems endless.
However, rather than feeling gloomy about your lack of horseflesh try thinking positively about your situation.
With winter approaching NOT owning a horse can be a great bonus.
Forfeiting an extra hour in bed to get up and muck out while it is still pitch dark or traipsing through muddy fields on bitterly cold days to break the ice on the water trough can take its toll on the keenest of owners.
As most of us have to work to earn a living, the short winter days limit our riding considerably and leave us with the choice of riding before or after work in the dark or only at weekends, unless you are lucky enough to have access to an indoor school.
There is no doubt that owning a horse can be very rewarding.
I remember being thrilled when I got the first whicker of recognition from my horse and most people feel happier and more confident riding a horse they know —even if it isn't well behaved!
However, owning your own horse usually means that you don't often ride anything else, so your own bad habits become ingrained in your horse.
Unless you have regular lessons, which many owners don't, either because they can't afford to or because they can't be bothered, it is unlikely that horse ownership will actually improve your riding.
Riding Schools
Most non-owners who want to ride go to their local riding school which can vary from being a top class training establishment with excellent facilities, where you will probably pay accordingly, or a small set-up with few mod cons.
It is wise to go to a school which is BHS and/or ABRS approved.
You are likely to find qualified staff at an approved school and certainly beginner riders should try to find the best tuition they can.
The first few lessons are crucial and I'm a firm believer that there are so few good British riders because our initial training is so often overlooked.
If you are just beginning to ride, I would strongly recommend at least half a dozen lessons on the lunge before you join the crocodile of horses marching nose to tail around a school.
There is no better way of establishing the sea than by being lunged and it is a great pity that beginner riders are so frequently taught by the most junior members of staff.
In fact a few lessons on the lunge will improve your riding whatever level you have reached.
Costs
Riding at a school is likely to cost you anywhere between £5–£20 per hour.
The cheapest will be with a junior instructor in a large ride and the top rate will be for a private lesson with the chief instructor.
Many children and teenagers ‘earn’ their rides by mucking out, grooming, cleaning tack or perhaps leading beginners in return for the occasional free ride.
It is probably the closest thing we have to the slave trade here in Britain but many horse-mad children will cheerfully spend day after day employed in this fashion, and the school holidays release an army of willing helpers.
Exercising other  people's horses
Many non-owners are happy to go to their local riding school for their weekly lesson or hack and never aspire to anything greater.
If a weekly ride doesn't satisfy your yearnings but lack of finances prevents you from riding more frequently, try putting an advertisement in a local paper offering your services to exercise other  people's horses.
It is surprising how much a competent, reliable rider can be in demand.
At this time of year, hundreds of people are struggling to get hunters fit and although roadwork is not that exciting, it will be free and your help will be much appreciated.
In fact, helping out with the dreary road and fitness work could result in you being offered a day's hunting or perhaps a ride around a hunter trial or whatever.
There are many busy mothers who would be delighted to see their horses being exercised, particularly during the winter when it is less easy to turn horses out (in an attempt to preserve limited grazing).
Similarly some women can't or don't want to ride in the latter stages of pregnancy but would like their horse kept in work.
Keeping the arrangement sweet
Having seen the loan situation from both sides of the fence it is essential that a few rules are followed to keep the arrangement sweet.
The horse must be treated as well, if not better, than if it were your own.
If someone has offered you free riding on their horse they are not going to appreciate finding their yard covered in droppings and scattered with grooming kit after you have left, or that you abandoned a sweaty horse without seeing to it after you have ridden.
Total honesty is also essential.
Don't pretend to be a better rider than you are; you will inevitably be caught out.
Accidents can and do happen, but if something happens to the horse, however minor, tell the owner — don't let her find out that it has overreached or whatever, when she next looks at her horse.
An arrangement like this can often be the best of both worlds.
Riding to help out usually gives you rides on a better horse than you would probably find at an average riding school and without the expense!
So if you are feeling depressed about not owning your own horse the answer is don't!
It really is possible to get plenty of riding without your own horse and without pots of money — particularly if you ride well and build up a reputation as a reliable and competent person.
As winter sets in, go to your local riding school which will often have its own indoor school (the only civilised way to ride when the weather is really foul) or try to build up some local contacts where you can offer your services.
Then put your feet up and count your blessings!
Being lunged is the best possible way to establish an independent seat.
Many busy people will appreciate a responsible person exercising their horses.
Many people are struggling to get their hunters fit at this time of the year.
Re-training the Older Horse
Jane Wallace (formerly Thelwall) explains how to iron out problems most commonly found when re-training the older horse.
Training starts with a horse as soon as a rider is introduced onto his back.
Most horses are backed as three year olds, then turned away with their training starting seriously during their fourth year.
For various reasons, some horses are not broken until they are four or even five years old.
The disadvantage of this is that the horse misses out on that first year of becoming accustomed to life and its excitements.
He will also be stronger which may prove to be a problem during the backing and breaking process.
A three year old is comparatively weak and easy to get to the bottom of, whereas a four or five year old will be able to put up more of a resistance (if that is in his nature).
The pattern of training for the recently broken five year old should follow the same path as that suggested for any youngster.
The improvement tends to be more rapid than with an immature three or four year old due to the increased strength.
This obviously must be channelled in the right direction!
The horse's mental attitude will be the same as any horse with the same amount of training and exposure to ‘life’.
The more that a young horse can see and do, therefore, the better.
I try to take my youngsters to lots of little shows as soon as I consider them to be ‘safe’.
They then learn to take as much as possible in their stride.
A horse will soon become used to the excitement of a show provided that he goes out on a regular basis from an early age.
A few in-hand shows are all experience too, but avoid doing too many because young horses soon become tired, bored and bolshy!
Re-training
Invariably, training an older horse actually means re-training.
Producing a young horse without problems is difficult.
Their learning curve is steep but this means that they will pick up bad habits and evasions as quickly as correct ways of going.
It is easier for a horse to evade going correctly because correct work is hard work, requiring effort.
Horses are not stupid and they soon grasp how best to avoid hard graft!
The pattern for retraining is the same as for training from scratch but often there exist problems which have to be corrected en route.
A young, green horse will be weak but if worked correctly will gradually build up the necessary muscle to enable him to perform the required movements.
He will show his fatigue by being apparently sluggish and lazy to the aids after working well for approximately 20 minutes.
An older horse may be quite fit, maybe having been hunted or hacked for long distances.
He may even have competed and undergone intensive schooling, but perhaps of the wrong sort.
All this will build up muscle, but not the right muscle for the work he is going to be asked to do.
It is always interesting to notice how a fit hunter will puff and sweat quite soon after being worked in a manege, if he is not used to working in such a way.
I know myself that I am very fit for riding, but after a game of tennis or squash,(I don't have the chance to play often!)
I am somewhat stiff.
A horse is the same in that he may be fit for one type of work but not another.
It is important to remember this when re-training.
Common sense must prevail to avoid over-working a horse and so straining muscles.
This would cause a real setback.
If a horse is stiff or sore he can only show his discomfort by resisting.
The trainer then has to decide whether the horse is being rather stubborn and refuses to work because he does not want to or because there is something preventing him from relaxing and settling down.
Ten minutes too long during a schooling session might mean a week's set-back in a training programme, so be careful not to either work for too long or to expect too much too soon.
Stiffness
The most common cause of all resistance is stiffness in the back both laterally and directly.
This stiffness prevents the horse from bending and bringing his hocks underneath him.
As a result, he will be unable to maintain a rhythm during his work or be in balance.
The horse finds balance by bringing his hocks underneath him and also uses this means for brakes and acceleration.
Any inability to carry the weight on the hind-legs will trigger off resistance in the mouth.
This may manifest itself in various ways.
A long time must be spent on suppling the horse by the use of circles, turns, changes of bend and transitions.
Trotting poles will also help increase the suppleness and activity of the horse.
Depending on the fitness of the horse, twenty or thirty minutes schooling should be more than enough initially.
Sometimes  a fifteen or twenty minute walk out before schooling helps the horse loosen-up before a session begins.
In these early stages of re-training, the horse can be expected to keep in rhythm while doing basic school movements, carrying himself on a light contact.
He should be encouraged to stretch down onto the bit without losing balance or rhythm.
Remember the order of training and try not to be tempted to have the horse ‘on the bit’ until the first stages are consolidated and the horse has become supple and balanced.
Finding Balance
Often a horse will try to find his balance by holding his head high rather than finding balance on his hocks.
The horse must be taught to lower his head which in turn will loosen his back and so help him understand how to engage his hocks.
Sometimes this requires quite an effort from both horse and rider.
It should not be a fight, but an explanation and encouragement should be given by the rider and a reward when understood.
On no account should the horse's head be pulled down.
The horse must give to the rider's hand, of course, but it is the bringing of the hocks under the horse which allow the horse to lower his head.
All too often, running reins are employed to do this job.
Used correctly, running reins do have their place in the training of a horse, but alas, their use is often abused.
The horse must always be driven forward and down onto the contact and the danger of running reins is that the horse's head is merely pulled in.
As soon as the reins are removed, the horse is liable to revert to his original way of going.
Working the horse strongly through from behind, combined with athletic exercises such as circles, serpentines and transitions, will produce a truer, more consistent result.
Lungeing
The use of gadgets such as Chambons or side-reins while lungeing, can undoubtedly be of great assistance in retraining a horse, provided that they are not merely used as a short-cut.
A mis-used gadget will only make problems worse by forcing a horse into a shape before he is physically strong enough.
It can damage muscles by forcing them to work harder than they are capable of at the time.
Any discomfort as a result of this will be mentally connected with pain and it will take the horse a long time to forget both physically and mentally.
As mentioned earlier, the most common form of resistance is stiffness in the back.
This is invariably aggravated by the rider's weight — especially in the case of a less experienced rider who may return a resistance by being a little insensitive in the hand.
The horse can be worked on the lunge with the same principles in mind i.e. rhythm and balance.
The horse should be able to work in a rhythm and make transitions without losing balance or resisting.
Until he is capable of doing this without a rider, he cannot be expected to do so when ridden.
As long as lungeing is not over-used, it is an invaluable aid to training.
It depends upon the problem of each horse as to whether a Chambon or side-reins are used.
A horse which needs stretching down will benefit from a Chambon whereas a horse which is rather ignorant of the bit will only have himself to argue with in side-reins.
Side-reins should be of the same length and of a length which encourages the horse to hold himself in a balanced outline.
He should not be restricted by the side-reins, so they must not be tight.
A Chambon must only be used by an experienced person and introduced gradually to avoid problems, such as the horse rearing.
Lungeing interspersed with riding progresses training and at the same time minimises the risk of strain.
As with any training or fitness work, the process can never be speeded up without cutting corners.
Any short cuts will be found out eventually, and this is usually the case with an older horse requiring re-schooling.
The more correct the early stages of training, the less chance there is of things going wrong.
Some older horses may develop habits which are difficult to cure.
It may be that in order to combat a particular problem, a different bit might help.
A change of bit (not necessarily a stronger one) often works wonders and this combined with correct suppling work can transform the way of going of many horses.
Re-training is fascinating work.
The rider has to work out the problem, why it has happened and then decide how best to correct it.
Once the horse understands what is required of him, he should enjoy his work and improve day by day.
Next month: Jane deals with the most common flatwork problems.
Horses are not stupid and will soon grasp how to avoid hard graft!
A horse that is fit for hunting may be unable to cope with a long schooling session.
The horse must be taught to lower his head and find balance on his hocks.
On no account should the horse's head be pulled down.
SCROOGE!
Does your horse play havoc with your budget?
In the first of a two-part series,Carolyn Henderson looks at how to cope when time means money.
It's a common misconception among people who don't keep horses that those who do have plenty of money.
No doubt some owners are lucky enough to fall into that category — but most of us have to scrimp and save to keep our horses happy.
The rising cost of living affects horses as well as humans, and if you dare to sit down and work out how much you spend even on the basics you will probably be horrified.
It's quite easy to get to £50 a week just for basic essentials like stable and grazing rental, bedding and feed.
It can be a valuable exercise to sit down and work out just what you spend.
When you have recovered from the shock, take a long, hard look at how you organise your horse's welfare; you may well be able to make cutbacks that are in no way detrimental to his health.
You may need to do some lateral thinking, as savings cannot always be related to the size of the cheques you write out each month.
For many people, time and money are the same thing.
Optimising Grazing Facilities
Start by looking at where you keep your horse.
If you are lucky enough to have your own land, you have a head start on those of us who have to rent facilities: but are you making the most of it?
For instance, dividing a large paddock into two or three smaller ones may involve outlay on fencing, but you will get better value from your land.
Rotate the grazed sections and be meticulous about pasture management, especially the regular collection of droppings.
If you're not sure about what you should do when, contact your local Agricultural Development Advisory Service (ADAS) office: you'll find it in the phone book under the section devoted to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foods.
It's also worth reading Pasture Management for Horses and Ponies , by Gillian McCarthy, published by Blackwell Scientific Publications.
The majority of owners keep their horses in some sort of livery system, either full, part or DIY.
Obviously full livery is the most expensive, but if your work is particularly demanding and involves erratic hours it may be the only option.
Most people like to try and look after their horses themselves, often with some help from the livery yard owner or a friend who has different commitments.
The advantage of the professional help (i.e. from the yard owner or manager) is that it is guaranteed; you know you won't get a panicky phone call saying ‘Sorry, I can't do your horse because my car's broken down/the kids are ill .’
Outside Help
Don't make the mistake of underestimating the value of a little outside help.
My horse is kept at a lovely yard 13 miles away: too far for many people's choice, but the facilities and the people compensate for the 20 minute drive.
I leave at 7.30am and by 8am have checked Skipper over and given him a small handful of feed in his manger (which seems to keep him happy when other horses are fed and means I don't have to wait an hour for him to digest a full feed).
By 8.45am I've picked out his feet and brushed him off, mucked out, prepared hay, water and evening feed and left them ready.
I then ride, making sure he is cool and relaxed on his return.
Skipper has his breakfast and goes out in the field and I go home and am ready to start work at 10.30am — one of the benefits of being a freelance is that the person who rings up at 10.31am doesn't realise that you are wearing jodhpurs and have dirty fingernails!
I then carry on working, knowing that later that day Skipper will be brought in, checked over and given the feed I prepared earlier.
It may make me sound as if I'm in training for a Blue Peter badge, but it works.
This system is only successful if you are confident that your horse will be treated as an individual and that the people helping you care enough to spot when something is wrong.
In other words, pay as much attention to the owner/manager as the yard when choosing premises.
The Mutual Help System
Some owners manage by helping each other, but this takes a lot of organisation and a failsafe mechanism if something goes wrong.
The usual way is for two people to get together, one doing morning feed and turnout and the other looking after evening feed and bringing in.
Each does his own mucking out.
The mutual help system has to take into account things like holidays and emergency backup.
Non-horsy spouses and relatives can be trained for this role, but they must be willing helpers!
It obviously helps if you can find a yard near home, and most DIY owners find that five to ten miles is the farthest they want to travel.
Benefits such as good facilities can make it worth travelling farther; it's amazing how a well-designed yard can cut down on working time.
When you visit a yard with a view to moving your horse there, try and visualise your routine.
Do you have to walk miles to turn him out or bring him in?
Is muck disposed of on a heap at the bottom of a field, or on to a muck trailer in the yard?
How far do you have to carry hay, bedding and water buckets?
Streamline Your Routine
It's also worth looking at your present routine to see if it can be streamlined.
Get out the pen and paper again and make a list of all the jobs you have to do, from mucking out and turning out to feeding and preparing haynets.
The more unnecessary journeys you can cut out, the more time you can save.
It's all down to time and motion study; fill seven haynets at the weekend and you'll save yourself time in the week.
You can also save time by deciding what is essential for your horse's comfort and what is dictated by tradition.
Throw away all the books that give a stable routine which starts at 7am with morning feed and fills up the rest of the day with activities like quartering and setting fair — most of which none of us have time for!
For the working owner, non-essential grooming is out.
Many people believe that the condition of a horse's coat depends on what you feed rather than how you groom, but whatever your views there is no doubt that as long as his feet are picked out and the parts where the tack touches are clean he will come to no harm.
He won't mind if he has shavings in his tail!
Be Nosey!
Be nosey, and always be prepared to pick up tips from other people.
If you get a chance, watch how things are done at professional yards, where time really does mean money.
Watch other people in your yard, too.
I was fascinated to see a friend train her horses so that she could pick up and clean out front and hind feet from the same side, working in order of near fore, off fore, near hind, off hind.
It might only save seconds, but seconds can make the difference between missing a train and getting to work.
Another friend puts all her bits and pieces like grooming brushes and fly repellent in an old door manger, which she fastened on to the door.
This means everything is to hand and off the floor and she doesn't have to keep going in and out of the stable while she gets her horse ready to ride.
Next month we'll be looking at ways of making the most of your hard earned cash.
Meanwhile, here are a section of money saving tips taken from the recent questionnaires.
If you have some good ideas please let us know.
Hydrophane has kindly donated FOUR sets of polo wraps for the best ones.
Write to ‘Money Saving Tips’ at the usual address.
Make the most of your grazing facilities by dividing up the paddock and being meticulous about pasture management, particularly picking up droppings.
In the ‘mutual help’ system everyone does their own mucking out.
Picking the feet out from the same side can save valuable seconds.
CASH SAVING TIPS
Feed your horse a dessert spoonful of maize or soya oil once a day instead of cod liver oil.
It's much cheaper and just as effective, my horse's coat is gleaming.
Ella Reed, Saffron Walden .
Mix used cooking oil into your hoof oil to make it go further.
You may have to pick out the occasional burnt chip!
L. Young, Herford .
Use a wire dog brush on woolly ponies.
It doesn't break or pull the hair out and it costs less.
P. Lacey, Wroxall .
End of season sale ski jackets make ideal hacking jackets in winter.
The bright colours are safer, too.
P. Hooper, Dyfed .
A disposable nappy is an excellent cover over foot poultices and retains heat.
P. Saunders, Godstone .
Put a dash of baby oil in the tail to give the hair a sheen.
It's much cheaper than the show products.
Sarah Hall, Wooler .
When time means money, book the farrier and routine injections on the same day.
Mine always keep me waiting about.
Anne Brabbin, Littleborough .
Stop smoking!
Ms Lambert, Bradford.
To keep the flies away, crush garlic cloves in boiling water, allow to cool and then sponge over horse.
Heather Slater, Kilwinning .
Use gold top calf milk powder in place of more expensive equine variety.
Use 1–3oz per day, dissolved in warm water.
Fiona Smith, Shipton .
The string from the top of feed bags makes excellent thread for mending rugs and can be dyed with a marker pen where the stitches show.
Melanie Elvy, Faversham .
Cut the bottom off a four pint plastic milk container to make a free food scoop.
Peter Worby, Luton .
Look out for cheap seconds of new leather riding boots.
Mine are fantastic and cost £30!
Lisa Robillard, Totnes.
Diluted TCP makes an excellent fly repellent.
J. Barbour, Bitterne .
READERS' EXPERIENCES
COPPER'S COMEBACK
Today's Horse reader Julie Soybir tells her amazingly courageous story of how she nursed her horse Copper back to full health after he broke his leg.
It was a warm sunny evening on September 18th 1989 when I went to fetch Copper in from the paddock for his evening exercise before settling him down in his nice fresh shavings bed for the night.
He had only been in for a few nights after his first summer holiday in the five years I'd owned him.
I had been walking him around the roads for a couple of weeks and couldn't wait to have him fit again.
I called him as usual, and he answered with his usual whinny but made no effort to come to me as he normally did.
I called again, and again he whinnied.
I went over to him wondering if something was wrong or if he was just being lazy.
I put on his headcollar and tried to lead him but he wouldn't budge.
I gave him a tug and he immediately lifted his near-fore.
It was then I noticed a small cut on his forearm, at least it looked small until it opened up and I realised it went all the way through all the underlying muscles.
At this point a friend of mine appeared, whose house is nearby, so I asked her to call the vet and to bring me a couple of bandages to keep the flies off until the vet arrived.
Copper still wouldn't move but my vet said it was important to get him to his box away from the flies.
After a few rears he managed to move in a kind of canter holding his near-fore out in front of him, never once letting it touch the ground.
By the time we got him to his box it was obvious he was badly hurt.
The vet gave him a strong dose of painkiller, and after waiting in vain for a while to see if the pain eased, she decided to pop back into town to fetch an x-ray machine.
We are very fortunate to live near Newmarket where equine veterinary care is taken very seriously and all sorts of equipment is available.
Copper had to then come out of his box to be near to a power point.
It was difficult to x-ray his leg so far up, and as it was a small machine and needed a relatively long exposure it was hard to get a clear picture with him shaking as the poor boy was doing by this time.
I put him back in his stable again, complete with an enormous amount of bandaging and went home to wait for my vet to phone with the results of the x-rays.
I was hoping for the best, never believing this sort of thing could happen to my own little horse.
Making his own decision
When the vet did ring it was with bad news.
A decision had to be made; or maybe it already had been made by Copper, because if he had decided to lie down before I could get back to him his leg would have been broken irreparably.
He had a spinal fracture of the radius, reaching from the cut down to his knee.
I felt numb but I had to get back to his stable three miles away and tie him up.
My father had to drive as I was pretty upset.
When I got there he was pleased to see me; he seemed to expect us to be able to do something about his leg but of course we couldn't.
Luckily there was a manger in the corner of his box with a tying-up ring next to it so I tied him to some baler twine, in case the worse came to the worse, and put his water and his hay at nose level in front of him.
During the night I visited him every three hours as my vet had told me that if his leg had broken completely it wouldn't be fair to leave him suffering.
In the morning our vet returned and we discussed the situation, with me close to tears.
She said Copper had a 50:50 chance but that his leg may break at any time, not to mention all the problems that come with keeping a horse standing up and not moving for what could be months rather than weeks.
I think that if she hadn't known us; that I was a groom and Copper was pretty sensible, she wouldn't have given me the choice of trying to save him, especially as he was seventeen years old.
I may have been being a bit selfish, but I couldn't bear to lose him in that way, and he seemed to be making such an effort himself, not ever putting weight on that leg and eating as much as he could.
I decided to try for as long as he was trying.
It meant a lot of hard work, dressings to be changed twice a day, support and stable bandages, plus massaging his legs to help circulation.
Apples, carrots, non-heating mix and a nightly bran mash with bonemeal and liquid paraffin was necessary as colic was a very real danger, and of course the three nightly visits.
Terrible thoughts
I must say it was the worst experience of my life, each time I looked over the stable door the most terrible thoughts went through my mind: what if he was lying down?
What if his leg had broken?
I wouldn't be able to live with myself for putting him through that, but then he would nicker to me and I could breath a sigh of relief.
I was shattered pretty much of the time, my sleep was interrupted and I forgot about everything else.
It was a good job I was a groom and didn't need to think to muck-out.
My poor boyfriend was also completely ignored, although he was very understanding, and we are now in fact married!
We had some nasty moments: the first was a week after his accident when the local show was being held in the field behind his stable.
I knew this meant trouble as he was always very fizzy at shows.
Our vet came out early that morning with some sedative, but we needn't have bothered.
He didn't even notice the tannoy, he was already as tired as I was and he could barely stand; I had to keep waking him up as he was swaying.
He also had a couple of mild bouts of colic where we both ended up covered in liquid paraffin.
One night I had to call the vet out at half past twelve as he was sweating and shaking and in obvious pain.
She came out and said he was definitely still in one piece but probably had cramp or pins and needles so we gave him some painkiller.
I was given the option to have him put down at any time, but of course as time went on his recovery was more and more likely and my hopes got higher.
Six months box rest and twelve months total recovery time, with what may be a permanently lame horse, was always a very daunting thought.
After eight weeks and a few x-rays, for which he staggered across his box (we had borrowed an extension lead by this time), I was finally able to get the farrier to take Copper's shoes off, as he had been wearing them for ten weeks.
I could also pick his feet out and deal with the foot-rot which was starting to set in.
Another problem was the oedema he was getting under his stomach and around his sheath.
This is basically the same sort of thing as the filled legs on a horse that has stood in.
It got quite bad after a while and I had to hold hot towels underneath him to get the blood moving.
On top of all that Copper has always had a dust allergy and he got very congested so we had to give him powders to keep his lungs clear.
All through this time he hardly had any painkillers as it was very important he didn't feel that he could use his leg before it was strong enough.
He must have been uncomfortable at the least but he never once even laid his ears back.
I must admit I kept him tied up for longer than I was advised as I wanted to make sure he was capable of moving about safely as he invariably would want to look out of the door and then go back to his food.
The great day came when I finally untied him.
I don't think he lay down for quite some time though as he never had any shavings in his mane or tail for weeks but at least he could move about and that relieved quite a few of his problems.
Improving in leaps and bounds
From that time on he improved in leaps and bounds and eventually, after about seven months, I started gingerly walking him around the small paddock next to his box with a bridle and a lunge rein threaded through his bit and over his head.
He was careful at first but he soon started to leap about and dash off in all directions.
I then started lungeing him and within a few months I rode him out at walk: a very difficult task.
It usually ended up as a slow jog with a buck thrown in for good measure.
It was then getting near the time that I could turn him out, again I put it off, frightened of what he might do.
I got some more sedatives in anticipation, and eventually had to turn him out when he decided one night that enough was enough and kicked several large holes in the stable wall.
By this time something else had become apparent.
Copper had trodden on me a couple of times in the stable, very uncharacteristically, and he also ran into a friend of mine while shying at something, as if she wasn't there.
The vet was called again and a cataract was diagnosed on his near side, which explained everything.
He has since got used to only having one sighted eye although it has given him a few recurring infections.
We entered the very horse show that we had to sit out the year before.
Copper had made a completely recovery, he was as sound as ever although a little on the thin side in an attempt to save his legs.
We even managed second prize in the ridden veteran after a lovely show where, unbeknown to the judge, Copper was pulling my arms out.
I forgave him this time though!
Everyone was so kind and helpful when Copper had his accident, although they all thought I was mad, and I would like to take this opportunity to thank them all, especially Cooper's vet.
I don't want to encourage anybody to take on such a  formidable task, just to say that I'm glad I followed my heart and not my head for once.
Six  months' box rest is a bit daunting!
Copper on the road to recovery in Spring 1990.
If you have an unusual story to tell, whether it's funny, happy or sad, send it to us at Today's Horse, 89 East Hill, Colchester, Essex CO1 2QN, with a few clear photographs and who knows, you may star in Today's Horse!
EQUINE Profile
Stella Havard speaks to Sam Barr , breeder of the famous Welton event horses, about his rising star WELTON AMBASSADOR
‘One of the most important things to say about Welton Ambassador is that he is the result of the union of two great eventing families .’
Welton Louis is Ambassador's sire and Diana Scott's Ben Faerie (sire of Ginny Leng's former top horses Priceless and Night Cap) sired his dam, Minerva.
Sam Barr, supreme breeder of top class performance horses for twenty-odd years is obviously, and quite understandably, proud of his six-year-old bay entire.
Standing 16.3hh, Ambassador was given plenty of time to mature, only beginning his competitive career at the start of the current season, and testimony to his brilliance is the fact that he is only a couple of points away from being Advanced.
‘We have a name for him at home —‘The Joker’, because he's a tremendous personality who loves a leg-pull.
If he senses someone is a little nervous of him, he tries to intimidate them, though his temperament is superb.
His joking apart, his  nature is quite perfect!’
No-one but Leslie Law, his regular competition partner, and Linda, Sam's wife who is devoted to the horses, ever have the pleasure of riding Ambassador.
Being a working stallion who has covered forty mares this season, he leads a fairly busy life.
‘We did say we'd limit him to thirty mares as he's been so busy competing, but somehow we managed to allow our arms to be twisted a few times.
But we actually do A.I. (artificial insemination) here on the farm, and that helps.
We find that it is every bit as effective as the natural service, in fact, though I haven't seen the figures, it might just be slightly better because the mares are inseminated when they are at their most receptive.’
Ambassador's fertility for last season was 89 percent, and his offspring appear to be ideal types to excel in the eventing world.
‘I would say that he is the right stallion to use on near thoroughbred mares to produce the speed needed to achieve cross country optimum times comfortably, because that's where the soundness comes in.
Terrible strain is put on three-day eventers if they are struggling to do the times cross country, and stress can mean injury.
I think that a horse has to be a minimum of 7/8 bred now to become a top class event horse.
That is not to say that the other less thoroughbred horses do not have their place in the eventing world!
In Ambassador we have spectacular looks and movement, stamina, speed, soundness and the proof of all these things in his successes to date.
If anything, Ambassador is perhaps a little too strong for a three-day event horse…’
Ambassador had a month off from competing for his stud duties, but otherwise his preparation was not much different from any other event horse, with hill work figuring largely in his fittening programme.
He and Leslie have regular lessons with Dorothy Willis, mainstay of Ginny Leng's team at Ivyleaze, and he is often schooled over showjumps at the local Hartpury College where the facilities are excellent.
‘I've become very involved there, and they have produced a very good equine studies course ,’ Mr Barr approved.
Ambassador is turned out daily.
‘We don't put him next to other horses, but he can see them clearly, only a field away, and he doesn't fret or bother at all.
He's never oversexed or silly, but then he's been brought up not to be.
We always treat the stallions like geldings, taking care, of course, but they are expected to behave.
The Joker is a very intelligent horse and knows his ‘covering bridle’ which we use on him for his studwork, or his ordinary bridle when he is ridden, and behaves accordingly.
Of course he has a fair number of mares, which makes a great difference.
What you have plenty of, you're not worried about, are you ?’
Ambassador is happy to travel and does not become upset away from home.
‘He's very neat.
He always travels on the back of the lorry where he has to pop up and turn, but he doesn't mind at all .’
Despite most eventers having to be clipped fairly frequently, Ambassador has a very fine coat, as do most entires.
‘The only time I can remember him with any coat at all was when we wintered him out as a three or four-year old, which we did deliberately to toughen him up .’
Minerva, Ambassador's dam, had been leased by Sam Barr from Sir Harry Mallet, and the ten foals she had bred have all been colts, which is a very rare  occurrence .
‘Ambassador is the only one we kept entire, though.
And we always let our prospective stallions have five mares when they are two years old so we can see what type of stock they throw.
We have gelded the odd one if we don't like the progeny .’
It is doubtful that Welton Ambassador will be seen out eventing again this season.
‘He's done wonderfully to amalgamate all those points, he's only been unplaced once, and won his very first Intermediate at Milton Keynes.
We'd entered him in the Novice section, but he'd been upgraded in the meantime.
I haven't decided yet, but I'm considering letting him do a year with one of the best dressage riders.
It was always our dream to have a stallion who is an Advanced eventer, which he practically is, an Advanced dressage horse and a Grade ‘A’ show jumper to provide all-round performance progeny .’
An ambitious idea indeed, but Welton Ambassador is already living proof of the careful breeding plans laid by Sam Barr, and it is a dream well within reach.
Next month: GENEROUS
DRESSING UP
John Henderson takes a light-hearted look at some of the curious dress regulations in the equestrian world
To non-riders dressage must appear to be the art of making the noble horse look like a wally with an even bigger wally on top in fancy dress.
Now, we riders all understand that the movements the horse makes generally have relevance in everyday riding.
However, hand on heart, even if you are a top dressage rider, can you really justify the fancy dress?
No, top hat and tails have no real use other than to make a nervous bridegroom look even more awkward so that everyone can enjoy his discomfort and, therefore, the wedding.
How can someone look elegant with a biscuit barrel on their head?
And off the horse it makes anyone long and slim, like Mark Todd, look like a nail!
But that's what the rules say he must look like, which seems to be a problem with just about every branch of equestrian sport.
Top level evening is a good illustration of how silly it all is.
On the cross country day the riders wear practical clothing for the job in hand, but either side of that they'll wear an outfit like Jimmy Cricket's and go show jumping in a jacket.
What makes it look all the more daft is that they will often have to wear the same number tabard all the way through, which over top hat and tails makes them look like someone wearing his vest over his dinner jacket.
No Logic
The rules often have no logic.
I mean, you can understand that light coloured breeches make it easier for the judge to see where the rider's legs are against a dark horse.
But why don't the rules stipulate that on a grey you have to wear brown breeches for the same reason?
Indeed, the colour of your breeches is very important, at least, if the rules are anything to go by.
The BSJA rules, for example, dictate: ‘Breeches or jodhpurs must be white, pale yellow or fawn colour’.
You can almost hear the old majors in charge of the sport muttering ‘got to be properly dressed’, but the next two rules concern the wearing of hard hats and only ‘recommend’ that they comply with British Standards.
In other words, you could ride into the ring with a home-made hard hat that would have to be accepted if it had a ‘harness secured to the shell at more than two points’, but they can pull you up for wearing black jodhs!
How can the colour of your bum be more important than the safety of your brain, unless the BSJA supports the dressage riders' theory that show jumpers are brain dead anyway?
It's not as if the regulation colours are practical.
Would you wear white breeches for general riding?
It would make far more sense for the rules to say that breeches had to be saddle brown or horse-gob green, which would also stop men riders showing off their underwear.
Visible Underwear!
Look round any showground and you'll see that a hell of a lot of showjumping men buy those striped Marks and Sparks underpants or are Donald Duck fans.
But you never see the horsy nubiles with black lace skimpy things showing through their white jodhs, because women know about these things, unfortunately.
Actually, I'm surprised the rule books don't stipulate ‘no visible panty line’ as they're so concerned about what people look like.
Mind you, as that would increase the likelihood of seeing in real life what's on the cover of Jilly Cooper's Riders , maybe it would be detrimental to showground safety.
(Which, come to think of it, makes it even more surprising it's not in the rule books.)
While on the subject of underwear, I, and many male show-going acquaintances, still haven't got used to the advent of the sports bra.
This would not be a problem if it wasn't for another silly set of rules about what you must wear.
All the rule books seem to say you must wear some sort of jacket — the BSJA naturally stipulate the colours — and in some classes it should even be tweed.
But the showing season is in the summer when the weather  is often too warm for any jacket, never mind tweed.
The result is that riders who want to avoid heatstroke have to wear as little as possible under their jackets and most of us men haven't got used to innocently looking round to see someone undoing her jacket to reveal nothing but a clingy bra underneath!
Most of us are too polite to object, but imagine the embarrassment we could be saved if the authorities allowed people to ride in shirtsleeves in hot weather.
In many cases they already lay down what colour the shirt must be.
After all, in hot weather court judges often allow barristers to speak wig-less so why don't show judges allow riders to remove unnecessary clothing?
Until then the Pony Club riders will look very smart in their shirts while their adult equivalents ride red faced and  harassed .
I know jackets protect your arms from thorns and falls but you don't seem to get brambles or stony ground in show rings.
Tradition vs.
Common Sense
But the whole issue of riding clothes is tied up in tradition and even away from the showground we let horse riding tradition rule our dress.
While other road going sports tend towards high-visibility clothing, riders still favour the natural country colours.
Much as I like  my Barbour, I have to admit it is not a safe colour and wear a reflective Sam Browne belt in poor weather.
But why can't you get something as waterproof and practical in highly visible colours?
It's not as if it'll frighten the horses, because they're supposed to be colour blind: mind you, have seen some of the migraine colour schemes a racing cyclist friend wears I'm not so sure about that!
However, cyclists make a good example because they too are starting to wear hard hats.
If they went for the traditional look I suppose they'd all be wearing hard hats that looked like the flat cap Victorian cyclists always wore.
But no, they wear white to reflect the heat, or bright colours to show up.
Try getting a white or fluorescent riding hat.
The best you can do is silks for a jockey skullcap, but shouldn't we  be able to buy hats covered with light or reflective materials, instead of velvet, for road use?
In addition, cyclists, runners and skiers have now adopted close fitting garments like our jodhpurs for ease of movement, but they don't top them off with ties or traditional jackets to go flapping around while they have other things to concentrate on.
Only in endurance riding, polo and cross country do we see riders wearing sensible clothing.
Riding's governing bodies should be paying more attention to clothing as ‘equipment’ important for safety and performance instead of for appearance's sake.
If other sports had riding's attitude to clothing, Nigel Mansell would drive in a leather flying hat and Ian Woosnam would compete in plus-fours, but one is unsafe and the other unnecessary so the motorsport and golf authorities have not tried to cling to them.
Indeed, in motorsport it's not the colour of your clothes that matters, it's whether they are fireproof, and the regulations stipulate that everything has to comply to the relevant safety standards.
Isn't it about time someone took a long hard look at the laughable regulations on what riders wear and questioned whether they benefit the sport?
A lot of men wear striped underpants.
If other sports had riding's attitude to clothing, Nigel Mansell would drive in a leather flying hat.
Most of us men haven't got used to innocently looking round to see someone undoing her jacket to reveal nothing but a clingy bra underneath.
Drawings by Caroline Finlayson.
‘To the Rescue’
Gordon Wesley BHS (SMT) DABRS answers more of your questions.
RUSHES OUT OF THE STABLE
Q.
Dear Gordon,
My cobby mare is very unhappy about being led in and out of her stable and on occasions rushes out of the stable when I open the door.
Apart from me getting crushed against the door, friends are reluctant to help out — understandably!
She is an angel in all other respects.
Can you suggest why she behaves in this way and how I can prevent injury to everybody in the family!
Name and address withheld.
A.
The first problem appears to be the leading problem.
She clearly has some worry about going in and out and wants to get it over and done with as soon as possible.
I would guess that she has been hurt at some time in the past, probably having banged her head or hip.
Often you will find a horse or pony which never gets over this fear.
At the risk of being insulting, have you got a stable with reasonable dimensions? e.g. door width 4′6″ (1.4m), door height 7′6″ (2.4m).
A very low ceiling or narrow door often worsens the problem.
Perhaps you could glue some nylon padding or stuffed hessian down the sides and at the lintel.
Try offering a titbit, or a small quantity of nuts in your hand as the mare goes in and out at shoulder height.
I do suggest that you never lead the mare in or out without having her on a lungeing cavesson and rope or a bridle with reins…a headcollar and rope is INSUFFICIENT.
Also I suggest you wear gloves.
Carry a small stick, NOT to beat your mare with but tap her on her breast and say ‘Steady’ or ‘Wait’or whatever you find effective.
Take it step by step, but do not jab her in the mouth and be FAIR but FIRM.
With regard to charging at the door, again fear must play part in her behaviour.
Construct a safety bar (which is removable) just below the level of the lower stable door so that when you open the stable door your mare can still rush across, but her breast comes up against the bar.
This will allow her to see out.
You can pop under the bar and put on her cavesson and/or bridle safely.
Good luck.
Afterthought …
Fear of doors, entrances, gates etc. often occurs when a horse has been (unwisely) tied to a gate and has gone off with the gate!!
OR when a gate has swung back on a horse rapping its knees or trapping its foot.
FEAR again is associated with pain.
Whatever the cause, training or re-training is the answer, with FAIR and FIRM handling.
WHAT BREED?
Q
Dear Gordon,
I have recently purchased a yearling filly believed to have come from Bodmin Moor.
I wonder if you can tell me what breeds run on the moor so I may be able to work out her breeding.
She has some spots on her, also some others she was with were spotted.
Could there be a spotted stallion on the moor?
Also is it possible to register these ponies with any society?
Julie Taylor, Siddal, Halifax.
A.
I couldn't possibly tell you what's on the moor at the moment.
Of course, you would expect the native breed i.e. Exmoor and they are registered by the Exmoor Pony Society (address from editor, ‘Today's Horse’).
It is not possible to register any breed of horse or pony unless you are sure or have proof of the parents.
Can you not trace where the pony came from, you say you have recently purchased it?
I am sure that one cannot guarantee 100% what is running on the moor, rather like the problem in the New Forest.
I hazard a guess that there are not only pure stallions on the moor; fate and carelessness always complicates herd life.
I think you will have to research this one on your own as you have the purchase details.
With regard to your pony, if she has creamy/mealy muzzle and eyes and light in colour on an otherwise dark coat, she is definitely an Exmoor.
As to spots, you have a choice of five kinds of spots:—
a)
Leopard — Light or white background with spots of any colour.
b)
Blanket — A white rump or back with spots of any colour.
c)
Marble — A mottled colour with a dark base fading to nearly white with age, not on face and legs.
d)
Frost — White spots or frosting on a dark background.
e)
Snowflake — A dark base with white spots.
SOIL LICKING
Q
Dear Gordon,
I have a small horse which I show jump once or twice a week.
She is fed performance mix with bran and hay twice a day.
When I put her in a small paddock while I muck out, she licks the soil for about ten minutes.
She has a mineral lick which she will not touch.
Will licking the soil do her any harm and will I need to worm her more often as two ponies go in the paddock as well?
She is a TB X Welsh and very active.
She is sixteen years old and gets turned into a field two or three times a week.
Is there anything you can suggest to stop her licking the soil?
E. Pool, Astley, Manchester.
A.
I have never come across the problem of a horse licking the soil…although I have heard of eating droppings (COPRAPHAGIA) and other inedible things such as tree bark, afterbirth,dirt and bedding.
You say that she has a mineral lick — have you tried a plain salt lick?
When performed in normal circumstances, these strange behaviour patterns generally denote depraved  appetite due to malnutrition, extreme hunger, indigestion, dietary deficiency, some kind of physiological upset or even sheer BOREDOM.
And, of course, licking the earth will increase the chance of worm infestation.
I notice that you show jump…does your horse suffer from a dry mouth condition?
A horse which does not produce saliva also does not mouth the bit.
If she has a dry mouth condition offer her a wet feed with the bit in position to teach her to move it about better.
You could always smear sticky treacle on the bit or make sure the bit is always warm before it goes into her mouth.
(Soak it in warm water).
Is the water in your paddock stale or contaminated and therefore not attractive to her?
She may lack something in her diet, obviously in her additives.
Check with your vet and see if her salts and/or trace elements are being satisfied or if she has a vitamin deficiency in her diet.
A blood test will give you the answer to this problem I'm sure.
HATES GROOMING
Q
Dear Gordon,
My eleven year old pony hates being groomed winter and summer.
I don't really know her breeding, but she clearly has some Arab in her and has a soft thin coat.
She has other vices.
What can I do?
I always get into trouble at Pony Club rallies for not grooming her enough.
I have had her three years.
Liz Carter, Lacock, Wiltshire.
A.
Perhaps she was roughly treated before you owned her.
This is usually the reason for restlessness or fear of grooming.
Often young riders break all the rules at Pony Club due to not organising themselves, so here goes with some do's and don'ts;
a)
Don't scrub sensitive areas i.e. belly and head with a dandy brush.
b)
Don't bash your pony with the back of brushes.
c)
Don't use a metal or hard plastic curry comb on the body.
d)
Don't drag at manes and tails with the wrong implements.
e)
Do use the correct brushes and combs on the correct part of your pony's anatomy — and use them tactfully.
Even a soft body brush can feel uncomfortable if the bristles are stuck into the skin.
Try it out on yourself first!
Well bred and thin coated ponies have sensitive skin.
Groom these ticklish areas with a stable rubber, tea cloth or your hand and work at it gently .
Cut down the grooming time but do it quickly, efficiently and calmly .
Play some sweet music NOT noisy ‘pop’ and talk to her all the time.
Always groom with a hay net nearby…grooming with ‘grub’ is a good association.
Don't jump from grooming the back of the pony to the front, i.e. making sudden movements.
Try someone else holding the pony in hand while you groom and talk if tying her up is a problem.
I am sure you will win her over with patience , but it might take weeks rather than hours or days.
A sturdy chain makes a useful alternative to a bar.
Groom ticklish and sensitive areas with a stable rubber.
FORUM
GINNY LENG ANSWERS YOUR CROSS COUNTRY AND EVENTING QUESTIONS
CONCUSSION WORRIES
Q.
Dear Ginny,
I Novice BHS Event my 16hh mare and sometimes over the last two seasons, these Events have taken place over very hard ground.
I am especially worried about my horse's legs.
What can I do to minimise the concussion I am sure my mare must have suffered?
I often cold hose her legs but is there anything else I can do?
A.
The simple answer I'm afraid is don't run your horse!
The last two summers have been very hot and dry, although this summer has luckily been a great deal better.
I feel you should pick and choose your events carefully, do not run each weekend and if it is hard do not go too fast.
Organisers do try very hard to help us by rotavating.
This is a great help and you may be able to find out if events intend to rotavate by asking around, or speaking to a competitor who rode at the competition the year before.
My farrier, Robert Hall, goes to great lengths to soak leather pads in oil before putting them on our horses front hooves under the shoes.
This does help a little.
Concussion is the main worry concerning feet and joints.
I'm afraid cold hosing will have little or no effect in helping concussion, it will however help filled and puffy legs.
Be cautious — remember the season is a long one, so try to run your horse on suitable ground.
EVENTING KIT
Q.
Dear Ginny,
I am a relatively new competitor to eventing.
Could you tell me what kit I might need for the cross country phase for both horse and rider?
I am a little nervous and want to return home safe and sound!
I am also very concerned should say my girth break or part of my bridle.
Is there anything I can do to safeguard against this?
A.
Starting with the rider, you should buy a BHS standard crash helmet, a black protector,(the best on the market is a Tipperary body protector which you can buy through Hydrophane stockists which is expensive but very good), a hunting tie (stock), string gloves (leather gloves slip when wet), breeches with no leather and safe and comfortable boots are all essential.
Remember to fill in your medical card and place it inside your hat in case of injury.
Always take a friend who can drive your transport in case you do get injured or the poor organisers will be left with unattached horses and vehicles all over the place!
Your horse will need good shoes and studs, boots (leather) or tendon protectors correctly bandaged and sewn, not taped, over reach boots, webbed girths and an over girth.
Make sure you've regularly checked all tack and equipment for stitching etc.
A good, well fitting saddle with numnah, safe stirrups and leathers and regularly checked stitching on bridles and reins.
You could attach a bootlace from the last mane plait to the top of the bridle to keep the bridle on in case of a fall.
The secret is to check your tack every week.
The stitching can go rotten in a very short space of time and remember when you start the cross country course, ride with confidence or do not start!
Your horse can feel your mood and will act accordingly!
ROADS AND TRACKS
Q.
Dear Ginny,
I am fascinated by the roads and tracks and the steeplechase phases in Three Day Events.
Could you please explain to me the principle behind these phases?
I am intrigued to know how you work out the speed on the roads and tracks and how you know when to trot and when to canter?
I would be very grateful if you could shed any light on the phases for me.
A.
The speed and endurance section of a Three Day Event is divided into four parts — sections A, B, C and D — which aim to test the stamina of the horse as well as its ability cross country.
Phases A (which must be shorter) and C are the ‘roads and tracks’, a fairly long distance to be ridden at a speed of 220 metres per minute,(a good trot, on average).
Phase B in the steeplechase and phase D, what eventing is all about, is the cross country course.
At a three day event, you've already done quite a distance by the time you get to do the course!
As a general guide line the total length of the roads and tracks are as follows: Advanced: 9900–13700m Intermediate: 9900–13700m Novice: 7920–9900m
The three day event originated from the military, proving a horse's speed, stamina and talent.
Since then it has been adapted and we now use phase A as a warm up for the steeplechase and phase C as a ‘let down’ after the steeplechase.
No competitor rides the roads and tracks in exactly the same way.
I tend to use each kilometre as a ‘four minute trot’.
Obviously, if you canter part of the way you will be able to walk.
Therefore, if you allow each kilometre four minutes on phase A you can either trot OR walk and canter.
Some people like to have a sharp canter to warm up for the steeplechase, I prefer not to.
Having completed the steeplechase, I let the horse canter along for about half a kilometre, then I allow him to walk for nearly a whole kilometre, bearing in mind, you will most likely have to ‘make up time’ later on.
Be sure to realise the steeplechase and roads and tracks are separate.
So if you went much too fast on the steeplechase, you do not have extra time on  phase C. Therefore, it is important to get the timing right.
Too fast would tire the horse unnecessarily while going too slow would incur time penalties.
It is trial and error and depends a lot on the type of horse you are riding.
The best way to practise is to mark out two or three kilometres and practise on your individual horse.
MILTON at home and abroad
In this exclusive pre-publication extract from Milton, Gillian Newsum describes Milton's life at home and abroad.
By all accounts Milton is a bit of a lunatic at home — particularly when he is taken out exercising.
‘He'll spook at anything ,’ says his rider John Whitaker, ‘and the trouble is he doesn't just look at the thing, he'll jump six feet in the air and then do the splits when he comes down again.
He's like a small child who is so busy peering at something that he doesn't look where he is going.
One day he shied away from an empty crisp bag and fell into a ditch.
I had to climb off and lead him out, and he was covered in mud all down one side .’
Because of his uncontainable high spirits only John and his second rider, Tracey Newman, ever take Milton out on exercise.
The responsibility can weigh heavily, ‘He's a hairbrain on the roads ,’ says Tracey.
‘I always take him out in knee-pads, and usually put on exercise bandages, as we are still wary of his split tendon operation.
It has never given him any trouble, but we've always kept an eye on it.
We do a lot of road work with him to keep him fit, but he's such a liability; I'm always worried that he'll come down on his knees.
He trips up quite a bit anyway when he's walking along.
I think he just doesn't pay attention and he's quite lazy with his feet .’
If it is windy Tracey will not risk taking him on the roads, and instead exercises him in the school, but she never jumps him.
Her objective is to keep him fit between shows, which in the Yorkshire Dales is not a problem; the horses at Heyside Farm have to climb a substantial hill just to get from the stableyard to the road.
Some horses need to be slightly less fit to give their best performance, otherwise they become too difficult to control, but Milton goes better the fitter he is.
He is ridden up and down the hills at home and, when the weather is reasonable, taken for gallops once or twice a week.
He jumps at home only when he has had a long rest and needs a quick reminder of what the job is all about; otherwise his jumping is confined to the shows.
‘He's such an easy horse to prepare ,’ says John.
‘I've never had any problems with him .’
When Milton is resting he is turned out during the day, but he has to be put in a field without much grass because he is incurably greedy and, given the opportunity, gets very fat in no time at all.
He has a wood shavings bed in his stable, otherwise he would eat all the straw, and he frequently has to go on diets, which make him grumpy.
‘A lot of people probably think he is too fat when he is jumping ,’ says John, ‘but he seems to be better for carrying a bit of weight; he has more energy.
I tried getting him slimmer once as I thought it might help him to jump even better, but it didn't suit him.
We've experimented with him a bit over the years, and I think we've got it about right now .’
When Milton goes in the field he is usually turned out on his own.
John likes to keep the horses separate so that they don't kick each other, but Hopscotch often jumps into Milton's paddock to keep him company; and sometimes if the weather is bad, one of the children's ponies is turned out with him, otherwise Milton, who is a bit of a softy, will hang around by the gate in the hope that someone will take pity on him and take him back to his warm stable.
For a horse who has a fairly relaxed outlook on life, Milton has a surprising number of phobias.
One of these is a fear of wires and hose-pipes, the sight of which will set the springs in his legs going.
For this reason the series of electric fences around the fields at Heyside Farm, put up mainly to prevent the young horses leaning over the top of the rails, has to be switched off whenever Milton is turned out.
‘I think that if he touched the electric fence when it was on, he'd be frightened to death and we'd never get near him again ,’ says Penny Stevens, his groom for the last five years.
He is also neurotic about being clipped.
He has always been very bad about it, which is why he injured himself at Steve Hadley's yard, and even now John has to dope him before he is clipped.
‘We try to give him a little less tranquilliser each time, so that he might gradually get over it, but he doesn't seem to get any better.
It's something we've just had to accept, and we try to clip him as little as possible.
He's always been quite sensitive about having his girths done up and things like that.
He'll nip you and then make a run for it.’
Pulling his tail is also a major performance.
John's wife Clare has to stand outside the stable on a crate with Milton's tail over the top of the stable door and pull it from there, while John has him twitched at the front end.
‘Otherwise he'd kick you from here to Barnsley ,’ says Penny.
All in all Milton keeps the Whitaker establishment on its toes.
He is likely to knock you off your feet just being led across the yard if he can find anything to spook at, and when it comes to removing rugs he is something of a Houdini.
He has little difficulty in pulling summer sheets and other light rugs straight over his head, even if there are straps under his tummy, so at night he has a rug with leg straps to keep it in place.
During the day he can often be seen looking like an overgrown pit pony in a thin, rather dirty New Zealand rug which has so far survived all his attempts at removal.
Milton has lived in the same stable all the time he has been with the Whitakers.
He used to be next door to Ryan's Son, but now Hopscotch is in Ryan's old stable.
‘I try not to show any favouritism to the horses ,’ says John.
‘I think you can spoil them, and Milton gets spoiled enough at the shows.
I don't think he should be treated any differently from the other horses.
Of course he's worth a lot of money, but you can't wrap him up in cotton wool .’
So at home Milton is just one of the others, although he seems to have enough tricks up his sleeve to ensure that he gets his own way most of the time.
When Milton goes to a big international show it is a different story.
He undergoes a personality change, from being just ‘one of the others’ at home in Yorkshire, to being show jumping's superstar.
The crowds adore him, and he knows it.
When he enters the arena he commands attention, initially because of his beautiful colour, but he has the presence and personality to hold audiences spellbound throughout his performances.
His extravagant action, his grace, his poise and his enthusiasm combine to produce a perfect jumping machine, and people soon realise that they are watching something exceptional.
‘There are a lot of things that make Milton so good, but the most important is that he wants to do it ,’ says John.
‘He loves jumping, and he loves the atmosphere, especially at the indoor shows where it is more immediate — a packed arena with a receptive crowd seems to lift his performance.
He has the scope and ability as well.
When other horses are reaching their limit, Milton always seems to have a bit more in reserve .’
When people say that Milton and John are suited it is not just in their ability.
They both have the right personality for the job.
Under pressure, when some horses tend to fall apart, Milton responds by jumping even better, while John stays cool and professional.
‘When you go into a competition that you know you can win, and you know that people expect you to win, then there is a lot more pressure on you than on someone who is less well known.
I try not to think about it; I just block it all out and concentrate on what I am doing in the ring.
‘At the World Cup final in Gothenburg, for example, I tried to treat each day as a normal day, doing my best in the individual classes and not worrying about the final result.
Everyone gets nervous before big competitions, but I think I've learnt to control my nerves.
You have to get yourself worked up a little bit, or you don't give your best.’
Both horse and rider have the calm, ‘laid-back’ outlook that is so necessary for the sort of life they lead.
Milton has never been bothered by the constant turmoil of his worldwide travels.
As long as he gets his food and sleep —‘and a bit of show jumping in between ’— he is quite content.
John has the enviable knack of being able to fall asleep virtually anywhere — taxis, aeroplanes, airports, hotel lounges.
He travels light, sauntering from aeroplane to passport control with his hands in his pockets and, seemingly, without a care in the world, while others struggle with bags, briefcases and duty-free, looking hot and bothered.
Milton gets bored when he travels.
‘He's usually bored before the box has left Yorkshire ,’ says Penny, who travels to most of the shows with him.
‘He gets a bit bolshie in the box, and paws at the floor.
If he starts being really difficult and kicking at the partitions we sometimes have to put hobbles on him.
Fortunately he is always good to load.
The only things he doesn't like are the narrow ramps on to aeroplanes, so we have to get behind him with a broom.
He usually travels well, but he did get a bit upset on the way back from the World Cup final in Gothenburg when we had a very rough crossing.
Touch wood, I've never had to dope him on the lorry.
I always carry some with me, but I hope I never have to use it because I don't think I'd get near him with the needle .’
For a horse who usually takes everything in his stride Milton has an inexplicable and very strong aversion to syringes.
This creates quite a serious problem at shows because he frequently has to be dope-tested after a successful performance.
‘He's had so many vets on the floor ,’ says Penny.
‘They go to put the needle in him and he leaps forward at him.
It usually takes about three people to hold him.
When you have got the needle in, it's a battle to get the syringe on, and then it's difficult to get any blood out of him because he's so tense .’
Milton accompanied by his miniature replica, Bo-bo, Joanne's Shetland pony, John often rides with his children, and the two eldest are already keen on jumping.
Milton performing his party trick — a dramatic leap into the air — after winning the World Cup final in Gothenburg, Sweden, 1991.
In Sickness and In Health
The Today's Horse vet Mark Lucey BVM&S, MRCVS, looks at STRANGLES 
Cases of strangles were rarely reported in the ‘60's and ‘70's but the disease appears to be seen more often these days.
In our practice we have seen two separate outbreaks of strangles recently.
Strangles is an acute disease caused by infection with a bacteria called Streptococcus Equi.
It is characterised by inflammation of the upper respiratory tract and the development of  abscesses in the adjacent lymph nodes of the head.
The most important fact to remember is that it is highly contagious and one case can very easily develop into a large outbreak unless prompt and very strict isolation of any case is done.
Young horses are usually most susceptible and we have seen several cases associated with stud premises.
It only needs one horse to come to a stud or livery yard premises incubating the disease to start a large outbreak.
Clinical Signs
The incubation period between picking up the infection and showing the first clinical signs is four to five days and during this time the animal appears clinically normal.
The first clinical signs are dullness, reluctance to eat and usually a temperature rise to 103F–105F together with a runny nose which starts watery but soon becomes a very thick yellowy discharge down both nostrils.
These early signs can be easily confused with a viral respiratory infection and any horse showing a raised temperature and dullness should be immediately isolated before your veterinary surgeon is summoned.
The characteristic swelling of the lymph glands between the lower jaw often take several days to develop and these signs usually confirm a strangles case.
The lymph nodes are very painful and can take up to ten days to burst and then exude a thick yellow pus.
The nasal discharge and the discharge from the  abscesses is highly infectious and this is how strangles is spread to other horses.
Horse to horse contact directly or via feed, water troughs, pasture or stable fittings pass the infection to susceptible horses.
Active cases must be well isolated so that disease free horses cannot come anywhere near infected cases.
Attendants treating clinical cases should wear separate overclothing to stop infection being spread on clothing or footwear.
 Abscesses form classically under the lower jaw but can occur in other sites.
A fairly common place is below the base of the ear or in the upper neck area and this can affect swallowing or cause breathing difficulties.
Once the  abscesses burst, they usually discharge for several days before gradually healing up often with an obvious scar which can remain visible for several months.
Nasal swabs or swabs taken directly from discharging  abscesses can be cultured to confirm the presence of the casual bacteria.
These can be grown up as a pure bacterial growth in a veterinary laboratory.
Treatment
The treatment of strangles is a combination of antibiotics and local treatment of the abscesses.
Penicillin is usually the antibiotic of choice.
It can sometimes be difficult to decide when to start antibiotic therapy.
Unless started very early in the course of the disease, antibiotics do not prevent the development of abscesses and can sometimes just delay their development.
Unless the horse is very sick or the swelling is severely affecting eating or breathing, it is sometimes better to delay antibiotics until the abscesses come up to a head and burst.
I think antibiotics should be used in young animals as they can become very ill with strangles.
Also if abscesses come up in sites other than between the lower jaw antibiotics should be used as these abscesses can get very large without treatment.
Owners ask why abscesses cannot be lanced early to help relieve pressure.
However, abscesses should never be lanced until there is an obvious soft spot in the centre of the swelling.
Once an abscess has burst or been lanced it should be bathed off twice daily with warm salty water or very mild Dettol solution.
Abscesses can be hastened to burst by fermenting the swollen painful area with hot compresses.
This should be done three or four times daily.
One fact which people often forget is that horses which have passed the acute clinically ill stage of the disease will still remain infectious for up to six weeks or possibly even longer.
One way of telling whether a horse has completely eliminated the infection is to take follow-up nasal swabs.
Recovered cases should not be mixed with uninfected horses until nasal swabs are clear of any bacterial growth.
Complications
With modern antibiotic therapy, death from strangles is almost unheard of, but there are several complications which can occur after the disease.
I have seen several horses develop to be roarers or whistlers i.e. develop laryngeal paralysis as a result of strangles.
This can occur if abscesses develop behind the angle of the jaw in the throat regions as the re-current laryngeal nerve can be damaged.
Another possible condition which can occur is purpura haemorrhagica.
This occurs about four or five weeks after apparent recovery and results in all four legs suddenly swelling up tremendously and the development of small haemorrhagic spots on the lips.
It is not known why this occurs in a few animals after strangles infection.
It may be an allergic reaction or residual bacteria remaining in the body and affecting the circulation.
Purpura haemorrhagica is difficult to treat, and prolonged antibiotics and cortisone therapy is used.
In conclusion, always treat any horse which develops a sudden temperature rise and respiratory signs as potentially infectious and always isolate any cases.
Spread of the disease can already have occurred by the time the characteristic abscesses develop.
Immediately contact your own veterinary surgeon and follow his/her advice carefully.
Isolation of affected cases must be very rigorously followed, or you will end up with a large outbreak on your hands.
Strangles is a nasty disease that is still seen too frequently.
In the UK, there is no vaccine licensed for use in its prevention, but a vaccine is used, I believe, in New Zealand and some other countries where it is still a relatively common disease.
Remember that cases which have apparently recovered, can remain as carriers for a considerable time and can only be detected by laboratory isolation from nasal swabs .
A typical strangles abscess on the underside of the lower jaw.
Photo from the Equine Veterinary Manual (The Crowood Press).
A horse that has apparently recovered completely can remain a carrier for a considerable time and therefore should not be mixed with uninfected horses until nasal swabs are clear of any bacterial growth.
Carolyn's Diary
warts and all!
In the third part of our series,Carolyn Henderson charts the progress of her four-year-old, Skipper.
After a couple of days in his new home Skipper was much more relaxed; he no longer jumped at every sound and soon learned that when I arrived on the yard in the morning, it meant food.
Getting him to eat was no problem, but preventing him throwing his food around or trampling it into the floor was.
There was no reason to change his diet (based on Bailey's Meadowsweet mix, Haymix and sugar beet) as he looked well on it.
Like many short coupled horses, he is a good doer and I soon get used to people saying ‘Is that all your horse gets to eat ?’ in amazement.
The trouble was that he likes to throw his food around, which inevitably led to waste.
We tried everything: a corner manger, a bucket in a tyre and even tipping the food on the ground.
Finally we found the secret.
His food goes in a corner manger and a brick goes in with it; the weight of the brick means he can't throw the manger about and we can only assume that its bulk gives him something to think about.
He's happy to eat round it, leaves the manger clean and eats more slowly, which is obviously better for his digestion.
Choosing Skipper's Tack
Now that he was starting to feel at home, it was time to start work.
When I bought him he had been ridden in an ordinary jointed snaffle, so it seemed sensible to stick to the mouthpiece with which he was familiar.
He tended to come behind the bit, so I wanted a fixed bit to encourage him to take a contact rather than a loose ring one.
Full cheeks are a definite help with steering on a green or ignorant horse, so we opted for these.
Even though he was teething, he was not particularly resistant, so there was no reason to use anything other than a plain cavesson noseband.
A martingale would also have been superfluous, though I did buckle a stirrup leather round his neck to give a ‘just in case’ neckstrap.
Lungeing
It seemed a wise precaution to lunge him first, as he had not been ridden for three days, and this was accomplished in a corner of the field without either difficulties or a great deal of finesse.
I don't know if he had been lunged before, but he didn't seem to have much idea about it and was wary of the lunge whip at first.
We started with parallel leading, where the trainer and horse are about six feet apart and move forward in straight lines.
The lunge whip is carried in the outside hand, pointing down the back.
It didn't take long for Skipper to realise that the lunge whip wasn't a threat, and we progressed to some rather wobbly circles.
In this situation you have to forget the textbook method of standing still and pivoting on one foot while the horse trots a beautiful circle around you: Skipper walked and later trotted a big circle and I walked a smaller one.
After a couple of halfhearted bucks he settled and found the whole thing rather boring.
Rather than mount from the ground, which can take some young horses by surprise just when you don't want to, I opted for a leg-up and repeated the walk, trot and half transitions.
Our First Venture
So far, so good.
Now it was time for our first venture out; luckily the yard was situated amidst very quiet roads, and my husband John had been loaned a schoolmaster called Paddy to act as escort.
Paddy is wonderful, a 16.3hh grey gelding who has been everywhere, seen everything and done everything from hunting to eventing.
He is totally traffic proof and is the perfect confidence giver.
Our first ride lasted for just 45 minutes; most of the drivers we met were considerate and took notice of the ‘Slow please, young horse message emblazoned on my tabard.
One idiot tried to shoot past us, but a combination of Paddy's bulk and John's succinct turn of phrase persuaded him that this would not be a good idea.
All I wanted to do for the first few weeks was to let Skipper get to know me and his surroundings.
At this stage we didn't have a proper school to work in, so most of his education took place out hacking.
Like any young horse, Skipper was more interested in his surroundings than his rider.
He soon realised, though, that he was expected to listen to me as well.
At this stage I couldn't expect him to be on the bit, but nor did I want him slopping along.
You have to be in control on the roads, and you can't do that ambling along with loose reins.
The aim was for Skipper to be on the bridle, as racing people say: walking in a relaxed but energetic rhythm and accepting the bit.
Some people say that trotting on the roads helps harden the horse's legs while others maintain that too much trotting mean too much concussion on legs and feet; I follow the latter view and so we stayed in walk with the occasional gentle trot uphill.
Working Alone
After two rides in company we went out on our own, on a route he had already covered with Paddy.
A lot of people say that you shouldn't hack young horses out on their own for months, if at all, but I've always preferred the theory that if horses don't learn to go out alone from the start you set up problems for later on.
Obviously you need to take your horse's temperament and your surroundings into account, but if you can get him working alone as soon as possible you are less likely to have to cope with him napping later on because he can't bear to leave his friends.
Right from the start, Skipper was happy to take the lead on a hack; if he had shown reluctance we would have kept his nanny in the background until his confidence grew.
Someone who has been training horses for years once told me that the most important thing is to keep your youngster ‘thinking forwards’.
That means that if you decide you want to go one way and he has other ideas, you have to convince him that your wish takes priority.
A Minor Disagreement
Our first minor disagreement of this kind came when we met a large puddle on a woodland track and Skipper decided he couldn't possibly get his feet wet.
In the end, he didn't — he started bouncing, so he got one hard wallop and promptly jumped it from a standstill.
I couldn't really blame him, as most horses are suspicious of water at first, especially when they can't tell how deep it is.
Over the next few days we went paddling everywhere we could, starting with mud and graduating to small and then larger puddles.
The day came when the road was flooded and Skipper waded through it with no hesitation.
It's little bits of progress like that which make riding young horses so much fun.
Inevitably we have silly problems, but so far nothing has been insurmountable.
For instance, Skipper was not impressed with my suggesting that he should stand still while I got on and wait until I asked before moving off.
We dealt with this by getting someone to stand at his head and reinforcing the message with the verbal command ‘Stand’ which he had learned on the lunge.
At first he was asked to stand literally for a couple of seconds before being praised and asked to walk on.
Gradually the time was increased, though I had to be careful not to ask for too much.
The important thing in this case was to reward him for being good rather than punish him for being naughty — if you scold or hit a young horse for not standing still you will only make matters worse.
If Skipper had been an older horse who knew what he should do and was simply messing about, a reprimand might have been in order.
As it was, he didn't understand that he had to stand still, because he hadn't been taught that this was required.
As show jumper and trainer John Bunyan told me on our first lesson (see next month's diary): ‘You have to work out the difference between ‘Can't’ and ‘Won't’.
If a horse is being naughty then you have to punish him in some way — but don't punish him if he doesn't understand or is physically incapable of doing what you've asked.’
‘It didn't take long for Skipper to realise that the lunge whip wasn't a threat, and we progressed to some rather wobbly circles’
This tabard is a vital part of our hacking uniform.
Farm tracks present all sorts of spooky hazards that Skipper learns to negotiate.
‘Reward a young horse for being good rather than punish him for being naughty’
BODY LANGUAGE
If you could read horses' minds, wouldn't riding and handling them be easier?
Jane Lucas explains how you can gain an insight into horses' feelings by the physical signs they give out.
If you could read horses' minds, wouldn't riding and handling them be easier?
You could tell whether a horse's misbehaviour was due to fear or plain stubbornness.
You would know if your horse was in pain or feeling ill.
Summing up a strange horse's temperament would be simple, allowing you to avoid being kicked or bitten.
However, if mind-reading is beyond your ability, you can gain a real insight into horses' feelings and moods by the physical signals they give out.
Posture
The horse's posture and muscle tension, shown mainly in the head, neck and tail carriage, is a good indication of the horse's mood.
The greater the horse's level of stimulation, whether due to excitement, fear or sexual arousal, the greater the muscle tension and therefore the higher the carriage of head and tail.
This is because the horse is physically preparing himself for action — running, fighting, playing, courtship etc.
At the other extreme, a sick or tired horse will display a very low carriage, with his tail drooping and his head and neck very low.
A relaxed horse will be somewhere between the two, with little tension in the head, neck and tail, maybe a rested hindleg, but still showing interest in his environment.
Facial expressions
The horse has great scope for facial expression due to the large number of facial muscles — 10 for the nostrils, lips and mouth and 13 for each ear.
The nostrils, chin and lips offer many clues to the horse's state of mind.
In the relaxed horse the nostrils, chin and lips will show no tension, often to the extent that the bottom lip will hang open.
In the event of the horse being stimulated, perhaps by a strange noise or object, the nostrils will be flared to catch any scent and the muscles around the mouth will be contracted, resulting in tightened lips and a dimpled chin.
As a general rule the greater the level of stress, the greater the tension apparent around the mouth and nose.
The horse's ears are capable of great movement, almost 180° rotation, and are usually directed at the object of the horse's attention.
A strange object or sound will result in the ears being fully pricked in the direction of the stimulus, in order to pick up any relevant sounds.
A ridden horse which is concentrating on his work will often turn his ears back towards the rider, indicating his willingness to obey the rider's next aids.
On the other hand, a ridden horse with his ears pricked forward is probably concentrating on an object or another horse it has seen, which could result in a shy or other forms of misbehaviour.
Ian Stark once said of his great mount Murphy Himself that if Murphy's ears were really pricked while they were going round a cross country course that he was probably out of control!
Ears which are turned to the side and are at ‘half mast’ indicate that the horse is relaxed, and therefore does not feel the need to listen out for danger.
Flattening the ears back makes them less vulnerable to damage, so occurs when the horse is feeling frightened or aggressive.
Eyes are another means of expression in the horse.
Half closed eyes mean the horse is relaxed, bright, open eyes mean the horse is alert and rolling eyes indicate fear or aggression.
Dull, unfocused eyes indicate pain or illness.
Timidity and Fear
If a horse encounters a strange object and is lacking in confidence, it will extend his head and neck to allow investigation of the object.
This is often seen when a young horse is introduced to something new, such as a brightly coloured jump.
The horse may also snort, which clears the respiratory tract, thereby increasing his smelling ability and also allowing ease of breathing if the object proves to be dangerous and flight is necessary.
If the horse feels there is a real threat his body muscles will be prepared for flight, resulting in a high head and tail carriage.
The horse will try to protect his sense organs by lowering his eyebrows (frowning) and laying back his ears.
Frequent dunging may also occur, in order to lighten the horse's bodyweight should a speedy escape be required.
If the threat is from behind, the horse may attempt to protect his rear end by tucking his tail between his legs.
If the threat does not recede, then the horse's natural reaction will be to run away — an instinct which can cause great problems in the ridden horse!
Aggression
The aggressive and frightened expressions are very similar — high head, neck and tail carriage, flared nostrils, rolling eyes etc — because most aggression is actually the result of fear.
However, the aggressive horse will be preparing to fight rather than flee, which will manifest itself in bared teeth and the head and neck being extended with a thrust, ready to attack.
If the offending animal or human does not back off, then this threatening behaviour may be followed by a lunge or charge and attack with the teeth.
Defensive Behaviour
If a horse is forced to defend himself, perhaps being cornered and therefore unable to flee, he will turn around and present his rump and maybe lift or stamp a hindleg, signifying his intention to kick.
If the threat still persists, he will let fly with one or both hindlegs.
Submission
Submissive gestures are used to try to avoid being attacked by a more dominant animal.
The head and tail carriage will be low and ears will be turned back.
A young horse will often open and close his mouth (mouthing) to an older horse, as a gesture of submission.
Irritation
A horse will register his disgust or irritation by wrinkling his nostrils, tossing his head and swishing his tail.
The source of irritation may be flies, an unpleasant smell, ticklish grooming or an unskilled rider.
Horses often display these signs when asked to perform a difficult movement, and will be marked down for resistance in a dressage test.
Confusion
The confused horse will be in a state of conflict, torn between two or more courses of action.
For example, he may be faced with a frightening object which he does not wish to go past, and yet is being urged on by his rider.
His confusion will be indicated by the rapid movement of his ears and eyes between the sources of conflict, as he tried to decide what action to take.
He will have a high head and tail carriage, flared nostrils and a tense mouth.
Friendliness
The relaxed, friendly horse will adopt a fairly low carriage, with little muscle tension, eyes and ears will be relaxed as will the muscles around the mouth and nostrils.
A horse may often indulge in mutual grooming with a companion horse, and he may also do this to a human he likes and trusts.
He will lengthen his nose to allow him to nuzzle and may make nudging movements with his head to attract attention.
A rub on the withers from you is often greatly appreciated in return!
Horse/Human Communication
As horses do not utilise verbal communication as humans do, they rely on interpreting the body language of their companions.
For example, if one of a group of grazing horses spots what may be a predator, he will raise his head, neck and tail and flare his nostrils.
This change in posture will alert the other horses who, in turn, will also ready themselves for flight, in case the threat proves to be real.
This tendency is often exploited when introducing a young horse to new situations, such as traffic.
By riding him in the company of a mature schoolmaster, the youngster will gain confidence from the other horse's relaxed carriage.
This responsiveness to body language also  affects the way horses react to humans.
For example, a nervous handler or rider will transmit his nervousness to the horse, while a confident rider will make a young horse feel more secure.
The more time you spend with horses observing their behaviour, the more effectively you will be able to judge their moods.
If you have your own horse, make a point of noticing his expressions and postures in different circumstances, and whether they preceded any particular type of behaviour.
You will soon come to recognise his normal expressions, and will instantly notice when they differ, indicating he is ill, frightened etc.
You will then be able to forge a rewarding and successful relationship with your horse.
The closed eyes are an indication that the horse is relaxed.
The ridden horse's ears may be at half mast indicating that he is relaxed and listening to his rider.
Photos: Kate Finlayson.
Here, the mare is clearly showing signs of irritation while the youngster is mouthing in a gesture of submission.
HOME STUDIES
Do you have a desire to learn?
Vanessa Britton suggests some courses to improve your technical knowledge.
If you want to learn more about horses you either have to go and work in a training yard or enrol for a college-based course — right?
Wrong!
For today, more people than ever before are studying at home, through Equestrian Open Learning Courses.
Studying at home is not the lazy option, which many people think it is, for it needs commitment.
There is nobody making you study, you have to motivate yourself, dedicating a certain amount of time to a better appreciation of the horse and its care.
The advantages of studying at home are that you yourself can choose where, when and how to study.
There are no time limits so study can be matched to the available time you have.
The disadvantage, of not gaining any practical experience of the knowledge you acquire while working through the course, can be overcome.
Once you feel confident that you know what to do and why it should be done, you can put your knowledge to the test, choosing the time and place most suited to your own circumstances.
School leavers, or inexperienced people joining the industry often get jobs in riding schools or competition yards where they gain practical experience.
They know how to do certain tasks, because they have been shown — but do they know why they are doing them?
Some do, but often instructors in busy yards do not have the time to explain why.
So, an employee in this setting would benefit from learning the theory at home.
Suitable Candidates
Open learning is suitable for many people: for the interested housewife; for people working full or part-time with horses; for those working in other industries who are keen on horses; for people who are about to embark on courses at colleges or training centres, helping them to prepare for what lies ahead; to update knowledge; or for experienced competitive horse owners or weekly riders — in fact anyone who finds it impractical to pursue their equestrian education by conventional means.
Open learning courses can be immensely rewarding as you succeed totally through your own effort and commitment and the only deadlines are those you impose on yourself.
No formal qualifications are required for enrolment and young or old are all potential candidates; all that is needed is a desire to learn.
There are two established equestrian open learning courses in Great Britain, both for professional or personal advancement.
One is Equi Study and the other is Briar Enterprises and there is also a Saddlery Home Study Course.
Types of Courses
Equi Study, the longest running of the courses, was started in 1982 by horse owners who understood the difficulties of improving equestrian knowledge conveniently and affordably.
They claim to offer ‘the widest range and the best courses available in the UK, which are written and produced by highly qualified and often nationally recognised experts…’
Their courses are based on the BHS and National Vocational Qualifications (NVQ) standards, which will certainly complement your practical training for these exams, although you do not have to work towards taking any exams to follow any of the courses.
The course material does follow the syllabus of each of the BHS examinations and can be bought separately or as a complete package — with or without tutor support.
The Assistant Instructor Series is made up of courses covering the BHS  stages I, II & III and PTT, which make up the BHSAI.
The Intermediate Instructor Series is made up of courses covering the BHS Stage IV and IT which make up the BHSII.
Briar Enterprises started in 1987.
It is run by a closely integrated team which mark and assess all work and as they say ‘having chosen to study with us, we can assure you of the highest standards of personal attention, help and guidance throughout your course …’
While the courses do not follow the syllabus of any particular professional examinations they are complete courses in themselves and could be used in preparation for BHS exams.
The Completely Crucial Guide to Pony Care course, is designed for junior horsemasters and is unique.
Basic Stable Management , is designed as an introductory course and students could follow on to the Senior Horsemaster Course 1 and then onto the Senior Horsemasters Course 2 which is an equivalent level of study to the BHS Stage IV.
Saddlery Courses
The Saddlery Courses are designed for people wishing to earn a full time living from making and repairing saddlery or for anyone who just wants to supplement their existing income, as they state ‘whatever you want from this course, either to earn money or to save money, it is designed for you .’
No true craft can be learned overnight, but with time and patience and the correct teaching it is possible to reap the rewards which one of the oldest crafts can bring.
Once learned, the skill will always be there, whether as an aid to repairing your own saddlery or as a source of income.
Anyone who might be thinking of embarking on one of their saddlery courses should be aware that some specialist tools will need to be bought.
There are a variety of ‘lessons’ included in the course and each can be bought separately, so if you only want to know how to do repairs, then that is the only lesson you need buy.
Alternatively you can buy all lessons as a complete package.
The best thing to do is to apply for further details of any of the courses which interest you.
All three send out very detailed information which should help you to decide whether open learning really is for you.
Further information available from:
Briar Enterprises , The Old Barn, Felsham Road, Cockfield, Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk IP30 0HP.
Equi Study , Hole House, Haltwhistle, Northumberland NE49 0LQ.
Saddlery Courses , 56 Grange Cross Lane, Newton, Wirral L48 8BQ.
Open learning — all you need is pen and paper and a desire to learn.
Once learned, saddlery is a skill which will always be there when you need it.
It is important to put what you have learned into practice.
FORUM
JENNIE LORISTON-CLARKE ANSWERS YOUR DRESSAGE QUESTIONS
Q.
Dear Jennie,
Please could you describe the aids to me and how they should be used properly.
I have become confused recently and would appreciate a clear explanation.
A.
We used aids to control and balance our horse.
Firstly we have the Natural Aids .
These are the seat and body, the legs, the hands and the voice.
These aids are used as signals to the horse to tell him what we would like him to do.
To perform the aids correctly the rider must have a firm steady seat and be able to use each leg and hand independently of the other.
The body must be upright yet supple and able to move with the horse.
The horse has to be taught to answer the aids correctly by intelligent use of the aids and instant reward of obedience.
The Artificial Aids .
These are the whip, spur, and martingale.
These are supplementary aids to the legs and hands and can be used for correction and help to teach the horse to answer the aids more readily.
The application of the aids is very important and the horse has to be taught their use.
In the early stages and with a young horse the aids must be very clear and definite until the horse understands what is being asked of him and when he responds he must be rewarded with a stroke on the neck and soothing voice.
The first essential movement is forward motion, for this close both legs with a light vibration, straighten the body upwards and lighten the reins slightly.
Move with the horse.
Having moved into the required pace then keep the horse balanced between your seat, legs and hands, by applying more leg into a restraining hand if the horse is falling on his forehand.
In this case, one rein keeps the balance the other bends the horse and directs, depending on the direction of movement.
For instance the outside hand balances the inside hand directs.
If you are trying to keep the balance then the seat is upright with the diaphragm taut.
When the balance is correct then you just sit and ride forward with your legs closed gently round the horse riding him up to a soft contact on the reins.
To decrease the pace, tighten your knees a little, grow tall in your body and then close the lower leg and ride forward into a restraining rein.
As the horse responds lighten the rein and ride forward again or relax aids until you require another movement and reward with your voice.
To use the seat .
You strengthen your body and raise your diaphragm for riding forward and raising the horse's forehand.
For downward transitions you tighten your buttocks and straighten your upper body also closing knees at the same time.
The Legs .
To use the legs for forward riding, vibrate the lower leg if no response reinforce with a flick with the whip then reward with the voice.
For sideways riding again vibrate one leg until the horse steps to the side then reward.
The hands or rein aids .
The rein aids should be soft and allowing, the reins should be held in the hand with the fingers closed round the rein.
The tension in the rein very much depends on the individual, but the aim is to be soft and easily acceptable to both the horse and the rider.
The horses should learn to accept the contact and the rider teaches the horse to accept the rein aid by adjusting the feel in the rein with the forward riding of his seat and leg aids, the hands control the impulsion created by the seat and leg aids but must also take care not to restrict the forward movement.
The Voice is a very important aid especially when training the young horse.
The voice is normally used to soothe and reward a horse, it is also used to tell the horse to trot and canter etc. when used more sharply, as when lungeing and can also help teach the young horse the aids when first starting to ride the horse.
The horse is taught to answer the voice when being lunged so this is all he knows when you first start to ride him.
So the voice plus the seat and leg aids start your horse in his first steps when mounted and the same applies for the downward transitions.
As the horse learns from the voice to listen to the seat, leg and rein aids then you gradually dispense with the voice and only use it for rewarding when he is good.
The Whip is an aid to reinforce the leg aid should the horse not respond.
It should be used lightly but positively if required and the horse quickly rewarded when he responds.
The whip is also used for correction when needed it should be used with discretion and never to vent one's anger on a horse for one's own inadequacies.
Firstly make sure your aids are clear and understandable before using the whip.
The spur is a refinement of the leg aid and should be used carefully.
The leg must be in control and in the correct position so that the spur is near the horses side and not constantly niggling and annoying.
The spur should be used occasionally and not constantly when riding your horse, misuse of the spur will make the horse ‘dead to the leg’ and will lose its effect.
The Standing Martingale .
This can be used when riding a young horse but if the horse is correctly taught from his early breaking and training is not usually necessary.
If the horse has been badly trained and throws his head up then it can be a useful aid until you have taught him to accept the rein aids.
HORSE CUISINE
TRADITIONAL FEED v COMPOUND
Which is best?
This month our equine nutritionist Zoe Davies MSc compares traditional methods of feeding with ‘balanced’ compound feeds.
No matter how you feed your horse, somebody else (usually a self confessed expert with little or no qualifications) has always got a better way.
Many horse owners today cannot draw upon years of experience and therefore rely heavily on advice from others.
Feeding and nutrition of horses is one of the few areas where independent specialist advice is quite difficult to find even though feeding is one of the most important aspects of horse management.
There are still plenty of myths and old wives tales surrounding feeding and some of these may be positively harmful to the horse.
So how do modern day compound feeds compare with traditional cereal feeds?
Grass has been the main diet for horses since the horse evolved and although it varies in nutritional quality throughout the year it does provide a balanced diet for most animals who are not working or breeding.
Obviously in the winter it still may not provide enough and will have to be supplemented with concentrates and this assumes that the pasture has been well maintained and is not overstocked.
The DIY horse owner may well find it difficult to get good facilities and will have to use more concentrates and/or good quality hay to compensate.
Increasing Nutrients
When we ask the horse to work or reproduce itself we know that their requirements for nutrients (ie Energy, Protein, Vitamins and Minerals) increase.
We provide these nutrients by feeding concentrates.
In the UK we traditionally give grain based feeds but remember that these would not naturally be present in the feral horses' diet.
Traditionally, we relied on cereals such as oats, barley, bran and flaked maize, with occasional succulents and mashes.
However, feeding weekly mashes with different ingredients from the daily feeding routine is effectively producing a sudden change in diet, something we are continually told not to do because of the potentially harmful results.
We now know that straight cereals are deficient in some of the more important nutrients.
They are not designed to exactly match the horses requirements.
Scientific analyses have now shown that certain protein and mineral deficiencies can cause developmental problems in growing youngsters and decreased performance in working horses.
We need to look at the nutrients contained in straights and rectify any problems, so let's take a look at some average values in the table below.
ENERGY:
Comparing the energy values of mixes with straights you can see that they are pretty similar.
The energy value is measured in Megajoules per kilogram of feed and this is similar to calories.
It is interesting to note that on a descending value of energy, maize is greatest followed by barley, followed by oats.
Many people believe the opposite is true.
Oats are a ‘safer’ feed in that they contain more husk.
CRUDE PROTEIN:
This is a crude chemical assessment of the protein level of a feed.
The cereals would appear to contain enough protein for working horses but certainly not enough for pregnant, lactating (producing milk), or growing horses.
These levels are misleading any way because they do not give a true indication of the ‘quality’ of the protein.
This can be partly determined by the amount of lysine (an essential amino acid) present.
(AMINO ACIDS ARE THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF ALL PROTEINS).
The level of lysine in straight cereals is less than half what the horse requires for hard work and reproduction.
Feed manufacturers make up this deficiency in their compound feeds for hard work and stud purposes, ie they ‘balance’ the mixture.
CALCIUM &  PHOSPHORUS :
These are major minerals in the horses' diet but calcium is very often deficient in equine diets, particularly in those fed straights.
Looking at the table we can see how low the calcium level is in cereals.
This can have disastrous consequences for growing horses who need calcium for bone formation.
In addition, muscles require calcium to work efficiently so a deficiency can cause problems with hard working horses as well .
The horse needs a higher calcium level than  phosphorus level in the diet, but if you look at all the cereals we can see the opposite exists.
This must be rectified because a higher  phosphorus level will interfere with calcium absorption in the  horse's gut creating further problems.
Some horse owners try to correct this major imbalance themselves by adding bone meal to youngsters' diets.
This simply creates a further imbalance because not only does it increase the calcium level (which we need), but it further increases the phosphorous level as well(which we don't want).
Ground limestone is a good source of calcium as is sugar beet but again too much supplementing can cause further imbalances particularly amongst other minerals in the diet.
One advantage of complete mixes is that these problems have been corrected by nutritionists who work for the compound feed manufacturers.
So we can see that feeding straight cereals can cause problems if we don't supplement the deficiencies correctly.
Also straights can vary tremendously in quality although the same can be said of some compound feeds by the way!
Reputable feed companies take most of the ‘guesswork’ out of the nightmare of trying to balance diets for horses with different needs.
They are also able to add vitamins and minerals in the form of premixes, to match the requirements for growth, or work etc.
Obviously their main aim is to make money, but many feed companies do provide an excellent nutritional service.
If you need further help or information contact them direct.
Cubes can be very useful for horses with allergy problems, particularly if they have been steam pelleted.
This helps to ‘clean’ the feed and reduce dust levels.
For those horse owners who want to ‘see’ what they are feeding their horses, the coarse mixes can provide the answer.
The trick is to find a feed that your horse enjoys and which provides him with all the nutrients he requires to do the work you are asking of him.
If you are able to balance straights yourself or have asked a nutritionist to do it for you all well and good, but for the horse owner with little or no experience in feeding, compound feeds are the answer.
Also, bear in mind that for the single horse owner a bag of coarse mix will be used up while the feed still retains its value.
If separate bags of nuts, bran, oats and sugar beet for instance are used, all will be stale by the time they are finished.
Although many compound feeds are designed to be fed on their own with pasture or hay,(ie not mixed with other cereals) some manufacturers make ‘balancers’.
These are mixes which are designed for the horse owner who still wants to feed traditionally ie oats etc, but wants to make up the deficiencies with a specific mix.
There are balancers for working horse and stud purposes and these are often ideal where, for example, oats are being home grown, or a supply of top quality oats has been found.
When buying your feed, ask the merchant about ingredients and nutrient levels in different mixes.
Remember they can vary tremendously in nutritional quality and the cheapest is usually not the best.
If they can't help you speak to the feed companies themselves, and if they cannot give you the information you want don't buy their feed, its as simple as that!
Next month Zoe Davis discusses the conservation of various forages such as hay and haylage .
A deficiency in calcium would be disastrous in growing horses, where it is essential for bone formation.