

PART ONE
Innocent Enjoyment
‘When a felon's not engaged in his employment
Or maturing his felonious little plans,
His capacity for innocent enjoyment,
Is just as great as any honest man's!’
W. S. Gilbert,Pirates of Penzance 
CHAPTER ONE
Henry Farr did not, precisely, decide to murder his wife.
It was simply that he could think of no other way of prolonging her absence from him indefinitely.
He had quite often, in the past, when she was being more than usually irritating, had fantasies about her death.
She hurtled over cliffs in flaming cars or was brutally murdered on her way to the dry cleaners.
But Henry was never actually responsible for the event.
He was at the graveside looking mournful and interesting.
Or he was coping with his daughter as she roamed the now deserted house, trying not to look as if he was glad to have the extra space.
But he was never actually the instigator.
Once he had got the idea of killing her (and at first this fantasy did not seem very different from the reveries in which he wept by her open grave, comforted by young, fashionably dressed women) it took some time to appreciate that this scenario was of quite a different type from the others.
It was a dream that could, if he so wished, become reality.
One Friday afternoon in September, he thought about strangling her.
The Wimbledon Strangler.
He liked that idea.
He could see Edgar Lustgarten narrowing his eyes threateningly at the camera, as he paced out the length of Maple Drive.
‘But Henry Farr,’ Lustgarten was saying, ‘with the folly of the criminal, the supreme arrogance of the murderer, had forgotten one vital thing.
The shred of fibre that was to send Henry Farr to the gallows was —’
What was he thinking of?
They didn't hang people any more.
They wrote long, bestselling paperback books about them.
Convicted murderers, especially brutal and disgusting ones, were followed around by as many paparazzi as the royal family.
Their thoughts on life and love and literature were published in Sunday newspapers.
Television documentary-makers asked them, respectfully, about exactly how they felt when they hacked their aged mothers to death or disembowelled a neighbour's child.
This was the age of the murderer.
And wasn't Edgar Lustgarten dead?
He wouldn't, anyway, be known as the Wimbledon Strangler, but as Henry Farr, cold-blooded psychopath.
Or, better still, just Farr, cold-blooded psychopath.
Henry liked the idea of being a cold-blooded psychopath.
He pictured himself in a cell, as the television cameras rolled.
He wouldn't moan and stutter and twitch the way most of these murderers did.
He would give a clear, coherent account of how and why he had stabbed, shot, strangled, gassed or electrocuted her.
‘Basically,’ he would say to the camera, his gestures as urgent and incisive as those of any other citizen laying down the law on television, basically I'm a very passionate man.
I love and I hate.
And when love turns to hate, for me, you know, that's it.
I simply had no wish for her to live.
I stand by that decision.’
Here he would suddenly stare straight into the camera lens in the way he had seen so many politicians do, and say, ‘I challenge any red-blooded Englishman who really feels.
Who has passion.
Not to do the same.
When love dies, it dies.’
Hang on.
Was he a red-blooded Englishman or a cold-blooded psychopath?
Or was he a bit of both?
Was it possible to combine the two roles?
Either way, however he did it (and he was becoming increasingly sure that it was a good idea), his life was going to be a lot more fun.
Being a convicted murderer had the edge on being a solicitor for Harris, Harris and Overdene of Blackfriars, London.
Even Wormwood Scrubs must have more to offer, thought Henry as he rattled the coffee machine on the third floor, than Harris, Harris and Overdene.
It wouldn't be so bad, somehow, if he was any good at being a solicitor.
But, as Elinor was always telling him, Henry did not inspire confidence as a representative of the legal profession.
He had, she maintained, a shifty look about him.
‘How could you expect anyone to trust you with their conveyancing?’ she had said to him, only last week.
‘You look as if you've only just been let out on parole!’
Glumly, Henry carried his coffee along the dark corridor towards the stairs that led to his office.
‘Office’ was a grandiose term for it really.
‘Cupboard’ would have been a better description.
It was a room about eight to ten feet square, offering, as an estate agent with whom Henry was dealing had put it, ‘a superb prospect of a ventilator shaft’.
It was, like so many other things in Henry's life, more like a carefully calculated insult from the Almighty than anything else.
He would give himself a treat today.
He would go up in the lift.
He stabbed angrily at the button.
Mr Dent from the third floor, who was waiting by the lift doors, looked at him narrowly.
‘Can't you tell —’ his eyes seemed to say, ‘that I have already pressed it?
Surely you realize that when the button is illuminated someone has pressed it?’
Henry, before Dent was able to start talking to him about lifts, weather, the Law Society or any of the other things that Dent usually talked about, headed for the stairs.
He pushed open the door and, as he put his foot on the first step, experienced a revelation comparable to that undergone by Newton in the orchard or Archimedes in his bath.
He could kill Elinor, very easily and no one need know .
The implications of this were absolutely breathtaking.
No one need know.
He said it aloud to himself as he trudged up the stairs.
No one need know.
Of course.
No one need know.
Every minute of every day people were being murdered.
Hundreds of people disappeared without trace every year.
No one ever found them.
The police were all, as far as Henry could see, totally incompetent.
They spent their time hiding behind low stone walls and leaping out at motorists travelling in bus lanes.
They liked people like Henry.
People like Henry, white middle-aged men who lived in Wimbledon and had one daughter, were their idea of what British citizens should be.
One young constable had come to the house last year when they had been burgled and, very laboriously, had written the details of the crime into a book.
He had looked, Henry thought, like a gigantic blue infant, a curious cross between cunning and naïveté , a representative of an England that was as dead as the gold standard.
Henry had tried to tempt him into making a racist statement by announcing that he had seen a black person outside the window two weeks ago, but all the constable had said was ‘You don't see many coloureds in this part of Wimbledon.’
He said this almost with regret, in the tones of a disappointed birdwatcher searching for the great crested grebe.
Nobody would ever suspect Henry.
Because — he was well aware — most people thought he was something called a Nice Bloke.
Henry was never quite sure what being a nice bloke entailed — it certainly wasn't much to do with behaving scrupulously well towards one's fellow man.
If it meant anything at all it probably meant other people thought you were a bit like them.
To most of those who knew him Henry was just eccentric enough to be terrifyingly normal, and even his carefully calculated bitterness, the quality of which, on the whole, he was most proud, had become, in early middle age, a Nice Dry Sense of Humour.
I'll give them nice dry sense of humour, he thought savagely as he came out on to his floor and lumbered towards room 4038, I'll give them nice dry sense of humour and then some.
I'll give them the real Henry Farr, and he won't just be making witty little remarks about the London orbital motorway either.
Of all Elinor's friends he was the least likely to be suspected of her murder.
She had, even at their wedding, surrounded herself with people, nearly all of whom were interesting enough to warrant the close scrutiny of the police.
Many of them, to Henry's horror, openly smoked drugs.
One of them wore a kaftan.
Two wore sandals.
And they still trooped in and out of his house occasionally, looking at him pityingly, as they talked of foreign films, the latest play at the Royal Court and the need for the immediate withdrawal of armed forces from Nicaragua.
Sometimes they sat in the front room reading aloud from the work of a man called Ian McEwan, an author who, according to Elinor, had ‘a great deal to say’ to Henry Farr.
Oh yeah, thought Henry grimly as he passed 4021a, his coffee threshing around dangerously in its plastic beaker, and Henry Farr had a great deal to say to Ian McEwan as well.
The trouble was, of course, that among Henry's sort of person, a rugby-playing surveyor, for example , or the kind of dentist like David Sprott who wasn't afraid to get up on his hind legs at a social gathering and talk, seriously and at length , about teeth, he was considered something of a subversive.
At their wedding, all those years ago, his friends, all of them even then in suits and ties, had nudged each other when he rose to answer his best man.
‘Go on then,’ he could see them thinking, ‘be a devil!’
But as his eyes travelled across to Elinor's crowd, with their frizzy haloes of hair, their flowered dresses and carefully arranged profiles, he realized that there was nothing he could think of to say that would persuade them he was anything other than a boring little man.
But there were certain advantages in being considered boring.
And if they wanted him to be boring then that would be the performance that he would offer.
He would be so stunningly boring that even the bankers, account executives, product managers and stockbrokers he counted as his friends would start to back away from him.
He would play up to Elinor's friends' idea of what he was.
He would play the part of the upright citizen, the dull wounded little man whose horizons were bounded by the daily journey to the office, the suburban garden and the suburban sky, set around with suburban roofs and neat suburban trees.
He cut a little caper as he walked along the corridor that led to his office, recovering a quality that had suddenly become important to him — his drabness.
He would be drab.
Drab drab drab drab.
He would be as drab as Crewe railway station.
As drab as a not very important mayor.
He would blend into Wimbledon until he was indistinguishable from the trees, the homing children, the lollipop ladies, or the gables on the red brick houses.
And they would never, never find out that he had done it.
When he came into the office, past Selinda his secretary, an elderly woman who was constantly asking him to give her ‘something interesting to do’(How could he?
Henry himself never had anything interesting to do), he squeezed close to the wall and coughed to himself in an extra drab way.
He left his office door opened and, for the next hour, treated her to a stunningly drab conversation about the searches on a leasehold flat in Esher.
When she put her head round the door and asked in her usual, conspiratorial manner if he wanted tea, Henry said, ‘Tea would be a delight, my dear!’
He said this in a high-pitched monotone that was intended to convey boringness; he was, however, he could tell from Selinda's expression, trying a little too hard.
He pulled out a correspondence file between a landlord and tenant in Ruislip — nearly eighty pages devoted to conflict over responsibility for a dustbin area — and tried to concentrate.
How was he going to do it?
Murder should not, he felt, be unnecessarily complicated.
It should have a clean, aesthetic line to it.
It should involve as few people as possible.
Oneself and the victim.
If it was like anything, thought Henry, it was probably like the art of eating out.
His first thought was to do something to the Volkswagen Passat.
That would have the advantage of getting rid of both car and wife at the same time.
If there was anything that Henry hated as much as his wife, it was the car they had chosen and purchased together.
He had hated the little brochure that described it — the pathetic attempt to make it look glamorous, the photographs of it, posed, doors open, doors shut, desperately trying not to look like what it was — a square box with hideous speckled seats.
The Volkswagen Passat was about as glamorous as a visit to the supermarket, which was what it was principally used for.
The people in the photographs in the brochure — a man, his wife, his two children and his stupid, stupid luggage, his folding chairs, his folding table, his hamper, his sensible suitcase packed for his sensible holiday — were exactly how Henry imagined the advertisers thought of him.
A man called Frobisher-Zigtermans — a person who insisted on not remaining anonymous during the transaction — had described it as ‘all car’.
‘It's all car!’ he had said.
‘I'll say that for it!’
And, as Henry smiled and nodded damply, he thought to himself, Is that all you can find to say about it?
‘It's all car.’
Can't you talk about its roadholding?
Its incredible power over women?
You can't, can you?
Because you think I wouldn't respond.
Because you think I'm as boring as this car.
Which is why I'm buying it.
Just thinking about his car made Henry want to hire an electric hammer and run with all convenient speed to Wimbledon, to fall upon its bodywork with screams of rage.
He would saw through the brake cable.
Not right through.
Almost through.
He would do it tonight, Friday, just in time for the weekly trip to the supermarket.
Elinor would turn left up Maple Drive, left again into Belvedere Road, left again on to the hill…and then…oh then…
Except she didn't go to the supermarket, did she?
He did.
Which was one of the many reasons, now he thought about it, why he was planning to kill her.
How did one saw through a brake cable anyway?
It was no good chopping the thing in half, was it?
Your victim would catch on before accelerating to a speed likely to be fatal.
You had to saw it halfway through, didn't you?
Henry wondered where the brake cable was, what it looked like, whether it was the kind of thing to which you could take a saw.
The trouble with this sawing-halfway-through lark was that you had no control over where and when the thing was likely to break.
Christ, it might even be when he was driving!
Even if she was sitting next to him, complaining about his driving, her own imminent decease would not compensate for the depression generated by his own.
Ideally, of course, Elinor would be driving her mother somewhere.
Somewhere a little more interesting than Wimbledon Hill.
Somewhere, well, steeper…
Henry sat for quite a long time thinking about the conversation between Elinor and her mother as they hurtled down the Paso della Lagastrella, brakeless.
‘Darling,do something!’
‘I'm doing something, darling!’
‘Oh darling, we're going to die, oh my God !’
‘I know we're going to die it's not my fault, oh my God !’
He thought about the soaring, almost optimistic leap the Volkswagen would make as it cleared the edge of the cliff (from Henry's memory of it there was no safety barrier on that particular stretch of the Apennines).
He thought about the long, long fall and then the flames, way below.
About the immense difficulty that would undoubtedly be experienced by rescue teams.
It was five twenty-nine and fifteen seconds.
In just forty-five seconds he would get up from his desk, take his coat and walk past his secretary.
He would say ‘Goodnight all’(although she would be the only other person in the room), and then he would take the lift down to the chilly autumn street and Blackfriars station, all soot and sickly neon.
And from there he would rattle back to Wimbledon and his wife of twenty years.
Henry sat in his chair as the seconds ticked away.
But when the large hand of his watch passed the twelve, he did not move.
He sat and stared at the desk in front of him, the creamy whorls in the wood, the tanned grain.
And he thought about the endless mystery of objects.
CHAPTER TWO
It was dark by the time Henry reached home.
The lights were on in all the houses up Maple Drive.
At number 23 the Indian was seated, motionless, in his bay window.
On the top floor of 32, Mrs Mackintosh stared nervously out at the dark street.
Mrs Mackintosh had Alzheimer's disease.
‘Has my husband gone out now?’ the expression on her face seemed to say.
‘Or is he due back at any moment?
Or perhaps he's here somewhere in the house, lurking behind a chest of drawers, waiting to spring out at me.’
Only last week she had told Henry (who had lived in Maple Drive for twelve years) that she wished to welcome him to the neighbourhood.
On Wednesdays she was driven by her sister to something called the Memory Clinic, where Henry imagined some ghastly psychiatric version of Kim's Game being played.
Not that Henry's memory was getting any better.
Only the other day…
Only the other day what?…
At 49 all the curtains were drawn and at 51 Mrs Archer had left the front door open, perhaps in the hope that Mr Archer would return.
Mr Archer had left her four years ago for a married man with a beard who lived, people said, in Shepherds Bush.
In his own house the curtains were open, the light was on and he could see a young girl with a pigtail, seated at the piano.
She was playing ‘Für Elise’, very, very slowly and cautiously.
Next to her was a woman with long black hair, a stubby nose and the kind of jaw found on actors playing responsible sheriffs in cowboy films.
As the girl played the woman dilated her nostrils and rose slightly off the piano stool, as if someone was drawing her up by an invisible wire attached to the crown of her head.
When the child reached the bottom of the first page the woman darted forward, black hair swinging across her face, for the kind of effortful page turn that would have upstaged Paderewski himself.
‘Behold!’ the gesture seemed to say.
‘I turn the page!’
The child struggled gamely on to page two but Seemed to suspect that, after a page turn of this quality, anything else was liable to be an anti-climax.
Henry watched the woman for some time.
Her broad shoulders.
The determined set of her upper torso.
Her grim concentration on her child's performance.
Mrs Elinor Farr.
The mother of his child.
Should he, perhaps, push her off a cliff?
They could go down to Beachy Head.
Wander along the edge of the cliff.
Some remark, along the lines of ‘Oooh look!
Over there, dear!’
And then a smart shove in the small of the back.
But how to persuade her to go to Beachy Head?
Let alone to stand near the edge of a cliff.
And suppose, as she fell, she clutched on to him?
Or, suspecting what was up, dodged smartly to one side when Henry made his move?
Henry saw himself in the air, high above the sea and the shingle, spread out like a starfish, Elinor above him, cackling wildly.
She was going to be difficult to kill, no question about it, thought Henry.
She had that dogged look about her.
Sighing, he let his key into the lock.
His daughter was see-sawing, inelegantly, between E natural and D sharp.
Maisie had managed, somehow, to make Beethoven's tune sound like a tired police siren; when it dropped a fourth to B natural she paused, fractionally, before playing the note; it sounded, as a result, like a burp or a fart.
At the cadenza, she stumbled down the keyboard with something that had elements of a flourish but ended up sounding more like a digital coronary, an awful, shaming collapse of the fingers that, at the last minute, recovered itself and looked as if it might turn into something like the chord of A minor.
Such was not its destiny.
As Henry removed his coat and set his briefcase down, Maisie's fingers, like demented spiders in a bath, ran this way and that, in any direction, it seemed, that might lead them away from the wistful logic of the melody.
All Mrs
Craxton's pencilled annotations on the manuscript (Sudden drop!!
Fingering here, Maisie !!!), all of O. Thurmer's revisions, phrases and fingering, all four hundred and sixteen pounds-worth of tutorials suddenly slipped away and Maisie Farr hammered the keys of the piano like a gorilla on amphetamines.
Henry paused on his way upstairs.
He loved music.
Why was Elinor in charge of Maisie's piano lessons?
He had never really been allowed near his daughter.
She had been presented to him, rather in the way she had been presented to her mother, ten years ago, by a Jamaican midwife, in Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton.
Served up, thought Henry, and not always graciously.
Sometimes she was served up garnished with prizes, a certificate of excellence in swimming or a merit card from a teacher, but more often than not she was slapped down in front of him like a British Rail sandwich, garnished with a series of medical complaints.
‘She needs grommets!’
Elinor would squawk, pointing at her daughter in the gloom of the kitchen.
Or else, ‘Her chest!
Listen to her chest, Henry!
It's awful!
Listen to it!’
And Maisie would stand like some artist's model, exhibiting her diseases as if they were her only claim on him.
perhaps a few blows to the side of the head with an axe?
Or an electric fire tipped into the bath one afternoon?
Henry liked the idea of his wife dying in bath gear.
The thought of her twitching her last in a plastic hat, face covered with green mud, carried him through to their bedroom (a room Elinor had taken to calling ‘my’ bedroom) and shored him up against Maisie's rendition of the second subject in ‘Für Elise’.
F major did not help her any, he reflected, as he struggled out of his ridiculous businessman's shoes.
The trouble was, all these methods were now the staple diet of Radio 4 plays.
just as cliché haunted Henry's daily journey to the train, his socks from Marks and Spencers', his regular nightly bedtime, his fondness for a cup of tea at ten thirty in the evening, just as he seemed to be destined to be as remorselessly English as the plane trees in the street outside or the homecoming commuters clacking through the twilight towards the village, so his one existential act (hadn't someone called it that?) seemed destined for suburban predictability.
Why couldn't he roast her in oil?
Hurl her into a pit of snakes?
Inject her with a rare South American pois — The word ‘poison’ had scarcely formed itself in his mind before Henry knew, with the sweet certainty that accompanies most forms of conquest, that he had found his métier .
He wasn't, clearly, the Mad Axeman of SW23.
He was not, could not be the Southfields Strangler or the Rapist of Raynes Park.
But the Wimbledon Poisoner!
He stood up, walked across to the mirror and there studied his reflection.
Then he said, aloud —‘The Wimbledon Poisoner’.
First ideas were always the best.
He removed his jacket, trousers, shirt, tie and underclothes and studied himself in the mirror.
A fat man of forty with an improbably long penis and a dense mass of wiry pubic hair.
A face, as Elinor was often telling him, like a deviant grocer's.
A few thin strands of black to grey hair and a nose that looked like badly applied putty.
An out-of-date Englishman.
At the thought of the word ‘Englishman’ Henry stiffened to attention.
He straightened his shoulders (straightened one of them anyway.
It seemed to be impossible to straighten both at the same time) and thrust out his chest.
Don't be down!
There was some go in him yet!
By stealth and devotion to his craft he might yet give something back to the class and the country that produced Crippen.
What did England produce now, by way of criminals?
Louts who could go no further than ill-thought-out violence on street corners.
Where were the classic murders that had once held the attention of the world?
The patient, domestic acts performed in this country of fogs and mists that had made English murderers the doyens of the civilized globe.
These days, the average Brit's idea of a crime was a drunken assault on a Pakistan grocer.
He would do it, and he would do it slowly, exquisitely.
He grasped his penis firmly in his right hand and agitated it.
It stiffened with blood and, like a dog sighting its lead, throbbed with anticipation.
Henry removed his hand and wagged his index finger at his member.
‘Not yet!’ he said.
‘We need all our energies for the task ahead!’
He had remembered (how could he have forgotten?) that the suburb had once boasted a poisoner almost as celebrated as Henry intended to be.
A really first-grade monster.
A beast.
A ravening wolf in sheep's clothing.
Everett Maltby.
Chapter 24 (Appendix), Volume 8 of his book.
Where was the section on Everett Maltby?
It was always going missing.
Sometimes you would find it wedged next to‘Witchcraft in Stuart Wimbledon’ and, later, it would appear in the middle of ‘The Impact of the Black Death on South West London’.
He padded through to the room that Elinor described as his ‘study’.
Henry thought of it more as a shrine.
It was here that he completed income tax forms, read carefully through the property pages of most of the local newspapers and, most sacred of all, worked on his Complete History of Wimbledon .
The title alone had cost him two weeks' work.
It couldn't be simply The History of Wimbledon (there was a book with that title — it didn't matter that it had been published nearly two hundred years ago).
It had to be something that would give the prospective punter some idea of the staggering depth and scope and thoroughness of Henry's work.
Suggest to them the fact that when they had finished this one they would know absolutely bloody everything that could be possibly known, now and for always, about Wimbledon.
That there would be no escape from the great wall of knowledge Henry was propelling in their direction.
He opened the desk drawer and took out a page at random.
It was from a rather combative chapter somewhere around the middle of ‘Wimbledon in the Ninth Century after Christ’.
‘We read’, he read, ‘in Richard Milward's unreliable, tendentious and often plainly wrong book Early and Mediaeval Wimbledon that ‘in 878 a Danish army took up winter quarters just across the river at Fulham.
Nothing is known of its activities, but Vikings normally maintained themselves by raiding the country within a wide range of their base.
So Wimbledon would have been very fortunate to have escaped without some damage .’
(My italics.)’
He had hit Milward pretty hard, thought Henry, but he had been right to do so.
Standards were standards.
The thought of Milward cheered him up, and he got up and went over to the bookcase where the offending pamphlet was stored.
He opened it and chose a sentence at random.
He was not disappointed.
‘During the Bronze Age — 2,500 to 750 BC the first metal objects appeared in Wimbledon.’
What did the man think he was doing?
Had he no notion at all of historical method?
The sentence conjured up, for Henry, bizarre images, ancient and modern.
He seemed to see men in winged helmets lounging around Frost's, the late-night delicatessen, or peering oafishly into the windows of Sturgis, the estate agent.
From there, he allowed the Vikings more licence.
They swarmed up Parkside and boarded buses bound for Putney, shouting unpleasant things at the driver-conductor.
And then they surrounded Milward's house and pillaged and put to the sword Milward and other members of the Wimbledon Society who simply did not understand that —‘You look as if you're going to have a thrombie!’ said a voice behind him.
Henry wheeled round, the pamphlet in his hand.
‘You're naked!’ she said accusingly.
Henry lowered the pamphlet and stood in what he hoped was a coquettish manner.
She looked at him stonily.
He gave her his best smile, a greeting he normally reserved for waiters.
It was going to be important not to arouse her suspicions during the planning stages.
‘I'm sorry!’ he said, adding in a tone that was intended to be gentle, but came out wheedling, ‘Do you find me repulsive?’
Elinor's answer to this was to slam the study door.
Henry scratched his crotch reflectively and stared down at his History of Wimbledon .
Down below the piano started up again.
She was playing slightly better this time, but the effect was still markedly sinister.
She sounded just perfect for the Wimbledon Poisoner's Daughter.
CHAPTER THREE
The next morning was Saturday.
Once, a long time ago, Henry could recall being alarmed at the emptiness, the ease, the sheer possibility offered by Saturday.
This was no longer the case.
On Saturdays Maisie now followed a routine as carefully planned as a day in the life of a nun in a particularly strict order.
She went to piano.
She went to ballet.
She went to drama classes.
She went to lessons in drawing, ice-skating, junior aerobics and many other skills which she had absolutely no hope of acquiring.
She did not, thought Henry bitterly, as he dragged himself out of bed and weaved his way to the bathroom over Elinor's discarded knickers, go to classes in being thin, or classes designed to allow the participants to hold one idea in their heads for more than five minutes.
My daughter, he told himself as he brushed his teeth and stared down at number 47's red Mitsubishi, is like me, fat and untalented.
Opposite him, the net curtains of number 47 parted and number 47 peered out.
Henry did not have to see his thin anxious face, his nervous nibble at his lower lip or the furtive glance to left and right to know that number 47 was performing the ritual known as Is the Mitsubishi Scratched Yet?
Ever since the pharmaceutical company for which he worked had given him the vehicle given , thought Henry grimly) number 47 had been watching over it in a manner that suggested an emotion deeper than motherhood, more desperate than romantic love.
It was as if he feared the car would suffer from some mechanical equivalent of cot death, would suddenly buckle and blister and bend, hideously out of shape, there before his eyes, at berth, peacefully parked at its usual angle.
Sometimes, Henry thought, it would be kindness itself to rise one night between three and four when the suburb slept and drag a sharp stone across the Mitsubishi's flanks.
At least it would end the awful suspense.
At least number 47 would know, instead of suspecting, that even expensive objects get old and dirty and die.
Die.
Elinor, now asleep in the bedroom, her square jaw up like a tombstone, her mouth as wide as a new grave, her light snore ticking fitfully, like some tired machine.
Elinor was going to die.
Henry brushed and spat into the basin, noticing the blood darken the snow-white saliva.
He would get the poison today.
Humming to himself, he went back into the bedroom and put on a pair of grey corduroy trousers, a red shirt and a bright turquoise jumper, stained with food.
He looked, he thought as he examined himself in the mirror, more than usually hideous.
He rather hoped his wife would wake and catch him like this, unshaven, hair greasy and uncombed, and as he stood beside the bed he farted quite loudly, as if to remind her that she deserved someone as awful as him.
But she did not wake and for a moment Henry was flooded by helpless rage, a feeling that made him want to run to the bedside table, snatch up Elinor's nail scissors and twist them into her neck, this way and that, gouging out blood and veins.
‘Excuse me!’ he would scream as he slashed at her throat, ‘I am here!
I exist!
Excuse me!
Excuse me!’
Giving himself dialogue seemed to calm him and he stood for a moment, arms idle at his side, breathing slowly and heavily.
He felt as if he had just run fifty yards, rather quickly.
Calm, Henry.
Calm.
The great thing about poisoners is their control.
You don't dash into breakfast and slop paraquat over the wife's Frosties, while hurling abuse at her.
You are quiet and slow and methodical.
And when she clutches at her side and complains of a slight ache you lean forward solicitously and ask, ‘Are you all right, my darling?’
You are gentle and considerate.
And inside you are the Wimbledon Poisoner.
He was OK now.
He bent over, kissed the least precipitous bit of her chin that he could find and went downstairs to find his daughter.
Maisie was sitting in front of the television, glaring sullenly at a man in a pink tracksuit.
Getting her out was clearly going to be a problem.
After ‘No’ her favourite word was ‘Why’.
Henry's ploy was simply to lie.
‘I thought of going out for some choc bars,’ he would say, adding sotto voce as his daughter ran for her anorak, ‘and I thought we might drop off at the gym/piano teacher's/library on the way…’
He promised her a sight of Arfur this morning.
He had remembered that Donald, Arfur's father, was liable to be waiting, with other fathers, in his parked car outside the Wimbledon Young Players' rehearsal.
Unbelievably, he had actually christened his only son Arfur.
Even more unbelievably Maisie thought Arfur was, to use a word too much on her lips these days, ‘cute’.
Even more unbelievable than either of these details was the fact that Donald was a doctor.
All the men in the suburb had jobs.
Henry didn't know any unemployed people.
He read about the unemployed in newspapers and saw films about them on television, pacing across photogenic sections of contemporary Britain and muttering darkly about waste and emptiness.
The curious thing was that the lawyers, dentists, opticians, salesmen and accountants he knew didn't seem to do much work.
perhaps, he thought as he followed Maisie down the front path, it was that he knew them only as fathers, as people whose primary function was to stand at the edge of swimming pools, dank gymnasia or football fields, their collective manhoods bruised by nurture, blurring with age and helpless love.
Or perhaps they didn't actually do any work at all.
Perhaps they only pretended.
Perhaps the unemployed were the only people who did any work these days.
Once you knew Donald was a doctor, of course, it was impossible to forget it.
His manner, over the years, had come to seem eerily medical.
If Henry offered him a drink, Donald would compress his lips, lower his eyes, as if in the middle of a difficult diagnosis, and nod, slowly, responsibly, like a man burdened with some ghastly secret about the state of Henry’ s insides.
‘Thanks, Henry,’ he would say, in a tone that indicated this might well be the last drink he would be accepting from his friend, ‘thanks!’
The phrase Henry wanted to use whenever alone with Donald's permanent bedside manner was How long have I got, Doctor ?
There was something about the care with which he looked into your eyes that was truly frightening.
The only time that Donald didn't look like a doctor was when people at parties asked him anything about health or physiology.
Then he looked like a frightened animal.
His composure would vanish, his grey eyes would shift around the room and, muttering something about antibiotics, he would disappear to the other end of the room, where some hours later he would be discovered at some local worthy's side, discussing parking problems at Waitrose with the quiet authority of a great physician.
Maisie had gone round to the passenger door of the Volkswagen and was standing, one hand poised to open it as soon as Henry should unlock it.
Henry lowered himself into the driver's seat and stood looking out at her for a moment.
It was amazing how little time children wasted.
How they went on to the next thing with such satisfaction and certainty.
How they went on from being carried and put in things to sitting in the front seat of cars, opening things for themselves, unlocking the tame mysteries of life.
She'll be bloody driving soon, he thought, as he clicked open the lock and his daughter settled in beside him.
She had her mothers knack of occupying space around her.
She snapped the seat belt into position and stared out through the window as if in search of something else to organize.
‘Elsie Mitchell says I stink!’ she said, as if opening this topic for theoretical debate.
‘Who's Elsie Mitchell?’
‘A girl in Class Two of course,’ said Maisie, ‘with a nose like a pig!’
Henry drove.
He turned right into Caldecott Road, left into Howard's Avenue, right on to Mainwaring Road and up the wide thoroughfare that led to Wimbledon Hill.
In all these streets, thick with lime trees, estate agents' boards and large, clean cars, there were no people to be seen at all.
Henry knew all the houses — the double-fronted mansion with the Mercedes in the driveway, the row of early Victorian workmen's cottages, fastidiously restored, the occasional bungalow or mock Gothic affair with turrets — he knew what each one was worth, and he followed their fortunes, decay, repair, sale, in the way a countryman might watch the seasons.
At 29 Howard's Avenue the builder's skip was still outside and the rusty scaffolding blinded its shabby windows.
At 45 Mainwaring Road the upper maisonette was still advertising itself for sale — no less than six boards competing for the passerby's attention.
Henry noticed all these things with something like affection while Maisie pressed her nose (very like a pig's, Henry thought) to the window of the Passat.
How was he going to turn the conversation round to the subject of poison?
Henry could not imagine, when it came to it, the beginning, middle or end of a conversation in which Donald would tell him how to get hold of an untraceable poison.
He could steal some leaves from Donald's prescription pad.
But were doctors allowed to order poisons?
Why should they be?
What were the medical applications of, say, arsenic?
Henry realized he had absolutely no idea.
He was as pathetically unqualified in the art of murder as he was at golf or philosophy.
The problem with this poisoning business was that the preliminary research was horribly incriminating.
One minute there you were asking casual questions about arsenic and the next there was your wife throwing up and having her hair fall out.
People would put two and two together.
Christ, what were the major poisons?
There was arsenic, cyanide, prussic acid and — the list stopped there.
Nobody much used poison any more; that was the trouble.
Or if they did it was so modern that nobody got to hear about it.
Henry couldn't think of any celebrated poisoners apart from Maltby and Crippen.
And after Crippen, what?
The line died out, didn't it?
And while we were talking about Crippen, it would probably be unwise to choose as a role model someone who had been topped for the offence.
He wanted someone who had got away with it.
He was drawing up outside the hall when he thought of Graham Young.
For the moment he could think of nothing apart from the name.
Young had, as far as Henry could remember, been sent to Broadmoor.
But hadn't he been a state-of-the-art poisoner?
A man who approached the subject with some finesse.
Even if it wasn't quite enough finesse to keep him out of the loony bin.
From Henry's recollection of the trial, which was, admittedly, not all that clear, Young had been some kind of chemist.
There was probably no better way, if one was going to do this thing properly, than to study a celebrated practitioner.
It wouldn't be enough to find a poison that would finish her off.
He needed to know how to play it when the abdominal pains got started.
Was there, for example, a poison that created symptoms that looked like a fairly recognizable disease?
And if so, why wasn't every red-blooded English male using it?
Graham Young, yes.
Graham Young.
Henry had an image of a quiet man in a suit.
A man not unlike himself.
Something wet and heavy hit the side of his head.
He realized Maisie was kissing him.
He turned and watched her run up the path and into the hall.
Where, though, was Donald?
His white Sierra was parked just ahead of Henry, the door open, but there was no sign either of him or Arfur.
Henry got out of the car and sauntered over to the Sierra.
No one around.
The passenger door was open.
And there, on the top of his open bag, staring straight at him, was the white notepad he used for issuing prescriptions.
Henry pulled open the door, yanked off the three top sheets and scuttled back to his car.
Only when he was safely inside the Passat did he look round to see if he had been observed.
He was safe he was safe he was safe.
As he groped his way under his seat, seeking somewhere to stow the paper, his fingers met something cold and hard and sharp.
The jack.
He'd been looking for that for ages.
And if all else failed it would probably be an effective, if unsubtle way of letting his wife know that something rather more serious than Marriage Guidance was required to get them out of their marital difficulties.
He wrapped the prescription paper round it and started the engine.
He had an hour to get to the library, do his research and return for Maisie.
A whole hour.
What better way to spend one of those rare breaks in the suburban day than by studying methods of getting rid of one's wife.
CHAPTER FOUR
There were no fewer than four books in the Wimbledon Public Library that dealt with the Graham Young case.
One of them — by a man called Harkness — was 400 pages long, contained twenty-four black and white photographs, three appendices and several maps and diagrams.
It was eighty pages longer than the standard biography of Antonin Dvořák, the composer, and only seventy pages shorter than the definitive historical account of Rommel's North African campaign.
There were pages and pages of psychoanalytic rubbish, Henry noted, and endless, dreary character sketches of the people Young had poisoned.
But there was also a fairly concisely written chapter entitled ‘Thallium Poisoning: Odourless, Tasteless and almost Impossible to Detect’.
This was just the sort of thing Henry wanted to read.
Most poisons, it seemed, tasted unpleasant.
(Elinor did not drink either tea or coffee and only the occasional glass of mint tea.
She drank no alcohol and thought most forms of seasoning depraved.
Her diet was, in a sense, poison proof.)
But thallium, it appeared, was quite tasteless.
Its effects, however, were sensational.
Your hair fell out.
You had hallucinations.
You lost the use of your limbs.
You went on to do sterling work in the diarrhoea, headaches and vomiting department and you ended up coughing out your last in a way that Henry thought would be entirely suitable for Elinor.
It wasn't just that.
Thallium poisoning created a set of symptoms exactly matching a series found in a type of polyneuritis known as the Guillain-Barré syndrome.
The first post-mortem on one of Young's victims — Fred Biggs — had found no traces of thallium in the body, although later microscopic analysis revealed there were several hundred milligrams, more than enough to kill him.
It was the polyneuritis that Henry liked.
Two years after they had been married, Elinor had suddenly, mysteriously, developed a weakness in her legs, and Henry, who, equally mysteriously, in those days wasn't trying to kill her, had hurried her to the local hospital where the doctors had diagnosed — wait for it — polyneuritis.
Polyneuritis was clearly a word like morality that meant so many different things as to be absolutely meaningless.
If it meant anything at all, thought Henry, it was something along the lines of We haven't got a clue .
Henry could imagine the conversation with Donald now.
Elinor on the bed, hair falling out, vomiting, losing the use of her limbs and he and Donald, over by the window, voices low, faces discreetly grave.
Donald would issue a death certificate for any cause you suggested to him; this case, Henry felt, might be so staggeringly self-explanatory as to allow him to come to a diagnosis off his own bat.
‘It's the…polyneuritis…’ he heard himself say, as Donald sneaked towards the medical dictionary, his big handsome head bowed with concern, his grey eyes looking into the distance, in the direction of the local tennis court.
He might even sob.
That would be good.
If only to observe the embarrassment on Donald's face.
Where should he have her cremated?
Somewhere rather low-rent, Henry thought.
There was a particularly nasty crematorium in Mitcham, he recalled, with a chapel that looked more than usually like a public lavatory.
And, from what he remembered of the funeral (his grandmother's), the ushers looked like men who were trying hard not to snigger.
Or should he go completely the other way?
Hire a small cruiser and slip her coffin over the side in some ocean that might have some special meaning for her?
(The Bering Straits, possibly.)
He could…but Henry was almost too full of good ideas for her funeral.
She wasn't even dead yet.
Half an hour left.
The chief problem with thallium was that it didn't seem to be used for anything much apart from the manufacture of optical lenses of a high refractive index — camera lenses, for example.
Henry stared for some moments at the word ‘optical’.
Why should he need stuff for making lenses?
He didn't make cameras, he wasn't an optician —
No, but Gordon Beamish was.
Gordon Beamish was a real live optician.
He was all optician.
He was probably always nipping down to Underwoods for a few grams of thallium.
Susie Beamish probably drank it for breakfast.
There would be an especial pleasure in using Gordon Beamish's name.
If anyone deserved a few years in an open prison it was Beamish.
Like many people who wear glasses, Henry hated opticians, especially opticians with 20/20 vision.
Gordon Beamish was a man who made a fetish out of being lynx-eyed.
He could be seen most mornings at the door of his shop in Wimbledon Village, arms crossed, mouth twisted in a superior sneer, just waiting for the chance to decode the small print on the front of buses.
‘I saw you in the High Street the other day,’ he would say, in a tone that suggested that it was quite impossible for Henry to have seen him.
Henry had lost count of the number of times Beamish began a sentence with the words ‘I notice…’ or ‘I observe…’
Things were always crystal clear to Beamish; he was always taking a view or spying out the land or finding some way of pointing out the difference between his world — a universe of sharp corners and exact distances — and the booming, foggy place in which Henry found himself every time he took off his glasses.
When suffering eye tests in the darkened cubicle at the back of his shop, almost the only thing Henry ever managed to see was the pitying smile on Beamish's face as he flashed up smaller and smaller letter sequences, all of them probably spelling ‘You are a fat shortsighted twerp’!
Beamish, thought Henry, could be the fall guy.
He liked to think of Beamish in the dock at the Central Court, his counsel blustering on about his client's perfectly normal, acceptable need for heavy metal poisons (‘But how do you explain, Mr Beamish, your ordering a quantity of thallium from a perfectly reputable chemist's…?’)
He closed the book, replaced it in the cookery section of the open shelves, and walked briskly to the car.
There was no time to lose.
It was entirely possible, Elinor being the way she was, that somebody else would try to kill her before Henry got in with his bid.
Indeed, he reflected, as he joined the queue at the traffic lights opposite the library, it was such a blindingly simple, brilliantly obvious idea, it was very difficult to think why everyone wasn't doing it.
Why, while they were about it, wasn't she trying to kill him?
Henry drove cautiously up the hill.
He tested the brakes when he reached the top.
They seemed OK.
Maisie looked, as always, subtly different after her piano lesson.
She looked more aware of the world, brighter, more optimistic.
This was some compensation for the fact that she was almost certainly no better at the piano.
Donald's son, Arfur, was there, a small, fat six-year-old, who stared at Henry and said: ‘I played the piano!’
‘Good!’ said Henry, through compressed lips.
He seized Maisie by the hand and walked back to the car.
If he could get hold of something from Beamish, he might be able to lay his hands on some thallium by lunchtime.
She could be dead by the time children's television started or, if not dead, at least well on the way to it.
He chose a route back down the hill that did not involve too many serious gradients, moving from Roseberry Road to Warburton Drive to Chesterton Terrace and, from there, doubling back along a series of streets with an offensively tangible air of esprit de corps — Lowther Park Drive, where people called to each other over their Volvos and, even worse, Stapleton Road, a place that seemed almost permanently on the verge of a street party.
The brakes still seemed OK.
Gordon Beamish was not in his shop — instead, under a gigantic spectacle frames stood a small, rat-faced girl called Ruthie.
Ruthie, as if to compensate for her boss's powers of vision, seemed to have every known complaint of the eyes short of blindness.
Astigmatism, squints, premature presbyopia, short sight, long sight, tunnel vision, barrel vision, migraine, Ruthie had the lot, and her glasses resembled some early form of periscope; they were a circular, heavy-duty affair, with catches and locks and screws.
Somewhere underneath the pebble lenses, tinged both grey and pink, the steel traps and the wires were, presumably, a pair of eyes but they were only, really, a flicker, in the depths of the optician's pièce de résistance that towered above Ruthie's nose.
Henry liked Ruthie and Ruthie liked him.
‘Is Gordon about?’
‘No,’ said Ruthie, ‘he took Luke to Beavers.’
Beavers.
That was a new one on Henry.
What the hell was Beavers?
Some neo-Fascist organization perhaps?
From what he could remember of Luke, the boy would have fitted well into the Waffen SS.
Leaving Maisie on the street he went into the shop.
‘I'll leave a note for him!’ he said.
Ruthie folded her arms, as if to emphasize her lack of responsibility for the shop she was minding.
Her eyes, or something very like her eyes, moved in the thick depths of the glass.
‘Fine!’ she said.
Henry went through to the back of the shop.
On Gordon's desk was a pile of headed notepaper.
Henry picked up two sheets.
Then he saw something better.
In a square, steel tray at the back of the desk was a notepad, the kind of thing given away by small businesses in an attempt to register their names with the public.
A. M. Duncan, it read, Lenses, Photographic and Ophthalmic.
And underneath the heading, an address.
After a quick glance back through the shop (Maisie and Ruthie were staring out at the street in silence) Henry slid one sheet of the printed paper into Gordon's typewriter.
What he really wanted to write was:
Henry Farr wishes some thallium to administer to his wife.
Please give this to him.
He is desperate.
But instead he told whomsoever it might concern that he was Alan Bleath, a researcher employed by the above company and he needed to buy 10 grams of thallium for research purposes.
Was that going to be enough?
She was quite a big woman.
Shouldn't he order a kilo?
Two kilos?
A lorryload, for Christ's sake!
The trouble was, he thought, as he signed the paper, indecipherably, with his left hand, folded it and put it into his jacket pocket, he didn't know much about thallium poisoning, and even less about the making of lenses with a high refractive index.
A really thorough murderer would have boned up on both subjects more intently.
Ten grams would have to do.
He took a sheet of Gordon's notepaper and typed a short note to Alan Bleath, thanking him for his recent contribution to the stimulating seminar on lenses of a high refractive index, signed this with a fair approximation of Gordon's hand and put it in one of the ‘Gordon Beamish: See?’ envelopes, addressed to Alan Bleath, 329 Carradine Road, Mitcham.
(‘Do you seriously expect me to believe, Mr Beamish, that someone came into your office and, without your knowledge, used your typewriter to address a letter?’
‘Well, I —’‘I put it to you that you had always loved Elinor Farr.
Your lust for her knew no bounds and when this loyal woman spurned you for her husband of twenty years you wreaked a terrible revenge!’
‘No no no!
You've got it wrong!’)
Actually, thought Henry, as he checked himself in the mirror, no one, not even the police, would be stupid enough to imagine that Elinor could be the victim of a crime passionnel .
The only passion involved in this operation was an overmastering desire to see her nailed down in a brown box.
He looked, he thought, fairly Bleath-like.
Apart from the glasses.
He slipped these off and saw a blurred, red disk of a face which resembled a Francis Bacon portrait.
Alan Bleath.
‘Hurry up!’ said Maisie.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Leaving a note for Gordon,’ said Henry.
Let's have a jar! he wrote on Gordon's pad.
‘Jar’ was the sort of stupid, hail-fellow-well-met word that Gordon would appreciate.
He decided not to go to a chain chemist's.
Those sort of Places made so much they could afford the luxury of high standards.
He wanted an old-fashioned, grubby Place with old-fashioned glass bottles in the window.
Somewhere run by an elderly couple with no commercial sense.
The sort of people who cried with relief when you went in to buy a piece of Elastoplast.
He needed the sort of chemist's he had gone to as a child.
If he could remember that far back.
These days he had trouble recalling the troublesome fragments of his education he had bothered to memorize in the first place; the names of a few acquaintances were jumbled together with old verb forms and things he thought were childhood haunts turned out to be places he had only just discovered.
But there was somewhere, wasn't there, where once, years ago, he had gone with his mother, or someone fairly like his mother, anyway?
Wealdlake Road.
That was it!
Wealdlake Road!
At the corner of Wealdlake Road, four streets north of Wimbledon station, was the ideal place.
A heavy wooden window frame, dusty glass and three big-bellied bottles, coloured with the bright, mysterious fluids Henry remembered from his childhood.
He couldn't remember quite when he had first visited the shop but, like Wimbledon itself, it had always been there.
Henry had lived in Wimbledon all his life.
They would, Henry thought, be glad to see anyone, even a prospective poisoner.
They were probably desperate enough to offer a comprehensive after-sales service (‘Thallium not right, sir?
Try antimony perhaps?
Or potassium chlorate…’).
He parked the Passat and told Maisie he was going to buy some aspirin.
‘Can I come?’
‘No!’ said Henry.
Before she had time to protest he had locked the doors and, removing his glasses as he went, walked briskly over the road.
He narrowly missed what he thought was a lamp post but turned out to be a tree, and reached for where the handle was usually to be found on a front door.
To his surprise it was there.
He felt perfectly calm as he entered the shop.
Not only calm.
He felt Bleath-like to a surprising degree.
perhaps this was because he could hardly see more than a yard in front of his face.
‘Hullo, sir!’ said a blurred, white shape.
It sounded old and incompetent.
‘Hullo!’ he replied, moving cautiously towards it.
Then, with the air of a man asking for twenty cigarettes, he said, ‘I need 10 or 15 grams of thallium.
Do you keep it or should I go to a larger store?’
The blurred white shape came closer.
It seemed to be smiling.
Why was it smiling?
You are Henry Farr the Wimbledon poisoner and I arrest you in the name of — Hang on, hang on.
He wasn't the Wimbledon Poisoner.
Yet.
In the face of the shape's silence, he continued, breezily.
‘I don't know whether a place as small as this keeps registered poisons but I've just moved labs…’
Moved labs!
Brilliant !
‘And I don't know this neck of the woods…’
The shape was close enough for Henry to see that it was male.
‘Thallium,’ it said, in a frankly sinister tone, ‘thallium…’
Henry wished it would not say the word quite so loudly.
And was it necessary to repeat it like that?
Or, in so doing, sound like that man in Journey Into Space who was born in 1945 and died in 1939?
Yes, thallium you old berk, thallium, the heavy metal poison that makes your hair fall out and gives you diarrhoea and you die screaming.
That one.
Thallium.
‘Not Valium,’ said Henry briskly, ‘but thallium!’
‘Yes,’ said the shape.
‘I remember…’
It sounded, Henry thought, as if all this had happened before.
as if , on this very spot a hundred years ago…what?
Some thought, some fragment of memory was tugging at him but he could not quite catch it, as so often these days.
Something he had said or somebody had said, something…
There was, anyway, an atmosphere in this shop, an unpleasant feeling, as if he had just walked through a gateway into a world parallel to our own, where huge and unpleasant moral choices are offered, fought over and discussed.
The shape seemed to be looking through a book, although what the book was Henry could not tell.
How to Spot a Poisoner perhaps, or Some Common Excuses Used by Murderers .
Or perhaps he was just trying to find out what thallium was.
‘The heavy metal…’ said Henry, in what he hoped was an offensively knowledgeable tone.
What do you require this for?’ said the shape.
‘Work on optical lenses,’ said Henry, adding, smartly, ‘with a high refractive index!’
‘Oh yes…’ said the shape.
Maybe he was looking at a book that told you things like that.
Or maybe people were always popping in here for 10 grams of thallium.
Or maybe he was bluffing.
He was going to look it up, whip down to Boots and, having bought a few quidsworth, sell it to Henry at ten per cent over the retail value.
He was probably willing to sell anything, the glass jars in the window included.
It was spooky, though, thought Henry, it was a spooky shop.
Or was it just that what he was doing was spooky?
He moved up to the counter with the air of a man who doesn't like having to go through a routine once again but is prepared to do so,all right then here's my card if you insist !
He took out the letter and tossed it on the counter.
‘There's my authority,’ he said, ‘if you need that.’
Bleath was clearly a man impatient of bureaucracy, anxious to get back to his lenses.
The shape seemed impressed.
‘Do you have any identification, Mr Bleath?’
Bleath put a hand into his breast pocket.
Then he transferred the same hand to the back pocket of his trousers and did some not very good patting of both flanks.
‘I seem to have mislaid my driving licence!’ he said tetchily and then, ‘Here's a letter addressed to me!’
It was the way he handed the old fool the letter, Henry decided afterwards, that had done it.
He had long ago noticed that if you stared at a customs officer when going out through the green channel, the customs officer stopped you.
You had to be careful with officials.
And he handed over the letter (which had creased beautifully in his pocket) with just the right note of impatient politeness.
‘You'll have to sign the register!’ said the shape.
He had done it.
CHAPTER FIVE
The Poisons Register was, like the rest of the shop, a piece of England's past.
It was in a thick blue binding and its antique look — the paper was ruled in the way Henry remembered books of his childhood being ruled — gave it the air of a family bible.
‘There you are, Mr Bleath.’
He went on to name a sum that Henry thought very acceptable.
It was a cheap and easy way of murdering your wife, thought Henry.
Very reasonable.
Very reasonable indeed.
Mind you, in any area of domestic life it was more sensible, in budgetary terms anyway, to Do It Yourself.
Some of these types who went in for murder as a professional thing would probably take you to the cleaners as soon as look at you.
He went out, slowly, calmly, ready for the catch question at the door…
‘Best of luck with the poisoning!’
‘Thanks!’
Shit!
Henry replaced his glasses.
But the shape, who was now revealed to be an amiable-looking man of about thirty, remained silent.
The air outside smelt good.
Up the hill from the south-west a gentle breeze was blowing, and opposite him a huge chestnut tree, already infected with the beautiful rust of autumn, stirred in sympathy with the wind.
It was good to know that Elinor would not be breathing this sweet, suburban air for very much longer.
In the car Maisie was studying her music.
She looked old and serious.
She had scraped her hair back from her forehead and tied it in a ponytail with a pink ribbon.
Maisie was always doing things with her hair.
Sometimes she piled it up, sometimes she pulled it forward in a fringe, and sometimes she let it hang straight, like her mother's.
But whereas Elinor's hair fell, as she herself put it, ‘like a great, calm waterfall’, Maisie's hair just hung, like old socks on a washing line.
And whatever she did with her hair, it still, thought Henry, didn't do anything for her face — Maisie's face was still there, round as a dinner plate.
The kind of face one saw on children by roadsides in Connemara.
He leaned over and kissed his daughter on the forehead.
She continued to study her music.
After Elinor was dead, he and Maisie could really get to know each other, thought Henry.
As he intended to behave extraordinarily well, she would grow to like and respect him (he wasn't entirely sure she did at the moment).
One of the advantages of scheduling one's own bereavement was that it was far easier to respond in a mature, caring way to one's partner's decease.
Henry had read an article in The Times , which said that partners who lost a loved one often blamed the departed for the death.
Henry did not intend to do this.
He was going to be a tower of strength to all concerned.
‘You've been ages,’ said Elinor, as he and Maisie trudged up the steps.
‘Sorry!’ said Henry.
His wife came towards him menacingly.
When she walked she moved each hip separately, like a gunslinger moving towards an opponent down Main Street.
She drew her right hand out from the folds of her apron and thrust a piece of paper at him, averting her eyes as she did so.
It was as if , thought Henry, she wished to have nothing to do with the dispute she knew this word would provoke.
‘Waitrose!’ she said.
‘I thought you went yesterday…’ said Henry.
His voice, he noticed, made him sound frightened.
Why was this?
Elinor narrowed her eyes and swung her straight black hair out behind her like a scarf.
She moved, as she often did, from pure, concentrated malice, to a vaguely girlish mode, as if she was looking for someone (not Henry) to put his arms round her and tell her everything was all right.
A fatherly sort of chap.
Henry grabbed the paper and backed away down the path.
‘You go to Waitrose now!’ she barked.
Was this a command or a statement?
It felt like a command, as did so many of Elinor's remarks — but it had the menacing power of a scientific law.
‘It isn't my turn!’ said Henry.
‘It is!’ said Elinor.
‘It isn't!’ said Henry.
‘Oh yes it is!’ said Elinor.
Henry kicked the side of the kerb viciously.
She was being more than usually assertive.
Things weren't helped by the fact that he had remembered, in the course of this not very elevated argument, that it was actually his turn.
He kicked the kerb again hard and set his lips in a scowl.
Why did he always choose to lose his temper over issues in which he was in the wrong?
She's been seeing her therapist again, thought Henry, as he stumbled towards the Passat.
‘Can I go?’ said Maisie.
Elinor drew herself upwards and outwards.
Then, with the fluidity usually only displayed by cartoon characters, she swooped down and around her daughter; her arms cradled each shoulder and her face slid down next to Maisie's.
Her voice changed too.
It acquired an impossible sweetness, a tenderness that was almost sinister.
‘Darling,’ said Elinor, ‘shall Maisie stay with Mummy and do her cello practice while Mummy helps her?’
Maisie looked trapped.
She liked Waitrose.
In Waitrose there were Twix bars and Breakaways; there were chocolate digestives and huge jumbo packets of crisps and giant, plastic bottles of Coca-Cola.
Sometimes she and Henry sat together in the car, a few streets away from their home, munching chocolate bars, while in the back of the Passat huge cardboard boxes of grains, wholewheat cereal, low-fat spreads and calorie-free, taste-free things to stop you dying of cancer awaited Elinor's approval.
She would not have sweets in the house.
Simply to smell Coca-Cola made her, she said, violently sick.
‘See you later, Maisie!’ said Henry.
‘We were going to Elspeth's!’ said Maisie.
Christ yes!
He started to mouth the words ‘I'll bring you a choc bar,’ but before he was halfway through this soundless sentence his wife's face levelled up towards him.
She had the clear gaze of an experienced poker player.
‘No sweets!’ she said.
‘No dear,’ said Henry.
Clutching the phial of thallium in his pocket he got back into the car.
It was curious.
The last place he wanted to be was in the car.
Why, every time he got out of it, was he forced back into it?
Today, of course, it suited him to be doing the shopping.
What went well with thallium?
Curried things?
Chicken Dopiaza Thallium Style!
But she wouldn't eat curry, would she?
Anyway the stuff had no taste.
just give her thallium!
Thallium à la mode de Wimbledon, served in a little china pot with a spray of basil and a clean table napkin.
Elinor might almost accept that.
Nouvelle cuisine methods of preparing thallium…a drop of thallium on a piece of seaweed, chilled thallium, served garnished with a single radicchio leaf…down home thallium…thallium and beans…big, tasty, hearty, man-sized thallium burgers served with french fries, pickle and thallium on the side…
‘It's so versatile ,’ said Henry, aloud, as he drove back down the hill,‘There are so many things you can do with thallium !’
Shopping with death in mind made shopping almost bearable.
Henry was by far the most cheerful-looking person in Waitrose, as he scanned the loaded shelves for his wife's last meal.
Elinor's favourite food was yoghurt.
Yoghurt and thallium?
Not really.
Ahead of him a morose-looking man in a cardigan was sorting through slabs of meat in plastic containers.
Once again Henry was struck by the enormity of supermarkets…those millions of dead animals, butchered, arranged in parcels, labelled with a SELL BY or a BEST BEFORE date, grouped, not by species or sub-species, but by parts of the body.
Whole rows of chicken thighs, galleries of boneless chicken breasts, chicken escalopes coated with breadcrumbs, ready seasoned, free-range, corn-fed chicken that — Hang on.
Ready-seasoned, free-range, corn-fed chicken.
Henry pulled one towards him.
In a way, he thought, it was a cleaner life being a battery chicken than a free-range, corn-fed chicken.
At least the battery chicken knew what it was up against.
Stuck in a cell, the light on twenty-four hours a day, at least the battery chicken wasn't going to be fooled into thinking well of people.
But the free-range, corn-fed chicken was the victim of a cruel joke.
Given a little hope, a little patch of ground…so that it would taste better.
Soon, thought Henry, feeling, as he often did, a sense of solidarity with chickens, they would label one with THIS FOWL HAS BEEN HAND-REARED AND TALKED TO NICELY.
IT DIED PEACEFULLY.
Elinor liked ready-seasoned, free-range, corn-fed chicken.
And the fine dusting of the seasoning — the green of the parsley, the black of the pepper, would be a perfect cover for thallium.
Even more importantly, Maisie didn't like chicken, especially free-range, corn-fed, humanely killed chicken that had been through Jungian analysis.
She liked great slabs of chicken in crispy batter.
It would also be comparatively easy -he was getting excited — to sprinkle the thallium on the breast, because Elinor liked breast and he liked leg.
‘A little white meat, darling?’
‘Of course, my darling!’
Elinor would squawk, brushing her mane of black hair away from her forehead.
And then the plate, piled high with sprouts and potatoes and gravy and topped with succulent slices of perfectly roasted breast of chicken, coated with a crispy surface of parsley, pepper and thallium, would land before Mrs Farr.
And she would spear a piece of chicken and carry it high in the air towards that great black hole of a mouth and, still talking about her therapy, her plans for the future, his inability to understand her as a woman, his crude, male-orientated sexuality, she would munch, munch, munch…
‘Are you going to make love to that chicken?’
Henry jumped.
It was Donald.
‘Oh.
Hi!’
‘You look miles away.’
‘I was.’
Donald peered into Henry's trolley in a  companiable fashion.
All it contained was a small jar of capers.
‘You're a bit behind, Henry.’
‘Indeed.’
Donald had got four sponge rolls, three jumbo packets of cornflakes, five loaves of bread, some digestive biscuits, a square packet of something called Uncle Sam ‘s Chocolate Chip Cookies, a  Battenburg cake and two mixed, assorted crisps, in bags that were the size of a small dustbin.
Donald approached Waitrose with military precision, working his way steadily through Farinaceous, Vegetables (Salad), Vegetables (Root, Loose and packed), poultry, Game, Continental Cuts and Mince, and from there by way of Fish (Frozen) and Fish (Fresh) to Spices, Pickles and Non-refrigerated Ready-packed Sauces, through to pet food, Pet Accessories and Household Cleaners.
He nodded his big, handsome head still thick with greying curls.
‘Keeping well, though?’
‘Fine,’ said Henry, ‘fine.’
Donald narrowed his eyes very slightly and nodded once again.
His perfect profile looked off down the rows of brightly coloured packets.
‘Should I tell him now?’ his expression seemed to say, ‘Or would it be better to let the disease take its course?
It won't be long now anyway…’
‘Elinor's a bit off colour, though.’
‘Yes?’
‘Well…it's a funny thing.
I don't know whether I told you…but some years ago she was diagnosed as having…polyneuritis…’
Donald's perfectly formed lips began to tremble.
‘I was wondering whether…maybe…’
Donald looked away, longingly, towards Refrigerated Delicatessen, his clear doctor's eyes, moving expertly from Ready-packed Gravadlax, through Hand-sliced, Oak-smoked, Ready-interleaved Salmon Slices, along the twelve varieties of German and Polish sausage, the pre-packed slices of Waitrose Pastrami and Salt Beef until they reached the orderly rows of Fresh Tortellini, Cappelletti, Paglia e Fieno and Tagliatelle (Green and White).
‘Well, ‘he said finally, ‘must get on!’
And with one more nod of that perfect head he was off, working his trolley through the morning crowd with the air of a great surgeon.
Henry put the chicken back in the pile.
He paused, then from the back took one that seemed to have got separated from the rest.
Its polythene wrapping looked vaguely torn and grubby, as if members of the Waitrose staff had already been playing catch with it.
It was past the SELL BY date too.
It would do perfectly.
It seemed wrong, somehow ‘to poison a piece of meat in pristine condition.
He threw it in the trolley and went off to look for things Elinor didn't like.
CHAPTER SIX
Once he had decided on Free-range chicken à la Thallium, it was fairly important not to buy anything Elinor might choose as a substitute.
If she were to insist on veal goulash, for example, all would be lost.
Maisie liked veal goulash.
She had heard it was bad for you.
If only she drank something other than herb tea.
Trying not to think about her possible reaction, Henry loaded cured fish, offal, red meat and a bold assortment of vegetables he had never even heard of, let alone eaten.
All they had in common was a potential for repelling Mrs Farr.
Bags of kohlrabi and okra, sweet potatoes, chillies, Chinese-leaf lettuce and three pounds of a very peculiar thing called an edenwort, which looked like a beetroot going through a severe identity crisis.
There was a little plastic notice next to it which read EDENWORT: SLICE IT OR BAKE IT OR USE IT IN CASSEROLES.
Or just throw it at the neighbours, thought Henry grimly, as he tipped the edenwort in next to the water-chestnuts and the giant yam.
Checking his purchases against her list as he approached the checkout, he was pleased to find that at no point did the two coincide.
Then he saw Donald, trolley piled high with middle-of-the-road food.
‘Hullo there!’ called Henry.
Donald nodded; briefly.
‘How about a pint?’
Donald considered this offer; his features rippled with thought.
If he were a picture his handsome, regular cheek-bones and serious eyes would probably be titled ‘A Doctor Decides’.
‘OK,’ he said, in the end.
Imaginary nurses sighed with relief.
The hours of waiting over!
At last they had a diagnosis!
‘A jar would be very nice.’
If Henry arrived back after three, Elinor would be at therapy.
Maisie would be at ballet.
He would have time to stow away the kohlrabi, the offal and the edenwort.
And by the time she returned it would be six or six thirty.
Teatime!
Time, now Henry was forty, did not proceed in the way it had previously done.
Once upon a time, there was waking, which was slow and painful, and then quite a long period, replete with chances and triumphs and defeats and risks, which sometimes, though not always, ended in lunch.
Afternoon, Henry remembered, used to be as prolonged and arid as Arizona, and they were followed by things called evenings, which were entirely different and separate from nights.
Now — you woke up with a sense of relief and surprise that you were still there, you got up, brushed your teeth, and before you knew it you were watching television.
It was dark outside and well past your bedtime.
You were also, probably, drunk, but how you got drunk, or where you had been between that first moment of reacquaintance with yourself and now, was a mystery.
Apart, of course, from the shops.
You had almost certainly been to the shops.
‘We could go to the Rose and Thorn!’ said Donald.
‘Great!’ said Henry.
Donald began to place his groceries on the moving counter.
Henry tipped out the edenwort and looked at Donald's back.
He looked like a man who would sign a mean death certificate.
What to do with the chicken after the meal?
Assuming he phoned Donald as soon as she began to vomit and have headaches, wouldn't Donald ask what they had eaten for dinner?
Maybe not, since Henry, unless he got the thallium anywhere near the chicken leg, would be feeling fine.
It was vital, though, to include Donald in the diagnosis of Elinor's condition.
He was not only a close personal friend, he was also, to Henry's knowledge, one of the worst doctors in the south-east of England.
‘Some bloke came into the surgery,’ he would say, sourly, ‘complaining of headaches.
‘What do you expect me to do about it?’
I said.
‘I get headaches.
We all get headaches. piss off out of it!’
I said, ‘You're giving me a headache!’
‘Good for you!’
Henry would reply.
‘Send him away with a flea in his ear.
Psychosomatic, I suppose?’
Donald would pull on his pint (he had to be fairly drunk in order to even start discussing medicine)—‘In fact,’ he would say, ‘turned out to be a bloody brain tumour ‘didn't it?’
‘Christ!’— from Henry.
‘Can you beat it?
Can you beat it?’
‘Indeed not,’ Henry would reply.
And the two men would shake their heads over the inconsistent, bloody-minded civilians who swarmed through a general practitioner's surgery, deliberately misleading qualified men about the nature of their fatal diseases.
Over the pint Henry would make a few more casual references to Elinor's polyneuritis.
When Donald examined his wire in the last stages of the illness it might be necessary to lead him to a medical textbook and steer those calm, grey eyes in the direction of the chapter headed ‘The Guillain-Barré Syndrome’.
The Rose and Thorn, on the edge of Wimbledon Common was, in the eighteenth century, a favourite spot for highwaymen.
The infamous Tibbet, executed at the roundabout at the top of Putney Hill, is reported to have stabbed a man to death there; it has literary associations also.
In the nineteenth century, Swinburne, having been thrown out of his local, the Green Man, on the west side of Putney Hill, walked over the common to the Rose and Thorn ‘where, according to a letter of Watts Dunton, he drank eight pints of strong ale and was violently sick over the landlord's daughter, a woman called Henrietta Luce who later married a distant relative of Trollope's.
Henry told Donald some of this, as he did every time he and Donald used the pub, and Donald nodded and smiled and said: ‘Really!
How extraordinary!’
As he did every time Henry told him these things.
He had got to the point, now, of sometimes saying, ‘Yes.
I read somewhere I think there was a landlord's daughter called Loo or Loup or…’
Thus giving Henry the chance to reply, ‘In fact her name was Luce…perhaps I told you…’
To which Donald would reply, a little too swiftly, ‘No, no…
I don't think so…’
And then…
‘Fascinating, really!’
And the two of them would discuss, with some enthusiasm, where Donald could have acquired this information.
Their conversations were, Henry felt, the sweeter for having a core of known fact which they could then decorate and refine, like old men in some village discussing last year's harvest.
‘Of course,’ he said on their third pint, ‘the Wimbledon Poisoner used to use the back bar.’
‘Is that right?’ said Donald.
‘Everett Maltby, ‘said Henry, ‘who lived off Wimbledon Hill.
He poisoned his wife and his mother-in-law and any number of other people, including some of the regulars at his local.’
‘Christ!’ said Donald.
‘Why?’
‘Liven things up a bit, I suppose,’ said Henry.
Donald took a deep swig of his beer.
He ran his tongue round his lips, as if assessing the taste.
‘Can get pretty dull, I suppose…’ he said.
pretty dull, thought Henry, I should say so.
‘I think I've heard of Everett Maltby,’ said Donald.
‘It's possible you have,’ said Henry.
‘He's a well-known local story!’
That must have been where he got the idea from, of course.
That was why Everett, suddenly, seemed more real, more frightening than usual.
Not that Henry believed in any of that rubbish about possession or reliving history or the power of the myth.
That was all so much fashionable garbage, wasn't it?
History was what happened to dead people.
It didn't act on the living, like yeast.
Although…
‘Wasn't he hanged?’
Donald was prompting him.
‘Yes, yes,’ said Henry, ‘in 1888.
The mystery really, is why he did it.
He was a quiet, apparently happily married man with no enemies.
He stood to gain nothing.
A complete mystery man.
He was a model citizen.’
‘Like you Henry!’ said Donald.
They both laughed.
Then they drank a little.
Then Donald said: ‘How did they catch him?’
Well, he had confessed, hadn't he?
‘Burdened’ as he put it at his trial, ‘with the intolerable knowledge of my own beastliness!’
That wasn't going to happen to Henry though, was it?
If a chap hadn't the guts to stand up for his own beastliness where was he?
There was, Henry felt, something rather unsavoury about Maltby. perhaps that was why he had never worked up the notes he had made on the case.
At one time he had intended a whole chapter of The Complete History of Wimbledon to be devoted to the issue of Maltby, but somehow the chapter had never materialized.
For a start, he kept losing the notes, and then, when he had managed to find them and set them out on his desk, he seemed to lack the will to start work on them.
There was something decidedly spooky about Maltby.
And as they talked the image of the man became clearer and clearer, until Henry wanted to say to Donald, ‘No.
Don't let's talk about this, shall we?
It ‘s too…dangerous.’
He could see the stuffy front room and the hideous green plant.
The heavy oak furniture, the unused piano, the not very attractive daughter…
He could see Everett's trips up to London, in the days before the electrification of the Wimbledon Railway.
He could see Everett sitting at a tall stool, in an office not unlike Henry ‘s, helping to build the wealth of the empire.
But there was some detail he knew he didn't want to remember.
Why didn't he want to remember it?
And why did thinking about it, yes, it did, frighten him?
‘How did they, though?’
He had been silent too long.
Henry took the route often taken by historians faced with a tricky historical problem.
He made something up.
‘He confessed,’ said Henry.
‘It all got too much for him.
Guilt.
You know?
And he broke down.
In this very pub, one night, and told everyone that he was the Wimbledon poisoner.
It took him some time to convince them, apparently.’
‘I don't think you've ever told me that!’ said Donald, sounding peeved to have elicited an original statement from Henry while on licensed premises.
Henry, too, felt somewhat alarmed to find himself using his imagination.
He tried to steer the conversation back to theory.
‘Your typical poisoner,’ he said, ‘is a drab, quiet creature seeking to call attention to himself by his crimes.
But often, so drab is he that even when he barges into the pub waving a bottle of paraquat and shouting I dunnit , people just don't want to know.
No one could believe that Everett Maltby had done the appalling things he had done.
He had to convince them.’
He drank some more.
‘Murder,’ he said, in the tones of someone who knew a bit about the subject, ‘is something we try and classify.
Try and put beyond the pale.
But we all have a murderer in us.
It's just that most of us are not honest enough to admit to the fact.
And there are more ways of killing people than by killing them.
If you know what I mean.’
‘Not sure I do…’ said Donald.
Henry looked at the clock.
It was two thirty.
Donald had had enough local history.
Like many people, he thought that local history was dull.
You could see him wanting to talk about the controversy over the redevelopment of Wimbledon town centre (Greycoat versus Speyhawk, or Caring Architects versus Greedy planners).
Henry did not want to talk about the redevelopment of Wimbledon town centre.
As far as Henry was concerned they could fill the whole thing in with concrete.
If he wasn't careful they would get on to the subject of the motorway.
Someone, it appeared, was planning to run a motorway through Wimbledon.
There were even rumours that it was going to go straight through the middle of Henry s house, a thought that, somewhat to his surprise, filled him with savage pleasure.
It was the past that inspired Henry, not the present.
Up at the bar he saw Everett Maltby and, beyond him, Tibbet the Highwayman and beyond him Cicely de Vaulles, who held the fief of the manor house, 250 yards from where he and Donald were drinking.
And he touched the thick-ribbed beer mug, brought it to his lips and drank again, sour, brown English beer.
History.
He had read somewhere, possibly in one of the books Elinor was always reading, that people under totalitarian regimes had no access to their past.
This happened in Wimbledon, too.
people were simply too lazy to try and remember.
Henry's memory, of course, seemed only defective in matters that immediately concerned him.
Who he had had dinner with the night before, and what, if anything, he thought about them.
But he was starting to lose track of the things that had made him what he was as well.
Where he had been to school, what kind of degree he had got at university.
Once upon a time he had read a quite terrifying number of books and accumulated an equally terrifying number of opinions about them.
But now his intellectual horizons had shrunk to debates about motorways or endless conversations about the right school for one's child, it was as if he didn't want to remember the Henry who had once promised a little more than that.
To his surprise, Donald was talking about disease.
Perhaps he was drunk.
Henry felt rather drunk.
‘Tell me…’
Donald was saying, ‘this…polyneuritis of Elinor's…’
‘Yes…’ said Henry.
‘Was that when I was treating her?’
‘I should think,’ said Henry, ‘you would have noticed if a patient of yours was diagnosed as having polyneuritis.
I mean, I should think you would have something to do with it, wouldn't you?’
‘Not necessarily,’ said Donald gloomily.
‘I might not have noticed it.
I might have said…‘pains in the legs sort yourself out sort of thing.’
I sometimes do.
And she might have gone to a specialist to have it diagnosed.
Or perhaps I did diagnose it but I've forgotten.
These days I forget what I prescribe and what people have got when they walk out of the surgery.
It just goes.
I forget everything.
I forget where I'm supposed to be and what I've done the day before and whose round it is…’
‘It's yours!’ said Henry quickly.
‘You see?’ said Donald, with an air of triumph, ‘you see?
The old brain is cardboard.
Complete and utter cardboard these days.’
He got to his feet and walked stiffly to the bar.
Perhaps you only forgot things you didn't want to be there in the first place.
That was certainly how Donald felt about his patients.
And maybe that was how Henry felt about himself.
And Maltby.
Why should he not want to remember Maltby, though?
Back to the matter in hand.
Come on.
Come on.
Elinor.
Elinor.
All this stuff about polyneuritis was handy, thought Henry, but perhaps a little too neat.
One minute, there they were talking about polyneuritis, next minute, there she was dying of it.
But Donald's first remark, when he returned with the drinks, was even more eerily appropriate to what Henry had in mind.
‘Tell you what,’ he said, ‘I'll pop up and have a look at her, shall I?’
Henry gulped.
Donald drank.
‘Most likely,’ he said, ‘it's stress.
She's feeling stressed.
She has what we doctors call…stress.
She's probably in a…stressful situation.
And so she imagines she has…this…’
‘Polyneuritis,’ said Henry.
‘That's the one.
Well…’
Donald went on, ‘who knows what polyneuritis is?
Really?
Really?
Medicine makes a lot of claims, you know, but basically all of us doctors are pretty well in the dark on most things medical…’
Donald was about the nearest he was likely to find to a Murderer's Doctor.
But he wasn't too keen on the idea of Donald arriving just as Elinor was wiping the last traces of chicken thallium off her lips.
One of the chief requirements of a poisoner was a quiet domestic life.
One needed few visitors, an oppressive routine, long silences, broken only by the tick of the clock and the groans of one's victim.
It was not a public crime.
Everett Maltby had…
But no.
Henry didn't want to think about Maltby any more.
‘Are you with me?’
Donald was saying.
‘Sure,’ Henry was saying.
‘So I'll pop up about half nine,’ went on Donald.
‘I'm very fond of old Elinor.
I think she's a sweet, no nonsense, old-fashioned girl.
She's such a gentle person!’
Henry goggled at him.
This remark, it seemed to him, was on a par with ‘Stalin was quite a nice guy, basically ‘.
And what had he agreed to anyway?
There was no chance that Donald would diagnose thallium poisoning.
Donald couldn't diagnose a common cold.
Having him there at the beginning was simply a stroke of luck so colossal that Henry's natural pessimism was trying to turn it into a disaster.
‘Make it half ten!’ he said.
They ate supper at eight.
By half past ten the thallium would be creeping round Elinor’ s bloodstream.
She would be suffering from pins and needles.
Stomach cramps perhaps.
She would be pleased to see a doctor.
CHAPTER SEVEN
When he got back the house looked empty.
The autumn afternoon was paling and the ivy that covered the façade of number 63 dripped with yellows and browns.
Opposite, number 47 in huge green wellingtons and baseball cap was talking to number 60.
Number 60's wife was shouting something at number 60's children.
Or were they number 58's children?
Henry pulled the plastic bags out of the boot of the Passat, and lowered his eyes.
Number 47 looked as if he were in a conversational mood.
As Henry got through the front gate, number 60 went back up the street towards his wife and number 47 dropped, suddenly and dramatically, on to his knees in front of the red Mitsubishi.
For a moment Henry thought that this might be a genuine act of worship, a public act of love towards the vehicle (I am not ashamed of what I feel about this car!
It's the most beautiful thing that ever happened to me !).
But, somewhat to Henry's disappointment, number 47 did not start necking with the bodywork.
He started to spray the hubcaps with what looked like toothpaste.
Henry was safe anyway.
Number 47 was either talking to you or the car; he was incapable of socializing what he felt about the Mitsubishi.
Henry was rather drunk.
How had he got back?
Had he gone via Windlesham Avenue and the comprehensive?
Or up Abacus Road, where the only black man in their part of Wimbledon lived?
Had he gone down to the bottom of the hill and worked his way up to Belvedere Road from the south-east?
The suburb was beginning to play tricks on him, to lie about itself.
He should never have started making up stuff about Everett Maltby.
Few things were sacred to Henry, but local history was one of them.
As he stowed the edenwort and the kohlrabi at the back of the cupboard, he saw his mother's strained, pale face as she boasted, unconvincingly, of her son's prowess to a neighbour.
‘Henry's got a real gift for history!’ she would say.
After he got his lower second at the University of Loughborough, she told Mrs Freeman at 82 that Henry was ‘on course for a Nobel prize’.
Could it be, thought Henry, as a shower of yams, bottled gherkins and packets of pastrami disgorged themselves on to the red-tiled floor of the kitchen, that his present bouts of cultural amnesia were a response to his mother's extravagant hopes for him?
‘Why have you gone into the law?’ she used to say to him.
‘You're better than that, aren't you?’
In fact, Henry's real problem with the law was that he wasn't quite up to it.
Even after eighteen years at Harris, Harris and Overdene he was, he reflected, about as much in the dark on legal questions as Donald was on medical issues.
Which was saying something.
Henry's mother had, he recalled bitterly, thought that he could ‘do better’ than Elinor as well.
‘It all depends,’ Henry had said, ‘what you are looking for in a relationship!’
In those days Henry had talked like that.
Well, if you were looking for the qualities Elinor had displayed in their years together, you could probably only have done better by marrying a man-eating tiger.
But of course, once Mrs Farr Senior had expressed doubts about a woman, it meant Henry was almost duty bound to marry her, just as, as soon as she expressed a political or aesthetic opinion, he immediately experienced a passionate surge of enthusiasm for the view most directly opposed to it.
He was almost as hostile to his own mother as he was to Elinor's, even though the politesse observed by his family meant he had not yet worked out a way of expressing it.
In the thirty-six years of which he had conscious memory of Mrs Farr Senior, their relationship had never developed beyond the ‘isn't it a nice day?’ stage.
They had never had an argument, apart from one occasion in 1956, when Henry refused to wear a pair of short trousers.
Henry's mother still referred to this argument.
‘You remember…’ she would say coquettishly, ‘when you made that awful fuss about the trousers…’
Thinking about his mother brought Henry back to the matter in hand and, grim faced, he went out to the car to retrieve the chicken.
He had left it on the passenger seat, where it lay, legs in the air, headless rump deep in the upholstery.
It was only when he was reaching across for it that he remembered.
Those three stolen sheets from Donald's prescription pad.
All it needed was someone to go looking for the jack, find their hands curling round them and start asking why …
You couldn't be too careful.
Everything had to be very, very carefully done indeed.
Henry yanked out the jack, groped for the papers and stuffed them into his pocket.
just as he did so, a voice behind him said, ‘I've got an awful headache!’
Elinor.
Headache.
How to respond.
Henry tried out a little gasp of sympathy.
‘Oh no!’ he said.
He sounded, he thought, almost openly satirical.
‘One of your headaches again!’
This was supposed to be said in the tone of one dealing with news of some immense natural disaster.
It came out as positively offensive disbelief.
Henry turned to her and held up the jack.
Appealing for clemency.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘I found the jack!’
She sniffed.
‘put it in the shed!’ she said.
Henry leered at her.
‘And I got a chicken,’ he said, ‘the kind you like!’
And kohlrabi and okra and chili and pastrami and thallium!
She frowned at the pavement.
‘When you've put the jack away,’ she said, ‘could you get in the car and go and get Maisie from ballet?’
‘Yes!’ said Henry.
She thrust her white face towards him.
She looked as if she was in pain.
Her eyebrows, Henry noted, were curiously thick.
Black and bushy.
Like a gorilla's, he thought.
‘You block me,’ she said.
‘You block my creativity!’
‘Sorry!’ said Henry.
She swung her bottom south-south-west and steered herself off up the path.
As Henry watched her retreating buttocks, grinding out yet another dismissal, he tried to remember if there had ever been a time, years ago, when he had desired her.
Or had she just seen him one day, walking around the suburb where he had been born, and said to him, in that sharp voice she used for all commands: ‘Marry Me!’
There was probably a man, somewhere, who could cope with Elinor.
Ten feet tall and eight feet wide.
With no nerves.
Henry went to the front hall, put the chicken and the jack on the table by the front door and trudged back out to the Passat.
It looked smug, Henry thought, about the fact that he was going to have to drive it again.
As he drove off down the street he saw the curtains of the front bedroom close.
Elinor was going to have her sleep.
She always needed a sleep after therapy.
An hour or so spent talking with other women about how weak, cruel, uncaring, lazy and insensitive their husbands were always made her tired.
‘Oh Maisie,’ thought Henry, ‘you who are, even now, longing to get your fat little feet out of the ballet pumps that you will never wear gracefully, soon we will be free of her.
Soon we will not have to go to ballet or piano or junior aerobics.
We can go wherever we like.’
Actually, if he were offered the choice of going wherever he liked in the world, he would probably choose Wimbledon.
The tribal customs of Wimbledon were, in Henry's view, as worthy of study as the totems and taboos of the Aborigines of the Northern Territory.
The stories of the suburb, the tales that gave number 24, 59, 3031 or 47 their right to their homes, these were, in their way, as substantial as the creation myths of the Eskimos.
Passats, BMWs, dormer windows, back extensions, wooden garden sheds, all meant something more than at first appeared — white wooden railings, gold nameplates on doors, stained-glass windows in bathrooms, net curtains, numbered dustbins, unnumbered dustbins, sash windows, plate-glass windows, windows with double glazing, windows without double glazing, walls painted white, all of this was part of a body of myth as strange and mysterious as the Epic of Gilgamesh .
What was the relationship between new roofs and marital discord?
Why did people who put adverts for local fêtes in their windows so often neglect the paint on their woodwork?
The codes of Wimbledon were too strange and complex to be understood by its inhabitants.
It needed some stranger to unlock it, to explain it to itself, to see behind that apparent silence and quietness.
Wimbledon.
Its architecture compared favourably with that of northern France (bar one or two cathedrals).
Its cuisine was as varied as Hong Kong or Bangkok (you could eat as well at the Mai Thai restaurant, Wimbledon Broadway, as in anywhere around the Gulf of Thailand).
Its history, if you skipped a thousand years, was as violent as Phnom Penh's or Smolensk's.
The things the Vikings had done in Raynes Park were, let's face it, unspeakable.
Why, Henry wondered, was he getting defensive about Wimbledon?
Who was attacking it? perhaps it was that letter from that bastard up in town.
That —
Dear Mr Farr,
Thank you for your letter and thank you for letting us see your nine-volume Complete History of Wimbledon .
It's a massive work and has obviously taken a great deal of your time and trouble.
I fear, however, that a detailed analysis of a suburb, especially a not particularly well-known one like Wimbledon, would not ‘travel, well in our terms.
I'm sure you'll understand what I mean when I say that a reader in, for example, Moscow would find your book very difficult to relate to.
For a book to have truly international appeal, it must have, well, truly international appeal!
We all loved the chapter about Victorian Wimbledon though.
Might not this make a pamphlet of some kind?
Perhaps for your local historical society?
Best wishes,
Karim Jackson.
Henry's hands tightened on the wheel as he thought about Karim Jackson's letter.
There were people in Moscow, New York, Rome, Paris, Oslo and Naples who were absolutely dying to find out about Wimbledon.
Wimbledon was as much a mystery to them as was the Orinoco to Henry.
All he had to do, he knew, was get the thing in print.
Why had this Pakistani — if he was a Pakistani — got it in for him?
Why did he take this extraordinarily negative attitude to the most important suburb in the Western world?
Was it something to do with tennis?
They played cricket in Pakistan, didn't they?
Was that the problem?
And more importantly than that, what was a Pakistani doing in a position of power and influence in a publishing house?
The man (if it was a man) was probably a fairly junior member of the firm; if only Henry could find a way of getting past him to the people really in the driving seat.
He mustn't think about his book.
Thinking about his book was almost worse than thinking about Elinor.
He would think about what his mother always used to call ‘nice things’.
‘Think about nice things!’ she would say to Henry as she tucked him into bed at night.
And, as he coasted towards Maple Drive through the suburb's still deserted streets, Henry thought about nice things.
He thought about thallium and the Guillain-Barré syndrome and whether it was or wasn't too late to have Elinor heavily insured.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Everything happened very quickly after he had got Maisie back to the house.
Elinor was still asleep.
Before she should have a chance to wake and discover the edenwort, Henry got to work on the supper.
Maisie sat in the corner of the kitchen with one chocolate bar in her mouth, another in her right hand, another in her lap and a fourth beside her on the draining board, in case anything should happen to the other three.
Henry paused over a half-dismembered edenwort.
He had better catch up on Elinor's latest batch of instructions.
She wrote him notes.
Notes saying what to get for supper, notes telling him not to leave his shoes by the bed…sometimes she left him notes telling him how she felt.
About life, about the world, and above all, about him.
Since she had started going to therapy, these notes had got longer and more articulate.
They didn't start ‘Dear Henry’, or ‘My Dear Husband’, but simply began, picking up (as her therapist had taught her) at ‘the moment of rage’.
There was one, now, lurking in the vegetable basket and Henry moved towards it as one might move towards an unexploded bomb.
Why do you not understand my needs as a woman?
You do not commit to the home, do you, Henry?
You are (I have to say) intensely judgemental.
You block and deny my aspirations to creativity and permanence.
Elinor attended art classes at Wimbledon School of Art.
She was particularly keen on pottery, a skill she had, in Henry's view, even less hope of acquiring than her daughter.
You deal death to the need in me to grow and change and become myself.
Like a huge wall that shields tender shoots from the light, you do not allow my passions and sensations their scope.
I am afraid of you, Henry!
Not half as much as I am of you! thought Henry, as he ran his eyes down the rest of the manuscript (she must have written it before going to sleep).
I am afraid of the male violence that is in you.
In a world run by men, for men…
Maybe, thought Henry, but, if so, run by other men for other men.
I am not one of these men!
A world of cruel greed, rape, nuclear war, phallocentric control, where women are pushed to the sidelines, how can I not be afraid of you?
With the fierce hatred that I know is in you?
Like a mugger you leap out at me from the dark, and my rights as a woman are violated by your obscene masculinity!
Henry looked at himself in the kitchen mirror, as he crumpled up the other three pages of this latest missive and threw it in the swingbin.
He looked, he had to admit, the very picture of obscene masculinity.
Glumly, he began to pull out okra and edenwort.
If she didn't eat the vegetables, she was almost sure to eat the meat.
Elinor was a star pupil in her therapy class.
Having been taught, first at an expensive public school and then at Oxford University, to express herself to order, she found the poor creatures who shambled along to 23 Dorman Road every Saturday, Thursday, Monday and Wednesday absolutely no competition at all.
Most of these women had been in what they called ‘the therapy situation’ for years.
Elinor's difficulties were, at least from her description of the classes, bigger and better than those of her fellow therapees.
She was a kind of Stakhanovite worker in the field of female suffering, setting new targets for pain, finding each week some new emotional cross to bear.
The main topic on the agenda of the therapy class was, to start with anyway, Henry.
They all sat around in a circle agreeing what a swine Henry was.
But as the therapy continued, Henry had observed, others were found to be guilty of the capital crime of blocking Elinor's creativity.
There were other saboteurs and wreckers, Trotskyists and double-dealing spies, who, sneakily and shamefully, crept about, blocking Elinor's rightful place as an internationally acclaimed oil painter, star newspaper columnist or opera singer.
Her mother for a start.
At first, Henry had not been able to believe that her therapist had got it so right.
If anyone had prevented Elinor from being an oil executive, or a leading novelist and short-story writer, it was Elinor's mother, a small, heavily built woman with a squint, who lived very near the Sellafield atomic reactor. principally because Elinor's mother was completely without talent for anything apart from giving men a hard time and had, presumably, passed on her genes to her daughter.
The therapist, apparently, while finding her mother guilty of the hideous and anti-state offence of blocking Elinor's creativity, took the view that she had managed to do this by getting Elinor to love her too much.
How she worked this out was a mystery to Henry, since her mother's role in Elinor's life was confined to twice-yearly visits in which she sat in their front room and listened to Elinor telling her how awful Henry was.
He put the chicken in a roasting bag and felt in his pocket for the vial of thallium.
‘Ugh!’ said Maisie.
‘Chicken.’
‘It's OK,’ said Henry, ‘you can fill up on choc bars and then pretend to eat it and when she isn't looking I'll sling it in the bin.’
‘Good!’ said Maisie.
‘I wouldn't touch a mouthful of it myself,’ said Henry, ‘it's that healthy free-range chicken that she likes…’
‘Yuk!’ said Maisie.
While she was munching her way through her third chocolate bar, Henry took the chicken through to the scullery and carefully anointed its breast with the thallium.
On top of the thallium he sprinkled salt, a very little pepper and a coating of tarragon leaves.
It was six thirty.
Back in the kitchen, he cleaned the edenwort and the okra and chopped them up small enough to be unrecognizable.
He whistled as he chopped and, as he tipped the vegetables into the frying pan, he sang, to the tune of Candyman Blues, the following song:
Thallium
Thallium
Guillain-Barré
Thallium
Thallium Thallium
Thallium Guillain-Barré.
Underneath the frying pan was another note.
You hate women, don't you?
Why do you hate women?
Why are you so frightened of them?
Why do you seek to destroy them?
To caricature them?
Is it their creative potential that frightens you?
Their menstrual power?
Their child-bearing power?
Is it their fund of womanliness you hate?
Don't you hate women, Henry ?
Henry couldn't think of a woman he disliked apart from Elinor.
And, of course, Elinor's mother.
How would Elinor's mother react to her daughter's death?
Henry had a feeling that she would take it well.
She had taken her husband's brain tumour like a…well, like a man.
‘OK,’ her square jaw seemed to say, ‘Derek has a brain tumour.
That happens.
We can deal with ‘it!’
And she and her daughter had dealt with it.
They had coped.
They had certainly coped a lot better than Elinor's father, a man Henry had always liked.
The news of his impending death had badly ruffled his composure.
He had talked wildly about the meaning of life, the emptiness of it all, the lack of scope offered by the Guardian Building Society.
Elinor and her mother had clearly found all this in bad taste.
‘Daddy is depressed,’ they would say, narrowing their 60 eyes and tilting their square chins downward, ‘very, very depressed.
About the fact that he is dying.’
They clearly felt he should have taken a more manly approach to the brain tumour.
A man who had such a positive attitude towards Do It Yourself could surely have used same of that energy to combat the decay of his central nervous system.
Henry thought about his father-in-law's funeral, as he placed the Chicken Thallium in the oven, and then checked his watch again.
He thought about the dignified posture of Elinor and Elinor's mother, about how good they looked in black, about how they retained their composure even as the oblong box containing Derek slid off through a gap in the crematorium wall.
About how, as Elinor and Elinor's mother stood by the flowers in the rain at Putney Vale Crematorium, someone had said to him, ‘They're taking it very well!’
Of course they were, thought Henry, they couldn't give a toss about the poor bastard.
He would wear his black leather jacket at Elinor's funeral.
And the green socks.
And the red shoes.
He would deck himself out in the kind of clothes that would give most offence to her were she alive.
And if Elinor's mother should break down he would sob operatically and people would say to each other, as he stood by the flowers afterwards, ‘My, my.
He is taking it badly.’
It was six forty-five.
He turned the oven on to 250 and put the okra and the edenwort on to a low heat.
In approximately one hour she would be getting her chops round the first succulent mouthful of Chicken Thallium.
By midnight she would be experiencing severe abdominal discomfort.
Whistling to himself, Henry laid the table, while, in the corner of the kitchen, Maisie finished her last chocolate bar and got to work on a packet of crisps, a tube of  Rollos , half a pound of jellybabies and a jumbo bar of Turkish delight.
As she ate she cast worried glances up towards the cupboard by the stove, where lay a small sack of potato crisps, some Liquorice Allsorts and two packets of biscuits.
Sometimes Henry wondered whether the junk food industry was going to be able to take the kind of demands Maisie was going to make on it in the years ahead.
Occasionally, for some obscure reason of her own, Elinor was pleasant.
Henry could not quite work out why, since her pleasantness was not always followed by a request for money or some other favour; perhaps she was remembering something he had quite forgotten, an incident during their courtship perhaps (they must have had a courtship) or a Henry, now lost to Henry himself, who could have inspired feelings such as pleasure.
Or perhaps this was part of some internal clock of hers and, at some moments, often weeks or months apart, Elinor was programmed to be briefly but definitely pleasant.
It always threw him.
‘Hullo, darling!’ she said, as she came round the kitchen door in her black trouser-suit, her black hair swept back under an Alice band.
‘I've had a lovely sleep!’
Henry looked at her suspiciously.
Why is she saying this? he thought.
What has she got in mind?
She crossed the kitchen floor and pecked him on the cheek.
‘Sorry I was cross!’ she said.
Her voice was light, tremulous. perhaps she was planning to murder him!
‘You're making supper!’ she said.
‘That's right!’
With just a hint of normal, workaday Elinor, she pointed a stubby finger at the vegetables.
‘What's that?’
‘It's edenwort, darling,’ said Henry.
‘It's a new vegetable!’
Elinor did not pick up the pan and hurl it across the room.
She scooped up a little on her forefinger and nibbled at it.
‘It's rather nice!’
‘And I've done chicken!’ said Henry.
‘Free-range chicken.
How you like it.
All crispy in the oven.
Topped with…’
‘What's it topped with?’ said Elinor suspiciously.
‘Lovely herbs!’ said Henry.
‘Lovely fresh herbs from the garden picked all fresh and with no chemicals on!’
‘Mmmm!’ she said.
And skipped off towards Maisie who, at the first sound of her mother's footsteps, had concealed her cache of sweets under her jersey.
Perhaps, thought Henry, she was appealing to his better feelings.
She was making herself difficult to kill on humanitarian grounds.
He watched her as she danced a few larky steps with her daughter, singing in an effortfully pure soprano while Maisie shuffled along trying to keep the sweets safe under her jumper.
‘Love-lee chicken!’ she was singing.
‘Love-lee chicken!’
Still in a larky mood, she began to lift her daughter up off the floor.
Maisie, like Henry, did not like being lifted.
She held herself quite still, staring seriously at her mother, thinking, quite obviously, Henry thought, about Turkish delight.
Elinor put her down.
‘You two,’ she said, ‘are so stiff!’
Henry looked across at Maisie.
Was Elinor perhaps going to try and top her as well?
Never mind.
In a very short space of time she would have her feet under the table and those huge jaws would be munching their way into the breast.
And then the doorbell rang.
CHAPTER NINE
It was Donald.
Elinor was pleased to see him.
She it was who opened the door and Henry heard a high-pitched giggle followed by a lengthy squawk of pleasure.
‘Donald,’ she said, ‘it's Donald.’
Henry wondered whether she was having an affair with Donald.
WIMBLEDON DOCTOR IN POISON LOVE TRIANGLE, he thought to himself.
Or possibly, DOCTOR IN LOVE PACT POISON DEATH WISH PATIENT HORROR.
No.
Donald would never do it with a patient.
His offence against those who came to him for medical help was less easy to punish.
But he was certainly guilty, thought Henry, of liking Elinor and, as he came into the hall, nodding his big head as Elinor fussed round him, Henry wondered whether his wife might not be,au fond , quite a pleasant woman.
Numbers of people seemed to like her.
Neighbours, friends, colleagues.
People bought her lunch and rang her up and sent her birthday cards; it seemed a particularly cruel joke that one of the few people who really did dislike her should be married to her.
‘You must stay to supper!’
Elinor was saying.
‘Oh, Elinor,’ Donald was saying, ‘I couldn't…’
But he was saying it in a way that implied possible assent.
Elinor went to the stove, singing in a high soprano voice ‘Donald's coming to supper…
Donald's coming to supper…’
When this song failed to make the impact she clearly expected it to make, she turned to Henry as if she was addressing some Yugoslav peasant and did a lot of the kind of lip and tongue work she had used on Elke, their one and only au pair.
‘Donald's staying to break bread with us!’ she said.
Henry managed a smile.
Once again, Lustgarten was on the line to him.
‘It was when the friend of the family, Donald Templeton, the trusted and valued doctor who attended both Farr and his wife, came to call that the plans of the man who came to be known as the Wimbledon poisoner came badly unstuck.
Suddenly, to Farr's consternation and disappointment, it wasn't a cosy, deadly meal for two by the fireside, but Chicken Thallium for three!’
Lustgarten stopped by the fire, his hand on the wall, and glared, menacingly, at the camera.
Lustgarten had a point.
Did Donald like breast meat?
If he did, was Henry going to be able to avoid serving him with any?
He tried to readjust his face to make him look less like Macbeth.
‘Oh,’ he said again, ‘great!’
Donald looked at Maisie.
‘Only ten!’ his big, grey eyes seemed to say.
‘Ten years old, and less than a month to live!’
Maisie grinned.
‘Hullo, Donald!’ she said.
Henry attempted to gain some control over the situation.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘we've got a nice, juicy chicken leg for you!’
Donald did not seem unresponsive to this notion.
He did not say, ‘Actually — I'm a breast man myself!’
But then, it was early in the game for such delicate negotiations.
Soon, carving etiquette might well be as developed and intricate a ritual as chess and, when it did get that advanced it would probably be in Wimbledon but, for the moment, Henry was faced with the unattractive prospect of involuntary double murder.
Was polyneuritis infectious?
‘I don't understand it, Doctor!
They both started throwing up and seeing flashing lights!
Might it be some form of…
I don't know…’(rapidly)‘…infectious polyneuritis?’
The trouble with this, of course, was that it might lead to another doctor, one more competent than Donald, examining their evening meal.
No — he would have to make sure that no breast meat came Donald's way.
It shouldn't be too difficult.
‘Henry tells me,’ Donald was saying in a carefully conversational manner, ‘that you've had a touch of the old…polyneuritis!’
He said this as if amused by the thought.
There was nothing terrifying or frightening about polyneuritis, his half-smile and gentle nod seemed to say, it was just an illness…like…cancer…or coronary thrombosis…or Alzheimer's…or leprosy! pretty soon they would all be laughing about it.
‘He what?’ squawked Elinor.
She shot him one of her more mainline, Elinor-style glances.
The standard who-is-this-jerk-and-why-am-I-married-to-him expression.
Which, for some reason, then turned into a laugh.
‘Silly old thing!’ she said, and cuffed him affectionately.
Henry looked at Donald.
‘She's a brave little liar!’ he tried to make his eyes say.
‘She doesn't want to bother you with it.’
Donald, who was still nodding his head, did not seem to notice any of this.
Perhaps he was just in the kind of trance he went into as a matter of course every time illness was discussed.
He had a faraway, Buddhist look in the eyes — a kind of stillness and peace that denoted the complete absence of any mental process.
‘I've been a bit depressed,’ she said, ‘that's all.’
Bit depressed?
Bit depressed?
You've been behaving like a commodity broker on Black Thursday, haven't you?
‘Let's have a drink!’ said Henry as he thought this.
‘Sherry,’ said Elinor swiftly.
A pint mug, my dear?
Or shall we decant it into a bucket?
‘Surely, my love,’ said Henry lightly.
Donald chose Scotch.
Maisie had a lemonade.
Hen–poured himself a Perrier water.
He was going to have to keep calm and steady for the task ahead.
‘For Farr,’ said Lustgarten, ‘as he laughed and joked with his old friend in the front room of their Wimbledon home, was already planning exactly where his carving knife would skirt the edge of the poisoned breast meat, digging deeper and deeper away from the tainted flesh, so that neither he nor Templeton would suffer.
Farr's doctor was no part of his murderous plan.
His venom, both actual and metaphysical, was held in reserve for his wife!’
Henry went to the oven and looked through the grease-stained glass window.
He could just make out the chicken.
It was still oatmeal-white around the fleshy part of the thighs.
But the breast was turning a golden brown — the herbs, the black pepper and the thallium were crisping up nicely.
He turned back to Elinor and Donald.
Donald looked, thought Henry, like a perfect blend of Doctor Kildare and Gillespie, the older, wiser doctor of the partnership.
Donald was perfectly poised on the edge of middle age — greying curls, the big, sculptural ears, the solidly Roman nose all suggested power, maturity, certainty.
Henry concentrated on Donald's face and, as so often these days, found it easier to look as if he was listening by doing the reverse.
He timed his nods and yesses and ‘Indeeds!’ on an entirely mathematical basis, interspersing them with a sort of pucker-cum-squint that could be mild disagreement or the preface to some statement of his own.
Sometimes he helped along this impression of participation by opening his mouth and shovelling his chin forward until someone interrupted him.
‘Actually,’ Elinor was saying, ‘we were going to Portugal, but I think we'll be staying in Wimbledon this year.
I can't see myself getting out of Wimbledon at all.’
Unless you count the ride up to Putney Vale Crematorium, thought Henry, that'll be a nice little outing for you, won't it?
He got up again and went back to the oven.
Donald and Elinor had been talking for thirty minutes.
Henry marvelled once again at time.
Its passage seemed, nowadays, to be the only event in his life.
Nothing happened in it any more.
It just went.
It wasn't the flying thing described by poets.
It was the only thing on the horizon, shouldering aside achievement and sensation with attention-seeking roughness, and nothing, not conversation, wine, sexual encounters or the search for knowledge or fame could prevent it.
What had they actually done while this chicken was cooking?
Bugger all.
Maybe murder was the only way to make all this meaningful.
Maybe that was why he was trying to poison Elinor?
For a moment he could not quite think why he was trying to poison Elinor.
It was just another thing he did — like dealing with wills and conveyancing at Harris, Harris and Overdene, or shouting at Maisie to go to bed.
Then he pulled down the oven door, smelt the sweet, fatty smell of the meat and knew that it was probably this very fact that accounted for his decision to go through with the business.
He was poisoning Elinor because she was there.
‘Lovely chicken,’ said Henry, ‘coming up!’
She was smiling at him.
My God, thought Henry, perhaps the therapy is beginning to work.
Perhaps she is going to turn into a quietly spoken, normal human being.
perhaps that is the point of therapy.
For the first year or so it turns you into a kind of psychopathic animal and then suddenly, like a butterfly emerging from the pupa, you sprout wings, your heart opens, you become…charming.
He looked at Elinor as he brought the chicken to the table.
No.
Not yet, anyway.
Killing Elinor was, Henry felt, still an ecologically sound thing to do.
It would take at least another seven or eight years to turn her into a recognizable human being.
Maybe even longer.
In fact (Henry went back to the fridge and took out two bottles of wine), if she kept on with this present therapist there was absolutely no hope for her at all.
If there was any hope for her, it was indisputable that the outlook was grim for anyone with whom she might come in contact.
The woman kept telling her she needed assertiveness training.
Elinor needed about as much assertiveness training as Napoleon.
‘Lovely chicken!’ said Henry.
‘Tasty free-range chicken.’
They were looking at him oddly.
Elinor took another swig of sherry and Henry arranged wine glasses at each place.
Then he went back to the cutlery drawer and, with a skill born of long practice, lobbed knives and forks over to Maisie, who set them down in her customary eccentric manner.
Sometimes forks would appear on the right and knives on the left ‘sometimes (Henry always felt this was Maisie's way of telling people they were not welcome) two knives or only a spoon.
Elinor, who usually took it upon herself to criticize all aspects of her daughter's behaviour, was into her third sherry.
She and Donald were discussing cars with great enthusiasm.
They talked of the Nissan Cherry, the Volvo 740, the Granada Ghia, the Renault 5, the XJ6 Jaguar.
People in Wimbledon, these days, always talked about things as if they were people, and people as if they were things.
They lacked confidence in their own values.
Henry was going to add a chapter towards the end of The Complete History of Wimbledon in which he planned to deal with the failure of nerve he sensed in the place.
Some creature he had met at a dinner party recently (he was, it had to be said, from East Finchley) had had the nerve to tell him that New York was ‘more vibrant’ than Wimbledon.
He had gone on about lofts. people in New York, apparently, lived in lofts, presumably because they couldn't afford houses.
‘You have to go there,’ he had said to Henry, pressing his face forward, ‘it's so alive!’
And another man, who should have known better even though he was from Southfields, had announced that Wimbledon was ‘on the dull side.
It's all accountants and solicitors, isn't it?’
What was wrong, thought Henry, with being a solicitor?
He thought about Harris, Harris and Overdene.
He thought about how Harris smiled at Harris, whenever Henry passed his office door.
He thought about the way that Overdene looked at him from his glass cubbyhole whenever Henry was twenty minutes late from lunch.
And found to his annoyance that he was grinding his teeth.
Henry breathed deeply.
Sooner or later something was going to snap.
‘Are you all right?’ said Elinor.
‘Fine, darling!’ said Henry.
The plates were on the table.
The group was seated.
Henry was carving.
Ladies first.
Two, three, four huge chunks of Chicken Thallium.
Smothered with gravy, garnished with unspeakable, uneatable edenwort and okra.
Ladies first.
If you don't like the vegetables — have the meat!
Ladies first!
The plate was on its way to Elinor.
‘Leg OK for you, Donald?’ said Henry.
‘Actually,’ said Donald, ‘I fancy a bit of breast!’
‘Have this!’ said Elinor, thrusting her poisoned meat towards him.
‘I'm not hungry all of a sudden.
Have this!’
CHAPTER TEN
Of course, in all the books, poisoning was a comparatively simple affair.
You made them Horlicks or Ovaltine or tea or coffee.
You added the arsenic, the antimony or the heavy metal.
And they took it down dutifully.
Henry might have known that in his case the operation would prove a little more complicated.
He watched, open-mouthed, as Donald beamed down at his Chicken Thallium.
‘Well,’ said Donald, ‘I'd better get abreast!’
Elinor seemed to find this very funny.
It was the kind of joke that went down well in Wimbledon.
Normally, Henry would have joined in the laughter.
Now he watched in horrified silence as Donald cut himself a giant slice of poisoned meat.
‘Won't you have any?’ he said, desperately, to Elinor.
‘No,’ she said, ‘I might eat later.’
‘It's lovely!’ said Henry feebly.
‘Mmmmm,’ said Donald, swallowing a mouthful, ‘it is!’
He chewed it very thoroughly and, as Henry watched, began to swallow.
‘You could die for this!’ he said.
Too right you could, thought Henry.
Things were now going very, very slowly.
As Henry watched (no one else round the table was eating) Donald lifted another laden fork towards his mouth.
Halfway through the trip he decided to make the mouthful even more exciting.
He smeared the chicken with edenwort, okra and gravy, rubbed it round the plate and set it off once more in the direction of his wide, beautifully moulded mouth.
The edenwort and the okra would do it.
Surely.
Unlike thallium, Henry felt, they were probably odourful and tasteful in the extreme.
Enough to make you gag on first crunch, surely.
Donald would choke and spit and deposit the whole mouthful back on to the plate.
But, as Henry watched, Donald broke into a smile.
And not just any smile.
It wasn't simply that he was managing to smile with his mouth full — a difficult enough task at the best of times — it was that his smile expressed so many real, positive qualities that it must be designed to sell something.
It seemed a shame to waste it on friends.
‘Mmmm,’ said Donald, ‘mmmm!’
And then, after a bit of Christ-this-is-so-delicious-it-seems-a-shame-to-go-on-about-it-but-I-feel-it-is-my-duty acting, he went on, ‘So chewy.
So chewy and fresh!’
He was even beginning to talk like an advertisement.
He really liked Chicken Thallium and he wanted people to know that he did.
Feeling like an accomplice in this business (‘Tell me — how did you get it so chewy?’)
Henry said, ‘Yes.
It is.
It is chewy.
It's a bit tough, the meat.
I —’
‘What is it?’
‘Edenwort and okra.’
Even this did not make Donald crane his neck forward and start retching all over the table.
He just nodded and smiled and went on chewing Chicken Thallium, slowly and methodically Henry tried to think of a remark that would go with an expansive gesture.
The sort of gesture that might, reasonably, allow a chap to knock over a bottle of wine and make sure at least half of it got all over Donald's plate.
‘But what does it all mean?’ perhaps, or, ‘For God's sake, we're all going to die!’
He was unable to think of a suitable gesture.
With a violence born of desperation, he swung at the bottle nearest to him and the mouth of a bottle of Tavel Rosé landed neatly in the pile of Donald's chicken, allowing pink liquid to pulse on to the plate.
‘Henry!’ said Elinor.
‘What on earth did you do that for?’
‘Sorry,’ said Henry, ‘I slipped!’
Donald was looking foolishly down at his plate.
‘Oh…’ he was saying, ‘oh…’
He wanted more Chicken Thallium, you could tell.
Henry was so infuriated by the childlike look of loss on his face he had half a mind to give him some.
Then, getting to his feet, he scooped up the plate.
Before he could head off for the dustbin, Elinor gripped his wrist firmly.
She had strong hands, and the pressure she put into her grasp felt as if she was about to throw him over her shoulder or come out with some menacingly appropriate comment.
‘Hang on!
Shall we just run a lab test on this chicken!’
In fact she said: ‘Give it to Tibbles.’
Tibbles was Henry's cat.
Or, more accurately, she was Maisie's cat.
Or, even more accurately, she was no one 's cat.
Responsibility for Tibbles was a free-floating affair, mainly consisting of whoever didn't want to feed her saying to whoever they thought should be feeding her, ‘She's your cat!’
She was, of course, in the way of cats, no one 's but her own.
A small, thin tabby, she spent her life trying to work out the central dilemmas of her life — how to get in and out of the house, and why the fat man called Henry tried to kick her every time the two other people in the house were out of the way.
Henry hated Tibbles.
He had fantasized about her death almost as much as he had fantasized about Elinor's.
Why, now her end was so imminent, did he feel a desire to avert it?
‘Why not?’ he said, and taking both plate and chicken he hurried out to the scullery.
‘I'll cut you some leg!’ he called.
How much had Donald eaten?
Enough to kill him?
And, if he had, what was the antidote?.
He very much did not want Donald to die.
Donald was boring, sensationally incompetent at his job, complacent, vain, narcissistic, almost aggressively narrow-minded.
But he was a forty-year-old Englishman.
He was someone to drink with, for Christ's sake!
He did not deserve death by heavy metal poisoning.
There was a poisons unit at Charing Cross Hospital, wasn't there?
Some years ago Maisie had swallowed a whole bottle of vitamin pills and, although Henry had suggested that in his view Maisie's stomach could probably have stood a diet of broken glass, aspirin and raw steak, Elinor had insisted on ringing Charing Cross Hospital.
As far as Henry could remember they gave advice over the phone.
But he couldn't possibly phone from the house.
He could go to a phone box.
‘…Er…
I seem to have swallowed a bit of thallium…’
How could he put it?
‘I'm doing some work on optical lenses with a high refractive index and I seem to have got some…er…thallium on my sandwiches…’
They would want to know where and how, wouldn't they?
They were probably in close touch with the police.
Oh, Jesus Christ, how long had he got?
How long had Donald got?
Not long, from the look of the chicken.
One thing was for certain.
Tibbles had got hardly any time left at all.
She was bum up in the air, small head to one side ‘gnawing her way through Donald's portion and then on to the rest of the poisoned carcass of the chicken, which Henry added to her plate.
If she was well enough to formulate a view on the question -and at the present rate of progress it looked as if she might be — Elinor would take a dim view of the poisoning of Tibbles.
Cats did not rate quite as high on her scale of things worth fighting for as, say, dolphins, but their stock certainly stood higher than that of the middle-aged, white, heterosexual male.
She seemed unable to appreciate the fact that Henry himself was one of a threatened species, even though that threat was treated with contempt by most ecologists and nearly all women.
Perhaps this was why, increasingly, Henry saw life as a struggle between him and the things his wife cared for so passionately — whales, seals, Aborigines, dolphins…
If it came to a straight choice between a dolphin and Henry (and in Henry's view things had already got that serious) he would go for Henry every time.
Would Elinor though?
He stood looking down at Tibbles, breathing heavily.
Blood pressure, Henry.
Blood pressure.
Don't think about animals.
Don't think about anything that disturbs you.
Think about what your mother used to call ‘nice things’.
Think about Wimbledon.
Think about the rows of quiet houses.
Think about the rattle of the electric trains on their way to Southfields and Putney.
Think about the neatly kept front gardens and the commuters clacking their way back in the twilight towards the carefully assembled innocence of home.
He was all right now.
He cut Donald a generous slice of untainted leg, and went back to the dining table.
Now.
How was he going to make this phone call?
He could not think of a single convincing excuse that would get him out of the house.
He would have to use the phone in the hall.
Now, while they were eating.
He got to his feet.
‘Just got to…er…’
Elinor and the doomed man looked at him oddly.
‘Make a call,’ said Henry with a crispness that surprised him.
‘It's a work problem.
Tricky conveyancing thing.
I think a tort may be involved.’
Elinor was looking at him with what might have been respect.
He almost never discussed his work with her, while she, like many other progressive people, regarded the law as a sinister conspiracy to defraud the laity.
‘It all hinges on Prosser v.
Prosser,’ went on Henry, in a world-weary voice, ‘as usual…’
And, with the purposeful stride of a great barrister on his way to a confrontation in the Old Bailey, he went out into the hall.
It was curious.
His attempt to murder her seemed to have given him a new strength in the relationship.
He was, suddenly, almost decisive.
And that was what was needed.
Even as he closed the door behind him, the thallium was on its way down through Donald's oesophagus, slithering towards his stomach and digestive tract, where his body chemicals would turn it into a disease Donald would have difficulty in recognizing.
There was no time to lose.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Henry dialled the number of Charing Cross Hospital and asked in low tones for the poisons Unit.
‘The what?’ said the girl on the switchboard.
‘The poisons Unit!’ hissed Henry, in what he realized was a distinctly suspicious manner.
‘Can't hear you, caller…’
‘The Poisons Unit!’ said Henry, as loudly as he dared.
He tried to say this in a way that suggested that he was always ringing up for a natter about arsenic and thallium, that there was nothing odd about his request.
At that moment Elinor came into the hall.
She stood in the darkness, looking at him curiously.
‘Hullo,’ said a voice at the other end, ‘the Poisons Unit.’
‘Hullo,’ said Henry breezily, ‘Henry Farr here from Harris, Harris and Overdene…’
‘Yes,’ said the voice cautiously.
Elinor was still looking at him.
‘I've got a problem,’ said Henry, ‘with the conveyancing papers on 56 Northwood Road.
I have a real difficulty in locating who has responsibility for the dustbins.’
‘This is the Poisons Unit,’ said the voice, cautiously.
‘I know,’ said Henry, ‘and I am sorry to bother you at this time of night but my client has given me to understand that this is when you would be available.
Tell me, in the lease as originally drawn up would you be able to let my client know whether there was specific reference to the controversy over the dustbins or did this develop after the Maltese took over?’
Elinor folded her arms.
‘Tell your client,’ said the voice at the other end of the phone, ‘that he or she would have a better chance of establishing who is or is not responsible for his or her dustbins if he or she employed a lawyer who didn't address his inquiries to people whose principal concern is pharmacology.’
The line went dead.
‘Thank you very much indeed!’ said Henry with what sounded like genuine enthusiasm.
‘That really is most helpful in our terms.
I will of course let my client know that Mr Makaroupides takes full responsibility for this and that will take a weight off his mind.
Have a nice day!’
He put the phone down and stared coolly at Elinor.
‘It's four o'clock in New York!’ he said.
‘So what?’ said Elinor.
‘That's where I was phoning.
Glyn, Harwood and Schmeiss operate almost entirely out of New York.’
Elinor goggled at him.
She had never heard Henry talk like this before.
Neither had Henry.
But desperation could do strange things to a man.
Donald was dying in there, for God's sake.
Hadn't there been something in that book about Graham Young?
Graham had got him into this.
He could get him out of it.
Young had, as far as Henry could remember, suggested the antidote for one of his victims himself.
Dyner—something…dyner—‘Are you all right?’ said Elinor.
‘I'm fine,’ said Henry, ‘but this means I'd better just pop out for a second.’
Elinor's eyes were wide with concern.
Henry never popped out anywhere.
Especially after nine o'clock at night.
‘I'll have to go and see Martin Rubashon.
He's only just down the road, but this is a face-to-face matter, I'm afraid.’
Who, Elinor's expression seemed to be saying, is Martin Rubashon?
And why have I never heard his name before?
‘What's a face-to-face matter?’ she said.
‘The dustbins, of course,’ said Henry testily, ‘this is a nine-million-dollar contract.
I'm not letting it slip over a few measly dustbins!’
And with a calm purpose that he did not feel he went out into the street.
As the autumn air met his face, he remembered.
Dynercaprol and potassium chloride.
That was it.
Young had actually suggested its use to the police at one stage of their investigations.
All he had to do was stroll down to Underwoods and pick up a bit of dynercaprol and potassium chloride.
He didn't fancy another trip to the chemist's he had visited that morning.
There was something scary about the place, something, well, Maltbyish…
He had, of course‘still got a few sheets of Donald's prescription pad.
With a quick glance back at the house he ran to the car.
Once inside he groped for the sheets in his pocket.
He must be careful to disguise his handwriting.
Wasn't doctors' handwriting supposed to be hard to read?
Henry normally wrote a neat, italic script; it was, according to the more malicious of his colleagues, his only real legal qualification.
How much though?
How much would Donald need to get him back on the road?
And how, come to think of it, was Henry going to get him to absorb the stuff, short of creeping up on him while he was asleep and forcing it down his throat or up his arse?
He stopped for a moment, the crumpled sheet of prescription pad on his knee, and wondered whether Donald was really worth all this effort.
Might it not be simpler just to let him go?
He had had a pretty good life.
A pleasant wife (in his terms anyway), a nice house in the suburbs.
He had had six glorious years with Arfur.
No.
He couldn't do it to Donald.
Henry filled in the form and drove down to Underwoods.
Although the pharmacist seemed to have some trouble deciphering the prescription, and Henry had to go through a nerve-wracking pantomime of ignorance about the nature of the chemicals he required, it wasn't long before he was standing once again on the doorstep of 54 Maple Drive.
It might be possible to slip the antidote in some pudding or dessert wine or digestif .
He had a few hours anyway.
And Elinor was just going to have to wait for her merciful release.
Henry wondered whether dynercaprol and potassium chloride taken without thallium might be poisonous.
He could slip some to Elinor as well.
But no, even as he thought this, he realized the hopelessness of the task ahead of him.
Killing Elinor was the kind of thing you would need years of study to accomplish.
You couldn't just walk into it casually, as he had done, drop home from the office and decide to eradicate her on the spur of the moment.
As her mother was fond of saying — it had taken a lot of trouble to get her this far, and this last little step was going to take a deal of organizing as well.
On the doorstep of number 54, Henry stood for a moment in the gloom, flexing his fingers.
The Wimbledon Strangler.
Inside he could see Elinor talking, with some animation, to Donald, her long hair falling across her face.
Donald was nodding eagerly as she talked.
She was gesturing about something now, some issue that had excited her, dolphins probably, and as she waved her arms Donald gave her an admiring smile.
She was, undoubtedly, in good physical shape.
She had a fairly thick neck and her forearms, well, the only way to describe them was meaty.
You could use tights of course.
Or piano wire.
Like the SAS.
With this comforting thought Henry rang the doorbell, hard, and watched his wife heave herself out of the chair and stump through to the hall.
Go for it, Henry! he said, once again to himself, Go for it!
The evening has a new agenda.
Detoxification followed by strangulation.
Go for it, Henry! he said, for the last time, Go for it!
CHAPTER TWELVE
Both of them refused all offers of food and drink.
The conversation had turned to law and order.
Elinor had begun, Donald told him, by discussing her problems.
It appeared she had something called the Madonna Complex.
Either she was a Madonna and people didn't give her credit for being one, or else she was trying to be one and people were trying to stop her or possibly she was being forced to be one against her better judgement.
Henry couldn't work out, from Donald's description, which of these alternatives was best described by the Madonna Complex, indeed he didn't really listen to a word either of them said.
All of his energies were devoted to bringing the conversation round to the topic of food and drink, but Donald, once he had explained, or failed to explain, the Madonna Complex, moved swiftly on to what he described as his problem, which turned out to be law and order.
‘Say what you like!’ he said.
‘Say what you like.
If a yobbo attacks my home and family.
If some coloured youth breaks into my house and tries to rape my wife…’
Henry goggled at him.
‘I'd strangle the bastard with my bare hands.
I don't see why coloured youths should have carte blanche to steal my stereo and shit all over my compact-disc player and rape my wife.
I don't see it.’
Elinor was looking at Donald, her mouth open.
There was, Henry knew, an unspoken contract between them.
She was allowed to talk about herself if he was allowed to rave on about black men.
The fact that he was soon going to die, thought Henry, gave his words a special poignancy.
‘England,’ he was saying, ‘used to be the most civilized country in the world.
Say what you like, you were safe in Wimbledon.
Right?’
‘Right!’ said Henry.
‘But now,’ said Donald, ‘England is a country run by yobbos for yobbos.
A country in which respect for law and order takes second place to the problems of some illiterate chocco.’
Henry wasn't sure how to answer this.
Hadn't Mrs Thatcher solved this kind of problem?
Wasn't it OK to be racist these days?
Donald seemed to be describing the bad old days before Mrs Thatcher, as far as Henry could see.
Perhaps his memory, like Henry's, was buckling under the strain of being forty.
Or else, possibly, the thallium was starting to affect his brain.
It would be difficult to assess things like that with Donald.
Whatever was the case he, Henry, had better get something down him.
‘Whisky, Donald?’
‘I won't, thanks.’
‘Beer?
Brandy?’
‘I won't.’
‘Cup of tea?
Coffee?’
‘Not for me.’
Wine?
Ouzo?
Vodka?
Mead?
Mineral water?
Hot chocolate?
Dynercaprol? potassium chloride?
‘Bugger off, friend chocco, I say.
Bugger off, friendly neighbouring Paki.
And bugger off, Greek and Arab while you're at it.
We don't need you.
England used to be a country with red pillar boxes and policemen with red noses and decent law-abiding citizens you could eat your dinner off.
Now it's a refugee camp!’
Elinor looked pained.
Her anguish, Henry noted, went down rather well with Donald.
‘Shouldn't we,’ said Elinor, ‘welcome the refugee?
Shouldn't people of all races and nationalities be welcomed by a caring country?’
Donald chose not to confront this vague, if morally positive statement.
He was grinning, in a fatherly sort of way, and wagging his hands at Elinor.
‘My point, Elly, is this —’(Elly?
Elly?)
‘Where is the space in all this for the little man?
The ordinary, average Englishman.
What I would call the little man.
Me and Henry, say, who just want a mortgage and a little house and get on with Elinor started to make more anguished noises.
‘How about a cool glass of orange juice?’ said Henry.
‘Or a sandwich?’
They both looked at him oddly.
Elinor narrowed her eyes.
‘Washing up, Henry!’ she said.
‘Yes, m'love!’ said Henry lightly.
Oh well.
Donald had had a good innings.
His time had quite obviously come.
‘How about some mineral water?’
‘No thanks, old man,’ said Donald, ‘we're setting the world to rights here.’
Henry started to pack the plates into the washing-up machine.
Smeared with grease, fragments of chicken and edenwort, they reminded him, as so often, of his life.
Quite decent things, hopelessly botched, needing to be made clean again.
That awful doubt came at him again.
Maybe Wimbledon wasn't such a great place.
Maybe The Complete History was what that publisher said it was — a boring load of old rubbish.
Maybe — but these were the kind of thoughts that kept Henry awake sometimes at four in the morning, longing for the dawn.
They were not to be contemplated.
That way lay madness.
Even as a poisoner, not, you would have thought, the most demanding of professions, he seemed to be a complete failure.
Seeing him engaged in domestic activity, Tibbles came up to him and began to rub her harsh fur against his legs.
In a curious way he would miss Tibbles.
Who was going to go first?
Her or Donald?
‘What the English have given the world,’ said Donald, ‘is a respect for law and order and decency.
I'm talking about justice, you get me?
A people who care passionately about fair play, whose legal system is — Christ!’
Henry jerked round.
‘You OK?’
‘Just got a blast in the gut.’
‘Oh,’ said Henry, ‘have a drink of something!’
But Donald was doubled up on the sofa.
Henry rushed through to the kitchen, poured the dynercaprol and potassium chloride into a small glass of water and hurried back to Donald.
‘Here,’ he said, trying to keep his voice jolly, ‘some new tummy thing for you.
It'll set you right in no time.’
Donald looked at him suspiciously.
‘The best thing for a gyp tum,’ he said, ‘is —’
‘Quickly —’ said Henry, raising the glass to his lips.
Donald spat back the liquid.
‘Christ, old man —’ he muttered, ‘what are you trying to do?
Poison me?’
It was clear that Donald extended his brutal, no-nonsense attitude to medical care to himself.
‘No,’ he said, ‘I'll be all right.
Sort myself out in no time at all.
I'll be — Oh my God!’
Henry made one more attempt.
Putting his left arm round Donald's shoulder, he took advantage of his first relaxation from the spasm of pain, to raise the glass to his lips, push his head back and, as if he were administering medicine to Maisie, roll the fluid past the perfectly kept teeth.
There was — a gulp and a yell and the rest of the glass (he had drunk at least some) flew up and out and on to the sanded floor of the dining area.
‘Henry —’ said Donald, ‘what the fuck is that?’
‘It's called…’
Henry paused.
‘Globramine.’
The sound of the name seemed to reassure Donald.
‘I think I know it,’ he gasped, ‘though I'm not very good on drugs.
I'm rather against a lot of these medicaments…’
He was wheezing now, as if in the grip of an asthma attack.
‘Let the bastards sort themselves out.’
It was difficult to know, though, whether he had had enough to save him.
But at least, thought Henry, the man had a fighting chance.
If only Elinor hadn't refused her portion.
She must have some radar, he thought, that at the last saved her from the worst effects of his anger and frustration.
Which is why it all came back on him.
It's a war, thought Henry, between men and women.
It ‘s a war, a long, bitter and pointless war, in which towns are burnt, cities taken, allies betrayed…and at the end of the war, as after all wars, there is no victory, only the shabby compromise of peace.
He could have murdered her then, in front of Donald and Maisie and the cat.
He could have run at her, forced her to the ground and banged her stupid, glossy head until her brains spilled out on to the stupid, glossy floor.
But he didn't.
He stood there, clenching and unclenching his hands, trying not to twitch.
Am I going crazy? he thought.
And when I do, will all this get easier?
‘I'll run Donald home!’
Elinor was saying, ‘you get Maisie to bed!’
‘Yes, dear!’ said Henry.
As Elinor and Donald shuffled towards the door, Tibbles shouldered her way into the room.
She looked left and right and approached the pool of dynercaprol and potassium chloride in a carefully stylish manner.
She looked round the room, as if to check that no one else wanted it and then, watched by a sullen Henry, began to lick it up greedily.
Women and cats, thought Henry, women and cats…
While Elinor and Donald were gone, Henry practised strangling.
The whole problem was going to be catching her off her guard.
And Elinor was never off her guard.
Now Henry thought about it, she seemed to enter rooms which he was in carefully, keeping her back to the wall; if he got close to her, she nearly always moved away quickly, usually making sure their bodies did not touch.
Henry had always assumed that this was due, on her part, to an entirely natural physical repugnance for him; she moved away from him as one might move away from a bad smell or a dangerous horse.
And up until now, the effortless ballet of their lack of encounter had come, in a way, as a relief.
He, after all, found her quite as repulsive as she found him and, as the two of them waltzed from oven to sink, from window to cutlery drawer, staring up, down, sideways, anywhere but at each other, Henry had always assumed that this was no more than the usual politesse of a failed English, suburban marriage.
But now he thought about it, weighing up different locations in the house as possible strangling areas, there was a definite pattern to her movements.
She was — in the bedroom and the kitchen anyway — quite definitely trying to get behind him, and in clearer ground, the hall, stairs, lounge or garden, she moved fast, certainly too fast to be strangled.
This had to be deliberate.
Didn't it?
About the only safe areas were the lavatory or the bathroom.
Henry went up to the landing and sized up the lavatory.
The chief advantage here was that the door was never locked.
Elinor's only defence system was to say, in a tone fractionally the right side of panic —‘I'm in here!’— if ever she saw the door move.
It might also be the case, too, that if he timed the attack carefully he might be able to give the verb ‘caught short’ a transitive sense.
They would, however, be facing each other.
There was, presumably, a sound evolutionary reason for the fact that no one had yet designed a lavatory in which the occupant faced away from the door, some relic of the time when primitive man was most at risk when at stool, but it did mean that the lavatory user was finely tuned to the approach of strangers.
Henry gave a short run and shouldered his way past the door.
It wasn't entirely satisfactory.
She might get her head down and then butt it upwards into his stomach.
She had, to hand, the lavatory brush, three toilet rolls and the hardback edition of a very long novel by a Peruvian author with an unpronounceable name.
She had her teeth and her two strong arms.
Her teeth.
Brushing her teeth.
That would be the ideal activity to interrupt by strangulation.
It would be late at night, she would have her back to the door and, when brushing her teeth, Elinor went into a kind of trance.
He stood at the door of the bathroom, visualizing this most familiar of her rituals.
Her left arm by her side, her right elbow out at an angle and her forearm shaking like a pneumatic drill.
Her head motionless as her hand moved up, down, side to side, up, down, side to side, the only sound the scritch scratch of the bristles against her perfect ivories.
He would do it tonight.
He would have to do it tonight.
You fell off the horse, you got straight back on and did it again.
Go for it, Henry! he told himself.
Go for it!
‘The deadline,’(this time he spoke aloud)‘is midnight!’
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Maisie came into the bathroom as he was standing slightly to the right of the basin, arms outstretched, thumbs interlocked ‘squeezing an imaginary neck.
‘Are you practising strangling?’ she said.
Henry jumped.
‘You should be in bed!’ he said.
‘Pozzo is depressed!’ said Maisie.
Pozzo was a small black furry creature that, years ago, had belonged to Henry.
Before Henry it had been Henry's father's.
Whether it was a zebra, or a panda or a bear or a seal, cat, ocelot or kangaroo was unclear, but whatever it was, on the grounds of its appearance, it had every good reason to be depressed.
Henry decided to out-twee her.
‘Was it sad because its mummy was nasty to it?’ he said.
‘And shall we make it a pwethent to make it happy?’
Maisie looked at him in disgust.
‘Don't be stupid!’ she said.
He grabbed her, propelled her towards the basin and began to brush her teeth.
‘Well, don't you be so disgustingly arch!’ he said, brushing her teeth vigorously.
Maisie put out her tongue at him (no easy task for someone who is having their teeth brushed) and made a farting noise.
‘You hate Mummy, don't you?’ she said.
‘Of course I don't!’ said Henry.
‘I love Mummy.
I love Mummy very much and she loves me and we both love you and we all go diddledy diddledy dumpling through the heather on a hot sunny day, like a bunny rabbit with the clap.’
Maisie laughed coarsely.
Then, a shade of nervousness entering her voice, she said: ‘You do love Mummy, don't you?’ 87 ‘Oh yes,’said Henry (he sounded, he thought, incredibly sincere as he said this), ‘deep down.
Incredibly deep down.
Millions of miles down in the black, twisted heart of me I do.
It's just that I am so evil and perverted and encrusted with slime that it's rather difficult for me to remember the fact.’
Maisie laughed.
She was one of the few people in the world who genuinely found Henry funny.
Other people, he thought, probably found him funny, but funny for the wrong reasons.
Funny because he was forty and not very clever and lived in an English suburb called Wimbledon.
Funny laugh-behind-your-hands, thought Henry, funny the way Karim Jackson —‘You're hurting me!’ said Maisie.
To his horror Henry saw that as he had been brushing her teeth he had started to grip her neck, hard.
There was a brutal, red thumb mark just at the point where her shoulders met her neck.
He bent down and kissed it, overcome suddenly with remorse.
It was thinking about that publisher that had done it.
Why did that bastard have the right to say ‘no’ to him? just like that.
To ignore something that could (Henry was prepared to admit that The Complete History might need work) be one of the most exciting developments in social history this century.
It seemed, somehow, monstrously unfair that a decision of such importance to England's cultural future should be left to a person from Pakistan.
Henry wasn't a racist.
He just didn't want the bastards to get the upper hand.
Didn't they have enough?
Couldn't they just ease up a little?
Why did Karim —‘Ow!’ said Maisie.
He was squeezing her neck again.
‘Sorry!’ sad Henry.
‘I won't have any teeth left.’
England was owned by other people these days.
After years of greatness it was just a place like any other place.
That, somehow, was the worst insult of all.
‘Ow!’ said Maisie again.
‘Sorry!’ said Henry.
She turned her plate-like face up to him.
‘Can I have my story?’ she said.
‘Of course, my love,’ he said.
Maisie was the only person to whom Henry ever talked these days.
She was certainly the only person to whom he started to describe his feelings.
In the stories he told her were roads and trees and houses and mountains and monsters and rivers and magicians; but at the centre of the story there was always Henry.
Henry, in the story, lived in Wimbledon, but not the same Wimbledon.
It wasn't even the Wimbledon of The Complete History .
It was Wimbledon with some things left in and some things left out.Wimbledon at once grotesque and matter of fact.
The suburb became, under Henry's hands, like a vacant lot in Hollywood — full of cardboard houses under an artificial sky.
And yet, almost against Henry's will, the real suburb kept breaking in until among the paper houses you could smell the decaying leaves, the acrid exhaust of cars and hear the children shouting to each other under the huge sky on the common.
‘What's this one about?’ she said, as, holding his hand, she climbed the short flight of stairs that led to her attic room.
‘It's about the time I turned into a pig!’ he said.
Maisie bounced into her room.
‘What kind of pig?’ she said.
‘A male chauvinist pig!’ said Henry.
‘Is that a good sort of pig?’ she said.
‘No,’ said Henry, ‘it's an awful, rude, wicked, cruel sort of pig.’
‘Why did you turn into it?’
‘Because,’ said Henry, ‘I was depressed.’
He lay next to his daughter on the bed and put his arm round her.
She looked up at him.
‘Why were you depressed?’ she said.
‘Because,’ said Henry, ‘my pig wife was going to be made into bacon.’
‘Why was she going to be made into bacon?’
‘Because,’ said Henry, ‘she had caught a very serious disease.’
‘What disease?’
‘It's called feminism,’ said Henry, ‘and I hope you never get it, because it is absolutely awful and it makes you swell up to an enormous size and when you have it really badly you go round bonking men on the head and blaming them for everything.
And your arms grow all hairy and muscly like a man's and you get very keen on boxing and tossing the caber.’
Maisie showed worrying signs of interest in feminism.
‘It sounds fun!’ she said.
Then she looked at Henry suspiciously.
‘Anyway,’ she said, ‘I know what feminism is.
It's thinking girls and women are good.
What's so wrong with that?’
Henry's stories quite often developed into debates of this kind.
In fact, on many occasions, Maisie talked more than Henry.
‘There's nothing wrong with that,’ said Henry, ‘and some feminists are quite nice.
But some of them are bad-tempered ratbags who should be locked away in a cellar with a lot of other feminists.
I'm not saying that women and girls are bad.
I think they're nice.
I just don't like being told that boys and men are bad.
I think it's stupid and unfair.’
Maisie thought about this.
Then she said, ‘Well.
Boys and men are all right, I suppose.
Anyway.
Go on with the story.’
‘So,’ said Henry, ‘my pig wife…’
It was curious.
Here he was, as usual, telling Maisie her story.
And a few streets away, Donald was probably in his death agony.
Or if not actually in it, well on the way to it.
What was so attractive about poison (and Henry had, with some regret, more or less reconciled himself to Donald's death) was that it acted so independently.
It was like a good secretary.
The sort of secretary you couldn't get hold of at Harris, Harris and Overdene.
‘Thallium,’ you said, ‘job for you!’and thallium picked up the papers, simpered, and went out into the world to do your bidding.
Strangling was not like that.
‘You're squeezing again!’ said Maisie.
‘Why are you squeezing?’
‘Because I love you,’ said Henry.
‘Go on about the pig now!’ said Maisie.
‘Well,’ said Henry, ‘my pig wife —’
‘What was her name?’
‘Her name,’ said Henry, ‘was Elinor.’
‘Oh,’ said Maisie, ‘like Mummy.’
‘Yes,’ said Henry, ‘but my pig wife wasn't like Mummy.
Mummy is sweet and good and kind.
But this pig was odious and conceited and impossible to live with.’
‘Because it was a feminist!’ said Maisie, with a touch of satire.
‘That's right!’ said Henry.
‘Which is not to say that it was odious and conceited because it was a feminist.
I repeat.
Not all feminists are odious and conceited.
But they are not automatically right about everything.
And the ones who see life purely as a battle between men and women — which, of course, it is, I suppose, are…’
He stopped.
Maisie was looking at him doubtfully.
He wasn't getting the story right.
It was infected with doubt.
Somehow the outside world had intruded and broken up the fabric of the tale.
What were usually asides, about life, religion, art, politics, had come to dominate the story.
He saw himself suddenly, a fat man on a bed, haranguing his daughter about feminism.
Was that what he was?
Did he, perhaps, really hate women?
Maybe Elinor was right.
And if she was, perhaps he ought not be trying to murder her?
No.
It was just a difficult, demanding task to perform.
That was all.
It interfered with your peace of mind.
From the outside, murder looked like a quiet, sensible alternative to divorce.
When you were actually involved in it, when you were down there at the murder coal-face, it could be as complicated and unsatisfactory as marriage.
He had better get Maisie to sleep, though.
He didn't really want her to hear her mother being strangled.
‘Actually,’ he said, ‘this story is really about this pig's father.’
‘Oh,’ said Maisie.
‘In fact,’ said Henry, ‘it's about my father.
Who was, of course, in the story, a pig.
And although I didn't like my pig wife or my pig mother come to that — I was very fond of my pig father.
Because he, like me, was a male chauvinist pig.
We all lived in this sty, just off Wimbledon Hill.
It was a very expensive sty and like all the other pigs in the street we were very heavily mortgaged —’
He saw Maisie start to open her mouth and, before she had time to ask the inevitable question, said, ‘We had borrowed money from the pig bank.
Anyway, one day the farmer who owned the street knocked on the door and told us that my pig father was due to be made into bacon .
There was no way to avoid it.
The next day we had to report to the huge, ugly, frightening, hideous abattoir man who, in case you didn't know, lives, actually lives three streets away from us!
He is tall and cold and sometimes he doesn't only come for pigs he comes for greedy little girls who make pigs of themselves, with too many sweets!’
Maisie was now bug-eyed with fright.
Henry leaned across and tapped her on the chest.
‘But,’ he said, ‘my pig wife, Elinor, decided to save my pig father.
She decided he was one fat pig in Wimbledon who was not, could not, should not be brought under the knife of the evil abattoir man who lives, in case you need to know, in Clifton Road just off the common, and the story of how she fought off his terrible friend Farmer Dune, and rallied all the pigs of Wimbledon is the greatest story ever told.
You will hear how Farmer Dune was himself eaten by a group of pigs.
You will hear how pigs decided to own their own houses, and how pigs like me who worked for Harris, Harris and Overdene openly ate legal documents in the street.
And you will hear most of all about the abattoir man, the evil, cold-hearted villain who knows no pity!’
Maisie was still bug-eyed.
Her chin trembled with anxiety and her big, blue eyes looked far beyond Henry and the bright patterned curtains, at something only children see.
He hugged her tightly, unburdened of some inner horror, suddenly carefree.
‘I'll tell you the rest,’ he said, ‘tomorrow night!’
When we will be a single-parent family .
Henry liked the idea of being a single-parent family.
There would be programmes about him on the television.
Support groups would flash their telephone number at him late at night on Channel 4.
He would, he realized, for the first time in his life have a socially acceptable problem.
Being fat and forty and hating one's wife and job were none of them socially acceptable.
Murder was to make him something he had always suspected he might be, but had never dreamed of becoming — interesting.
For a moment, he wished he could tell Elinor these things.
To talk to her, reason with her, confide in her, as people are wont to do when confronting their victims with loaded guns.
‘You see, Inspector, you have to die because —’‘Elinor,’ he could see her white anxious face now, ‘you have to let me strangle you.
I need to grow and change and develop as a person in my own terms.
My therapist, Elinor, a man called Graham Young, suspects that the only way forward for me emotionally is to fasten my fingers round your windpipe and squeeze and squeeze and squeeze until your face turns black…’
He was squeezing.
But not Maisie.
This time he was squeezing the bedhead.
And his daughter, her big head lolling across his chest, was fast asleep.
Down below, the front door opened and then closed quietly.
Henry loosened his fingers from his daughter's shoulder, tucked her under her duvet and, walking lightly on the balls of his feet, moved with a new precision on to the darkened landing.
He smiled to himself at the head of the stairs.
Not long now.
Not long.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
‘Donald is desperately ill!’ was the first thing she said, as he met her in the hall.
As soon as she had announced this fact, she pushed past him roughly, on her way to the kitchen.
This wasn't as bad, Henry thought, as post-therapy hostility.
It was more like plain, straightforward dislike.
He felt able to deal with this.
One just had to be manly about it.
It was a shame.
Strangling really needed a more co-operative partner than Elinor.
One of those kittenish creatures he remembered from the films of his childhood in the Fifties, clad in waist-high, baby-doll nightdresses, women who seemed to enjoy nothing more than lying back among the yellow nylon sheets and allowing themselves to be strangled.
It was feminism that was to blame.
Nowadays women carried everything short of CS gas; all of them — at least, all of the women Elinor knew — were fairly well up on the -martial arts.
He followed her through to the kitchen where, as far as he could see, she was still in operatic mode.
‘Desperately, desperately ill!’ she said, over her shoulder, then swooped down to the dishwasher, picked up a handful of plates, and marched off towards a cupboard.
As she marched she threw remarks over her shoulder, as if in some climactic race with a large orchestra.
‘He is in a very critical state, Henry.
He is in the throes of this awful thing, can't you see?’
Then —‘Chest pains!
Dry skin!
Pulse slow!
Headache!’ and finally, ‘Poor, poor Donald!’
Well, it was his own fault, thought Henry.
If he would go around pinching other people's food!
If only he had managed to force down a little more dynercaprol and potassium chloride!
Elinor turned to him.
‘We've called in Roger From the Practice!’
Roger From the Practice, eh? thought Henry.
Well, that should finish him off in no time.
‘Poor old Donald!’ he said, limply.
‘I don't think you care about Donald!’ she said, pushing off from the cupboard, like someone striking out in a swimming bath.
Henry felt this was unfair.
He liked Donald a great deal; and the prospect of the man's imminent death did nothing to dispel this feeling, since he was the person directly responsible for this state of affairs.
Well, perhaps not directly responsible.
This business of being responsible for people had to stop somewhere, didn't it?
All Henry had done was poison a chicken which the berk had then insisted on eating.
There was no way this made Henry ‘directly responsible’ was there?
We had, thought Henry, gone beyond such primitive notions of morality.
‘You don't care about anyone!
You don't care about anyone but yourself and your narrow little world.’
‘Well, what do you care for?’ said Henry.
Elinor thrust her square jaw at him.
‘Art!’ she said, ‘Feelings!
People!
The world around me!’
She didn't, of course, thought Henry, mean the world around her.
The world around her was largely made up of Wimbledon.
She meant quite a different world.
A world of giving women and strong but equally giving men, a world of Bengali dancing, passionately held ideas and seventeen different kinds of psychoanalysis.
A world that existed only in her head.
Henry thrust his hands deep into his pockets, glumly.
He wondered which row to select from the library of disputes available to him.
It was going to be an important row.
He could see it now, tucked up in a cassette case.
Last Row Before Strangulation .
Was it going to be the You Are Cold and Unfeeling Row, the Why Are You So Feeble Row, the Fat Row, the Racist Row, the Right-Wing how, the Left-Wing Row, the Merits of Jane Austen Row, the Driving Row, the Looking After Maisie Row or the Why Are You so Bitter and Twisted Row.
After some moments' thought, Henry selected the Sex Row.
The Sex Row was always the best.
It was so beautifully, predictably ugly.
It followed the track it had followed for so many years, awakened the parties to rage, apathy and contempt in precisely the usual places and ended, as it always did, in a drawn game.
Henry stuck his lower lip out and in an uncouth voice, said: ‘How about a bit of sex?’
Elinor looked at him, blankly.
‘A bit of sex,’ said Henry, ‘you know.
We take our clothes off and I stick my penis into you and pull it in and out for a few minutes and white stuff comes out and you say ‘Is that it?’
And I say ‘There isn't any more where that came from.’
And you say ‘Why can't you be more tender?’
And I say ‘Search me, squire.’
You know.
A fuck.
You must remember.
We had a fuck, didn't we once?
A few years back.’
Elinor's mouth had dropped open.
She looked now like some domestic cleaning device, mouth open for household filth.
Henry gave her some more.
‘Or buggery,’ he said, yawning, ‘that buggery sounds good.
I read about it in Knave magazine.
And that magazine Hot Bitch .
You have to go to Holland to get it but it's well worth the trip.
It's very informative.
Or oral, You could suck my cock if you liked.
We could turn on the artificial gas fire!’
Here he leered in a conspiratorial fashion.
By way of answer Elinor's mouth dropped another few notches.
‘Or spanking!’ went on Henry brightly.
‘I fancy spanking.’
Elinor gave a choking sound.
For a moment he thought she was going to hit him, and then her face turned crimson, her mouth started to bang to and fro like a door in a gale force wind and a sound came down her nose that suggested she had just swallowed a quart of White’ s Cream Soda.
Elinor was laughing.
It was primarily a Display Laugh, something to indicate that she could rise above Henry, but (this disturbed him somewhat) at the back of her he caught a glimpse of something that could only be genuine amusement.
‘Oh, Henry,’ said Elinor, now blocking her mouth with the palm of her hand and moaning elaborately, ‘you're trying to be funny!
Aren't you?
Is that the idea?’
Her laughter dropped away suddenly.
It was obviously a ploy.
She said then, very quickly, like a trick question to someone in the Yes/No interlude on the Michael Miles Quiz Show: ‘Marriage Guidance didn't do much for your need to dump, did it?’
Henry was beginning to enjoy this.
‘Marriage Guidance,’ he said, ‘didn't understand my need for brutally climaxing into tight white bottoms.’
Marriage Guidance had been a bloke called Kevin who, in Henry's view, had had designs on Elinor.
She, skilled in the ways of therapy, had after the first few sessions begun dissecting his own motives for him and Kevin, like an obedient dog, ended up nodding slowly as she told him clearly, fully, frankly what he meant when he said what he thought about what she or Henry felt, and how what he thought he thought about what they felt, or said they felt, probably wasn't what he really felt any more than what they said they felt was really deep down what they really felt.
Except of course, in her case.
Because what she thought she felt was what she actually did feel and she said it, loud and clear and everyone else could go and fuck themselves.
This was called ‘being in touch with your feelings’.
‘At Marriage Guidance,’ went on Henry, ‘I didn't feel able to discuss my need to tie you to the bed and whip you with my pyjama cord.
But that wasn't on the agenda, was it?
On the agenda was something called Tenderness with a capital T. Well —’ Henry thrust his face towards her, allowing a small fragment of saliva to trickle down his chin.
‘Tenderness is just another aspect of female control.
Tenderness is just something that women like because it gives them the upper hand.
Tenderness is that hideous, cooing voice you hear mothers using to their children as they get them to do this, go there, stay here.
I am so pissed off with being told how men own and control the world.
I tell you they don't.
They all start out doing what some woman wants them to do.
And you know the weapon she uses?
She uses Tenderness with a capital T!’
Elinor folded her arms and, shaking her head in the way Henry sometimes did at the motorists who cut him up, she began to pace up and down the red-tiled kitchen.
She did quite a lot of snorting, quite a lot of brittle laughter and a very great deal of what Henry took to be assumed inarticulacy.
‘Basically…’ she said, ‘basically…
I think…
I don't know, but I think…
I suspect…
I feel…’
Here she raised her square white face up to his and sought his eyes.
Then she said, according a miraculously even level of stress to each word in the sentence: ‘We're-at-the-end-of-the-road.’
At this point the telephone rang.
Henry answered it.
It was Donald's wife.
Henry could never, would never be able to remember her name.
‘It's Donald…’ she said.
‘Yes!’ said Henry.
He sounded curt, businesslike. perhaps a little too businesslike, he thought.
He sounded like a man whose next line would be ‘I'm in a meeting’.
‘He's…’
‘Yes?’
Her voice suddenly swooped into hysterics.
For a moment, Henry thought she was going to laugh, and then came a sudden explosion of sobbing.
‘He's…dead!’
At this moment Tibbles came into the room.
‘Roger From the Practice is here!’
Well, I'm not surprised he's dead, I'm surprised you're not all dead!
‘He's dead, he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!’
Henry wished Mrs Donald (what was her name?) would stop behaving like an extra in Oedipus Rex .
So he was dead.
Plenty of other people were going to be dead before the night was out.
Tibbles for one.
She was looking a bit like she had the morning of her hysterectomy.
She prowled and paused and placed her feet carefully, all as if she were a normal feline, but there was something woefully uncatlike about her performance.
She looked as if she was not entirely sure she was a cat, as if , thought Henry, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight of her nine lives were oozing out of her like blood from a wound.
Henry looked up at Elinor smartly.
He said: ‘Donald's dead!’
‘Oh my God!’ said Elinor.
‘Oh no!
Oh no!
Oh no!
Oh my God!’
Christ, thought Henry, he's only your doctor!
At the other end of the phone Mrs Donald (what was her name?) was grieving with similar bravura.
‘Respiratory failure at 11.30 p.m.’ she said (why did women have to be so scrupulously exact as to detail?)‘and before that he couldn't swallow.
He said that he had a violent head pain.
And then he had hallucinations.
He thought there was a pig in the room.’
‘What kind of pig?’
‘I don't know.
just a pig.
Oh my God!
Oh my God!
He was so sweet.
I loved him so much.’
‘I…
Christ…
I liked him.
He was a nice bloke.
A damned nice bloke actually.’
‘And oh my God my God just like that!
Like that.
He's dead he's dead he's dead he's dead he's dead.
He'll never come back.
He's dead.’
A pause.
‘Roger From the Practice is here!’
‘Good.’
‘He was so good and loyal and honest and brave and sweet and kind.
And…he was such a good doctor.’
Henry thought this was depressingly typical of the way in which people talked about the recently deceased.
Inaccurate would be a charitable way of describing Mrs Donald's description of her husband.
He held the receiver a yard away from his ear.
Tiny strangled sobs floated out of it and across the room.
Elinor swung towards him.
For a moment Henry thought she was going to hit him, and then, instead, she seized the receiver from him and, sweeping it down to the floor with her she poured love, support, tenderness and quietness down the line.
‘Billykins,’ she said (surely this could not be the woman's name?),
‘Billykins, this is so awful.’
Henry wandered to the other end of the room.
Elinor sat on the floor, allowing her long black hair to fall around her and started saying ‘Yes…yes…yes, I know…’ and ‘Of course…’a lot .
She listened, thought Henry, the way some people figure skated.
Presumably Billykins was telling her about Donald the Gourmet Cook, Donald the Great Fighter for Social Change, Donald the Novelist.
He can't only have been Donald the Great Doctor.
If Roger From the Practice was doing the post-mortem, thought Henry, he should be OK.
Roger From the Practice couldn't tell emphysema from the common cold.
‘…Yes yes, my darling…’
(Uh?)‘…my darling, yes…we're with you…we're with you…’
Elinor put down the phone.
She stared bleakly across at Henry.
‘My God,’ she said, sounding a bit like a vicar who has just discovered the Third World, ‘this makes one's own problems seem pretty small, doesn't it?’
‘Does it?’ said Henry.
He sucked on his lips.
She put her head on one side.
‘I think,’ she said, ‘that you have instincts and feelings that are not really human at all.
I don't think you are human, actually.
I think you're like some disgusting little animal, some creature from another planet.
I'm sorry for you, Henry.
One day you'll wake up and realize how utterly ghastly you are, and I don't think you'll find that very easy to live with.
I'm going to bed.’
Flexing his fingers, Henry followed her up the stairs.
Behind him, pathetically, Tibbles mewed in the hall.
Henry hoped she wasn't gong to make a fuss about dying.
Ahead of him Elinor was pulling her dress over her head.
She was wearing, as usual, a sack-like dress, one that hinted coyly at pregnancy.
Underneath it was, as usual, Elinor's body.
It wasn't, actually, if you could forget who it belonged to, a bad body.
The thought occurred once again to Henry that someone who wasn't him might have a sexual interest in his wife.
If not Donald, then perhaps one of the women from the therapy group.
Was he, could he, be married to a lesbian?
Such things had happened to more eminent lawyers than he.
He heard the sound of the tap running, and then the sound of bristles against gum, ivory and lip.
Arms out in front of him, Henry ran up the stairs, thinking, as he ran — She has three minutes to live.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
She turned out to have rather longer than that.
For a start, when Henry rounded the bathroom door it seemed, to use a phrase of Elinor's, ‘inappropriate behaviour’ to run at her.
He found himself walking at a steady pace towards those meaty shoulders.
Her head, which was rotating at a different speed and a contrary motion to her brushing arm, reminded him of a duck in a shooting gallery.
It had a difficult-to-hit quality about it, an almost larky imperviousness to attempting to interfere with it.
Still flexing his fingers, he started to dig them into the base of her neck, or rather, in the area where her neck might be assumed to begin.
He found his hands full of dry, papery skin which, as he worked his way closer to her windpipe, came up and away like a curtain of strudel dough.
Tossing this first layer of skin aside, he attempted to burrow deeper, only to discover yet more skin, though whether this was the outer skin that had slithered back through his advancing fingers, or a whole new layer was not apparent, but it was pretty clear that finding her windpipe, let alone getting hands round it and squeezing it, was a two-person job.
‘What are you doing, Henry?’ she squawked.
‘Do you want sex again?’
‘What do you mean, ‘again’?’ said Henry.
‘You only ever touch me when you want sex,’ said Elinor.
And started to brush her teeth again.
‘I don't,’ said Henry.
‘I sometimes put my arms around you because I need to feel your closeness.
I need to touch you tenderly and feel the warmth of your body.’
As he said this, Henry pulled at his nose and raised his upper lip to expose his gums.
He looked, he thought, like a nasty species of rodent.
‘Shut up, Henry!’ said Elinor.
‘You just grope my fanny and expect me to respond.
Sex isn't just about an animal urge.
It isn't like going to the lavatory.’
Henry started to slide down the wall.
It looked as if strangling her was not going to be possible.
Tonight anyway.
Maybe he should go for a contract killing.
‘It's a bit like going to the lavatory!’ said Henry.
‘Anyway, what's so wrong with going to the lavatory?
I like going to the lavatory.’
‘We had noticed!’ said Elinor archly and, shaking out her black hair behind her, she placed the toothbrush, emphatically, in the plastic cup and marched out of the bathroom.
On the landing a new thought occurred to her and she re-entered, her long arms swinging, her face screwed up with anger.
‘How can you, though?’ she said.
‘How can you?
Your best friend lies dead.
Dead.
And all you think about is…that!’
Here she pointed dramatically at Henry's flies.
Henry found he was grinning foolishly.
Any sort of attention to his genitals, even if it was the sort of gesture usually used by particularly aggressive barristers, was welcome.
‘And stop smirking!’ she barked.
‘Christ!
Anyone'd think from the way men carry on that their…things…are somehow clever and funny.’
She was down to its level now, her finger jabbing at the zip of his trousers.
Sex between Henry and Elinor had come to a halt some four or five years ago and, from what Henry could remember about it, it was something that was better discontinued.
Elinor had spent most of their congress complaining.
There were pains in her back, her right arm had gone to sleep, she was stiff, he wasn't stiff.
It was lasting too long.
It was over too quickly.
He was too tentative, too assertive, too submissive, too dominant.
Following her into the bedroom, he decided to continue on the plainly offensive tack.
‘Maybe,’ he said, sitting on her side of the bed as she reached for a woman's magazine, ‘maybe I'm gay!’
She looked at him oddly.
‘Don't be silly, Henry!’ she said, in a slightly querulous tone.
Then she started reading a recipe.
‘I often think,’ he went on, ‘about having sex with men.’
Elinor looked at him over the rim of her magazine.
‘Well,’ said Henry, ‘it would make a pleasant change from having sex with you.
Or rather, from not having sex with you.’
Elinor snorted.
‘You are just being silly,’ she said, ‘and offensive!’
‘Getting down on all fours,’ went on Henry, ‘and being rogered by a complete stranger in the open air.
On the common.
Melting back into the undergrowth, your trousers by your ankles —’
‘Henry,’ said Elinor, ‘I think you are sick.
I think you are ill.
I think you need treatment.’
‘What kind of treatment?’ said Henry, licking his lips, ‘corrective treatment?
A good lashing?’
‘Donald,’ she said, ‘is dead.
He's gone.
We've lost him.
Doesn't that mean anything to you?
Don't you have any human feelings?’
If he had hoped that a row might spur him on to a direct, hands on approach to murdering Elinor, Henry was disappointed.
Talking to her, as so often, left him demoralized and confused.
She seemed to have such endless resources of anger, so many obviously right, sincerely held opinions.
The more he thought about it, the more it became clear to him that this was a job for a real professional.
A man with a hatchet face in a blue suit.
Elinor would step out of her therapy class one morning, wave goodbye to Anna and Linda and Susie and Tatiana and Ruth and wham — several hundred rounds from an M16, the screech of tyres and the howl of brakes as the saloon car roared off down Makepeace Avenue.
‘Did you know anyone who had a grudge against her?’
‘I…can't, officer…’
Henry would sob, ‘she was just a quiet, ordinary housewife…’
The trouble was, he thought as he pulled off his trousers, where did one find contract killers?
They didn't stick their cards through your letter box or advertise in the Yellow Pages, And very often they were unreliable people, demanding payment in advance or trying to blackmail you.
A bit like builders.
He had had a lot of trouble with builders last year.
As had Donald.
They had talked it over in the Rose.
If something went wrong with his contract killer perhaps he would talk it over the way he talked over his builder.
‘OK, mate?.’
‘Not so bad.
But we've got one of these…contract killers on and…’
‘I had one of those for Billykins.
She —’
Donald.
Donald was dead.
He had killed Donald.
He was a murderer.
Henry lay back against the pillow and closed his eyes.
‘Sorry, Donald,’ he said, in his mind, ‘really sorry.’
Donald was very nice about it.
‘Look, mate,’ he said, ‘it happens.
Come to the funeral.’
‘I will,’ said Henry.
‘I wouldn't miss it for the world.’
Elinor was looking at him curiously.
‘Are you thinking about Donald?’ she said.
‘Yes,’ said Henry, ‘I was.
I was thinking about what a nice bloke he was.’
‘Oh my God!’ said Elinor.
‘He leaves a great gaping hole in the community.’
‘He does,’ said Henry.
And indeed he would, very shortly, be going in to a great, gaping hole in the community.
In the Putney Vale Crematorium to be precise.
‘One minute,’ said Elinor, who seemed to have cheered up considerably, ‘there he was laughing and joking and having a good time.
And the next minute there he was, writhing around on the floor in agony!’
‘I know!’ said Henry.
‘It was like he'd been…
I don't know…poisoned or something!’ said Elinor.
Henry coughed.
‘I don't think,’ he said, ‘that that remark was in very good taste.’
It was long after she had gone to sleep and he had prodded her in the ribs to stop her snoring and was, himself, lying awake, staring into the darkness, thinking about Donald that it occurred to Henry that this was the longest conversation he had had with Elinor for about a year and that, after a bad start, she had, once or twice, come dangerously near to amiability.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Donald's funeral was, in the planning stages anyway, a magnificent thing.
Billykins, everyone agreed, was magnificent.
She was dignified, pale, but, in the playground at least, composed.
Arfur seemed positively cheerful.
She wore a fetching, knee-length black dress and a kind of Spanish headdress that made her look a little like a sherry advertisement.
‘I just want to carry on,’ she said, ‘as if all this had never happened.’
There were moments when Henry thought she would not turn up for the funeral, so magnificent was she about the whole thing, but as the date approached he noticed she was wearing more and more black jewellery, black scarves, capes, cloaks and jerseys, stockings, blouses and hats.
She would deliver Arfur at eight fifty a.m.’ magnificent in a black coat, black ankle-length dress and black leather boots, and reappear at three fifteen, leaning against the climbing frame in the same ensemble, garnished with a scarf or a single piece of jewellery.
The neighbours, all the neighbours agreed, were magnificent.
They called round.
They went in and out of Billykins's house, and did something everyone described as ‘sitting with her’.
Mr and Mrs Is-the-Mitsubishi-Scratched-Yet went up to her in the street and pressed her hands between theirs.
They baked cakes and meat pies and wholemeal loaves and they ordered flowers and hoovered the carpets and stairs; in fact, thought Henry, Donald was getting more (and higher quality) attention dead than he ever had alive.
His death, people said ‘pulled the street together’.
Even Nazi Who Escaped justice At Nuremberg, at number 42, was seen talking to people in a high, jovial voice, that only increased his resemblance to a Gestapo officer.
Mr and Mrs Is-the-Mitsubishi-Scratched-Yet smiled and nodded at people who passed them and tried not to flinch every time anyone went within ten yards of the Mitsubishi.
There was, too, at first anyway, wild talk of the honours to be done to Donald.
Dave Sprott, the northern dentist at 102, whose carefully preserved northern accent had always seemed to Henry a way of criticizing the London suburb in which he found himself, suggested that they ‘hire’ St Paul's Cathedral.
‘I think 'e's owed that,’ said Sprott, ‘I think 'e's owed a generous tribute.’
From St Paul's Cathedral to Putney Vale Crematorium did not seem such a short distance to the neighbours, such was their generous enthusiasm for Donald's interment, and when they heard there were plans for a memorial service at Wimbledon Parish Church, some people said it was even better to do it this way.
‘Donald’, they said, ‘wouldn't have wanted St Paul's.
What did St Paul's mean to Donald?’
This was a fair question, although the same could have been asked about his relationship with Wimbledon Parish Church.
But the fact that no one seemed to know where Wimbledon Parish Church was, that no one in Maple Drive had seen the vicar, even at Christmas or Easter, seemed to make little difference.
It was, as Nazi Who Escaped Justice at Nuremberg pointed out, the thought that counted.
And everyone in Maple Drive, as they cooked, consoled, took out their best suits and thought of even nicer things to say about Donald than the last nice thing that had been said about him, were privately so astonished, so relieved, so savagely glad to be alive that if someone had proposed to bury him upside down in a bucket of horse manure they would probably have agreed it was all for the best.
Two days before the funeral Henry was asked to give a short speech, and although he began by saying he would not be able to talk, didn't think he could get the words out, was no orator, ended, of course by accepting.
At the Harris, Harris and Overdene Christmas party three years ago he had made what some considered to be the funniest impromptu speech anyone had ever heard inside the office.
At the University of Loughborough there were several people who went on record as saying that you could always get a laugh out of Henry.
He didn't see why he shouldn't have a stab at the more serious mode of public address.
After all — the man was one of his best friends, wasn't he?
It was the least he could do.
In one of his private talks with his late general practitioner he said: ‘Look old son.
It won't bring you back.
It won't, you know, make up for the fact that, let's face it, I poisoned you!’
‘No no no,’ said Donald, ‘for Christ's sake, mate.
It happens.’
‘No, I mean…’ said Henry, ‘I did.
I poisoned you.
And I'm very, very sorry I did.
It was an accident but that doesn't excuse it.
And the least I can do is tell them all what a great bloke you are!’
‘Were,’ said Donald, ‘were…’
‘Christ, mate!’ said Henry.
‘You see what I mean?’
He wrote his speech several times.
When it actually came to writing rather than vaguely thinking about his address, Henry found it more difficult than he had expected.
He had not written much since The Complete History of Wimbledon and that book's rejection by ten publishers (he had still not heard from The Applecote Press, Chewton Mendip) had made him a little nervous of putting pen to paper, but he found that if he emptied his mind of everything and forced his hand to fist a biro and then forced that biro across a sheet of paper, some pretty profound and interesting thoughts resulted.
He ended by writing twenty-five pages, some of which he read to Elinor late one night, There were also two longish poems in free verse, which he didn't yet feel quite ready to expose to the world.
When he had finished the third page she put her head to one side and said in her cross-but-trying-to-be-helpful voice, ‘I like the bit about Donald.’
‘How do you mean?’ said Henry.
‘It's all about Donald, isn't it?’
She became assertive-in-spite-of-herself, and marching rapidly from one end of the kitchen to the other, which she always did when entrusting him with a home truth, said, ‘It's not, Henry.
It's mainly about you.’
‘Is it?’
Henry looked at the pages of script he had written in praise of the man he had helped on the way to eternal bliss, and found this to be true.
There was a very long story about him and Donald in the Rose and Thorn, a short, rather vulgar anecdote about something that had happened to Donald's wife while crossing Wimbledon Common and a boastful piece about how he, Henry, had amused some French sailors in the bar at the Mini Golf, Boulogne sur Mer.
The whole thing was, he had to admit, in very dubious taste.
He started again, He decided to write out a list of Donald's good qualities.
Charity.
Skill in Medicine.
Standing his Round.
Qualities as a Father and Wit.
But the headlines seemed to paralyse him completely.
When he got down to Punctuality and Considerateness as a Driver , he decided to give up and improvise.
‘Well, for God's sake,’ said Elinor, ‘try and make sense.
You only make a fool of yourself when you try and speak in public.
You were embarrassing at our wedding.’
‘Was I?’
‘Oh my God, yes,’ said Elinor, ‘you just sort of dribbled!’
Henry folded his arms over his chest.
‘I might, of course,’ he said, ‘be overcome by emotion.’
Elinor wheeled round, a look of horror on her face.
‘How do you mean?’ she said.
‘I may be in tears,’ said Henry, ‘I may just…you know…blub!’
She made the kind of face she made when tasting sour milk.
‘For God's sake, Henry,’ she said.
‘If you do that I shall leave you.’
Henry found such moments of unpleasantness between them almost reassuring.
She had been so pleasant since Donald's death that there were times when he could not believe that he was planning to murder her.
The trouble was that it seemed almost unfair to Donald not to have another go.
Had the man died in vain?
He had probably been trying something far too fancy.
Thallium was an Alfa Romeo among poisons, its charm being the fact that it was almost impossible to detect.
But was detection such a problem?
No one seemed at all interested in how poor old Donald died; he had just keeled over one night.
Arfur spoke for everybody when he said, a wondering expression on his face: ‘My Daddy just felled over and died!’
What was needed was something down home and businesslike.
Something you could buy over the counter at a supermarket.
It didn't have to be colourless, tasteless or odourless, it just had to be got, somehow or other, past Elinor's front teeth, down her oesophagus and into her digestive system, even if to do so it should be necessary to hold her down and clamp a funnel between her jaws.
If there was a single reason, thought Henry, why he was once again determined to poison her, it was probably her stubborn refusal to go along with his earlier attempt.
There must be something she ate that would act as a cover for paraquat or whatever he was going to use.
Some particularly disgusting form of health food, some heavily unbleached flour that could be rebleached.
Bleach.
He would start by looking at bleach, and then think of something to go with it.
When he went to Waitrose to buy the food for their contribution to what everyone in the street was calling ‘Donald's funeral breakfast’ Henry spent hours browsing through the domestic cleaners, all of which sounded pretty lethal.
Domestos kills all known germs — Dead!
Their names were harsh, aggressive, Vorticist in tone —Scour!
Blast!
Zap!— and the one Henry most favoured, which seemed from looking at the label to be a sexier version of raw bleach —Finish 'Em It came in a huge blue bottle on the side of which was a picture of something that looked like a bluebottle with twelve legs keeling over, while a housewife in rubber gloves looked grimly on.
There would be especial pleasure, thought Henry, in using a household cleanser against a feminist.
Women like Elinor refused to channel their aggression in the direction of household germs.
Keeping your house clean was now seen, probably rightly, as a plot by men to stop you doing anything more interesting.
No, it was Henry who, on Saturday mornings, scrubbed the kitchen floor, wiped down the surfaces, hoovered the carpets, poured bleach down the lavatories and sinks.
But now, a few litres of Finish 'Em would be put to the service of a more crucial domestic task, the elimination of Mrs Farr.
The trouble was — how to conceal the taste?
Even hot sweet tea, a favourite refuge for poisoners, would not sweeten the flavour of Finish 'Em and in order to kill Elinor he would need at least half a bottle.
And — even assuming he could persuade her to drink it — wasn't it, well, out of the ordinary to find half a litre of bleach in someone's stomach?
It was not possible.
She would have to eat a bucket of chicken vindaloo to get the stuff down her and, although there had been publicly expressed doubts about the kitchens of the ‘Tandoori’, Wimbledon, they hadn't, as far as Henry knew, got around to using bleach to liven up their menu.
He had decided to give up, had, indeed, spent several hours trying to think of one thing he actually liked about Elinor when, two days before the funeral, she looked up from a quiche Lorraine ('Billykins says it's about all she could face’) and barked: ‘What are we going to drink?’
‘Uh?’
‘At Donald's thrash,’ said Elinor, ‘we're going to have to drink something.
I know it's awful but what?
People do like alcohol at a funeral.’
Henry goggled at her.
There had been much discussion in the street on this very topic.
Dave Sprott the dentist had suggested a barrel of draught Guinness.
Sam Baker QC (almost) from number 113a had suggested that he ‘bring along a few bottles of my Australian Chardonnay’ but no one could face the prospect of being talked through another glass of uniquely flinty, resonantly expressive Murray River Chardonnay by Sam Baker QC (almost).
Vera Loomis, the ninety-two-year-old who lived at number 92 and was known for some reason as Got All the Things There Then? had offered plum wine or home-brewed lager and Susan Doyle, who was reported to watch News at Ten while her husband pleasured her, had suggested lemonade shandy.
Detective inspector Rush from 38, known to Henry as Neighbourhood Watch, was of the opinion that alcohol at funerals was disrespectful.
He stopped Henry, as he so often did, in the street one afternoon and said, as he so often did, ‘Drinking and driving, Henry, wreck lives.’
Someone said that they had heard him suggest that all guests should be breathalysed at the door, for Rush had the reputation locally for being a more than usually dedicated policeman.
Henry had been involved in many of these discussions, had indeed had a pint with Dave Sprott to debate the issue, but when Elinor put the question to him he saw, suddenly, how he could not only perform a helpful, neighbourly act, and another last tribute, but also serve something that would, in all senses of the word, Finish 'Em.
‘Punch,’ he said, throatily, ‘I'll make a punch.’
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Henry started making the punch the evening before the funeral.
He got grape concentrate, sugar, cooking brandy and a large bottle of bleach and put the mixture into a large saucepan Elinor used for making marmalade.
He didn't boil it, for fear the bleach might evaporate; after the mixture was warm he added twenty bottles of Yugoslav Riesling, two bottles of Guinness and a pound and a half of oranges cut into segments.
Then, reasoning that a little bit of bleach wouldn't harm him, he sipped, nervously, at a teaspoonful of the mixture.
It tasted unequivocally of bleach.
In fact though, Henry argued to himself, punch usually tasted of bleach.
He was simply responding to the fact that he knew there was bleach in the mixture.
He was thinking bleach.
His toast in the morning tasted of bleach, his pint at the Rose tasted bleached, He would simply add more sugar.
He added three more packets of brown sugar.
It still tasted or bleach.
The beauty of it being a funeral was that no one ever complained about the quality of the food and drink at a funeral.
You ate what you were given and tried to look as if you couldn't really bear to think about food.
Even when things warmed up, it wasn't really done to comment on what was provided.
There was, Henry had noticed, a specially reverent way of saying ‘thank you’ when accepting a cheese and tomato sandwich at a funeral reception and he did not see why people should develop critical faculties just because they were swigging back a wine glass containing a fair quantity of the domestic bleach known as Finish 'Em.
The apparent disadvantage of the scheme — the fact that he was going to end up poisoning not only Elinor and Donald but also most of the inhabitants of Maple Drive, including what remained of Donald's family (Arfur was notoriously fond of ‘Daddy's ‘Ine’) was outweighed by its brilliantly direct character.
One of the main problems about person-to-person poisoning, Henry had found, was its very intimacy.
You had to go to such trouble to persuade the subject to accept the poison and when (or rather, in his case if ) you managed it, your very intimacy made it all too clear to everyone that you were the one who was slipping them the doctored crumble, the dodgy spaghetti bolognese or the potato salad unusually rich in mineral salts.
This way, it was going to be fairly obvious that someone had emptied a bottle of bleach into the punch but, since Henry could not possibly have a motive for murdering the whole of Maple Drive (as far as the police were concerned, anyway), it would be relatively easy for him to gasp in horror and dismay and to take the Wimbledon CID around the places where he had left the bowl of punch unattended.
He intended leaving the bowl in as many places easily accessible to a psychopath as possible.
As he mixed away happily (Elinor had retired to bed early) Henry began to see the headlines.
WIMBLEDON POISONER — PSYCHOPATH MAY STRIKE AGAIN SAY POLICE!
He, of course, would have to take a glass or two, enough to make him moderately sick, but that would be a small price to pay for finishing off Elinor, not to mention Mr and Mrs Is-the-Mitsubishi-Scratched-Yet and Nazi Who Escaped justice at Nuremberg.
THE BLEACH PRANKSTER: NEW FACTS!
They would never trace it to him.
Even if he was noticed forcing glasses on to his wife, no one would suspect.
Because one of the beauties of this time was his apparent (or indeed real) lack of motive.
Not many people murdered their wives out of dislike.
They usually did it for more obvious, sordid reasons; they wanted money, they had fallen in love with someone else or lost their temper.
Henry's dislike was a more rational, delicate emotion than that.
It was much more, he thought as he moved the boiling pan off the stove and on to the floor, trying to ignore the unholy smell of bleach that came off it as it sloshed against the sides of the vessel, that he had simply woken up one morning and realized, to use a phrase a friend had used about someone else's wife, ‘what he had got hold of’.
And once he had realized that…
To the left of the gas ring was a note.
For a moment, Henry thought it would be another few thousand words on the subject of his obscene masculinity, but to his surprise he saw it began ‘Dear Elinor…’
A lover.
She had got a lover!
Well, this made his activity all the more comprehensible, didn't it?
He was picking the letter up when he noticed that it was in Elinor's own handwriting.
Dear ELINOR,
Mean that!
Because you are dear!
Listen!
Listen!
Henry detected the influence of therapy here.
Do not despair!
You are Elinor!
Talented cook, linguist, dancer’ mother, opera singer and interior designer!
Love yourself!
Doesn't Irma Cauther have something to say about this?
(Probably.)
Oh, cast off the glooms!
Be!
Be womanly!
Escape from the heavy hands of Patriarchy!
But there is one, not far from here, who feels for you as a woman!
There is one who would know you, is there not?
One who would speak your name and seeks to know the woman in you!
Cast off the glooms.
Really she was getting off lightly with a few glasses of bleach.
If there was any justice in the world he should really decapitate her with a spade on Wimbledon Common in full view of her therapy class.
Pour encourager les autres .
And what was all this about one not far from here who knew the woman in her?
This sounded, to Henry, dangerously like illicit bonking.
And the not far from here made it pretty certain it was a neighbour.
He screwed up the note into small pieces and looked around for others.
There were, as far as he could see, none.
When the punch had cooled he took it out to the garden shed, within easy reach of Tibbles who, since her dose of chicken thallium, seemed to have improved in every conceivable way, and went upstairs to the bedroom.
Elinor had woken up and was trying on a black dress that looked more like a kind of solo tent than anything else.
With it, she had chosen a pair of black sneakers and a huge black bracelet.
She was looking at herself in the full-length mirror by the side of the bed, pulling great lumps out of her stomach and grimacing at her own image.
‘I'm fat!’ she said, as Henry came in.
‘I know,’ said Henry, loosening his trousers, ‘so am I.’
‘God!’ said Elinor, and again, ‘God!’
Henry did not wash his face or brush his teeth.
Instead he pulled off his green boxer shorts, given to him by Maisie last Christmas, and farted in what he hoped was a reasonably light-hearted way.
Elinor did not bother to respond.
Instead, she said, ‘Donald's death has made me think!’
‘Has it?’ said Henry.
‘Yes, darling,’ said Elinor.
Why is she calling me darling? thought Henry.
What does she want?
Did she see me pour the Finish 'Em into the punch?‘I know we're going through a bad patch at the moment.’
Not at all.
I think we're developing along the right lines, Elinor.
I think there are many positive aspects to our relationship at the present time, not the least positive of which is
‘I know sometimes you're almost brutally male, Henry.
And unresponsive.
But in a way I think this may be a defence mechanism.
Because underneath…’
A long, long way underneath.
‘…you are probably quite sensitive.
But you are out of touch with that human part of yourself.
You've grown a protective skin, a sort of…carapace of crudeness to help you deal with the world.
And at the moment you've become that outer self.
You have no room for good and gentle feelings.
Whereas I —’
I am opera singer, talented linguist, cook, mother, feminist!
‘I have feelings of tenderness towards people.
People I meet as part of my role as mother.
People from nearby.
There is someone — I'm not going to say his name, but there is someone who I think…admires me.’
Henry goggled at her.
This was, presumably, a pathetic, almost touching illusion on her part.
He decided not to pander to it by asking for the admirers name.
‘It's helped me through this depression, actually.
And yes, I have been depressed.
I don't deny that.
I don't deny that I have some problems of my own,’ she went on, although from the tone of her voice it was clear she had no idea what those problems might be.
None the less the brisk, no-nonsense manner implied that once she had found what, if any, they might be, like the good feminist she was, she would be out there dealing with them.
In fact she might even just dream up a few to even up the score a little.
It must be difficult, thought Henry, when you were living with an obscenely masculine, fat, not particularly talented patriarch like Henry.
Especially if you were a quote talented linguist gourmet cook and opera singer unquote.
‘What problems could you possibly have?’ said Henry.
‘You're a feminist.
Feminists by definition do not have problems.
They are simply corrupted by patriarchy, aren't they?
All we have to do is to do away with fathers and we're fine, aren't we?
Isn't that the idea?’
‘Don't be silly, Henry!’ said Elinor, in the style of a primary teacher, which once, years ago, she had been.
‘We're thinking about our problems.
Aren't we?’
She sat up very straight on the side of the bed and continued to address him as if he were sitting on a mat in the Top Infants, wrestling with difficult, dangerous new concepts like add-ups and take-aways and the precise whereabouts of Australia.
‘We're thinking about how we can be better as a couple and live in harmony as man and woman.
Male and female principle.
I believe, you see, that Womb and Phallus must be reconciled in some way!’
‘We could do a project on it,’ said Henry.
‘We could cut out pictures of penises and wombs and —’
‘Henry!’ said Elinor, in a voice that suggested that if he didn't shut up he might get a clip round the ear.
Then she continued in the sort of I'll-be-reasonable-if-you'll-be-reasonable tones adopted by the Russian government to, say, the Lithuanians.
‘You seek to control,’ she went on, ‘it's perfectly natural.
It's a very masculine thing.
It goes with a whole package of your attitudes.
You're very reactionary, politically.
You are racist, as poor darling Donald was.
And you are frightened of the world.
Frightened of the liberation movements.
The movements that seek to free black people, American Indians, Nicaragua and so on.
Whereas I seek to go with the flow.
To change and grow.
To progress, Henry!’
Why was it, thought Henry, that Elinor felt so in tune with the poor and the oppressed of the world?
And why was it that this deep empathy with the hard done by inspired her to give him such a hard time?
Henry had absolutely no consistent views about anything that did not directly concern him; in his opinion, such views were a rather revolting luxury.
Why…but Elinor was talking again.
‘I was reading this book the other day.
About this urge to control experienced by males.
Men seek control over women apparently.
Whereas women —’
‘Seek total world domination!’ said Henry, under his breath.
‘What?’
‘Nothing, dear!’
Elinor looked at him suspiciously.
‘The world arms race, for example.
Is a product of this urge to dominate, isn't it?
And if you look around at the world and try and find the women in positions of power, you have to say, where are they?
Where are they?’
Henry started to mutter, into the duvet, the names of women in positions of power.
‘Mrs Thatcher,’ he hissed, ‘Mrs Gandhi.
Golda Meir!’
OK two of those were dead but they had certainly caused a lot of trouble when alive, hadn't they?
When he couldn't think of any more women in government, he added a few authors, actresses, athletes —‘Jane Fonda,’ he muttered, ‘Chrissie Evert, Dusty Springfield, Adriana Rich!’
They were all women, weren't they?
They were all doing all right.
They were doing a lot better than him.
‘Ella Fitzgerald,’ he mouthed, ‘Kate Millett, Nancy Reagan, Benazir Bhutto…’
‘What?’
‘Nothing, darling.’
Elinor turned to him and laid a hand on his head.
‘I just felt,’ she said, ‘since Donald had that terrible thing happen to him, we have been a bit closer.
The horror has brought us together.
We haven't dumped so much.
We've accepted each other for what we are.’
Talented cook, linguist and opera singer and fat, patriarchal slob.
Henry climbed under the duvet.
‘I think,’ he said ‘I feel —’
These two words brought Elinor out in a kind of rash of solicitude.
She swung her whole body round and fixed her eyes on Henry's face as if he were a dying spy with some vital secret to impart.
‘I feel,’ said Henry, ‘that —’
Elinor nodded vigorously.
This was clearly the way to get her to shut up and listen.
‘I feel,’ he went on, ‘as a man —’
What did he feel as a man?
Nothing much really, apart from pretty fucking confused.
He felt he probably didn't know what feelings were any more.
What feelings were OK and what were obscenely patriarchal and what merely irrelevant.
He had more or less given up feeling, thought Henry, when his mother got started on him.
‘Yes,’ Elinor was saying, ‘yes?’
‘Well…if we could…share more…’
‘Yes?’ said Elinor.
‘If once or twice,’ he looked up at her soulfully, ‘we could share a…drink, say.
You know?
Get really drunk together.
Have a few glasses of beer or Scotch or…you know…punch!
The way we used to!’
Elinor smiled, a tight, maternal smile.
And patted his hand.
‘I know,’ she said, ‘I know…’
She wouldn't have to get very drunk, thought Henry.
Four or five glasses of Henry's Stomach Cleanser should do it.
Finish 'Em.
Finish 'Em all.
Her, Dave Sprott the dentist and Sam Baker QC (almost), Inspector Rush, ‘Neighbourhood Watch’, and Mr and Mrs Is-the-Mitsubishi-Scratched-Yet and Nazi Who Escaped justice at Nuremberg.
By tomorrow night Wimbledon was going to be an easier, cleaner, emptier place in which to live.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
It was, to start off with anyway, a moving and impressive funeral.
It was, as Vera ‘Got All the Things There Then?’
Loomis, the ninety-two-year-old from 92 pointed out, the best funeral that she had ever attended.
It was, she said, adding that she had been to over fifty funerals in the UK alone, the funeral of a lifetime.
She was, she told everyone, particularly impressed with Henry's speech.
At one stage Dave Sprott the northern dentist had suggested they hire a black charabanc and people in Maple Drive, used now to his carefully preserved northern humour, had managed deliberately weak smiles of the kind they managed when Sprott backed them into a corner at someone's Christmas party.
But as Henry remarked to Elinor as the cortège moved away from Darby's, the undertaker in the village, a charabanc might have been a more decent way of moving the extraordinarily large number of people who turned out for what Sprott referred to as ‘the big goodbye’ for Donald Templeton MD.
There were so many limousines and lesser limousines and cars in attendance on the lesser limousines that the queue of cars stretched from Volley's Pizza and Pasta House down to the Polka Children's Theatre on the frontiers of Wimbledon.
Some of the delayed motorists were distinctly lacking in respect, one going as far as to say that if he were going to get buried he'd have a bit more consideration for other road users.
In spite of this, to start off with anyway, everyone felt the event was going well.
Mr Darby himself, a professionally miserable man in his late sixties, handed Billykins down from the car and into the chapel and, as the mourners crowded in after her, as politely unaggressive as only mourners can be, there was a real, though muted feeling of loss in the air.
Inside the chapel there were white flowers, piled almost to the ceiling and, in a brown box a little to the right of a bargain-basement cross, was Donald.
The first sight of the coffin made Henry feel distinctly uneasy.
‘Look, Donald,’ he said, ‘I really am incredibly sorry about all of this.’
‘Mate,’ said Donald, ‘we've all got to go sometime.
I'm going today.
Very soon you'll be on your way as well.’
‘Sure,’ said Henry.
‘And so,’ said Donald, ‘will all these people.’
‘Very, very, very soon,’ said Henry.
Billykins had decided to ‘dispense with the burial service as such’.
Which, everyone in the street had agreed, was a bold and generous gesture on Donald's behalf.
‘What does it mean?’ she had asked Henry, a day or so after Donald's death, ‘what does it mean?’
‘Indeed,’ said Henry feelingly, ‘what does it mean?’
She had chosen three hymns: ‘Say Not the Struggle Nought Availeth’, ‘Ye Holy Angels Bright’ and ‘Now Thank We All Our God’.
And at the cemetery the vicar, a man who looked as if he needed far more consolation than he would ever be capable of dispensing, had agreed to say a few words before Henry's address.
Henry's address, Billykins had said, would be the centrepiece of the occasion.
Much, much better to have the sincere words of a family friend than some vicar who didn't really know Donald.
In Henry ‘s hands was a crumpled piece of paper on which was written: ‘Skill at medicine 2 mins.
Wit and tolerance 3 mins.
Father and husband 8 mins.
Golfing ability?
Tennis serve?
Value of house?
Poss. tell Biarritz anecdote here (too crude???).
Remember: don't be tasteless, Henry!’
Lower down the page he had scribbled a quotation from Shelley: ‘Life stains the white radiance of Eternity’.
This, as Henry looked at it, the piped organ music swelling through the chapel, seemed to sum up the complete irrelevance of English literature.
‘Stains the white radiance of Eternity’, eh?
What did that mean when it came down to it?
How many pints would that buy you?
In case of trouble, underneath that, Henry had written —‘Death is Nature's way of telling us to slow down’.
And, below that —‘Death comes as the end.
The everlasting friend.
Sophocles.’
In his researches at Wimbledon Public Library he had not been able to find any really cheering quotations on the subject of death.
There were a few of the I-am-not-really-dead-but-just-popped-out-for-a-packet-of-fags sort of lines, which all went on a little long for Henry's taste, and quite a number of death-as-a-viable-alternative-to-life stuff, much of it from the fathers of the early church.
Henry had thought of taking this line, but the trouble was, he found, one became almost too jolly at Donald's expense, the implication being that he, the jammy bastard, was well off out of it, while they, the real sufferers, were condemned to a few more years of the horrors of living in Wimbledon.
The worms crawl in The worms crawl out The worms play poker on your snout Be merry my friends be merry!
(Trad.) was also to be found on Henry's scrappy sheets of paper.
Next to it he had written: ‘Use this if golf joke goes well!’
And on the next page a long, uplifting sentence from a French sociologist, the gist of which was that dying was something we needed a lot of help with.
The French sociologist, whose sentence was more like a paragraph, went on to argue that death was something that we needed to share -it needed to be seen publicly.
The dying man should be surrounded by his friends and family, should make, as it were, a day of it.
To Henry, the idea of being cheered on as you croaked, by Elinor, Mr and Mrs Is-the-Mitsubishi-Scratched-Yet, his mother, her mother, Maisie and anyone else with a few hours to spare was almost completely repulsive.
But Donald, to judge from the size of the congregation -they were three deep in the aisles and old Mr Donovan from 21b (‘I fought two wars for you lot’) had to wait outside the double doors — Donald was not experiencing what the French sociologist called the Lonely Death.
He was having, rather, the Oversubscribed Death.
At the end of the second hymn — Ye — Holy — Angels — Bright — Who-o-o-o wait at God's right hand!— Henry found himself being tugged forward by Elinor.
He looked up and saw the vicar carrying a book that looked more like an illustrated part work from W. H. Smith's than Holy Writ.
‘Not yet…’ he hissed.
‘Donald Templeton,’ the vicar began, ‘was a man loved, and I mean loved, by all who knew him.’
Which did not, thought Henry, include you, chum.
‘Those who followed his career in television, from the role of humble assistant film editor, up through the features department of Granada Television, through to his incredibly successful period as editor of the BBC magazine programme,Holiday '76 , knew him to be resourceful, keen, and deeply aware, not only of the problems of travel — his chosen speciality — but also-of such things as cuisine and interior design.’
Henry looked along the row.
Billykins's jaw sagged under her veil.
Most of the other mourners were listening to this with the same rapt attention they might have accorded a vaguely accurate account of Donald's life.
It didn't really matter, their expressions seemed to say, he might as well have been a short-order cook or a deep-sea diver or a male prostitute.
He was just another wally like anyone else.
In some ways, thought Henry, the man with whom Donald had been confused seemed to have had a better time of it.
‘Later,’ went on the vicar, ‘Donald Templeton showed himself a skilful cross-country skier, on and off piste, a witty raconteur and an enthusiastic do-it-yourselfer.
But, when we think of him today, which I can assure you we do, we think of those left behind.
Of Norman, of Jean-Paul and of little Beatrice who feels this as deeply as anyone, including the Sussex branch of the family who, because of the railway accident you all know about, cannot be with us here today.
Donald Templeton —’Whoever he may be .
‘Smiles down at us today.
His conversion to Islam, his rejection of that faith and the subsequent, troubled period, when the disease had made him all but unrecognizable to any but a few close friends, are things we may wish to pass over today, but —’
Here the vicar raised his eyes to the congregation and a look of panic passed across his face.
Perhaps, thought Henry, there was another Donald Templeton.
Perhaps…
But whatever the reason, whether it was that everyone had been so busy reassuring everyone that no one had bothered to talk to the crematorium, whether they had got the time wrong, or whether the vicar had simply had a brainstorm, he now, you could tell, was dimly aware that he had not given an exemplary performance.
Whatever the reason may have been, the vicar had no direction in which to go but forward.
‘But,’ he said, his voice challenging his audience to rise and refute him, ‘death, as someone said, is the great leveller.
And in my father's house are many mansions.
And if ever a man sleeps well after a day's work done well that man is, and I pray God give him rest, Donald Templeton!’
Here, overcome by a mixture of shame, embarrassment and some genuine fellow feeling for whoever it was inside the box some yards to his left, the vicar turned to the coffin and said, in a Shakespearian voice, ‘Goodbye, Donald!’
At which point Billykins, perhaps mindful of the more glamorous, civilized life she could have had as the wife of the editor of Holiday '76 , burst into tears and was comforted by Elinor.
Somehow or other, the vicar got off stage, and disappeared behind the altar, perhaps off to hurl himself into the flames that would shortly be consuming Donald.
It seemed, thought Henry, the least he could do.
As he left, Henry, pushed from behind by Elinor, crept up in the direction of the coffin.