

El Cid
CHAMPION OF SPAIN
With a trampling of drenched, red hoofs
and an earthquake of men that meet,
strong war sets hands to the scythe, and
the furrows take fire from his feet.
(Erectheus Swinburne)
El Cid Campeador — Rodrigo del Bivar
He was Rodrigo del Bivar — otherwise known as El Cid or ‘the Lord’— one of the most complex and remarkable heroes of the Middle Ages.
In his most familiar guise, as a literary figure, he is brave, heroic, loyal, a good husband and father, a redoubtable foe and a man of honour.
In short, he is all that a medieval paladin might be expected to be.
However, even within that most famous and partisan account of his life, the twelfth century Poema del Cid , there is an element of cunning, almost knavish behaviour which is far from usual in such a character.
El Cid lies, cheats, even steals from innocent men; while elsewhere the portrait is even less flattering.
Yet despite all this, El Cid is probably Spain's greatest hero.
He is famed for his just behaviour, nobility and magnanimity.
He was so respected by his natural enemies, the Moors, that when he was exiled by his Christian overlords, they were more than willing to give him shelter and employment.
Indeed, it was the Moors who gave him the title by which he is best known, a contraction of the Arabic sid-y , meaning ‘my lord’.
He was born in 1043 at Bivar, a village to the north of Burgos in northern Spain.
As the son of noble parents, Rodrigo was brought up and trained in knightly pursuits at the court of Prince Sancho, eldest son of King Ferdinand of Castile and Leon.
He soon proved himself a redoubtable warrior, and won the respect of his peers.
When, with the death of Ferdinand in 1065, civil war broke out between his surviving sons, Rodrigo commanded the army of his overlord Prince Sancho.
Then, in 1077, Sancho was murdered and El Cid became a favourite at the court of his brother Alfonso and his sister Urraca.
There was believed to have been an incestuous relationship between Alfonso and Urraca and they were probably responsible for Sancho's death.
Whether or not he suspected this, Rodrigo accepted the favours bestowed upon him by the new King — including marriage to Alfonso's niece Ximena Diaz.
It seems to have been a happy marriage and Ximena bore Rodrigo two daughters.
But Rodrigo had made many enemies, both among the disgraced followers of the murdered Sancho (who saw his change of   allegiances as disaster) and those at the court of Alfonso (who saw his rise as a threat).
In particular, the powerful Beni-Gomez family schemed continually against Rodrigo until Alfonso banished him in 1081.
It was from this point that Rodrigo's life as a wandering and heroic adventurer began in earnest.
He gathered a considerable following of loyal and disaffected men, and together they served many masters, both Christian and Moslem, during the next five years.
Then, in 1095, a new influx of Moorish invaders landed in Spain.
They were led by a fanatical chieftain named Yusuf and Alfonso was soundly defeated at the battle of Sagrajas.
Rodrigo, by now widely known as El Cid Campeador (the battler), was recalled to favour and proceeded at once to drive back the invaders.
This he did with such success that within the next few years his name became a byword throughout Spain.
From then until his death in 1099 at the age of fifty-six, El Cid fought a series of dazzling campaigns against the Moors, taking the fortified city of Valencia and making it an impregnable fortress against his enemies When news of his death reached the rest of Spain, men and women wept openly in the streets, tearing their clothing and lacerating their cheeks in an  extravagant display of mourning.
Many refused to believe El Cid was actually dead.
Just as with other heroes like Arthur and Charlemagne, it was thought that he had been transported to another time or place to await his country's greatest need.
The legend of El Cid began there, but nearly a thousand years were to pass before the true story of his life and deeds began to be known.
Eleventh Century Spain
El Cid was born into a world of complex, shifting forces and allegiances, both religious and political.
Indeed, the situation changed so swiftly that   there is almost no resemblance between the political maps of Spain for 1000 and 1050, or again between those covering the times of the birth and death of El Cid.
Warriors of El Cid's time, in mail shirts; from an eleventh century ivory reliquary of San Millan de la Copolla.
Valley of Sajambre, near Leon (opposite).
Rodrigo was born near here at Bivar in 1043 and would have spent much of his childhood in sight of these rugged hills.
For much of this time the country was in a continual state of war, with the Moors in the south and the Christians in the north constantly invading each others' borders.
However, there was never any clear dividing line between north and south, neither culturally nor physically.
Despite a veneer of Islamicism, many of the Spanish Moslems were originally of Gothic or Iberio–Roman stock.
They were separated from their northern neighbours only by religious beliefs.
Furthermore, since at this time Islam was pursuing a policy of particular openness towards other religions, less of a barrier existed than is sometimes assumed.
Indeed, there was such a degree of integration between the two that even modern Spain retains a powerful element of Orientalism within its cultural makeup.
Moorish Spain came into being over a period of several hundred years — from the period of the first Moslem conquest in the eighth century, to the eventual re-conquest by Christians from the north of the peninsula in the later part of the thirteenth century.
In the interim there existed a period of extraordinary cross-fertilization between Christian and Arabic cultures.
In the words of the historian Pierre Vilar:
Moorish Spain was in fact a crucible in which were fused the contributions of diverse cultures…
The products of this crucible filter across Christian Europe — Scholastic philosophy, romanesque art, the school of medicine at Montpelier, the lyric poetry of the troubadours and the mystical poetry of Dante.
(Spain: A Brief History )
This interaction occurred because of the very fragmentation experienced by the country.
After the breakdown of the Omyniad caliphates under Al-Mansur around 1030, Spain became a patchwork of small communities and states.
Each claimed a king — or even, in one case, an emperor — and they included the purely Christian, the Moslem-influenced, the purely Moorish, and the Christian-influenced Islamicism.
It was an extraordinarily fluid ratio of exchange which would be hard to parallel today.
Perhaps a graphic parallel would be to imagine that a country existed in the middle of Europe which was at one and the same time Catholic, Protestant, Jewish and Islamic, while sharing equally the cultural and economic influence of the USA, USSR, and China!
At this time, the Christian factions within the Caliphates (ex-slaves and captives who had risen to high office under Al-Mansur) requested help from the Court of Castile.
This was an extraordinary state of affairs but one which enabled Rodrigo del Bivar to serve so many masters without apparent conflict.
It is also the reason why he could lay claim to a rich blend of cultures, having an excellent grasp of the European legal system and Arabic poetry and customs.
This was reflected too in dress that combined Moorish robes with European mail and weaponry.
The length of time during which the frontiers of the Christian and Moorish regions continued to shift, meant that there was ample opportunity for cultural and religious exchange.
There seems to have existed a form of Spanish Islam which was like nothing then available anywhere in Europe.
When they were not fighting each other, the kings and caliphs were just as likely to be seeking each other 's protection or  vassalage .
Thus, while these enlightened times continued, there existed little of the prejudice and fanaticism which were engendered by the Crusades.
Gold embroidered cape showing the influence of Moorish art in the design of lions attacking camels.
Such a garment may well have been worn by Alfonso III for his coronation.
Mix of Cultures
The cultural achievements of the Moors in Spain far outstripped those of the semi-barbarian north.
Philosophy, medicine and the arts flourished in an enlightened atmosphere which existed scarcely anywhere else at the time.
Moktadir and Mutamin, two of the Moslem lords with whom El Cid took service during his years of exile, were themselves scholars and poets of no small skill.
Rodrigo must have learned a great deal from these intelligent, cultured people.
Certainly his years with the Moors seem to have changed him, softening without blunting his warlike character.
In cities such as Toledo, which was reconquered by the Christian forces in 1085, an even more extraordinary mix of philosophies and beliefs obtained in something approaching harmony.
A strong Jewish faction introduced the roots of the mystical system known as Qabalism.
Similarly, there were practitioners, among both Moslem and Christian, of the ‘hermetic arts’ of alchemy, science and mystical theology.
In the north of Spain, on the other hand, there was a dearth of learning and an almost total disregard for the arts — except where Moorish influence was most strongly felt.
Philosophy was frowned upon as almost certainly heretical, while the Catholic Church generally strove to outlaw even classical learning in favour of theological treatises.
There arose therefore an interesting situation.
The Christian Spanish had looked towards their Moslem neighbours as arbiters of culture and  learning.
Yet, when faced once again with war between north and south, Christian and Moor, they found themselves unable to relate to their brothers in France or Italy, who in turn regarded them as scandalously Islamicised.
As Ramon Pidal puts it:
By the eleventh century, Al Andalus was populated by an extremely heterogeneous mass, part of which was still Christian whilst another part was half Moslem.
Political maps of the time show how complex the situation really was when Rodrigo began to exercise an influence.
From the eighth century onward, there was a strong Christian presence in the northerly mountainous regions of Asturias, Cantabria and Galicia; while in the south the caliphates flourished in Cordoba, Seville, Toledo and Granada.
Between these two, an unequivocal dividing line made the plateaux of Leon and Burgos a kind of no-mans-land, across which the two forces ranged more or less in a continual dispute until the middle of the tenth century.
Then the forces of the Asturian kings pushed further south, founding states in Leon, Castile and Burgos.
It is the fates of these kingdoms which form the background of El Cid's area of greatest activity.
Had he never existed, it is probable that the Almoravid Moors, under their fanatical leader Yusuf, would have overrun a far greater area of central Spain — and perhaps prevented the gradual blurring of the two cultures which produced the later kingdoms of Moorish Spain and thereafter the great empire of the sixteenth century.
Arms and Battle Tactics
Two things gave the Christian forces in Spain superiority over their Moslem foes: the weight of their armour and horses, and their possession of massive siege engines.
Castile itself had been named after the fortresses  built along the border between Christian and Moslem Spain, and essentially those who held these castles held the greatest degree of control over the lands on either side.
For this reason, the great part of reports relating to warfare in this period concern sieges.
We hear endlessly of Rodrigo taking various fortified cities and castles — only to lose them later and often in a matter of months.
The mangonel, which projected massive, damaging boulders and was a vital engine of siege warfare for the Christian forces.
By this time, the Christians had virtually perfected the art of siege warfare, using the powerful mangonel, among other massive siege engines.
This machine could project massive boulders against the walls of a besieged castle with the power of a cannon.
Similarly, the trebuchet could lob the lifeless carcass of a horse (or more often a human corpse) over the walls, to add to the disease already raging within.
The Moors depended more on starvation tactics and in sheer weight of numbers; they scarcely ever adapted to the use of siege towers or other engines of war, until the widespread use of cannon and gunpowder several centuries later.
However, on open ground, the Moors' skill as horsemen and the magnificent Arab steeds they rode, gave them a positive advantage over the heavily armoured war-horses of the Christians, which were more like carthorses, slow and heavy against the speedy, light Arab mounts.
The Moslems also wore much lighter armour and carried light swords, bows and spears.
Again, these gave them the advantage when it came to the swift ‘attack-and-run’ tactics which they frequently employed.
The heart-shaped shields of the Moslems, called adarga , proved so popular that they were sometimes adopted by their opponents.
However, in a head-on clash, the weight and armour-piercing qualities of the Christian forces were virtually unstoppable.
The great castle of Montellana-Coronil in Seville.
It saw much of the fighting between Moors and Christians during El Cid's lifetime.
Nonetheless, the cost of maintaining a fully armoured force was considerable; hence the frequent failure of kings like Alfonso to raise sufficiently large forces.
Weapons and armour, measured in the equivalent of cows, have been quoted as being worth as much as:
Helmet
6 cows
Mail-coat
12 cows
Sword and scabbard
7 cows
Leg armour
6 cows
Lance and shield
2 cows
Horse
12 cows
Both sides made use of bows, though the Moslems were by far the more proficient in their use.
In hand-to-hand fighting, once again the huge and heavy broad-swords of the Christians proved superior  over the light, curved scimitars of their adversaries.
Again, in the use of spears, the Christian knight, crouched behind his kite-shaped shield, atop his massive war horse could topple a lightly armed man completely out of the saddle — and probably spear him through in the process.
All of these qualities, when duly accounted for, amounted to a virtual condition of stalemate between the opposing forces.
The almost weekly loss and gain of territory depended entirely on the skills of leadership and prevailing conditions.
In a straight fight, the Christians usually won; in skirmishes, the Moslem forces held their own and often overcame their opponents with fanatical zeal.
Moorish infantry and cavalry, armed with bows, swords and spears, and carrying small round shields.
The Court of Leon and Castile
Ferdinand I of Castile and Leon was crowned on 21st June 1038.
He was a strong and greedy monarch who pursued a course of military aggrandisement from the very beginning of his reign.
He desired to subjugate the whole of Moslem Spain and to integrate this vast tract of land into his own kingdom, which would then be the single greatest state in the country.
So confident was he of his success that he assumed the title 
Three warriors of about 1150, wearing conical helms and long mail shirts and carrying kite-shaped shields.
Armed with spears and swords they reflect the style of Rodrigo's army.
‘Emperor while his plans were still far from completion.
However, his great energy and militaristic abilities enabled him to extend his sway deep into Moorish territory — in particular the Caliphate of Valencia.
By 1065 he had conquered Toledo and made it a Christian — Moorish  fief owing allegiance to Leon.
He was on the point of taking the key fortress of Valencia in the same year, when he fell sick and died within a matter of weeks.
His realm was split between his three sons Sancho, Alfonso and Garcia, along the lines of a will he had made in 1063.
To his second, favourite son Alfonso, he gave the Kingdom of Leon and the Campos Goticos, together with the tributes from the Moorish kingdom of Toledo, whose overlord he had successfully beaten into submission only a year before.
To Sancho, his first-born, he gave the smaller inheritance of Castile and the tribute of Saragossa.
Garcia, the third son, received Galicia and Portugal, along with the tribute of Badajar and Seville.
To his daughters, Urraca and Elvira, he gave dominion over all the monasteries within his borders, on the sole understanding that they did not marry and thereby produce alternate heirs to the kingdom.
On hearing of these terms and before Ferdinand died, Sancho refused to accept this partition on the grounds that it went against the rights of the eldest son.
It is said that Ferdinand made all three brothers promise to defer to Rodrigo del Bivar, putting him virtually in loco parentis to the infantas , though he was still only of an age with them.
So, with the death of Ferdinand all was quiet for a time.
Sancho, ruling in Castile, at once began to extend his territories, assisted by Rodrigo, who was given the title of Ensign, a position which automatically gave him command of the army.
Knights battling, from an eleventh century Spanish manuscript.
El Cid's Early Adventures
One of Rodrigo's earliest exploits was his win in a single combat against the champion of Navarre in order to settle a border dispute between Sancho and the Navarran king.
Soon after, in 1067, he lead the armies of Castile against the Moorish city of Saragossa, subduing it effectively and extracting a firm promise of fealty and prompt payment of tribute.
A Jewish chronicler attributed the success of the expedition entirely to the youthful Ensign, calling him for the first time ‘Cidi’, the equivalent of Mio Cid ‘my lord’.
Then, in 1067, Ferdinand's widow died, thus removing any scruple remaining in the mind of Sancho towards honouring the partition.
Within a year, Castile was at war with Leon, brother against brother.
As always, Rodrigo del Bivar was in the forefront of the action.
The first action in the brief war was the battle of Llantada Plain on 19th July 1068.
Castile was the victor, but instead of surrendering himself, as had previously been agreed, Alfonso fled south.
Gathering his forces, he attacked the Moorish state of Badajoz, evincing a still higher tribute than was already paid to the third brother Garcia.
The result was a further outbreak of hostilities between the three sons of Ferdinand, with Sancho pretending to side with Garcia against Alfonso, while really waiting his moment to annex Galicia and Portugal.
Ramon Pidal gives a rounded portrait of the brothers at this time:
Garcia of Galicia lacked the ability possessed by his brothers and accordingly was the first victim of the discord among them all.
Sancho was ambitious, headstrong, and over-bearing and was noted for his indomitable courage…
Alfonso, on the other hand, though go-ahead and energetic, was of a docile nature and readily deferred to his parents and his eldest sister Urraca, so that he became the favourite son and developed all the traits of a spoilt child.
Whether El Cid acted in a position of arbiter, as Ferdinand had intended, is not known; he seems to have stepped aside from the almost continuous wrangling of the brothers.
In 1071, this conflict resulted in the capture and exile of Garcia and the subsequent division of his lands between Sancho and Alfonso.
Some of the near contemporary songs which have survived from the period describe Rodrigo himself as capturing Garcia and handing him over to the brothers.
It may be that he saw this as the best means of curtailing a war that was tearing apart Christian Spain.
With Garcia effectively out of the running, relations between Sancho and Alfonso worsened.
Several border engagements took place, culminating in the battle of Golpejera.
Here Sancho was heard to remark that he was the equal of a thousand men while Rodrigo was equal to another hundred.
El Cid replied, modestly, that he was only equal to one man at a time, and that as for the rest it was up to God.
However, in the battle which followed it was certainly Rodrigo who helped turn the tide of events for Sancho.
Alfonso was taken prisoner, possibly by El Cid himself, and subsequently exiled to Toledo.
With him went several  members of the Beni-Gomez family, and it is from this that their hatred of Rodrigo dates.
The Gateway of San Andres, Zamora.
The city saw much conflict during El Cid's campaigns, as the ebb and flow of conquest and recovery gave it first a Christian master and then a Moorish one.
It may have changed hands as often as eight times in a period of twenty years.
Sancho meanwhile had himself crowned king of Leon, and thus came to rule over the most extensive kingdom in the whole of Christian Spain.
However, his success was to be short-lived.
His sister Urraca, who was believed to harbour an elicit passion for Alfonso, raised a rebellion against Sancho.
When he arrived outside her castle of Zamora, she sent a man into the royal camp to murder him.
Sancho fell dying outside his own pavilion while Rodrigo and others gave chase.
However, the assassin escaped back to Zamora, which opened its gates to him.
Sancho's death at the age of 34 struck fear into the hearts of his followers, many of whom fled.
Only Rodrigo was able to rally enough men to escort the King's body to its resting place in the monastery of Ona.
Urraca at once sent messengers to Alfonso who, having won the support of the Moorish king of Toledo, left his place of exile to proclaim himself King of Castile, Leon and Galicia.
At the same time he proclaimed Urraca as Queen, giving her the status she would normally have attained if she were actually his consort.
But not all the lords of the kingdoms supported Alfonso.
Rodrigo del Bivar was one who did not.
Indeed, in a remarkable episode, El Cid is said to have forced Alfonso to swear an oath on sacred relics to the effect  that he had nothing to do with his brother's murder.
In this, Rodrigo once again displayed his judgement of what was best for Spain, for under this oath Alfonso gained the support of those who doubted his right to rule, as well as the support of El Cid himself, who now showed himself willing to stand by the new King.
El Cid leads his heavily-armed and mounted soldiers in a desperate foray from the besieged fortress of Valencia.
the sheer weight and ferocity of their charge carries them through the massed ranks of their Moorish adversaries.
El Cid upholds his honour and that of his King by defeating an enemy champion in single combat.
Having unhorsed each other, the two men finish the fight on foot, in a hand-to-hand trial of strength.
Alfonso took the oath, but he never forgave Rodrigo for forcing him to humble himself before the rest of his vassals.
Status, Marriage and Banishment
El Cid now became an honoured member of Alfonso's court — but he no longer held the high office of Ensign as he had during Sancho's reign.
Also his foes, the Beni-Gomez family, and in particular Garcia Ordonez, began a rise to power almost in equal measure to the decline of El Cid.
Meanwhile, the fate of the unfortunate Garcia was now sealed.
On the advice of his sister, Alfonso summoned his youngest and only surviving brother who, expecting to be restored to his throne, came willingly.
He was immediately seized and thrown into prison, where he remained in chains for a further seventeen years, finally falling sick and dying before a suddenly contrite Alfonso could order his chains removed.
Garcia's epitaph, written by a monk of Leon, made clear the opinion of the time:
Here lies Garcia, King of Galicia and Portugal, taken captive by his brother's craft.
he died in chains on 22nd march, 1090.
In 1074 Alfonso surprisingly arranged an excellent marriage for El Cid with his own niece Donna Ximena Diaz.
By all accounts she was something of a beauty.
Also, being of royal descent from the House of Aragon, her marriage not only demonstrated to all that Rodrigo stood in high favour with the King, but also helped heal the breach between Castile and Leon.
Ximena was seen as representing the former, while Rodrigo, who had formally renounced his rights as a Castilian noble, now stood for Leon.
Thus, for a time, Rodrigo's fortunes were restored.
But gradually the Beni-Gomez family worked on the mind of Alfonso.
They reminded him of the ignominious episode of the oath-taking, and pointed out that Rodrigo now had a personal ‘army’ almost as large as the King's.
Matters came to a head when Rodrigo lead his men against a revolt of both Christians and Moors at Toledo, a revolt in which the Beni — Gomez family were certainly involved.
Diego Ordonez lost no time in accusing El Cid of seeking to further his own ends by laying claim to Toledo, something which Rodrigo never appears to have intended.
The outcome was that Alfonso banished his most trusted vassal, giving him ten days to leave Castile and Leon.
Bestowing his wife and children in the safety of the monastery at Cardena, Rodrigo departed to his exile.
However, his departure was more like triumph since he took with him some 2000 men who preferred  to go into exile with him rather than remain in Alfonso's service.
The next few years were to establish Rodrigo as one of the truly remarkable soldiers of his time.
They were to be wandering years, but they were to end in triumph.
Exile and the Peril out of Africa
The normal recourse of exiled Spanish knights was to the nearest Moorish court, but Rodrigo made instead for the Kingdom of Barcelona.
There he attempted to persuade the counts Ramon and Berenguer to aid him in taking Saragossa, a key fortress which King Ferdinand had long sought to bring under his sway.
Rodrigo met with a cold and scornful reception from the counts, who believed they had no need of a renegade knight with a rather large force of his own.
So he took an extraordinary step, going directly to Moktadir, the Moslem ruler of Saragossa, and pledging his sword and men to the Moorish prince.
Moktadir, who was seriously threatened by the neighbouring kingdoms of Navarre and Aragon, gladly accepted.
When he died shortly after the arrival of El Cid, his son Motamid ratified the agreement and honoured Rodrigo by placing him in joint command of the army.
Rodrigo and Motamid rapidly began to make inroads into the border territory separating the Caliphates of Saragossa and Lerida.
The latter was in the hands of Motamid's younger brother, who at once made an alliance with most of the states of Catalonia, including Barcelona, where El Cid had recently offered his services and been turned away.
It was the same story over again, brother against brother, neighbour against neighbour; and as before Rodrigo was caught in the middle.
Nevertheless, he quickly captured Count  Berenger and slaughtered most of his followers when he overwhelmed their camp outside the city of Tamarinte.
Upon his return to Saragossa, El Cid was treated as a hero in exactly the same way as if he had been a Moslem.
Motamid heaped gifts upon him, gold and jewels and rich silks.
But Rodrigo was not like other mercenaries; he made it clear that he required nothing for himself.
Instead, he negotiated an unofficial treaty which made Saragossa subject to Castile and Leon, and established the Caliphate as a virtual protectorate of Alfonso's kingdom.
There then followed an episode which further proved Cid's loyalty and Alfonso's treacherous nature.
The Emperor — as he was by then styling himself — led an attack on a castle close to the border of Saragossa.
In the event, he was defeated and fled after the death of most of his forces.
Rodrigo, hearing of this, rushed to Alfonso's aid and for a moment it  seemed that the Emperor would relent and rescind El Cid's banishment.
However, though Rodrigo was willing to give up his exalted position at Saragossa, Alfonso regained his nerve and at once again turned against his ally — and El Cid returned to Saragossa.
Alfonso entered a period of personal success which nearly eclipsed El Cid for some two years.
Then, in the winter of 1085, Alfonso arrived at the gates of Saragossa and laid siege to the city.
Rodrigo, who was elsewhere at the time, heard the news with dismay.
His honour would not permit him to attack his sovereign, yet he still owed allegiance to Motamid.
He chose to do nothing, and for a time remained in a distant castle as a virtual prisoner of conscience.
Alfonso pressed forward on all fronts.
After a heavy assault, he took the great city of Toledo which became his chief fortress on the eastern frontier, extending his kingdom still further into Moorish territory.
Many of the Moslem kings now came forward with tributes and it seemed, briefly, that most of Moorish Spain was about to fall to the Christians.
This would indeed have made it one of the greatest empires in Europe.
But two men prevented this, one indirectly, the other by force of arms: Rodrigo del Bivar and the Almoravid chieftain, Yusuf ibn Teshufin.
The Almoravids were really Berbers from the region of the Sahara.
In the eleventh century, they were one of two nomadic tribes to erupt into sudden and ferocious activity, for at the other end of the Mediterranean, the Seljuk Turks poured into Asia Minor.
The Almoravids swiftly overran much of Africa and the Sudan, restoring these countries to orthodox Islamic practice.
This they administered with sword and fire, destroying taverns and burning musical instruments as symbols of moral corruption.
It was to these fanatical warriors, and above all to their chieftain, that both Motamid and the Caliph of Badajoz appealed for aid against the steady encroachments of Alfonso.
Having twice refused on the grounds that he had first to win Tangier and Ceuta (which he accomplished in 1084), Yusuf finally turned his attention to Spain at Motamid's third desperate request.
He landed, with a vast army, on 30th June 1086 and was met by Motamid and the Moslem Kings of Granada and Malaga at the head of their own forces.
Alfonso, hearing the news, at once raised the siege of Saragossa and began to assemble his own forces.
The two armies met at Sagrajas and the first to engage with the Christians were Motamid's own native Spanish Moslems.
Yusuf held back, coolly remarking that both sides were their enemies and that the more they slaughtered each other the better.
Finally, Yusuf advanced and the thunderous roll of the Moorish  drums was heard for the first time on Spanish soil.
The compact, organized attack of the Moors shook the Christians; they were more used to single combats where the actions of one man could turn the day.
The disciplined ranks of the Almoravid army inflicted terrible losses.
They were more lightly armed than Alfonso's knights, but their new way of fighting turned the scales in their favour.
The royal bodyguard of King Alfonso III (866–909) armed with swords, lances and shields, both round and kite-shaped.
Finally, Yusuf led into the fray his own Black Guards, consisting of 4000 men.
Armed with light Indian swords and shields of hippopotamus hide, they fought their way through to the King, forcing him to withdraw, wounded in the thigh.
At the end of the day, Alfonso escaped with barely 500 men, most of whom were wounded.
Meanwhile Yusuf caused the heads of the slain to be cut off and piled in heaps, from the top of which his muezzins called the faithful to prayer.
Now, at last, Alfonso called out to El Cid to come to his aid.
He sent waggon-loads of treasure and a great entourage of knights to Saragossa with requests for a formal reconciliation.
In effect, he need not have bothered; he had only to ask in the name of Spain and Rodrigo would have come.
The two men met in Toledo in the spring of 1087 and with the exception of El Cid's old enemies, there was general rejoicing from those who believed that if Rodrigo had commanded the army at Sagrajas the outcome would have been different.
Yusuf, meanwhile, much to everyone's astonishment, returned to Africa, having learned of the death of his son.
He left only a token force of 3000 horsemen under the command of Motamid.
Spanish Christendom thus enjoyed a respite and Alfonso lost no time in consolidating his battered forces.
The losses at the Battle of Sagrajas had been great and not even the addition of El Cid's men could make it anything like as strong as it had been before the coming of Yusuf.
However, Rodrigo was disinclined to sit behind the walls of Saragossa.
He set about raising all army of his own to win back the lands lost in the recent campaign.
Many men, elated at the prospect of fighting under El Cid, flocked to him.
With a force totalling some 7000, he began to subdue much of eastern Castile, making it as strong as it had been before Sagrajas.
He also succeeded in winning pledges from the rulers of Valencia, then perhaps the most prized city of Spain.
This astonishing success, considering the size of his forces and the difficulty of much of the terrain over which he fought, only succeeded in outraging Alfonso, who seems to have believed — or been persuaded to believe — that El Cid intended to set up a rival kingdom in Valencia.
However, before the King's unjust rage had time to ripen, news came that Yusuf had returned and was marching north.
Alfonso at once set out to meet him, sending a peremptory command to Rodrigo to join him.
An eleventh-century manuscript's depiction of war between Christians and Moors, and its inevitable outcome — baptism or execution.
Somehow, in the confusion of rapid troop movements, El Cid never succeeded in joining with the royal army, though he certainly attempted I to do so.
Yusuf, who had returned with a smaller force than before and doubted the strength of his Spanish allies, abruptly withdrew.
Alfonso was victorious without striking a blow; and his anger at the failure of El Cid to join him knew no bounds.
Egged on by Rodrigo's old enemies, the Ordonez, he again pronounced a judgement of exile — this time backing it up by confiscating all El Cid's lands and goods.
He even went so far as to imprison Rodrigo's wife Ximena, and his children; and though he soon released them he refused to listen to El Cid's demand to settle his innocence by right of combat.
For the second time, and only two years after his triumphal return, Rodrigo was again in exile.
This time he was virtually friendless, and his old comrade and employer, Motamid had died, leaving his son Mostain to rule over Saragossa.
El  Cid's future seemed anything but happy, yet events were to take a dramatic turn in the months ahead.
The Struggle for Valencia
Exiled for the second time and without the support of many of the Castilian knights who had followed him before, Rodrigo once again displayed his qualities of a great commander.
With a greatly reduced army, he marched into the kingdoms of Deria and Lerida.
Capturing two strong castles, which he made his base, he secured a whole caveful of treasure belonging to the Lord of Lerida.
With this money, he was able to pay all his supporters, and with this added incentive he pressed the Moorish Caliphs so hard that they submitted to him, sueing for peace in the April of 1090.
Rodrigo then advanced again on Valencia with extra forces supplied by his recent enemies of Deria.
Al-Kadir, the timid and vacillating ruler of Valencia, capitulated without delay, restoring the tribute he had been paying to El Cid before his second banishment.
Rodrigo marched into Valencia in triumph, only to learn that his old adversary Berenguer of Barcelona — who had never forgiven the Cid for capturing him in an earlier campaign — had formed an alliance with the Moorish lord of Lerida and El Cid's own sometime ally Mostain of Saragossa.
He also visited Alfonso and tried to enlist his support.
Rather to the surprise of all, the Emperor refused.
Even without him, the force against which Rodrigo now found himself ranged was vastly superior to his own.
Leaving the safety of Valencia, he marched swiftly to a wooded valley near Tevar and fortified the three entrances with stout barriers.
There followed a swingeing series of letters between Rodrigo and Berenguer, in which each accused the other of treachery and cowardice.
El Cid's final reply ended:
Thou twittest me with being a knave and a traitor, but then thou hast a lying tongue…
Thou vauntest much of conquering me, but victory is in the hands of the Almighty, not in thine.
Enough then of words, and let us fight it out like very knights.
Come quickly and receive thy wonted reward!
(Pidal)
While this exchange was going on, Rodrigo had allowed certain of his men to desert to the other side, taking with them the story that El Cid was about to escape by night through one of the passes.
This achieved the objective of making Berenguer split his force into three groups, each to watch one of the passes from the valley.
There then followed a confused series of night manoeuvres, which  ended in confusion for both sides.
Men from each force blundered to and fro in the darkness and El Cid himself was slightly wounded.
However, his well-trained followers carried the assault without him, capturing Berenguer and 5000 of his men without any great losses of their own.
The proud Count of Barcelona was thus forced to recognize the abilities of the man whose service he had once refused.
After this, most of the east and south-east of Moorish Spain offered tribute to El Cid, acknowledging him as their overlord and paying out 95,000 dinars a year for his protection.
By 1090 Rodrigo had succeeded in establishing a huge protectorate in the east which he found increasingly hard to maintain.
Yusuf had returned briefly to Spanish soil, only to depart again, leaving behind a sizeable force of men.
Consequently, there was a constant danger of those Moorish princes owing allegiance to El Cid calling upon him for aid, or simply reneging on their agreements and going over in force to the Almoravid leader.
This delicate balance had to be maintained.
Rodrigo strove mightily not to offend his Moorish subjects, especially in Valencia which became his base of operations over the succeeding months.
He ruled with justice and mercy, befriending the Moors rather than seeking to overpower them with his presence.
Such was the success of El Cid's enlightened rule that even Alfonso began to follow suit, ceasing his raids on the Andalusian Moors and  seeking treaties rather than warfare.
Slowly, what was beginning to emerge — largely as a result of El Cid's efforts — was a Spanish kingdom where both Christian and Moor could live at peace.
El Cid's charging cavalrymen, riding in a tightly disciplined formation, could strike at their enemy with tremendous force, wheeling and then retreating swiftly.
So successful was the new pattern that when Yusuf made a third entry into Spain in 1090, he met with absolutely no support from the Caliphs; they either ignored him or actually placed obstacles in his path.
The Almoravid chieftain's desire was to reconquer Toledo.
He failed in this and retired, as Ramon Pidal puts it, ‘completely baffled’, leaving Alfonso and El Cid in a position of even greater strength.
The King now prepared to mount an attack on Granada and, thanks to the request of his queen in a personal letter to Rodrigo, El Cid joined him, raising the siege of Leira just as the city was about to capitulate rather than fail Alfonso.
But once again, El Cid's loyalty proved insufficient to satisfy the King.
Although the two men rode together to Granada, Rodrigo made the mistake of pitching his tents closer than Alfonso's to the walls of the city.
In this he was probably hoping to answer those who had claimed that fear was the cause of his failure to appear during the campaign at Valencia.
Alfonso chose to see this as a further sign of Rodrigo's pride; once again the two men parted without reconciliation.
The brief moment of semi-unity in Spain was over almost before it had begun.
Yusuf's forces returned in strength and began to win back many of the states so recently conquered by Alfonso and by El Cid in their separate campaigns.
Within two years, all trace of Alfonso's Moorish protectorate in Granada and Andalusia had vanished.
The Almoravids held the south firmly.
Only Rodrigo now stood between them and prevented the whole of Moslem Spain from reverting to independent Moorish rule.
From Valencia, El Cid began to show his true strength, gradually extending his sway until he was virtual ruler of the great part of eastern Spain.
At forty-five years of age he was at the height of his powers, determined to drive out the Almoravids and bring about a united Spain.
To this end, he began to negotiate with other Christian princes.
Unlike Alfonso, they chose to recognize his worth and to aid him in the war against the African Moors.
Knowing that the more treaties he himself signed, the greater would be the King's suspicion, Rodrigo did his utmost to bring about peace between Moslem lords and Christian princes.
Initially, Alfonso tried to frustrate his plans, but after El Cid had firmly put an end to the power of his old enemy Garcia Ordonez, the King gave way and finally revoked El Cid s exile.
Rodrigo now stood solidly as a unique power in the east.
Valencia, over which he was only nominal ruler, became virtually a kingdom with El Cid as its Lord.
His deeds had made his name synonymous with victory; the Almoravids feared and hated him; he had overcome all his  enemies and won his way back to the position of Alfonso's vassal — although, in fact, he overshadowed the King in such a way that Alfonso virtually faded from the scene in the next few years.
It was Rodrigo's actions that now stood out in the notice of the people: it was El Cid's name they called in the streets.
he received a friendly welcome from Mostain, and began to prepare his assault on the Almoravids in the south of the country.
He was away from Valencia for a total of nine months and in that time two dramatic events took place.
Yusuf sent a large force into Valencia and every fortress along the road to the city surrendered without a fight.
When the Almoravid general sent a token force of twenty mounted warriors to the gates of the  city, their arrival caused such consternation that it was believed that there were actually 500 or more.
Panic spread through the city, followed by rebellion in the royal palace.
The ageing king, Al-Kadir, was murdered and one of his viziers proclaimed the new overlord.
Castle of Sadaba, Saragossa, and one of El Cid's strongholds from which he rode forth to attack the Moorish cities and castles.
When news of this reached El Cid, he at once set out for his city but already in a matter of ten days, much of what he had achieved was undone.
Granada, Seville, Malaga, Almeria, Murcia and Deria all fell to Yusuf's triumphant hoard.
Rodrigo raised his standard at Juballa, a strong castle on the borders of Valencia, and from there began to raise an army to reconquer the city which had so recently been under his command.
He sent a letter demanding its surrender, but its new ruler replied that the mighty Yusuf was near at hand and that if El Cid wished, he, the ruler of Valencia, would use his influence to gain El Cid a position under the true ruler of Spain!
Rodrigo now began a systematic war of attrition, biting deep into Valencian territory and reducing several of its castles to rubble.
He also raided the villages around the city itself, carrying off cattle and prisoners.
A poor response from Valencia was easily overcome and within the city there was much murmuring against the new ruler.
Within a month, Valencia was virtually an island in the middle of El Cid's forces; by July they were ready to sue for peace, which Rodrigo granted, on condition that all Almoravid soldiers left immediately.
With this achieved and with Rodrigo again in command of Valencia, the cards were dealt for the last hand between the Champion of Spain and the wily Moorish Emir.
Yusuf had written demanding that El Cid leave Valencia at once.
Rodrigo replied, in a letter which was sent to all the Moslem rulers, implying that Yusuf did not dare to cross the sea and face him.
In fact, it was to be another two years before the situation changed radically.
In that time, there were frequent skirmishes between the Christians and Almoravids, and Valencia several times closed its gates to El Cid while he was engaged in campaigning in other parts of the country.
Finally, on 15th June 1094, the city gave itself up totally to Rodrigo after a siege that had lasted nineteen months.
This time, there was no question of nominal suzerainty: El Cid was virtually King of Valencia, though uncrowned.
He sent for his wife and their three children, who took up residence with him in the old palace.
Now, Christian knights from all over Spain began to flock to his banner.
Soon El Cid was able to count upon a force of some 8000 Christians and three times that number of Moslem warriors, both from Valencia itself and from Saragossa, Tortossa and Albarracin.
But Yusuf could no longer allow the continuance of El Cid's foothold in the east.
He therefore despatched a force of some 150,000 horse and 3000 foot soldiers under the generalship of his nephew Mohammed, with orders to crush the power of the Campeador for ever.
Vengeance and Death
The battle of Cuarte took place near Valencia in December 1094.
Here, the Christian forces defeated the Almoravids resoundingly, killing and driving off literally thousands of the Moors.
El Cid himself fought like ten men and when he returned to the city he was bloody but victorious.
He had used new tactics against the Moors, riding out suddenly at the head of a force of heavily armoured and mounted knights.
They cut a swathe through the massed black-clad warriors, and then turning swiftly trampled back over their disorganized ranks.
Legend has it that it was here that Yusuf met his death beneath the hooves of his enemies, steeds; here also that El Cid received a fatal wound.
In reality, Yusuf was not even present and El Cid was to live for several more years.
The Poema del Cid describes his return to Valencia, where he was greeted by Ximena and their daughters:
Set the bloody swords and sweating steed;
thus are Moors vanquished on the field
The booty from the battle was tremendous.
Rodrigo himself acquired 1000 horses, and he sent 200 of these to Alfonso along with the elaborate silken tent of the Almoravid leader, its carved posts decorated with gold.
Battle between two opposing groups of eleventh-century knights.
Note the small round shields and long mail coats.
So complete was this victory that it ensured a kind of uneasy peace for nearly three years.
Then, in 1097, Yusuf returned to Spain once more.
In the fighting which ensued, Rodrigo's son Diego was slain, fighting alongside Alfonso, El Cid having remained in Valencia waiting for an attack which never came.
So great was Rodrigo's grief that he was almost paralysed for several weeks.
Not only was the death of Diego the cause of personal sorrow, it also spelled the end of his family line.
Now aged fifty-four years, Rodrigo was still a splendid figure, possessed of as much energy and strength as in his youth — but he had campaigned almost unceasingly for nearly thirty years against the Moors and against Christian enemies.
He had been wounded several times, twice seriously enough to have his life despaired of; he had twice suffered the rigours of exile.
All this had taken its toll and there was no opportunity to rest or recover from either private loss or public defeat.
Gathering a new army, El Cid advanced on the Moorish forces, then holding the Castle of Murviedo in some strength.
He laid siege to the fortress and gradually weakened it to the point of collapse.
But the siege was to drag on into the summer of 1098 before the fortress finally capitulated and Rodrigo was able to enter in triumph and order Mass to be sung in one of the main squares.
With this, El Cid at once avenged the death of his son and once again showed that any attempt to reconquer Valencia was fruitless while he still lived.
But the long-expected battle between the Campeador and the Emir was not to be.
By now in his eighties, Yusuf would never again return to Spain — he too had been worn down by long years of struggle to remove the thorn of El Cid from his side.
At best, he would now only send fresh generals against the Christian force; but even after El Cid's death, much of the heart had gone out of the Moorish invaders.
Rodrigo died suddenly at Valencia on Sunday, 10th July, 1099.
He was fifty-five and still filled with plans for a united Spain.
Ximena, who survived him by fifteen years, held Valencia for only short time.
It was only a matter of months before she was forced to withdraw even with the support of Alfonso (who now that the Cid was dead finally recognized the worth of his finest knight).
Valencia returned to Moslem rule, along with the majority of the lands won back by Rodrigo's efforts.
Alfonso himself did not die until 1134 but, without the power of El Cid's support, he made no further inroads against the Moors.
But the ideas of a united Spain did not completely die with El Cid.
In time, the borders between Christian and Moslem grew more blurred, though there were many bloody wars still to be fought.
During that time Spain became a cultural bridgehead between East and West.
El Cid's remarkable achievements were recorded in poem and song, and grew with the telling until he became Spain's national hero.
It is to the history of some of these works that one must turn for the last part of the story.
Poema del Cid and its Sources
Monument to El Cid Campeador at Burgos, near which he was born.
Only eleven years after El Cid's death a Moorish historian named Ibn Alcama wrote an account of the fall of Valencia, which he had witnessed, under the title Eloquent Evidence of the Great Calamity .
He blamed the fall of the city on the impiety and general degeneracy of the people, who had  been so foolish as to ally themselves with Christians in the first place.
Not surprisingly, he spent a considerable amount of space vilifying the enemies of Islam.
As one would expect, this work, together with one by the Portuguese Moor Ibn Bassam, is virulently opposed to El Cid.
Nevertheless, it is to these two writers that we owe almost all that we know of El Cid's life from those who were his contemporaries.
They enable us to see how much of the Poema is romantic decoration (actually very little) and to fit the high points of the story into the larger context of medieval Spain.
The only near contemporary Christian account, the anonymous Historia Roderici (of about 1110) is only concerned with two aspects of El Cid's life — his heroism and his unfailing loyalty towards Alfonso.
All episodes which do not illustrate these two Christian virtues are omitted, giving only a biased, pietistic portrait of an idealized figure.
Next comes a fragmentary Latin poem known as the Carmen , which deals with the struggle between El Cid and the counts of Barcelona.
Then, some forty years after Rodrigo's death, comes the Poema del Cid , one of the truly great works of medieval literature and the work from which the exploits of El Cid are generally known.
It exists as a single manuscript, probably dating from 1245.
It shows strong stylistic similarities to other medieval romances, in particular the Chansons de Geste of Charlemagne and the Song of Roland .
Although the emphasis of the Poema is on the heroic qualities of El Cid, we have a more fully rounded portrait of his life, marriage, family and exile.
Also included are episodes which show Rodrigo in a less than heroic light.
He is described as playing tricks on Jewish moneylenders in order to finance his soldiery, and generally behaving in a manner very far from what one might expect from the deeds of similar heroes such as Roland, Ogier or Lancelot.
Not that the anonymous author of the Poema ever criticizes his hero — the whole work shines with an almost feverish air of hero-worship.
Rodrigo is always ‘my Cid’, as though the writer felt a degree of affection for his hero beyond that of author and subject.
Indeed, the possibility that he may actually have known Rodrigo cannot be ruled out, and offers a tantalizing possibility that we may be reading a first-hand account.
After the Poema there were to be no more serious attempts to re-tell the life of El Cid with any fidelity to actual events.
King Alfonso X ‘the Wise’, commissioned a vast chronicle of Spanish history, the Primeva Cronica General de Espana (c. 1289).
It was written not in Latin, but in the Romance language.
This drew not only on bona fide sources, but upon poetry, ballads and pseudo-history.
Once again, as with heroes such as Arthur, Charlemagne and Macbeth, an original core of genuine history gathered about it a coating of myth and legend which distorted the truth and added extensively to the apocryphal side of Rodrigo's life.
This set the pattern for all later accounts of El Cid up to the seventeenth century, when medieval sources were frequently questioned as to their ultimate accuracy.
From this point onwards, attitudes to El Cid were divided.
They included, on the one hand, the eulogistic writings of the nineteenth century Swiss historian Johann Muller, who wrote that:
all that godliness, honour and love could make of a knight was combined in Don Rodrigo…
This remarkable man is one of the few who…have been, in their own lifetime, their country's pride.
But, on the other hand, they ranged to the equally fervent, though dissatisfied Masden, the Jesuit who described the earlier works as catalogues of the ‘perfidy, perjury and brazen deeds of Rodrigo Diaz.’
(Sunderland, after Pidal.)
After this, the figure of El Cid entered a dark period in which historian after historian, following a 1849 work of the Dutch orientalist R. Dozy, contrived to portray Rodrigo as a cruel, treacherous and often barbarian character.
Assyrian soldiers at the  siege of Jerusalem in 1099.
Their armour and weapons reflect perfectly the influence of both Christian and Moorish arms.
Warriors who fought with El Cid would have employed such an amalgam of both kinds of weaponry.
Not until the enlightened work of Ramon Menendez Pidal in the first half of the twentieth century, was the figure of El Cid re-established in something like a clear light.
Any writer dealing with Rodrigo must turn to Pidal, and this present work could certainly not have been accomplished without his scrupulous and immensely detailed account of the life and period of El Cid.
The memory of the heroism and sterling qualities of Rodrigo del Bivar have thus been enshrined for all time; his statue stands today in the main square of Burgos, staring out forever across the lands he fought so long to transform.
He was a hero of the old style, whose life and deeds left their mark on the tide of human history and became the inspiration of a whole nation.
The Life and Deeds of El Cid Campeador
The following extracts are from the earliest translation of the story of El Cid.
Robert Southey (1774–1843) who was later to become poet laureate, discovered the medieval Chronica del Cid during his childhood in Spain, and later made a translation which became something of a best-seller in the nineteenth century.
The story it tells is close to the historical details already described, but there is an overlay of romanticism which brings the dry facts to life.
This selection also includes several episodes not dealt with in the first half of this book, but which are an integral part of El Cid's legend.
They are arranged to make a more or less connected narrative, and, taken within the larger historical framework already described, form a more detailed story of El Cid.
The headings of the sections and the linking passages were created especially for inclusion in this selection, but the spellings and names are those used in the original extracts.
The Rise of Rodrigo del Bivar
King Don Ferdinand succeeded to the states of Castille after the death of his father King Don Sancho el Mayor, in the era 1072, which was the year of the Incarnation 1034, and from the coming of the Patriarch Tubal to settle in Spain 3197, and from the general deluge 3339, and from the creation of the world 4995, according to the computation of the Hebrews, and from the beginning of the false sect of the Moors 413.
And in the year 1037 Ferdinand slew Bermudo the King of Leon in battle, who was his wife's brother, and conquered his kingdom, and succeeded to it in right of his wife Doña Sancha.
So he was the first person who united the states of Castille and Leon, and the first who was called King of  Castille; for till this time the lords of that country had been called Counts.
He was a good king, and one who judged justly and feared God, and was bold in all his doings.
Before he reigned he had, by Doña Sancha his wife the Infanta Doña Urraca, his eldest daughter, who was a right excellent lady, and after her he had the Infante Don Sancho, his eldest son and heir; and then the Infanta Doña Elvira, whom after the death of the King her father, her brother King Don Alfonso married to the Count Don Garcia de Cabra.
And after he became King he had the Infante Don Alfonso, and the Infante Don Garcia, who was the youngest of all.
And he put his sons to read, that they might be of the better understanding, and he made them take arms, and be shown how to demean themselves in battle, and to be huntsmen.
And he ordered that his daughters should be brought up in the studies beseeming dames.
Having defeated a large Christian force, the Moorish Emir Yusuf orders the heads of his foes cut off and piled in mounds.
From the top of one these, a muezzin calls the faithful to prayer.
In those days arose Rodrigo of Bivar, who was a youth strong in arms and of good customs; and the people rejoiced in him, for he bestirred himself to protect the land from the Moors.
At this time it came to pass that there was strife between Count Don Gomez the Lord of Gormaz, and Diego Laynez the father of Rodrigo; and the Count insulted Diego and gave him a blow.
Now Diego was a man in years, and his strength had passed from him, so that he could not take vengeance, and he retired to his home to dwell there in solitude and lament over his dishonour.
And he took no pleasure in his food, neither could he sleep by night, nor would he lift up his eyes from the ground, nor stir out of his house, nor commune with his friends, but turned from them in silence as if the breath of his shame would taint them.
Rodrigo was yet but a youth, and the Count was a mighty man in arms, one who gave his voice first in the Cortes, and was held to be the best in the war, and so powerful that he had a thousand friends among the mountains.
Howbeit all these things appeared as nothing to Rodrigo when he thought of the wrong done to his father, the first which had ever been offered to the blood of Layn Calvo.
He asked nothing but justice of Heaven, and of man he asked only a fair field; and his father seeing of how good heart he was, gave him his sword and his blessing.
The sword had been the sword of Mudarra in former times, and when Rodrigo held its cross in his hand, he thought within himself that his arm was not weaker than Mudarra's.
And he went out and defied the Count and slew him, and smote off his head and carried it home to his father.
The old man was sitting at table, the food lying before him untasted, when Rodrigo returned, and pointing to the head which hung from the horse's collar, dropping blood, he bade him look up, for there was the herb which should restore to him his appetite.
The tongue, quoth he, which insulted you is no longer a tongue, and the hand which wronged you is no longer a hand.
And the old man arose and embraced his son and placed him above him at the table, saying, that he who had brought home that head should be the head of the house of Layn Calvo.
In the Great Hall of Burgos, El Cid forces the treacherous King Alfonso to swear an oath on sacred relics that he had no part in his own brother's death.
Alfonso is thus humbled and perjured before his nobles.
After this Diego being full of years fell asleep and was gathered to his fathers.
And the Moors entered Castille, in great power, for there came with them five Kings, and they past above Burgos, and crost the mountains of Oca, and plundered Carrion, and Vilforado, and Saint Domingo de la Calzada, and Logroño, and Najara, and all that land; and they carried away many captives both male and female, and brood mares, and flocks of all kinds.
But as they were returning with all speed, Rodrigo of Bivar raised the country, and came up with them in the mountains of Oca, and fell upon them and discomfited them, and won back all their booty, and took all the five Kings prisoners.
Then he went back to his mother, taking the Kings with him, and there he divided the whole spoil with the hidalgos and his other companions, both the Moorish captives and all the spoil of whatever kind, so that they departed right joyfully, being well pleased with what he had done.
And he gave thanks to God for the grace which had been vouchsafed to him, and said to his mother, that he did not think it good to keep the Kings in captivity, but to let them go freely; and he set them at liberty and bade them depart.
So they returned each to his own country, blessing him for their deliverance, and magnifying his great bounty; and forthwith they sent him tribute and acknowledged themselves to be his vassals.
King Don Ferdinand was going through Leon, putting the Kingdom in order, when tidings reached him of the good speed which Rodrigo had had against the Moors.
And at the same time there came before him Ximena Gomez, the daughter of the Count, who fell on her knees before him and said, Sir, I am the daughter of Count Don Gomez of Gormaz, and Rodrigo of Bivar has slain the Count my father, and of three daughters whom he has left I am the youngest.
And, Sir, I come to crave of you a boon, that you will give me Rodrigo of Bivar to be my husband, with whom I shall hold myself well married, and greatly honoured; for certain I am that his possessions will one day be greater than those of any man in your dominions.
Certes, Sir, it behoves you to do this, because it is for God's service, and because I may pardon Rodrigo with a good will.
The King held it good to accomplish her desire; and forthwith ordered letters to be drawn up to Rodrigo of Bivar, wherein he enjoined and commanded him that he should come incontinently to Valencia, for he had much to communicate to him, upon an affair which was greatly to God's service, and his own welfare and great honour.
When Rodrigo saw the letters of his Lord the King, he greatly rejoiced in them, and said to the messengers that he would fulfil the King's pleasure, and go incontinently to his command.
And he dight himself full gallantly and well, and took with him many knights, both his own and of his kindred and of his friends, and he took also many new arms, and came to Valencia to the King with two hundred of his peers in arms, in festival guise; and the King went out to meet him, and received him right well, and did him honour; and at this were all the Counts  displeased.
And when the King thought it a fit season, he spake to him and said, that Doña Ximena Gomez, the daughter of the Count whom he had slain, had come to ask him for her husband, and would forgive him her father's death; wherefore he besought him to think it good to take her to be his wife, in which case he would show him great favour.
When Rodrigo heard this it pleased him well, and he said to the King that he would do his bidding in this, and in all other things which he might command; and the King thanked him much.
And he sent for the Bishop of Valencia, and took their vows and made them plight themselves each to the other according as the law directs.
And when they were espoused the King did them great honour, and gave them many noble gifts, and added to Rodrigo's lands more than he had till then possessed: and he loved him greatly in his heart, because he saw that he was obedient to his commands, and for all that he had heard him say.
So Rodrigo departed from the King, and took his spouse with him to the house of his mother, and gave her to his mother's keeping.
And forthwith he made a vow in her hands that he would never accompany with her, neither in the desert nor in the inhabited place, till he had won five battles in the field.
And he besought his mother that she would love her even as she loved him himself, and that she would do good to her and show her great honour, for which he should ever serve her with the better good will.
And his mother promised him so to do; and then he departed from them and went out against the frontier of the Moors.
The Cathedral of San Isidoro, Leon.
Here the Spanish kings were buried.
How Rodrigo Met with a Leper
Rodrigo set out upon the road, and took with him twenty knights.
And as he went he did great good, and gave alms, feeding the poor and needy.
And upon the way they round a leper, struggling in a quagmire, who cried out to them with a loud voice to help him for the love of God; and when Rodrigo heard this, he alighted from his beast and helped him, and placed him upon the beast before him, and carried him with him in this manner to the inn where he took up his lodging that night.
At this were his knights little pleased.
And when supper was ready he bade his knights take their seats, and he took the leper by the hand, and seated him next himself, and ate with him out of the same dish.
The knights were greatly offended at this foul sight, insomuch that they rose up and left the chamber.
But Rodrigo ordered a bed to be made ready for himself and for the leper, and they twain slept together.
When it was midnight and Rodrigo was fast asleep, the leper breathed against him between his shoulders, and that breath was so strong that it passed through him, even through his breast; and he awoke, being astounded, and felt for the leper by him, and found him not; and he began to call him, but there was no reply.
Then he arose in fear, and called for light, and it was brought him; and he looked for the leper and could see nothing; so he returned into the bed, leaving the light burning.
And he began to think within himself what had happened, and of that breath which had passed through him, and how the leper was not there.
After a while, as he was thus musing, there appeared before him one in white garments, who said unto him, Sleepest thou or wakest thou, Rodrigo? and he answered and said, I do not sleep: but who art thou that bringest with thee such brightness and so sweet an odour?
Then said he, I am Saint Lazarus, and know that I was the leper to whom thou didst so much good and so great honour for the love of God; and because thou didst this for his sake hath God now granted thee a great gift; for whensoever that breath which thou hast felt shall come upon thee whatever thing thou desires to do, and shalt then begin, that shalt thou accomplish to thy heart's desire, whether it be in battle or aught else, so thy honour shall go on increasing from day to day; and thou shalt be feared both by Moors and Christians, and thy enemies shall never prevail against thee, and thou shalt die an honourable death in thine own house, and in thy renown, for God hath blessed thee;— therefore go thou on, and evermore persevere in doing good; and with that he disappeared.
How El Cid was Exiled
[Now]…
King Don Alfonso assembled together all his power and went against the Moors.
And the Cid should have gone with him, but he fell sick and perforce therefore abode at home.
And while the King was going through Andalusia, having the land at his mercy, a great power of the Moors assembled together on the other side, and entered the land, and besieged the castle of Gormaz, and did much evil.
At this time the Cid was gathering strength; and when he heard that the Moors were in the country, laying waste before them, he gathered together what force he could, and went after them; and the Moors, when they heard this, dared not abide his coming, but began to fly.
And the Cid followed them to Atienza, and to Ciguenza, and Fita, and Guadalajara, and through the whole land of St. Esteban, as far as Toledo, slaying and burning, and plundering and destroying, and laying hands on all whom he found, so that he brought back seven thousand prisoners, men and women; and he and all his people returned rich and with great honour.
But when the King of Toledo heard of the hurt which he had received at the hands of the Cid, he sent to King Don Alfonso to complain thereof, and the King was greatly troubled.
And then the Ricos-omes who wished ill to the Cid, had the way open to do him evil with the King, and they said to the King, Sir Ruydiez hath broken your faith, and the oath and promise which you made to the King of Toledo: and he hath done this for no other reason but that the Moors of Toledo may fall upon us here, and slay, both you and us.
And the King believed what they said, and was wroth against the Cid, having no love towards him because of the oath which he had pressed upon him at Burgos concerning the death of King Don Sancho his brother.
And he went with all speed to Burgos, and sent from thence to bid the Cid come unto him.
Now my Cid knew the evil disposition of the King towards him, and when he received his bidding, he made answer that he would meet him between Burgos and Bivar.
And the King went out from Burgos and came nigh unto Bivar; and the Cid came up to him and would have kissed his hand, but the King withheld it, and said angrily unto him, Ruydiez, quit my land.
Then the Cid clapt spurs to the mule upon which he rode, and vaulted into a piece of ground which was his own inheritance, and answered, Sir, I am not in your land, but in my own.
And the King replied full wrathfully, Go out out of my kingdoms without any delay.
And the Cid made answer, Give within thirty days time, as is the right of the hidalgos; and the King said he would come and look for him.
The Counts were well pleased at this; but all the people of the land were sorrowful.
And then the King and the Cid parted.
And the Cid sent for all his friends and his kinsmen and vassals, and told them how King Don Alfonso had banished him from the land, and asked for them who would follow him into banishment, and who would remain at home.
Then Alvar Fañez, who was his cousin-german, came forward and said, Cid, we will all go with you, through desert and through peopled country, and never fail you.
In your service will we spend our mules and horses, our wealth and our garments, and ever while we live be unto you loyal friends and vassals.
And they all confirmed what Alvar Fañez had said; and the Cid thanked them for their love, and said that there might come a time in which he should guerdon them.
Eleventh century German sword and sheath of the type carried by Rodrigo's followers.
And as he was about to depart he looked back upon his own home, and when he saw his hall deserted, the household chests unfastened, the doors open, no cloaks hanging up, no seats in the porch, no hawks upon the perches, the tears came into his eyes, and he said, My enemies have done this…
God be praised for all things.
And he turned toward the East and knelt and said, Holy Mary Mother, and all Saints, pray to God for me, that he may give me strength to destroy all the Pagans, and to win enough from them to requite my friends therewith, and all those who follow and help me.
Then he called for Alvar Fañez and said unto him, Cousin, the poor have no part in the wrong which the King hath done us; see now that no wrong be done unto them along our road: and he called for his horse.
And then an old woman who was standing at her door said, Go in a lucky minute, and make spoil of whatever you wish.
And with this proverb he rode on, saying, Friends, by God's good pleasure we shall return to Castille with great honour and great gain.
And as they went out from Bivar they had a crow on their right hand, and when they came to Burgos they had a crow on the left.
How the Moors of Africa First Came to Spain
Now came true tidings to Valencia that the host of the Almoravides were coming, and that they were now at Lorca, and the son in law of the Miramamolin at their head, for he himself could not come, by reason that he ailed.
They of Valencia took courage at these tidings, and waxed insolent, and began to devise how they should take vengeance upon Abeniaf, and upon all those who had oppressed them.
And Abeniaf was in great trouble at this which was said openly concerning him, and he sent privily to the Cid, telling him to come as soon as might be.
The Cid was then before Albarrazin, doing all the evil that he could, and he brake up his camp and came with his host to Juballa; and Abeniaf and the Alcaydes of Xativa and Carchayra came unto him, and they renewed their covenant to stand by each other, and be of one voice.
And they took counsel and made a letter for the leader of the army of the Almoravides, wherein they told him that the Cid had made a treaty with the King of Aragon, whereby the King bound himself to help him against them; and they bade him beware how he came towards Valencia, unless he chose to do battle with eight thousand Christian horsemen, covered with iron, and the best warriors in the world.
This did they thinking that he would be dismayed and turn back: but the Moor did not cease to advance, notwithstanding this letter.
How El Cid Entered Valencia
On the following day after the Christians had taken possession of the town, the Cid entered it with a great company, and he ascended the highest tower of the wall, and beheld all the city; and the Moors came unto him, and kissed his hand, saying he was welcome.
And the Cid did  great honour unto them.
And then he gave order that all the windows of the towers which looked in upon the town should be closed up, that the Christians might not see what the Moors did in their houses; and the Moors thanked him for this greatly.
And he commanded and requested the Christians that they should show great honour to the Moors, and respect them, and greet them when they met: and the Moors thanked the Cid greatly for the honour which the Christians did them, saying that they had never seen so good a man, nor one so honourable, nor one who had his people under such obedience.
And when they were all assembled, he went out unto them, to a place which was made ready with carpets and with mats, and he made them take their seats before him full honourably, and began to speak unto them, saying, I am a man who have never possessed a kingdom, neither I nor any man of my lineage.
But the day when I first beheld this city I was well pleased therewith, and coveted it that I might be its Lord; and I besought the Lord our God that he would give it me.
See now what his power is, for the day when I sate down before Juballa I had no more than four loaves of bread, and now by God's mercy I have won Valencia.
And if I administer right and justice here God will let me enjoy it, but if I do evil, and demean myself proudly and wrongfully, I know that he will take it away.
Now then let every one go to his own lands, and possess them even as he was wont to have and to hold them.
He who shall find his field, or his vineyard, or his garden, desert, let him incontinently enter thereon; and he who shall find his husbanded, let him pay him that hath cultivated it the cost of his labour, and of the seed which he hath sown therein, and remain with his heritage, according to the law of the Moors.
Moreover I have given order that they who collect my dues take from you no more than the tenth, because so it is appointed by the custom of the Moors, and it is what ye have been wont to pay.
And I have resolved in my heart to hear your complaints two days in the week, on the Monday and the Thursday; but if causes should arise which require haste, come to me when ye will and I will give judgment, for I do not retire with women to sing and to drink, as your Lords have done, so that ye could obtain no justice, but will myself see to these things, and watch over ye as friend over his friend, and kinsman over his kinsman.
And I will be Cadi and Guanzil, and when dispute happens among ye I will decide it.
When he had said these things they all replied that they prayed God to preserve him through long and happy years, and four of the most honourable among them rose and kissed his hands, and the Cid bade them take their seats again.
How the Moors Attacked Valencia
The winter is past, and March is coming in.
Three months Doña Ximena had been in Valencia, when tidings came to the Cid from beyond sea, that King Yucef, the son of the Miramamolin, who dwelt in Morocco, was coming to lay siege unto Valencia with fifty thousand men.
When the Cid heard this he gave command to store all his Castles, and had them well repaired.
And he had the walls of the city prepared, and stored it well with food and with all things needful for war, and gathered together a great power of Christians and of the Moors of his seignory.
Hardly had he done this before he heard that Yucef was near at hand, and coming as fast as he could come.
Then the Cid assembled together the Christians in the Alcazar, and when they were assembled, he rose upon his feet and said, Friends and kinsmen and vassals, praised be God and holy Mary Mother, all the good which I have in the world I have here in Valencia; with hard labour I won the city, and hold it for my heritage, and for nothing less than death will I leave it.
My daughters and my wife shall see me fight,…they shall see with their own eyes our manner of living in this land, and how we get our bread.
We will go out against the Moors and give them battle, and God who hath thus far shown favour unto us will still continue to be our helper.
When they heard this they cried out with one accord that they would do his bidding, and go out with him and fight under his banner, for certain they were that by his good fortune the Moors would be overthrown.
Spanish soldier from the door of a Spanish cathedral.
His shield and spear show graphically the arms carried by El Cid's armies.
On the morrow the Cid took Doña Ximena by the hand, and her daughters with her, and made them go up upon the highest tower of the Alcazar, and they looked toward the sea and saw the great power of the Moors, how they came on and drew nigh, and began to pitch their tents round about Valencia, beating their tambours and with great uproar.
And Ximena's heart failed her, and she asked the Cid if peradventure God would deliver him from these enemies.
Fear not, honoured woman, said he; you are but lately arrived, and they come to bring you a present, which shall help marry your daughters.
Fear not, for you shall see me fight by the help of God and holy Mary Mother; my heart kindles because you are here!
The more Moors the more gain!
The tambours sounded now with a great alarum, and the sun was shining…
Cheer up, said my Cid;…this is a glorious day.
But Ximena was seized with such fear as if her heart would have broken; she and her daughters had never been in such fear since the day that they were born.
Then the good Cid Campeador stroked his heard and said, Fear not, all this is for your good.
Before fifteen days are over, if it please God, those tambours shall be laid before you, and shall be sounded for your pleasure, and then they shall be given to the Bishop Don Hieronymo, that he may hang them up in the Church of St. Mary, Mother of God.
This vow the Cid Campeador made.
Now the Moors began to enter the gardens which were round about the town, and the watchman saw them and struck the bell.
My Cid looked back and saw Alvar Salvadores beside him, and he said, go now, take two hundred horse, and sally upon yonder Moors who are entering the gardens; let Doña Ximena and her daughters see the good will you have to serve them.
Down went Alvar Salvadores in great haste, and ordered a bell to be rung which was a signal for two hundred knights to make ready; for the history saith, that the Cid, by reason that he was alway in war, had appointed such signals for his people, that they knew when one hundred were called for, and when two, and so forth.
Presently they were ready at the place of meeting, and the gate was opened which was nearest the gardens where the Moors had entered, without order; and they fell fiercely upon them, smiting and slaying.
Great was the pleasure of the Cid at seeing how well they behaved themselves.
And Doña Ximena and her daughters stood trembling, like women who had never seen such things before: and when the Cid saw it he made them seat themselves, so as no longer to behold it.
Great liking had the Bishop Don Hieronymo to see how bravely they fought.
Alvar Salvadores and his companions bestirred themselves so well that they drove the enemy to their tents, making great mortality among them, and then they turned back, whereat my Cid was well pleased; but Alvar Salvadores went on, hacking and hewing all before him, for he thought the ladies were looking on, and he pressed forward so far, that being without succour he was taken.
The others returned to the city, falling back in brave order till they were out of reach of the enemy: and they had done no little in that exploit, for they slew above two hundred and fifty Moors.
When my Cid saw that they who eat his bread were returned, he went down from the tower, and received them right well, and praised them for what they had done like good knights: howbeit he was full sorrowful for Alvar Salvadores that he should be in the hands of the Moors, but he trusted in God that he should deliver him on the morrow.
And the Cid assembled his chief captains and knights and people, and said unto them, Kinsmen and friends and vassals, hear me: to-day has been a good day, and to-morrow shall be a better day.
Four thousand, lacking thirty, were they who went out with my Cid, with a good will, to attack fifty thousand.
They went through all the narrow places, and bad passes, and leaving the ambush on the left, struck to the right hand, so as to get the Moors between them and the town.
And the Cid put his battles in good array, and bade Pero Bermudez bear his banner.
When the Moors saw this they were greatly amazed; and they harnessed themselves in Great haste, and came out of their tents.
Then the Cid bade his banner move on, and the Bishop Don Hieronymo pricked forward with his company, and laid on with such guise, that the hosts were soon mingled together.
Then might you have seen many a horse running about the field with the saddle under his belly, and many a horseman in evil plight upon the ground.
Great was the smiting and slaying in short time; but by reason that the Moors were so great a number, they bore hard upon the Christians, and were in the hour of overcoming them.
And the Cid began to encourage them with a loud voice, shouting God and Santiago!
And Alvar Fañez at this time issued out from ambush, and fell upon them, on the side which was nearest the  sea; and the Moors thought that a great power had arrived to the Cid's succour, and they were dismayed, and began to fly.
And the Cid and his people pursued, punishing them in a bad way.
If we should wish to tell you how every one behaved himself in this battle, it is a thing which could not be done, for all did so well that no man can relate their feats.
And the Cid Ruydiez did so well, and made such mortality among the Moors, that the blood ran from his wrist to his elbow! great pleasure had he in his horse Bavieca that day, to find himself so well mounted.
And in the pursuit he came up to King Yucef, and smote him three times: but the King escaped from under the sword, for the horse of the Cid passed on in his course, and when he turned, the King being on a fleet horse, was far off, so that he might not be overtaken; and he got into a Castle called Guyera, for so far did the Christians pursue them, smiting and slaying, and giving them no respite, so that hardly fifteen thousand escaped of fifty that they were.
And they who were in the ships, fled to Denia.
Eleventh-century Norman knight with chain mail coat, kite-shaped shield, sword and long lance which could be used from horseback.
With small variations, this is typical of the kind of armour worn by El Cid and his warriors.
Then the Cid and his people returned to the field and began to plunder the tents.
And the spoil was so great that there was no end to the riches, in gold and in silver, and in horses and arms, so that men knew not what to leave and what to take.
And they found one tent which had been King Yucef's; never man saw so noble a thing as that tent was; and there were great riches therein, and there also did they find Alvar Salvadores, who had been made prisoner the yesterday, as ye have heard.
Greatly did the Cid rejoice when he saw him alive and sound, and he ordered his chains to be taken off; and then he left Alvar Fañez to look to the spoil, and went into Valencia with a hundred knights.
His wrinkled brow was seen, for he had taken off his helmet, and in this manner he entered, upon Bavieca, sword in hand.
Great joy had Doña Ximena and her daughters, who were awaiting him, when they saw him come riding in; and he stopt when he came to them, and said, Great honour have I won for you, while you kept Valencia this day!
God and the Saints have sent us goodly gain, upon your coming.
Look, with a bloody sword, and a horse all sweat, this is the way that we conquer the Moors!
Pray God that I may live yet awhile for your sakes, and you shall enter into great honour, and they shall kiss your hands.
Then my Cid alighted when he had said this, and the ladies knelt down before him, and kissed his hand, and wished him long life.
Then they entered the Palace with him, and took their seats upon the precious benches.
Wife Doña Ximena, said he, these damsels who have served you so well, I will give in marriage to these my vassals, and to every one of them two hundred marks of silver, that it may be known in Castille what they have got by their services.
Your daughters' marriage will come in time.
And they all rose and kissed his hand; great was the joy in the Palace, it was done according as the Cid had said.
The Death of El Cid
The Cid sickened of the malady of which he died.
And the day before his  weakness waxed great, he ordered the gates of the town to be shut, and went to the Church of St. Peter; and there the Bishop Don Hieronymo being present, and all the clergy who were in Valencia, and the knights and honourable men and honourable dames, as many as the Church could hold, the Cid Ruydiez stood up, and made a full noble preaching, showing that no man whatsoever, however honourable or fortunate they may be in this world, can escape death; to which, said he, I am now full near; and since ye know that this body of mine hath never yet been conquered, nor put to shame, I beseech ye let not this befall it at the end, for the good fortune of man is only accomplished at his end.
How this is to be done, and what ye all have to do, I will leave in the hands of the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Alvar Fañez, and Pero Bermudez.
And when he had said this he placed himself at the feet of the Bishop, and there before all the people made a general confession of all his sins, and all the faults which he had committed against our Lord Jesus Christ.
And the Bishop appointed him his penance, and assoyled him of his sins.
Then he arose and took leave of the people, weeping plenteously, and returned to the Alcazar, and betook himself to his bed, and never rose from it again; and every day he waxed weaker and weaker, till seven days only remained of the time appointed.
Then he called for the caskets of gold in which was the balsam and the myrrh which the Soldan of Persia had sent him; and when these were put before him he bade them bring him the golden cup, of which he was wont to drink; and he took of that balsam and of that myrrh as much as a little spoon-full, and mingled it in the cup with rose-water and drank of it; and for the seven days which he lived he neither ate nor drank aught else than a little of that myrrh and balsam mingled with water.
And every day after he did this, his body and his countenance appeared fairer and fresher than before, and his voice clearer, though he waxed weaker and weaker daily, so that he could not move in his bed.
On the twenty-ninth day, being the day before he departed, he called for Doña Ximena, and for the Bishop Don Hieronymo, and Don Alvar Fañez Minaya, and Pero Bermudez, and his trusty Gil Diaz; and when they were all five before him, he began to direct them what they should do after his death; and he said to them, Ye know that King Bucar will presently be here to besiege this city, with seven and thirty Kings whom he bringeth with him, and with a mighty power of Moors.
Now therefore the first thing which ye do after I have departed, wash my body with rose-water many times and well, as blessed be the name of God it is washed within and made pure of all uncleanness to receive his holy body to-morrow, which will be my last day.
And when it has been well washed and made clean, ye shall dry it well, and anoint it with this myrrh and balsam, from these golden caskets, from head to foot, so that every part shall be anointed, till none be left.
And you my Sister Doña Ximena, and your women, see that ye utter no cries, neither make any lamentation  for me, that the Moors may not know of my death.
And when the day shall come in which King Bucar arrives, order all the people of Valencia to go upon the walls, and sound your trumpets and tambours, and make the greatest rejoicing that ye can.
And when ye would set out for Castille, let all the people know in secret, that they make themselves ready, and take with them all that they have, so that none of the Moors in the suburb may know thereof; for certes ye cannot keep the city, neither abide therein after my death.
And see ye that sumpter beasts be laden with all that there is in Valencia, so that nothing which can profit may be left.
And this I leave especially to your charge, Gil Diaz.
Then saddle ye my horse Bavieca, and arm him well; and ye shall apparel my body full seemlily, and place me upon the horse, and fasten and tie me thereon so that it cannot fall: and fasten my sword Tizona in my hand.
And let the Bishop Don Hieronymo go on one side of me, and my trusty Gil Diaz on the other, and he shall lead my horse.
You, Pero Bermudez, shall bear my banner, as you were wont to bear it; and you, Alvar Fañez, my cousin, gather your company together, and put the host in order as you are wont to do.
And go ye forth and fight with King Bucar: for be ye certain and doubt not that ye shall win this battle; God hath granted me this.
And when ye have won the fight, and the Moors are discomfited, ye may spoil the field at pleasure.
Ye will find great riches.
What ye are afterwards to do I will tell ye to-morrow, when I make my testament.
Eleventh-century Spanish soldier in mail shirt and coif, with conical helmet and long shield.
The lance would have been used both to stab and as a weapon  from throwing or as a lance on horseback.
Three days after the Cid had departed King Bucar came into the port of Valencia, and landed with all his power, which was so great that there is not a man in the world who could give account of the Moors whom he brought.
And there came with him thirty and six Kings, and one Moorish Queen, who was a negress, and she brought with her two hundred horsewomen, all negresses like herself, all having their hair shorn save a tuft on the top, and this was in token that they came as if upon a pilgrimage, and to obtain the remission of their sins; and they were all armed in coats of mail and with Turkish bows.
King Bucar ordered his tents to be pitched round about Valencia, and Abenalfarax who wrote this history in Arabic, saith, that there were full fifteen thousand tents; and he bade that Moorish negress with her archers to take their station near the city.
And on the morrow they began to attack the city, and they fought against it three days strenuously; and the Moors received great loss, for they came blindly up to the walls and were slain there.
And the Christians defended themselves right well, and every time that they went upon the walls, they sounded trumpets and tambours; and made great rejoicings, as the Cid had commanded.
This continued for eight days or nine, till the companions of the Cid had made ready every thing for their departure, as he had commanded.
And King Bucar and his people thought that the Cid dared not come out against them, and they were the more encouraged, and began to think of making bastilles and engines wherewith to combat the city, for certes they  weened that the Cid Ruydiez dared not come out against them, seeing that he tarried so long.
All this while the company of the Cid were preparing all things to go into Castille, as he had commanded before his death; and his trusty Gil Diaz did nothing else but labour at this.
And the body of the Cid was prepared after this manner: first it was embalmed and anointed as the history hath already recounted, and the virtue of the balsam and myrrh was such that the flesh remained firm and fair, having its natural colour, and his countenance as it was wont to be, and the eyes open, and his long beard in order, so that there was not a man who would have thought him dead if he had seen him and not known it.
And on the second day after he had departed, Gil Diaz placed the body upon a right noble saddle, and this saddle with the body upon it he put upon a frame; and he dressed the body in a gambax of fine sendal, next the skin.
And he took two boards and fitted them to the body, one to the breast and the other to the shoulders; these were so hollowed out and fitted that they met at the sides and under the arms, and the hind one came up to the pole, and the other up to the beard; and these boards were fastened into the saddle, so that the body could not move.
All this was done by the morning of the I twelfth day; and all that day the people of the Cid were busied in making ready their arms, and in loading beasts with all that they had, so that they left nothing of any price in the whole city of Valencia, save only the empty houses.
When it was midnight they took the body of the Cid, fastened to the saddle as it was, and placed it upon his horse Bavieca, and fastened the saddle well: and the body sate so upright and well that it seemed as if he was alive.
And it had on painted hose of black and white, so cunningly painted that no man who saw them would have thought but that they were grieves and cuishes, unless he had laid his hand upon them; and they put on it a surcoat of green sendal, having his arms blazoned thereon, and a helmet of parchment, which was cunningly painted that every one might have believed it to be iron; and his shield was hung round his neck, and they placed the sword Tizona in his hand, and they raised his arm, and fastened it up so subtilly that it was a marvel to see how upright he held the sword.
And the Bishop Don Hieronymo went on one side of him, and the trusty Gil Diaz on the other, and he led the horse Bavieca, as the Cid had commanded him.
And when all this had been made ready, they went out from Valencia at midnight, through the gate of Roseros, which is towards Castille.
Pero Bermudez went first with the banner of the Cid, and with him five hundred knights who guarded it, all well appointed.
And after these came all the baggage.
Then came the body of the Cid with an hundred knights, all chosen men, and behind them Doña Ximena with all her company, and six hundred knights in the rear.
All these went out so silently, and with such a measured pace, that it seemed as if there were only a score.
And by the time that they had all gone out it was broad day.
Twelfth-century sword, much like the weapons carried by Rodrigo and his men.
Now Alvar Fañez Minaya had set the host in order and while the Bishop Don Hieronymo and Gil Diaz led away the body of the Cid, and Doña Ximena, and the baggage, he fell upon the Moors.
First he attacked the tents of that Moorish Queen the Negress, who lay nearest to the city; and this onset was so sudden, that they killed full a hundred and fifty Moors before they had time to take arms or go to horse.
But that Moorish Negress was so skilful in drawing the Turkish bow, that it was held for a marvel, and it is said that they called her in Arabic Nugueymat Turya , which is to say, the Star of the Archers.
And she was the first that got on horseback, and with some fifty that were with her, did some hurt to the company of the Cid; but in fine they slew her, and her people fled to the camp.
And so great was the uproar and confusion, that few there were who took arms, but instead thereof they turned their backs and fled toward the sea.
And when King Bucar and his Kings saw this they were astonished.
And it seemed to them that there came against them on the part of the Christians full seventy thousand knights, all as white as snow:.
and before them a knight of great stature upon a white horse with a bloody cross, who bore in one hand a white banner, and in the other a sword which seemed to be of fire, and he made a great mortality among the Moors who were flying.
And King Bucar and the other Kings were so greatly dismayed that they never checked the reins till they had ridden into the sea; and the company of the Cid rode after them, smiting and slaying and giving them no respite; and they smote down so many that it was marvellous, for the Moors did not turn their heads to defend themselves.
And when they came to the sea, so great was the press among them to get to the ships, that more than ten thousand died in the water.
And of the six and thirty Kings, twenty and two were slain.
And King Bucar and they who escaped with him hoisted sails and went their way, and never more turned their heads.
Bronze dagger of Moorish design, carved with magical symbols to protect its users from harm and to inflict the maximum damage on those it struck.
Barbarossa
SCOURGE OF EUROPE
Emperor and Legend
The Emperor Frederick I drew his popular names of Barbarossa or Rothbart from his red coloured beard.
Born in 1121, son of Frederick, Duke of the German territory of Swabia, he became one of the most powerful and famous of the medieval emperors.
In addition to his political and military achievements, Barbarossa acquired a legendary fame; like the British King Arthur, he is said to be sleeping, awaiting the time of greatest need for his return as a national saviour.
Throughout his life, Barbarossa strove vigorously to restore and strengthen the Holy Roman Empire.
Much of his energy was spent in repeated feuds with various popes, with the Italian confederacy known as the Lombard League, and with his cousin the other great German prince of the period, Henry the Lion.
Despite Barbarossa's will and energy, his plans fell apart immediately upon his sudden death; the tragedy of such an able ruler drowning while on crusade shook the entire system which he strove to uphold.
Barbarossa was, in many ways, the epitome of the feudal emperor or prince: he was physically fit and imposing in appearance, he was skilled in arms and he was a great leader and tactician.
He fought many successful campaigns, both in terms of warfare and diplomacy, and most of all he upheld the medieval system of fervent religious belief combined with regal authority.
He was also a builder and developer of culture, and worked endlessly to set Germany upon a firm governmental and financial footing after the internal struggles that had long divided the German territories against one another.
This was a period of rapid development in the technology and tactics of warfare; gone were the Frankish troops of the time of Charlemagne, who were expected to be riders, foot soldiers, swordsmen, spearsmen and archers all at once.
Specialisation, both within class distinctions and within armed skills, was clearly evident and the rigid feudal pattern of government and loyalty and the honour code of vassalage and service which held the culture together, provided various levels of authority in any army, with ultimate leadership from the king or emperor.
Mailed and heavily armed knights were an upper military class, with associated  servants who undertook the many tasks needed to maintain both knight, horse and arms, before and after a conflict.
Knight, mounting his horse, wearing chain mail of the type developed from eastern sources during Barbarossa's reign.
Foot soldiers bore the brunt of the fighting, not as the light, multipurpose troops that the original Frankish warriors had tended to be, but divided into functional roles such as lightly armoured spearsmen or archers.
There were also sergeants or armigers who were mounted warriors, upon light horses, with light armour, and of a lower social status than the other mounted fighting men.
Above these were the heavily armed cavalry, who were free vassals of noble blood.
These were the knights of medieval chivalry so well known through courtly fiction, but based upon historical fact.
In a short study it is impossible to deal in depth with the vastly complex web of politics that surrounded Barbarossa; a glance at the list of popes shows just how complex the situation was; hardly had any pope become established and negotiations opened, than another was taking his place.
The religious political factor was merely one of several major recurring problems during Barbarossa's reign, all of which interacted with one another.
His entire life was involved with warfare, plots and counter-plots, intrigues, feuds and religious problems.
We are fortunate to have a letter from Barbarossa himself, written to his biographer, in which he tells of his campaigns in Italy and of the terrible slaughter that resulted from feuds between the Emperor and the Italian cities.
After his death, Barbarossa became the subject of many legends, including that of the sleeping king waiting to return and save his people.
Some examples of these stories are included, collected from German oral tradition in the nineteenth century.
Body armour, prior to the advent of chain, as worn by a helmeted knight in a manuscript illustration of the Barbarossa period.
Frederick of the Red Beard
Frederick was a Hohenstaufen, and the second emperor to be crowned from this noble family.
The Hohenstaufen were descendants of Frederick of Beuren (died 1094), whose son, another Frederick, built the considerable power and fortune of the family before his death in 1105.
The Hohenstaufen castle was near Beuren, in the Goeppingen district, east of Stuttgart.
Frederick of Hohenstaufen had two sons: the younger one became Emperor Conrad III, while his first, Frederick the One-Eyed, was the father of Barbarossa.
Because of the repeated use of the name Frederick, it is easiest to identify Frederick Barbarossa by his nickname.
The Hohenstaufen family were allied to the Babenburgs, originally from Bamberg in Bavaria.
Leopold of Babenburg, who was ruler of the Austrian March, married Agnes, the widow of Frederick of   Hohenstaufen, and they had three sons: Leopold, Henry Jasomirgott and Otto von Freising.
Barbarossa with his sons Henry and Frederick in the 1188 manuscript from Fulda Abbey.
Thus Barbarossa came from a noble family, with a background that suited him to his eventual imperial career.
In 1147 he succeeded to the dukedom of Swabia, and within a year he set out to take part in the Second Crusade, under the command of his uncle Conrad III and Louis VII of France.
One of the most illuminating insights into the character of Frederick Barbarossa comes from the descriptions of him in the Fourth Book of Bishop Otto von Freising and from Rahewin, his twelfth-century biographer.
The descriptions are a mixture of quotations from texts which were already known at the time of writing, when Rahewin completed the work of Otto von Freising.
These are mixed freely with original descriptive material.
The descriptions therefore are also found in earlier works dealing with Theodoric II of the Visigoths, Charlemagne, and other historical characters.
The copying of descriptions of famous men from other chronicles is typical of the style of the period, and need not be taken to imply lack of information or plagiarism, for wherever necessary personal details are added.
The process is similar to oral tradition, in which good descriptions, tales, or verses are preserved and repeated; indeed the audience or reader would have been disappointed if some of the famous and much loved descriptions were not included.
Apart from the deliberate references to Theodoric and Charlemagne, which are intended to show that Frederick Barbarossa was of the same mould as these great heroes, the description of the Kaiserslauten palace is especially interesting.
When examining Barbarossa as a legendary  character, this image appears again, from a traditional source collected by the Grimm brothers in the nineteenth century.
Apart from the obvious literary currency of descriptions of this sort, it is significant that a garden, palace, or type of paradise is always associated with the sleeping king or emperor, for this is the ancient motif found in classical mythology of the Titan Cronos, ruling in the Golden Age.
Reconstruction from archaeological evidence of the original Staufen Castle.
Whatever else, the mixture is a fascinating glimpse of the great German ruler:
‘Divine august Frederick is in character and appearance such man that he deserves to be studied even by those not in close contact with him.
Both God and nature have combined to bestow lavishly upon him the gift of perfect happiness.
His character is one that not even those envious of his power can disparage him.
His body is well proportioned.
He is shorter than the tallest of men, yet taller and more noble than those of middle height.
His hair is golden and curls a little above his forehead.
His ears are only just covered by his hair above, as the barber, out of respect for the empire, keeps the hair in his head and cheeks short by continual trimming.
‘His eyes are sharp and piercing, his nose well formed, his beard reddish, his lips fine and not pulled out of shape by too long a mouth.
His entire visage is bright and cheerful.
His teeth are even  a snow white in colour.
The skin of his throat and neck, which is stout but not fat, is milky white and often imbued with the red glow of youth; modesty not anger causes him to blush frequently.
His shoulders are broad and he is strongly built.
His thighs supported by stocky calves are neat and sturdy.
‘His pace is firm and steady, his voice clear, and his entire bearing manly.
Because of his shape he has an air of dignity and power, standing or sitting.
His health is very good, except that he is sometimes subject to an occasional fever.
He is a lover of warfare, but only in the pursuit of peace.
He is quick of hand, extremely wise in counsel, merciful to suppliants, and kind to those taken in under his protection.
Composite visual reconstruction of Barbarossa's appearance from various surviving sources.
‘You may ask about his daily routine when abroad; he attends matins at church and priestly services either alone or with a small following, and worships so devoutly that he has set an example to all Italians of the honour and reverence that should be paid to bishops and clergy.
He shows such a deep respect for divine services that he honours with seemly silence every hour in which psalms are sung to God, nor does anyone dare meanwhile to trouble him with matters of state.
When his devotions are over, after the Mass, having been blessed by holy relics, he then dedicates the rest of the morning to the work of government of his empire.
‘If he engages in hunting he is foremost in training, assessing, and using horses, dogs, falcons and other hunting birds.
He strings his own bow while hunting, takes the arrows, sets and fires them.
If you choose what to hit, he will hit whatever you have chosen.
‘At meals there is both restraint and royal bounty; moderate drinking prevails without excess, yet those who hunger will never complain of frugality.
When it is time for recreation, he sets aside his regal dignity for a moment, and is in such a humour that his condescension cannot be criticised, his severity cannot be called bloodthirsty.
‘Towards his household he is not threatening nor is he contemptuous of counsel when offered, nor vindictive when searching out a fault.
He earnestly reads the Scriptures and adventures of ancient kings.
He usually distributes with his own hands alms to the poor, and carefully divides a tithe of his wealth among the churches and monasteries.
He is very eloquent in his mother tongue, but understands Latin more readily than he actually speaks it.
He wears his native costume, is neither extravagant or frivolous in his clothing, nor is he ever poorly dressed.
It pleases him to have his camp display the signs of Mars rather than those of Venus.
‘Though he is famous for the extension of his territories and conquests in which he is constantly engaged, he has also started many public works for the beauty and convenience of the realm; some of these he has completed, and a great part of his wealth is set aside for pious honouring of his ancestors.
For he has fittingly restored the most beautiful places built long ago by Charles the Great at Nijmegen and near the village of Ingelheim, adorned with acclaimed workmanship — structures extremely well built but decaying through neglect and age.
By this he gives clear evidence of his innate greatness of soul.
At Kaiserslauten he built a royal palace of red stone on a lavish scale.
On one side it was surrounded by a strong wall, on the other it was washed by a fish pond the size of lake, well stocked with all kinds of fish and game birds, to feast both the eye and the palate.
It has close to it a park that provides pasture for a large  herd of deer and wild goats.
The regal splendour of all these works and their abundance, too great to list further, are well worth seeing.’
Twelfth Century Germany
Frederick Barbarossa's exploits are all the more interesting in the context of the type of society into which he was born.
This society moulded many of the ideals, virtues, strengths and weaknesses in his later role as emperor.
German Medieval Culture
Twelfth-century Germany was in a period of expansion; the population was increasing rapidly, agriculture and trade were booming, and towns were growing substantially.
During this period, the city of Cologne became the biggest city in Germany, with a population of around 50,000 people by 1180, and extensive trade connections.
It also became the   largest city in Western Europe, with walls enclosing an area of no fewer than 483 acres.
Barbarossa initiated a programme of castle construction in order to strengthen imperial power in Germany.
During his youth, Barbarossa saw a rapid increase in the number of monasteries, considerable development of learning, scientific and intellectual skills, and the beginning of cathedral schools, which were soon to blossom into universities.
By the end of the twelfth century, there were universities across Europe; at Oxford.
Montpelier, Paris, Salerno and Bologna.
There were also rapid developments in military techniques, which  Barbaross had ample opportunity to employ during his many campaigns.
An important outlet for the growing population, energy and skills of the period were the crusades — religious wars against the Saracens, aiming to free Christian shrines, particularly Jerusalem, from Muslim rule.
Feudal Loyalty
Loyalty to specific lords was an essential aspect of medieval life, running from the most humble serf, who was virtually a possession or slave, to the bond between vassal and lord that held the entire culture together at the highest levels.
This is well illustrated by a famous decree made by Barbarossa, in which he ruled that a fire raiser who had taken refuge in a castle must be delivered to justice by those who had sheltered him, but not if he were the lord of the castle-owner, or his vassal, or his kinsman.
The feudal bond of duty and loyalty was seen to be almost as strong as, and certainly similar to, the ties of blood relationship.
In contrast to this complex and long-established system, which originally derived from the tribal period in early Celtic and Germanic Europe, we find that certain cities and merchants were freed of feudal ties.
Liberties were conferred on cities, in order that feudal laws should not restrict trade and other important aspects of mercantile power.
Many cities had rights of self-government, with councils replacing feudal governors.
Much of Barbarossa's continual political conflict was connected to administrative matters of this sort.
Feudal service had strict rules, terms and periods, with specific requirements for nobles and serving man alike.
The system also perpetuated the concept of the code of honour, in which the strong defended the weak against oppressors, and the highest rulers were always benevolent towards their vassals.
Barbarossa's common soldiers were almost certainly still wearing Norman-style hauberks as late as the Third Crusade.
More typical though is this armour from an illustration of around 1190.
One warrior wears helmet with a nasal guard and carries a spear with cross pieces.
The Second Crusade
The Second Crusade was organised by Pope Eugenius III, but was not a success.
The planning and organisation were inefficient, and although it was supposedly undertaken as a Christian venture, the Byzantine Emperor Manuel Commenus obstructed the crusade whenever possible.
Newly appointed as Duke of Swabia, Frederick Barbarossa had an  opportunity to mix with other nobles, and acquitted himself well in the crusade.
His loyalty and courage earned him the friendship and confidence of Emperor Conrad III.
He was also able to meet and fight along with his relatives, Otto von Freising, Henry Jasomirgott, Henry, Bishop of Ratisbon, and Vladislav, Duke of Bohemia.
This unfortunate crusade was not a total loss as far as Barbarossa was concerned, for it set the political and feudal scene for his election as Emperor within a short time of his return to Germany.
The system of government to which he was elected had an interesting structure and development.
Government of Twelfth-century Germany
The central chain of command and influence was as follows :
The Emperor
Kings and princes
Lesser noble vassals and feudal lords
Special governors and appointees (often placed directly by the Emperor)
THE ADMINISTRATION
Chancellor in Chief of Germany (usually Archbishop of Mainz)
Chancellor in Chief of Italy (usually Archbishop of Cologne)
Chancellor in Chief of Burgundy (usually Archbishop of Besançon)
Administration at county level was undertaken by the feudal lords.
THE COURT
Counsellors
Relatives
Friends and favourites
Court Officials were the Seneschal, Cup-bearer, Marshal and Chamberlain.
These were ancient, traditional positions and could be of considerable power depending upon the individuals and the emperor himself.
The Diet represented both central and local authorities, and was a gathering of major importance.
Medieval representation of Frederick Barbarossa as a crusader, the role in which he met his death.
Armour and Weapons
The reign of Frederick Barbarossa saw some important developments in military equipment, particularly in the design of armour.
To grasp the overall picture of the weaponry and armour available to the knights and soldiers of Barbarossa's armies, one must summarise the development of equipment during the period concerned, bearing in mind that any changes were not universal and immediate, and that arms and armour of both older and more recent styles would have happily co-existed.
Hand Weapons
The basic weapons in use from the end of the eleventh century to the end of the twelfth century were the spear or lance, the mace, the bow, the sword and dagger.
Variant weapons included the guisarme or fauchard, which persisted in many forms as late as the seventeenth century, and inflicted such horrible wounds that attempts were made to have it banned during the medieval period.
The pole-axe was a long-shafted fighting axe requiring the use of both hands, while the standard battle-axe could be wielded single handed.
The axe was originally a northern European weapon, and a typical design during the time of Barbarossa would have been a simple axe blade balanced by a spike on its reverse.
Northern European warriors also used the halberd, which consisted of an axe blade balanced by a pick, with the head of the shaft terminating in a long, vicious spike.
The halberd was not introduced extensively into England or France until as late as the fourteenth century, but may well  have been used by the Germanic troops of Barbarossa, particularly those vassals from the more northerly territories.
Fourteen types of shafted weapons carried by Barbarossa's campaigning armies; military flails (1, 6, 7), marteau (2); battle axe (3), fauchards (4, 8), corcesque (5), military fork (9), halberd (10), partisan (11) and guisarmes (12, 13).
Guisarmes (top) were used to great effect as thrusting and cutting weapons on long shafts whilst (above) the cultellus was used to administer the coup de grace to unhorsed knights, and the war scythe and glaive to pull the  horseman from his saddle.
Other hand-held weapons of the time (left) were the morning star or morgenstern, mace and goedendag.
Towards the close of the twelfth century the pike was used to counter cavalry charges, and remained in use in various forms until as late as the eighteenth century.
It consisted of a long, narrow, steel spear head, with a long wooden shaft reinforced by strips of metal.
The butt end of the pike was fitted with an iron shoe which could be grounded to take the shock of a charge, and the metal strips along the shaft (sometimes as much as 20 feet long though usually around 10 feet) acted as protection against sword cuts.
The fork was simply a military development of the agricultural implement.
It usually had two or three prongs of deliberately unequal length with hooks added to pull horsemen down, and sometimes barbs.
As with a number of shafted weapons, it was used from the eleventh to the seventeenth century.
Scaling forks were made with long shafts and prominent hooks to dislodge defenders from walls.
The bill was a shafted weapon with a crescent-shaped blade sharpened on the inside; it was current from the ninth century onwards in various forms and, like the fork, had an agricultural origin as an improvised weapon which gradually became specialised in its own right.
It was popularly known as the ‘brown bill’ because such improvised weapons were often rusty.
The glaive was another variant of the bill, but its cutting edge was along the convex curve of the blade rather than the concave; this weapon also developed hooks and spurs on the base of the blade for specialist purposes.
The glaive was very popular in both France and Germany, and the word ‘glaive’ was frequently used to mean any knife or blade attached to a shaft.
The morning star or morgenstern was a German weapon, used by both cavalry and infantry.
The infantry version had a longer shaft, but both versions were essentially spiked maces.
The Germanic cavalry often had morning stars made entirely of iron.
Other ferocious hand weapons were the ‘holy water sprinklers’ or military flails.
A close relative of the morgenstern was the aptly named ‘holy water sprinkler’, more prosaically known as the military flail.
This consisted of a long or short shaft with a staple at the end, to which a chain was attached.
The chain terminated in an iron ball covered with spikes; a variant form had the chain supporting a wooden or iron flail sprouting spikes.
The mace, or goedendag, was a weapon used throughout Europe up to the sixteenth century.
Many variant forms existed, but the basic shape was a central weighted head surrounded by flanges, sometimes with a spike for thrusting.
In later centuries the mace was to become an emblem of authority, and is still used by town councils and corporations in Europe as a ceremonial implement.
The mace was particularly favoured by militant churchmen, who argued that although the scriptures forbade the shedding of blood, and thus precluded them from wielding swords, the mace was a crushing implement and thus avoided such religious bans altogether.
The martel de fer was a type of mace used by both horse and foot soldiers, and was often carried by archers in preference to the sword.
It consisted of a shaft with a hammer head, often serrated, and balanced by a pick or blade on the opposite side.
The sword hardly varied in form from the twelfth to the fifteenth century: it generally had a two-edged blade, about 40 inches in length.
The quillons were usually straight, but occasionally curved towards the blade; the grip was sometimes double handed and sometimes single; pommels tended to be decorated, particularly those of noblemen and princes.
Other weapons found between approximately 1066 and 1180 include the bisacuta, oucin and besaque, all of which were types of pick used to pierce the joints between the armour plates on a hauberk.
Foot soldiers used daggers extensively to disable unhorsed knights; these daggers were known as cultelli and occasionally approached the length of a short sword.
Guisarmes, mentioned earlier, were also fitted with bells to frighten horses, a fact which emphasises the general style of warfare in which the foot and mounted warriors continually strove to outdo one another.
Debate as to the relative merits of foot and horse continued for many centuries, and still exists in an attenuated form in the modern technological army.
Arbalests and Crossbows
Although the crossbow is known to have existed as early as the fourth century, its main use was as a hunting weapon and it was not until the latter part of the twelfth century that it became a major military weapon.
However, this was not without some opposition: in 1139 a council presided over by Pope Innocent II banned the crossbow as a barbarous weapon unfit for Christian use, a decision confirmed by Innocent III.
Richard I of England allowed the use of crossbows during the crusade, but in England the famous longbow eventually took precedence.
On the Continent the arbalest or crossbow was used extensively, and crossbowmen often formed an individual armoured unit, both for defensive purposes and as a serious threat to charging cavalry.
Hand crossbow, rolling purchase arbalest and Moorish three-pointed dagger; all used on the crusades and during Barbarossa's Italian campaigns.
The crossbowman, or arbalastier, shown here wears helmet and sword of the Moorish influence which appeared in the early 1200S.
Early Armour, Shields and Helmets
Body armour varied enormously; earlier forms in the eleventh century tended to be scale armour, in which reinforcement was added to a leather garment.
The reinforcements could be bronze, leather, iron, horn, or cuir-bouilli which was an extremely hard, boiled and moulded leather.
Quilting was another form of body armour, in which the overgarment was padded with wool or cloth sewn between two layers of fabric.
This provided a good defence against swords and arrows, but no protection against a lance thrust or a mace.
Quilting was also used underneath mail and metal armour, as an additional defence layer and as padding for comfort against chafing.
Common foot soldiers, however, often had quilting as their only armour.
Shields lengthened during the period concerned, and the Norman-style long shield, bowed to give extra area and defensive shape, was a standard design.
Germanic foot soldiers still used small circular shields, similar to those of their Frankish predecessors.
Helmets were frequently of the standard conical shape, fitted with a nasal strip.
The nasal strip was popular until the middle of the twelfth century, when it dropped out of general use.
Neck and cheek guards  were also known on helmets, though these were less widespread.
The heaume or pot helmet appeared late in the twelfth century, eventually developing into a complete head covering.
This type became increasingly common and more ornate in the two following centuries.
The Chain Mail Revolution
By the latter half of the twelfth century, when the crusades were in full swing, chain mail replaced the simpler scale armour to a great extent, and the pot helmet was increasingly used by the wealthier warriors.
Chain mail was an eastern technology, and the crude Western version made from bands or rings fared badly when compared to the light, skilfully-made mail of the oriental cavalry during the crusading period.
The Saracen warriors were able to ride and fight with far more comfort and freedom than their European adversaries.
The best chain mail in the Christian armies was, at first, that looted from the Saracens.
A general improvement of European mail occurred due to this influence, but true chain mail was expensive, and the almost exclusive property of the lords and princes.
Germany and Spain were eventually to become major producers of armour: within a century or so of the time of Barbarossa some of the most famous makers of armour were German, while Cologne became renowned for its swords.
This last speciality may reflect the much earlier skills of the Franks, the Frankish swords were of such good quality that the Emperor Charlemagne issued an edict that they were not to be exported.
Thirteenth- and fourteenth-century German arms and armour, however, were extensively sold all over Europe.
The foot soldiers, however, did not benefit from looted oriental mail, or from the Western revolution in home manufacture.
They still used the simpler armour found from the preceding century, with conical helmets padded or plated hauberks or jerkins, and fought with unprotected legs.
The German pot helmet developed rapidly from this basic form.
Barbarossa's foot soldiers were often still attired like this eleventh-century warrior.
Chain mail was made first by coiling links around a pole and then fully constructed by interlinking.
Barbarossa's troops subdue the Roman mob at the time of his coronation.
The violent citizens sought to kill or abduct the Pope when Barbarossa refused to pay them an immense bribe.
Engines of War
The taking and destroying of fortified towns played a considerable part in the many campaigns and siege warfare of the medieval period.
Projectile weapons had been known from Roman times, but much of the technology was redeveloped during the crusades.
It may be surprising to discover that medieval war engines were capable of throwing huge objects, and causing extensive destruction within a besieged city.
Roman weapons used the bow as their mechanical basis, but the medieval ones tended to use the sling, which made them heavier and more cumbersome.
Slinging siege engines used in the twelfth century had long wooden arms powered by heavy weights.
These then developed into the trebuchet, which had a sling at one end of a long wooden arm.
Trebuchets had a long range, and were generally constructed on site.
In addition to stones, they fired pitch, naphtha, Greek fire, dead horses and other animals, and barrels of putrid, rotting matter.
The putrid matter was intended to cause plague in the besieged town or castle.
Although the English savant Roger Bacon deciphered the composition of gunpowder in the thirteenth century, it was used in the twelfth by the Moors in wars in Spain and so was probably known to the troops of Barbarossa, perhaps as a terrible Moorish secret weapon.
In conclusion, it is clear that from this examination of the state of weaponry and warfare throughout the reign of Barbarossa, and given that he lived to the age of 70, he must have experienced many of the gradual changes and improvements in arms and armour that occurred during the twelfth century.
Of particular relevance to Barbarossa as Emperor was the use of the chain mail stolen from the Saracens, and the resulting changes in European manufacture that followed.
Foot soldiers storming a platform defended by a crossbowman in heavy armour.
The attackers carry a siege hook, bow, sling, and axe and all combatants utilise armour and weaponry of the period.
The trebuchet; a twelfth-century example of this deadly weapon, capable of enormous destruction as a siege engine.
Barbarossa was crowned Emperor in Saint Peter's Basilica, declaring that the Pope merely confirmed his existing right to imperial power, but opposed by the Roman citizens and surrounding Italian territories.
The Emperor's First Plan
In 1152 Emperor Conrad III died at Bamberg.
At this time heirs were not selected exclusively through primogeniture, but by election.
In any case, Conrad's son Henry, who the nobles had agreed to elect upon his father's death, had himself died.
So when Conrad III handed the royal insignia to his nephew Barbarossa upon his death bed, no clearer signal was required of a potential choice, and the German princes, anxious to elect a suitable person of their own choice before any papal interference could be made, chose Frederick Barbarossa.
The conflict between nobility, emperor and papacy was to be a constant and powerful factor throughout his reign.
Within a few days of his election, Barbarossa was crowned on the 9th March 1152.
The ceremony took place in Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle), the imperial city developed extensively by Charlemagne.
At the time of his election, Barbarossa was aged 28; he was athletic, and excelled in swimming, riding and hunting.
He was of medium height, with broad shoulders, and, of course, his famous fair complexion and red beard.
Proven as a warrior, he also exemplified many of the feudal virtues so important to his culture and class: loyalty, justice and, where necessary, inflexibility.
It should be clearly stated that Barbarossa was pious; his entire life and style of rule was guided by his religious beliefs.
He practised Christian morals, and took a very active role in the development and protection of the Church.
However, his complex arguments and bitter feuds with the Holy See were in the realm of politics; kings, emperors and popes were well practised in setting aside or utilising matters of faith and devotion when it came to controlling the apparatus of temporal power.
Most important of all was Barbarossa's inherent intelligence; he was no mere warrior king or religious enthusiast.
He understood and developed the concepts of imperial rule and responsibility, and took an intense interest in all matters of law, government and the practical realisation of the feudal ideals which he personally embodied.
It was that very intelligence which evolved the master strategies.
Warrior in tegulated, square-plate armour of the late eleventh century.
Shipboard warriors of Barbarossa's army carrying staff slings and fire arrows; a battle axe, spear and sword are also in evidence.
The Revealed Plan
Barbarossa's initial aim was to unify Germany, and settle a number of conflicts which had been weakening the realm.
This was to be the first of three stages in a carefully planned development of the imperial role and power.
In 1152, the first plan was revealed by the new emperor.
He wrote to various important and powerful persons, including, of course, the pope, Eugenius III, declaring that he would, upon his honour, re-establish the strength and purpose of Germany and the empire.
In short, he sought to restore the Holy Roman Empire of Germany, Burgundy and Italy.
In 1153 an agreement of mutual assistance was signed, in which Eugenius III and Barbarossa confirmed support for one another, or more significantly between pope and emperor.
Unfortunately, Eugenius died on the 8th July of the same year, and was succeeded by Anastasius IV.
The new pope was still pro-imperial, but did not survive for long, dying on the 3rd December 1154.
The variations in papal power and support are so crucial to an understanding of Barbarossa's reign that the summary of papal allegiances included is worthy of study and is useful in following the complex developments.
First Italian Campaign
Barbarossa's declared and overall intention was to purify, restore and develop the Holy Roman Empire.
Germany was within his immediate control, and Burgundy was the least of the three kingdoms which he resolved to merge firmly together, but Italy was a hotbed of revolt, dissent and major political and economic opposition to his aims.
Thus, in October of 1154, Barbarossa mounted his first expedition, with the aim of restoring papal authority where it had been challenged, and fully realising the imperial crown.
He was eventually to undertake six campaigns in Lombardy to subdue and punish rebellious cities, grown rich through the boom in manufacturing and commerce, and increasingly independent of the old feudal authority.
The immediate cause of his first campaign was to support the town of Lodi, which had been subject to control by Milan.
Barbarossa sent a mandate requiring Milan to give up her claims, but the Milanese consuls tore up the document, and the imperial ambassador fled an enraged crowd.
So in 1154 Barbarossa crossed the Alps with a large army and Milan was severely punished.
The city of Tortona, which refused to submit, was burnt to the ground and gradual submission was forced upon all the rebellious cities of northern Italy.
In 1155 Barbarossa was crowned with the famous Iron Crown of Lombardy, said to have been made from a nail of the True Cross.
By this time the pro-imperial Pope Anastasius had died, and had been succeeded by the anti-imperial Hadrian.
The new pope did not share the  general goodwill towards Frederick, and wanted to assert the superiority of pope over emperor.
While he was not openly aggressive to the strong Barbarossa, he certainly made it clear that he did not wish the emperor to interfere in ecclesiastical matters.
Barbarossa, as we have seen, believed it to be his holy duty to weld crown and church together.
Man-at-arms in the type of armour combining leather and iron developed towards the close of Barbarossa's long life.
A working compromise was reached only after Barbarossa agreed to hold the Pope's bridle and stirrup at a formal meeting; an act of ritual homage which he had at first refused.
Meanwhile, the unruly people of Rome, currently opposed to the Pope, suggested that it would suit them better to confirm the imperial crown upon Barbarossa.
He replied that he held his power in Italy by the same right of conquest established by Charlemagne and Otto, he had come, he said, ‘not to receive as a suppliant the transient favours of an unruly people, but as a prince resolved to claim, if necessary by force of arms, the inheritance of his forebears’.
Thus, on the 18th June 1155, Frederick Barbarossa was finally handed the sword, sceptre and golden crown that declared him fully Emperor, confirmed by military, political and spiritual authority.
His first act was to seize possession of the Leonine City in Rome, which came under attack from rebellious Roman citizens based upon the Capitol.
But the Emperor and Pope withdrew to Tivoli, where Barbarossa again confirmed papal authority by refusing to accept the keys in his own name.
Clearly, he realised that he must uphold the papacy even in the light of Hadrian's opposition to imperial equality.
On 27th July 1155 Barbarossa razed Spoleto, which had paid him tribute earlier in false money.
He also put Milan under imperial ban during this period, depriving the powerful city of its regalia and right to mint money or collect tolls.
He was gradually moving out of Italy, leaving the Pope to handle his own political problems after an imperial show of strength.
But Milan would have to be dealt with again, and Barbarossa would return to quell the troublesome Italians on more than one occasion.
In September of 1155 he finally departed for Germany, to embark upon a further programme of reorganisation in his homeland.
Second Plan — The Great Design
The most important stage of Barbarossa's rule now began to unfold; in this phase he aimed to expand imperial power and to unify Italy, Alsace and Burgundy.
His first moves were to settle various internal disputes among his relatives and nobility, ensuring that they were kept satisfied and willing to fulfil their feudal duty to him as supreme overlord.
In May of 1156, Barbarossa appointed a new chancellor.
His choice for this important post was unusual, for the chancellor was not a career diplomat or a member of favoured royal chapel, he was, in the courtly sense of the day, an outsider.
His name was Rainald von Dassel, and his appointment was to prove crucial to Barbarossa's success.
The imperial system of government was well established by the time Barbarossa came to the throne, with the established chain of command already described.
Rainald was a man of considerable talent; he was described by his friends as being generous, serene and sincere.
More important from the governmental viewpoint was that he was extremely active and intelligent, a good speaker and a skilled, astute negotiator.
Most important of all was the fact that he was devoted to imperial service; thus his role as chancellor and Barbarossa's role as emperor were seldom to come into conflict.
Barbarossa was ever the pragmatist; despite his ambitions, he paid homage to Pope Alexander III.
Although Rainald was a cleric, he did not take his religious vocation with any great seriousness, and on many occasions used his intelligence to give imperial policies an anti-papal effect.
He was attracted, though, by ceremony and magical or miraculous powers associated with religion, and when he had the relics of the Three Wise Men brought from Milan to Germany, it was he who carried them into Cologne Cathedral.
Rainald was convinced of divine approval for his role within the imperial cause; his reputation as a soldier was considerable, and he put his skill and courage (which he did not modestly hide) down to the essential ‘rightness’ of his task.
Thus he and Barbarossa were to become close friends as well as working together, for the next ten years.
He died in 1167 of plague after the defeat of the army near Tusculum.
Marriage and the Treaty of Benevento
On the 5th June 1156, Frederick Barbarossa married for the second time.
His new wife was Beatrice of Burgundy, and the marriage was part of the complex Second Plan to strengthen imperial power.
In the twelfth century marriages were generally arranged by parents, guardians or overlords, so this move was quite normal for the time, marriages being primarily matters of finance or territory, rather than of the heart.
Through his marriage to Beatrice, Frederick gained control of Provence and Burgundy entirely, thus strengthening the position of his native Swabia.
Meanwhile, a treaty had been negotiated between Pope Hadrian IV and William I of Sicily (June 1156) in which certain territorial rights were listed, and in return homage and a large yearly tribute were paid to the Pope.
This effectively broke the treaty signed between Barbarossa and Pope Eugenius III, and contributed to growing conflict between emperor and papacy.
In August of 1157 Barbarossa invaded Poland to resolve troublesome territorial arguments; and the following month found him holding court at Besançon, one of the imperial centres established by his predecessor Charlemagne.
Here the Pope was to further aggravate the already poor relationship between himself and the Emperor.
In a complex letter to Frederick, Hadrian implied that the empire was a beneficium of the papacy, a gift bestowed only by papal authority.
This suggestion was certainly not accepted, and in his reply Frederick Barbarossa made it clear that the empire was independent of the papacy, no matter how closely tied the two entities were through political and religious motives and history.
The reply from Barbarossa, couched in the most vituperative and courtly language, may be summarised by its last section, quoted here from the writings of Otto von Freising, his contemporary chronicler:
And since, through election by the princes, the kingdom and the empire are ours from  God alone, Who at the time of the passion of His Son Christ subjected the world to dominion by the two swords (Luke 22:38) and since the apostle Peter taught this doctrine ‘fear God, honour the King’(Peter 2:17) whosoever says that we received the imperial crown as a benefice from the lord pope contradicts the divine ordinance and the doctrine of Peter and is guilty of a lie…
Barbarossa's second wife, the Empress Beatrice, depicted on a coin of the period.
Barbarossa's own depiction shows imperial regalia of orb and sceptre.
The Great Design Progresses
By January 1158 Barbarossa was holding a diet at Regensburg to settle internal German disputes.
He also sent Rainald von Dassel and Otto von Wittlesbach to Italy as ambassadors.
Their task was to take oaths of allegiance from the various semi-independent cities, and to encourage resistance to Milan.
In July of 1158 the Emperor once again led his army into Italy, and by August the troops had reached Milan.
With the surrounding countryside devastated, and the common people deprived of all supplies of food, both Brescia and Milan submitted to Frederick's authority, and Milan became an imperial city.
In November of the same year, the important diet of Roncaglia was held, at which all the cities and imperial vassals of Italy were represented.
Four of the leading jurists of Bologna were appointed to prepare a document defining for ever the relationship between the empire on one hand and the cities of Italy and imperial vassal on the other.
The rights assigned to the empire by these jurists were so great that many cities  refused to acknowledge them.
Milan prepared for strong resistance to the Roncaglia decrees, which included conceding of all regalia or royal rights to Frederick, such as rents, tolls on roads, rivers, in ports and in market places.
The independence of the cities was effectively strangled.
As part of the Milanese conspiracy to defy the decrees, a messenger tried unsuccessfully to assassinate Barbarossa in his camp at Lodi in June of 1159.
Death of Hadrian IV
On 1st September 1159, Hadrian IV died.
The cardinals, clergy and Roman people were divided into pro- and anti-imperial camps and as a result two competing popes were elected.
Frederick supported Victor IV, while his rival, Alexander III, was forced to flee Italy and take refuge in the powerful kingdom of France.
The Razing of Milan
By 1161 Milan was again in revolt, and Barbarossa assembled a large army in Germany, crossed the Alps in the spring, and laid siege to the city.
His tactic was to starve the Milanese into submission so the city was encircled by a ring of improvised castles, cutting off communications and supplies.
This enabled the Emperor to avoid any pitched battles that would be destructive of manpower, and by 1162 the Milanese were starving and forced into surrender.
It was clear by February that Frederick would allow no compromises; he returned six prisoners to the city, five of whom were blinded, while the sixth had his nose cut off.
This last prisoner had been allowed to keep his sight only in order to lead the others home as a terrible example.
Milan agreed to accept the Roncaglia decrees, and agreed to the appointment of a podesta .
Such officials were occasionally native Lombards, but more often were German country squires or minor nobility, proven warriors and trusted servants of Barbarossa.
Unfortunately, they often had little experience in civil administration and although the system may have seemed effective in suppressing Lombard leadership, ultimately it acted against Frederick's interests due to its inherent inefficiency and unpopularity.
In this case, however, unconditional surrender was now required.
In March of 1162, Milan was razed to the ground by imperial troops, and the inhabitants were forced to settled in four widespread parts of the territory.
The city was not rebuilt until 1167.
By this dramatic and merciless conquest, Barbarossa pacified northern Italy, placing the territory under an imperial governor.
The Papal Schism
Frederick now attempted to have his approved pope, Victor, recognised by Louis VII of France, and both he and Rainald made speeches at the  synod at St-Jean-de-Losne declaring that the Emperor had sole authority to decide a papal election.
This did not meet with approval, and by 1163 Frederick had returned to Italy with a small band of men, aiming to capture Rome and proceed to Sicily.
Meanwhile Alexander III formed a new league of Italian cities from his refuge in France, and fomented further revolts.
In 1164, Victor died at Lucca, and the dubious consecration of Paschal III, soon known as the ‘anti-pope’, was carried out by Bishop Henry of Liege.
This consecration was arranged by Rainald, for blatantly political reasons, and at first Frederick would not accept such an obvious ploy on the part of his chancellor to gain control of papal authority.
But the German church now supported the rival Alexander, as they had not been consulted over the appointment of Paschal.
In 1164, Rainald was deprived of the chancellery, but retained his position as Arch-chancellor for Italy.
It was in this role that he removed the relics of the Three Wise Men from Milan, and placed them in Cologne Cathedral, where they are still found to this day.
Barbarossa ordered the relics of the Three Kings to Germany and installed this costliest shrine in Christendom in Cologne Cathedral.
Henry the Lion
The dominance of the figure of Frederick Barbarossa makes it easy to lose sight of other major characters who lived during his reign.
One individual who demands special attention is Henry the Lion, leader of the  Guelphs.
The supporters of Barbarossa became known as Ghibellines from the name of the Hohenstaufen castle, Waiblingen; and the opposition were known as Guelphs, from the Welfs, traditional enemies of the house of Hohenstaufen.
Henry was one of the most remarkable princes of Germany in the twelfth century.
Born in 1129, he inherited large territories and an equally large collection of feuds when his father was poisoned in 1139.
By 1146 Henry had become ruler of Saxony.
At the diet of princes in Frankfurt (1147) he demanded the return of Bavaria, which had been taken from his father by Emperor Conrad III and bestowed upon an Austrian vassal.
Conrad refused, and war broke out between the Guelph faction and the emperor.
In 1152, with the death of Conrad, Germany was deeply divided.
The houses of Hohenstaufen (Ghibellines) and Welf (Guelphs) both pressed their claims to the royal crown but as already described, Frederick Barbarossa succeeded in his claim.
Despite this rivalry the new Emperor restored Bavaria to Henry in 1154, bringing him to the height of his power as a German prince.
The year 1165 also saw growing unrest in Saxony, where Henry as leader of the Guelphs, had gradually increased his power and field of influence, originally with the encouragement of his imperial overlord Frederick.
A strong coalition developed against Henry, including Rainald, Albrecht the Bear, the Landgraf Ludwig of Thuringia, and many lesser vassals from Saxony, Thuringia and Hessen.
Thus, internal unrest once again threatened Barbarossa's concept of the great design.
In fact, Henry the Lion ruled territories extending from the Baltic and the North Sea to the Adriatic, but his period of favour and amicable relationship with Barbarossa was not to last long.
Those first signs of unrest were found in disputes with various powerful churchmen, who formed a confederacy against him at Merseburg in 1166.
Within two years of overcoming this faction, Henry had divorced his first wife and married Matilda, the daughter of Henry II of England.
He then travelled on an expedition to the Holy Land, and in his absence his various enemies, including the Emperor himself, began to encroach upon his territories.
By 1174 Henry returned to Germany to serve under his imperial overlord on the fifth campaign in Italy.
In this campaign he led a large body of troops, as befitted such a powerful prince, but due to the continuing disputes between himself and Barbarossa, he abandoned the imperial cause at the siege of Allessandria.
As a result of this disloyalty, and his refusal to appear at three imperial diets, he was banished from the empire and his dominions were distributed among other princes and powerful vassals loyal to Barbarossa.
After a period of conflict, Henry was forced to accept the ban, and fled to his father-in-law in England.
In 1182, he asked formally for pardon, prostrating himself before   Barbarossa.
In return he was promised his hereditary possessions of Luneburg and Brunswick, but ordered to leave Germany for three years, and so returned to England.
By 1184 he was back in Germany, ruling his hereditary territories in peace, but with a much reduced status.
The Hohenstaufen castle of Trifels, one of Barbarossa's strongholds in the Rhineland.
Barbarossa's imperial seal and signature of authority on a document dated July 1165.
However, Barbarossa was still suspicious of the leader of the Guelphs, and when he resolved to go on crusade he ordered that Henry must either follow him to the Holy Land or return to exile in England for a further three years.
Henry chose England, but because the imperial promise to preserve his territories was broken, he returned to fight for his hereditary claim in 1189.
Reconciliation eventually followed in the typical feudal manner — through an arranged marriage.
Henry's eldest son married Agnes, Barbarossa's niece and the Guelph and Ghibelline feud was thus brought to a close.
Henry the Lion died in 1195, and was buried in Brunswick where his tomb still remains.
Oaths and Canonisation
One effect of the increasing difficulties with both papal and civil opposition was that Frederick and Rainald tried to draw the English King Henry II into imperial politics.
They sent ambassadors to England to encourage marriage arrangements between two of Henry's daughters and Henry the Lion and one of Barbarossa's sons.
By Whitsun of 1165, Rainald had devised the Wuerzburg Oath.
This important oath not only bound Barbarossa never to recognise Alexander as pope, but also bound imperial successors as well as the bishops and princes.
Within six weeks all abbots, prelates and vassals were to take the oath.
Refusal meant forfeiture of property, and exile.
Freemen who failed to swear were to be mutilated and exiled.
On 29th December 1165, Charlemagne, the founder of the Holy Roman Empire, was canonised at Aachen.
There had long been resistance to making him a saint due to his open contempt for Christian domestic morality (he had lived with concubines after the death of his last wife).
But sufficient purgatorial time was deemed to have passed, and as far as Barbarossa was concerned, it was politically essential to state the unity of the empire and church by accepting Charlemagne into the body of saints at this time.
Revolt in Lombardy
In 1166 Barbarossa assembled his forces to return to Italy, where the rival Pope Alexander had fomented further rebellion.
Frederick was determined to capture his papal enemy.
By the spring of 1167, northern Italy was divided between supporters of the empire — the Ghibellines — and defenders of civic independence — the Guelphs.
Frederick put the rebellious cities under imperial ban, and intended to   finally suppress the opposition of Milan, Piacenza, Cremona, Mantua, Brescia, Parma, Bergamo and the March of Verona.
The result was the formation of the Lombard League, made up of sixteen cities united against the empire.
Their aim was to fight for full independence, and to restore Italy to the rights that had been established under Henry V, Lothar III and Barbarossa's immediate predecessor Conrad III.
Between 1168 and 1174, Barbarossa spent what is often termed the middle period of his reign in Germany.
He considered some serious reversals of his policies, and declared his son Henry VI King of Germany and King of the Romans.
Meanwhile, he attempted to settle the continuing conflict between Henry the Lion and his numerous opponents, which so weakened German unity.
By 1170 further negotiations with Pope Alexander, still in opposition to Frederick, had broken down.
It was rumoured that Frederick had attempted to encourage Alexander to crown or at least support the coronation of his son Henry.
In return, Henry (but not his father) would agree to recognise Alexander as rightful pope.
When Frederick learned of the breakdown of negotiations, while at his court at Fulda in June of 1170, he solemnly repeated his oath never to recognise Alexander.
By 1174 Frederick had led yet another expedition into Italy.
However, his princes were not enthusiastic about the project this time and his army was weak, so he was forced to hire roaming mercenaries.
These brabanzonen , as they were known, were a growing social and political problem at this time and Alexander had even issued a decree forbidding their use.
Frederick planned to attack Lombardy from the east and west simultaneously, perhaps remembering the renowned pincer campaigns for which Charlemagne had been famous.
Neither side, however, was particularly willing to enter into serious combat.
By Easter of 1175 the Peace of Montebello was partly drawn up, although negotiations collapsed and the war recommenced.
Third Plan — and Death
On 29th May 1176 Frederick was defeated at the battle of Lagnano because Henry the Lion, continually striving to increase his own power, had deserted the imperial cause at the last minute.
But by 1177 Barbarossa had established the Peace of Venice, which brought agreement between Pope and Emperor.
Alexander was escorted to Rome by Christian of Mainz, and Frederick's imperial power was recognised by the various factions.
But conflict with Henry the Lion soon became aggravated; Frederick acquired new territory in Saxony, Thuringia and Lusatia.
Henry's failure  to attend and comply with imperial councils finally led to a declaration of forfeiture of his fiefs, and the title of Duke of Saxony was conferred upon Bernard of Anhalt, the younger of son of Albrecht the Bear.
German armour, typical of that worn by the Hohenstaufen knights, on a warrior of about 1100.
Hohenstaufen castles had strong, cylindrical keeps, as at Muenzenberg in Hessen.
In 1181 Pope Alexander died and was succeeded by Lucius 11I, who seemed willing to make compromises with Barbarossa.
By November of that year Henry the Lion had been defeated and banished from Germany for three years.
This made it possible for Germany to develop economically and socially, and enabled Barbarossa to consolidate and extend his imperial and personal power throughout the German kingdom.
Many new castles were built during this period, particularly in the north.
By May of 1184 Barbarossa was taking further steps against southern Italy, consolidating his hold by negotiation with the new pope, Lucius III.
Then Henry VI, Barbarossa's son, and Constance of Sicily were formally engaged, an important dynastic move.
Just as Frederick was gaining increasing power in Italy, and it seemed that the Holy See would become isolated from general support, Lucius died in November of 1185 and the new Pope Urban III, was one of Barbarossa's fiercest opponents.
When the marriage of Henry and Constance was solemnised on 27th January 1186, the ceremony was carried out by the Patriarch of Aquileia, who also crowned Henry as  King of Italy.
This was a direct challenge to Urban, who had not been consulted or even properly informed.
A further period of imperial and papal conflict seemed likely.
But by 1187 Urban had died at Ferrara, and within two months, his successor Gregory VIII also died, at Pisa, while on his way to a meeting with Barbarossa.
The next pope, Clement III, soon issued a solemn appeal for a crusade.
Furthermore, he made real attempts to come to terms with the Emperor, and it seemed likely that the papal imperial conflict would now be resolved.
By March of 1188, Frederick seemed finally to have defeated his opponents on the major domestic and imperial fronts.
In the summer he made his last will, and assembled a vast army to take Jerusalem from the great Saracen leader Saladin.
Jerusalem and Death
In May of 1189 an army of 20,000 men was assembled at Ratisbon.
It was the largest force that Barbarossa had ever led, and was made up of experienced warriors, loyal princes and vassals, the epitome of the feudal army under its divinely appointed emperor.
On 11th May, the many battalions, each comprising 500 men, left Ratisbon in great pomp and splendour.
Frederick first led the army successfully into Syria, and took the city of Iconium.
He then moved on into Armenia, but on 10th June 1190, while  crossing the River Salef, his horse shied suddenly and Barbarossa fell and disappeared beneath the swiftly flowing waters.
His lifeless body was eventually taken from the river.
Relief portrait of Barbarossa, mounted, whilst crusading to rescue Jerusalem from the Saracens.
During six Italian campaigns, Barbarossa mercilessly razed several cities, including powerful Milan whose population was deliberately dispersed.
German foot soldiers acted as engineers, demolishing walls and buildings.
Thus, while at the peak of his long and difficult reign, and while engaged upon an ideal cause that represented all that he stood for in terms of imperial and religious aims, Frederick Barbarossa probably died from what we would now recognise as a massive heart failure.
Despite his arrogance and cruelty towards opponents, he had been a remarkably enlightened and often liberal and generous ruler.
Perhaps it is not surprising that he became the subject of legend, his noble image inspiring the collective imagination to attach magical tales to his historical person.
Aftermath
The drowning of Barbarossa was a terrible blow to his immediate followers, and to Germany as a whole.
A small party of his vassals took his body to nearby Antioch, where he was buried in the cathedral.
It may be difficult for the modern reader to grasp the emotional effect of his passing upon his people.
Such a sudden death, while engaged upon a religious war, and without the essential last sacrament, seemed almost to be an impossibility, an event which flew in the face of all religion, order and concepts of essential rightness.
What of his soul?
Would he go to heaven, as he had been engaged upon a holy war, or would his sins, unforgiven, weigh against him?
These questions were utterly demoralising to the vassals of the late Emperor, and were to cause debate and confusion for many years to come.
Barbarossa's death by drowning as described around 1250 in the Gotha manuscript of the Saxon Chronicle.
Barbarossa died by drowning or from a heart attack, falling from his horse while crossing the River Salef near Antioch.
His sudden death, on the Third Crusade, devastated imperial morale, both political and religious.
Consequently, after Frederick's burial, some of his followers were so devastated that they committed suicide.
Others, and this is most telling in the religious context, abandoned Christianity and became Muslims.
They felt that with the Emperor's death, their Christian God had deserted them, or had proven incomprehensibly capricious; or more positively they felt that Allah suddenly was shown to be more powerful and
A body of men under Duke Frederick of Swabia proceeded to Acre to lay siege as planned, but the effort was half-hearted, and the arrival in strength of English and French forces by sea removed the Germans from the forefront of the crusade.
Duke Frederick died of disease soon after.
The Succession
Before leaving for the crusade, Barbarossa had installed his son Henry as regent and upon hearing the news of his father's death, Henry succeeded to the imperial throne.
However, his reign was to be a short one, for in 1191 he contracted a serious illness, and six years later he died.
Henry VI was not of the same calibre as his father.
He blindly pursued established policies and fought to preserve his heritage of power, making  little attempt to formulate new policies, and often taking cruel measures to enforce those already in existence.
As with the reign of Charlemagne some 300 years earlier, we find that the death of a powerful and talented emperor takes the empire into the shadows also.
The remains of Barbarossa's imperial palace at Gelnhausen.
Following the proposals outlined in Barbarossa's third plan, Henry VI attempted to make the monarchy entirely hereditary, doing away with the elective powers of the princes.
Despite offering similar hereditary rights to the nobles themselves, Henry was not successful in implementing this plan, but he died before any firm rejection of his proposals was made by the German princes.
His only son was an infant, and his brother Phillip had to face a claim to the crown by Otto, son of Henry the Lion.
Thus, Frederick II, grandson of Frederick Barbarossa, ruled in Sicily and fought to extend his power into northern Italy, but never ruled in Germany in the manner of his illustrious forebear.
The final blow to Barbarossa's original plan to restore the Holy Roman Empire, extend it, and give the emperor equal or superior rights to the pope, came when Innocent III became pope.
After the death of Henry VI, Innocent took advantage of the continuing civil war in Germany to undo any of the advances that Frederick Barbarossa had gained over the papal power.
Although legend persisted regarding Barbarossa, by the beginning of the thirteenth century, within a decade of his death, his historical achievements had virtually vanished.
The Sleeping Emperor
Some time after the death of Barbarossa, various legends became associated with his name.
There is some evidence that these were originally connected to his grandson Frederick II, and that by the  mysterious process of collective imagination and tradition, they became drawn to the more powerful figure of Barbarossa.
Legendary in concept, this depiction of Barbarossa at Gelnhausen portrays him in the company of mythical beasts.
What is certain is that he carried the legend of a king or emperor waiting to be reborn for several centuries, just as the British King Arthur has done.
We may consider this legend on three levels: nationalistic, poetic or dreamlike, and mythical.
The first level is the most obvious: the sleeping Barbarossa and his knights represent that upsurge of Germanic nationalism and imperialism which occurs in every century.
In this sense he is symbolic of the nationalistic cause, either to restore Germany to her former glories, or to justify and inspire territorial ambitions.
Within folklore it is always the first theme, that of restoration, which occurs.
The more political and propagandist elements are absent from tradition.
The second level, that of poetic or dream symbolism, is inherent in all folk-tales, traditions and motifs of regeneration.
Here Barbarossa represents the redress of wrongs, the cure of ills, the great king who will return to bring a new golden age.
This leads in turn to the third and deepest level of the motif, the mythical aspect.
In this last context we find, curiously, the most ancient and primal root of the entire theme of the sleeping king.
He is a representation or manifestation of the Titan Cronos, giant ruler of a distant Golden Age and paradisal land, said to be sleeping in the Otherworld, awaiting a final time of awakening.
Quite why this theme should be attached to Barbarossa in particular is not immediately clear; it would be equally valid, and perhaps more apt, if it were told of Charlemagne.
Perhaps it was attached to the great Frankish emperor originally, for one variant of the tale names the sleeping king as ‘Charles’.
It may be that the curiosity of Frederick I having a red beard has caused him to remain in the popular imagination: red-headed men and women have many superstitions attached to them, particularly red-headed kings.
Those then are the general themes of Barbarossa as a legendary character.
The following four German folktales relating to this theme, as collected by the Grimm brothers in the nineteenth century, are typical but only a fraction of the many variants known.
The Missing Emperor
The Emperor Frederick was excommunicated by the Pope; he was not allowed to enter churches and no priest would celebrate Mass for him.
Just before Easter, when everyone was preparing to celebrate the great festival, the emperor went out hunting to be away from the festivity.
Nobody knew what was really in his heart and mind.
He put on exquisite robes that had come as a gift from distant India, and took of vial of scented water, then mounted upon his noble steed.
Only a small number of men accompanied him into the forest.
Suddenly, he held up a wondrous ring upon his finger, and vanished from sight.
The Emperor was never seen again.
Where he went, if he lost his life in the forest, if he was ripped apart by savage beasts, or if he was still alive, no one knew.
Yet old farmers say that Frederick does still live, and that he occasionally appears disguised as a pilgrim.
Furthermore, he proclaimed that he would one day rule again over the Roman Empire, that he would vex dishonest priests, and that he would not cease from battle until the Holy Land was delivered into Christian hands.
Only then would he hang the burden of his shield upon a withered branch.
Barbarossa in Mount Kyffhausen
Many legends are told of Barbarossa; it is said that he is not dead, that no true Emperor has ruled since his reign, and that he lives on until the Day of Judgement.
Until that time, he will remain hidden in Mount Kyffhausen.
When he finally emerges, he will hang his shield on a leafless tree, which will sprout green leaves, and a better age will begin.
Occasionally, he talks to people who enter the mountain, though at other times he can be encountered outside.
He usually sits upon a bench at a round stone table, resting his head in his hands, sleeping.
He nods his head and blinks his eyes with sleep.
His red beard has grown very long, right through the stone table; when it has encircled the table three times it will be the time of awakening.
It has now circled the stone table twice.
In the year 1669, a peasant was taking grain from Reblingen to Nordhausen.
Along the route he was stopped by a dwarf and led into the mountain, where he was told to empty his grain sacks and fill them with gold.
He saw Barbarossa sitting there motionless.
Also a shepherd, who was whistling a tune that the emperor liked, was led into the mountain by a dwarf.
The emperor rose as he approached and asked him ‘Are the ravens still flying around the mountain?’
The shepherd answered that they were, and the emperor cried ‘Now I am going to have to sleep for another hundred years!’
The Shepherd on Mount Kyffhausen
Many people say that near Frankenhausen in Thuringia is a mountain in which Frederick Barbarossa may be found…he has been seen there many times.
A shepherd who kept his flock upon the side of the mountain and knew the legend, began one day to play upon his bagpipes.
When he thought that he had fulfilled his duty well, he called out in a loud voice: ‘Emperor Frederick this tune is presented to you!’
The Emperor suddenly appeared and said ‘May God greet thee, little man.
May I ask in whose honour you were playing those pipes?’
‘I played for Emperor Frederick’, answered the shepherd.
‘If thou hast done so’, said the Emperor, ‘Come with me, and thou wilt be rewarded for thy playing’.
Relief carving of Barbarossa as Emperor, in the cloisters of St Zeno Convent.
‘But I dare not leave my sheep’, cried the shepherd.
‘Follow me and no harm will come to thy sheep’, the Emperor replied, and taking him by the hand led him into a cave in the side of the mountain.
They came to an iron door that immediately opened onto a marvellous hall where many servants paid honour to the shepherd.
Emperor Frederick showed him great kindness and asked what reward he wanted for playing so well upon the bagpipes.
The shepherd replied ‘None’.
‘Go’, said Barbarossa, ‘And take one of the supporting feet from my golden cask as your payment’.
The shepherd did as he was ordered, and was ready to leave, when the Emperor started showing him many wondrous weapons, armour, swords, and muskets.
He told the shepherd to tell his own people that he would use these weapons to regain the Holy Sepulchre.
Then he allowed his guest to leave.
The following day the shepherd took the golden cask foot to a goldsmith, who confirmed that it was genuine gold and bought it immediately.
Barbarossa in Kaiserslautern
Many people claim that Frederick was imprisoned by the Turks, and that   after his release he returned to Kaiserslautern and lived there for a long time.
He is said to have built his palace next to a beautiful lake, now called Emperor's Lake.
He is also said to have caught a huge carp there, and to commemorate this event he took a gold ring from his finger and wore it ever after as an earring.
It is believed that this giant carp is still within the lake, and will not be caught until Frederick reigns again.
Copper bust of Barbarossa from the Klosterkirche, Kappenburg.
The most spectacular and dramatic image of Barbarossa in his legendary role of Sleeping Emperor occurs in the Kyffhausen monument.
When people still fished in the lake two carp were caught joined together with golden chain around their necks.
This event has been carved on Metzler Gate in Kaiserslautern for as long as people can remember.
Not far from the palace a fine zoological garden was built so that the Emperor could view all kinds of wonderful animals from his window.
It has long since been turned into a pond and moat.
Frederick's bed is said to be still in the palace, hanging from iron chains.
Although this bed is neatly made in the evenings, it is found disturbed again every morning, as if someone sleeps in it each night.
There is a cliff in Kaiserslautern which holds a cave so deep and mysterious that no one has discovered its bottom.
Tradition says that Emperor Frederick, who was missing, lives there.
A man once attempted to descend into the cave on a long rope tied at the surface to a bell.
He could ring the bell when he could descend no further.
Reaching the bottom he saw the Emperor Frederick with a long beard, sitting on a golden throne.
The Emperor spoke to him and said that as long as he did not speak to anyone in that underground place, nothing would happen to him.
He should also tell his master whatever he had seen.
The adventurer looked about him, and saw a wide beautiful lawn on which many people stood around the Emperor.
Finally, he rang his bell and was pulled up unharmed to the surface, where he delivered the emperor's words to his master.
Barbarossa was crowned Emperor Frederick I by the Pope.
Despite their spiritual office, medieval popes were totally involved in secular politics, holding court in costume and pontifical regalia which expressed their great power.
Cologne Cathedral today.
This great medieval church still holds the shrine of the Three Wise Men, taken there by Barbarossa's Chancellor Rainald von Dassell.
Richard Lionheart
THE CRUSADER KING
I knew the man, my dear master and a great king, who brought the leopards into the shield of England…
Of him therefore…the hymned and reviled, the loved and loathed, spendthrift and miser, king and beggar…of King Richard Yea-and-Nay, so made, so called, I thus prepare my account.
(the Life and Death of Richard Yea-and-Nay Maurice Hewlett)
The Young Lion
The image that most people have of Richard I Coeur de Lion is of a brave, chivalrous knight and a fearless soldier.
At times he attains almost mythical stature, appearing in the ballad cycles of Robin Hood as a noble saviour contrasted to bad King John.
The reality is somewhat different.
Richard certainly was brave, and undoubtedly he was a good soldier.
But he was also boorish, sadistic and greedy, once personally overseeing the execution of 2,500 Moslem prisoners.
He preferred the furtherance of his own prestige over the needs of his kingdom — especially England, from where he was absent for almost the entire period of his kingship.
Historians are divided over Richard's abilities as a king.
To some he was wholly bad, to others merely indifferent.
Few find him more than adequate and even fewer describe him as good or even satisfactory.
He knew no English and took no interest in what he must have regarded as a far flung outpost of his Angevin Empire — except for the revenues it could bring.
Thus, the nineteenth century historian Bishop Stubbs said that Richard ‘Was a bad king…his ambition that of a mere warrior.
He would fight for anything whatever, but he would sell everything that was worth fighting for.’
Born on 8th September 1157 at Oxford, Richard's early days were totally overshadowed by his remarkable parents.
King Henry II was wily, ambitious, and possessed of one of the keenest minds in Christendom.
His mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine, was beautiful, vengeful and intellectually the equal of any man.
They are two of the most colourful and exciting figures in the whole of medieval history.
Being their son must have meant living constantly in the shadow of two brilliant luminaries.
Henry was an exacting master, possessed of so much energy that it was popularly rumoured that he could fly, so swiftly did he travel from place to place.
Eleanor became the centre of the world of troubadour song and romance, the world of knights and ladies, of adventure, love and the wanderings of brave men in search of noble deeds.
Small wonder if their son grew up with a taste for chivalrous pursuits, warlike deeds and sometimes foolhardy enterprise.
Unlike his father, Richard was no statesman.
His ability to upset people and drive wedges between himself and those who were supposed to be his allies was famous.
One such affront, to the Archduke of Austria, later cost him his freedom and caused him to suffer a long imprisonment from which he was only freed at huge expense — much of which was raised by his neglected kingdom of England.
A Family of Conflict
Richard was brought up in France at his mother's court at Poitou.
Eleanor and Henry had separated unofficially and there was no love lost between them.
Richard was parcelled out to his mother, just as their other sons, Henry, Geoffrey and John, were kept by their father.
Perhaps Richard had the best of it: at Queen Eleanor's court he encountered troubadours and intellectuals who taught him the social graces.
In addition, he was able to take part in furious knockabout tournaments (Henry had banned them in England, deeming them a threat to public order) and this early training stood Richard in good stead in later life.
Certainly, there was nothing peaceful in the relationships between either the brothers or their father.
In a chamber of the palace of Winchester, a fresco depicted an eagle being attacked by its fledglings.
This was designed by Henry II himself in token of the way in which his own offspring spent most of their lives fighting against him.
A strong man himself, Henry bred strong sons for whom even the great Angevin Empire was too small.
For years the family spent most of their time in internecine struggle.
The reasons for this constant conflict are not hard to fathom.
In 1170, Henry's eldest son was crowned by the Archbishop of York and was henceforward called ‘the Young King’ Henry.
Richard, as second son, had been promised Aquitaine by his mother and had done homage to Louis VII of France.
Geoffrey, the third son, was to marry the heiress to the Dukedom of Brittany.
Between them the three sons held title to most of Henry II's kingdom — but title only.
Henry II was barely thirty years of age and in the prime of his life.
It would be a long time before anyone inherited — and his sons knew that sooner or later Henry would take something from them to give to the youngest of them all, John.
Tomb effigies of Eleanor of Aquitaine and of Henry II (opposite) from Fontrevault Abbey
The upshot was that Richard, Geoffrey and the Young King Henry went to the court of the French King.
From there they began formulating plans to take what they saw as rightly theirs, without waiting for their father's demise.
Eleanor, disguising herself as a man, attempted to join them, but was captured and spent the rest of Henry II's reign in prison.
It was a strange situation, which must have made a lasting impression on Richard, who was more than usually close to his mother.
Perhaps because of this he contrived to fight on even after his brothers had surrendered to the Old King.
Finally, he too was forced to submit by Henry's superior forces and greater supply of money.
Rather than punish him for the attempted rebellion, Henry gave Richard the task of quelling the very Aquitainian rebels from whom he had so recently looked for support.
It is typical of Richard that he accepted the task with alacrity and succeeded with such brilliance that almost overnight he became recognized as a famous warrior.
This did not please his elder brother, the Young King, who demanded that both Richard and Geoffrey should swear formal allegiance to him.
This Henry almost persuaded them to do — until the Young King also demanded that Richard should swear his oath on a holy relic; at which Richard simply turned round and declared that Aquitaine was his anyway by right from his mother and had nothing to do with anyone else.
This so angered Henry II that he ordered his other sons to curb Richard's pride.
Then, when both sides began to raise armies, he attempted to call a halt before civil war divided the Angevin Empire in half.
In the end, by a touch of irony, the older Henry fought side by side with Richard against the other two brothers, thus reversing the roles of the earlier rebellion and causing the new French King, Philip II, to await the outcome with interest.
Then everything changed.
In June 1183, the Young King fell victim to a sudden attack of dysentery and died a few days later.
Richard was now heir to the throne of the Angevin Empire.
Henry II now hoped that things would settle down, and suggested that Richard should hand over Aquitaine to John, the youngest son.
This  Richard refused to do, and once again the family brawls began.
They might have continued unabated until Henry II's death, but two important factors altered the stakes for all the players in this complex game of dynastic skulduggery.
First, only three years after the death of the Young King, Geoffrey, heir to Brittany, died in a tournament, leaving
Richard and John as the only brothers to continue the struggle.
The second factor was the appearance on the scene of a common enemy — though not immediately recognized as such.
This was Philip II of France, whose extravagant plans for the future of his kingdom included the destruction of the Angevin Empire.
Wooing first John and then Richard, Philip succeeded in keeping them at each other 's throats, or at Henry's coat-tails, for several more years.
Then, in 1187 an event occurred which was to change not only Richard's life, but the history of Europe and much of the rest of the world for generations to come.
Epoch of Change — Twelfth Century Europe
The twelfth century was an extraordinary period in many ways.
It saw the laying to rest of the old war-torn, Dark-age Europe and the emergence of a distinct and purposeful civilization, which we now recognize as the first flowering of the Middle Ages.
With the establishment of strong dynasties, civil wars and baronial insurrections were quelled or kept under control.
European population began to expand in the more settled times.
It was the time for the dissemination and transcription of stories and songs by means of travelling storytellers and poets; many of these, like Chrétien de Troyes and certain trouvères and troubadours received royal patronage.
Stories of the great heroic kings like Arthur and Charlemagne were on everyone's tongue.
The Second Great Seal of Richard I, which shows him seated between the Moon and the Sun and bearing the symbols of his sovereignty.
Crusades against Islam
Medieval North European civilization was to some extent an insular entity, shielded from its own past and from an encroaching future.
Christianity had formalized society, bringing a standardization to culture, learning and administration.
The Christianization of the rest of Europe and Russia was steadily progressing, though the fragmentation of the Christian church into Catholic West and Orthodox East was of recent origin: one clause of the creed — that the Holy Spirit proceeded from the Father ‘and from the Son’(filioque )— had caused the Pope of Rome and the Patriarch of Byzantium to bombard each other with bulls and writs of excommunication.
The West upheld the filioque clause; the East did not.
And so the mutual help and support which should have  typified Christian brothers became a stick which the Western church used in the coming crusade to beat Orthodox and infidel alike.
The idea of holy war (jihad ) was native to Islam, a method of Moslem expansionism, but it was in Spain that Christianity first borrowed this notion.
Roland's stand at Roncevalles against the Moslem army and El Cid's long campaign against the Moorish occupation of Spain vaunted the virtuous defence of Christendom.
The feats of both heroes were the stuff of epic song.
And so, when Byzantian emperor Alexius I appealed to Pope Urban II for help against the Seljuk Turks in Asia Minor, Urban saw the chance to vindicate the Western Church and show himself magnanimous to his Orthodox brothers.
He sent the call through Europe to mobilize all Christian kings to liberate Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulchre.
Jerusalem had been in Arab hands since the seventh century and the Holy Sepulchre was empty, but such was the emotional fervour stirred up by Urban's preachers that the First Crusade was launched and a new kind of ‘holy war’ was under way.
The old dictum ‘might is right’ which had typified the early years of the second millennium, was transformed to ‘might for right’.
Instead of fighting each other and laying waste Europe, crusading-spirited warriors now had licence to fight Moslems and plunder the infidels' land.
The times were such that Christianity, whose founder taught brotherly love and  forbearance , was quite incapable of applying these precepts within its own jurisdiction.
The lesser evil was to syphon off the unschooled violence which was wrecking Europe and to apply it usefully elsewhere.
It was in this early training ground that Britain discovered its propensity for colonization and love of Empire.
Despite their natural animosity, Christians and Moslems learned much from each other.
Among the most famous of these cultural exchanges was chess, which was introduced into Spain during the tenth century.
This reproduction from a thirteenth century chess manual shows a Christian and a Moslem playing a game.
Slaying Orthodox Christians, Jews and Moslems with great impartiality on their way, it took the crusaders two years to reach Jerusalem.
There, many promptly claimed lands and titles and chose to remain.
These men appreciated the riches of Islamic culture and technical achievement — and, doubtless, enjoyed the heady freedom of land without feudal obligations entailed to some ruthless overlord.
It was these men who formed their own alliances and accommodations with Moslem rulers in exchange for peace.
In contrast, the military orders like the Knights Templar undertook serious duties in protecting poor pilgrims from marauding bands of Moslems, as well as acting as an independent body of warrior-monks.
The pattern of Europe was squarely placed upon the city of Jerusalem when, in 1100, Baldwin of Boulogne became the first King of Jerusalem.
This was a political expediency which, in the later Middle Ages, was to become an empty if honourable title borne by otherwise undistinguished European rulers.
The Second Crusade was a less spectacular affair, failing because of many factors: the North German princes decided to direct their crusade against the pagan, Slavonic-speaking Wends; the French forces nearly attacked Constantinople as a result of severe relations between East and West; the native crusader barons were more determined to sustain their alliances with Moslem rulers in the Middle East than to help the next wave of crusaders (who might themselves claim lands).
Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, as depicted in his tomb effigy.
Angevin Squabbles
While the Second Crusade was dragging on, Richard's father Henry II was consolidating his dynastic empire and England was in a state of civil war — which explains why no English king had yet appeared personally in the crusades.
Henry I of England, William the Conqueror's son, had left only one heir, Matilda, whom he had married to Henry V of Germany, the Holy Roman Emperor.
At his death, Matilda's claim was overlooked in favour of Henry I's nephew, Stephen.
There had ensued a formidable civil war, with the barons backing one side and then the other, while the Angevins undermined Stephen's kingship with carefully laid plans of their own.
Matilda's German husband had died in 1126.
Henry I, her father, had ordered her back home to be used as a dynastic pawn.
He rapidly re-established his alliance with the Angevin heir, Geoffrey, Duke of Anjou and Maine, by marrying him to his daughter.
Matilda was still only 25 and Geoffrey a mere 14, but it was the wisest thing Henry I did in order to secure his dynastic survival (after the disastrous loss of his heir when the White Ship sank with loss of all hands, leaving him only a single female heir).
Geoffrey supported his wife's cause with vigour, but with two sets of lands to administer, Geoffrey attended to the French territories while  Matilda went to uphold her claims to the queenship of England.
The early life of their son, Henry II, was marked by the wrangle between Stephen and Matilda for the sovereignty of England.
His succession to the English crown in 1154 at the age of 21 was hailed with relief by those worn down by insurrection and counter-bargaining.
Anarchy was over and there now began the reign of one of the strongest kings ever to rule England, one whose territories and titles gave him authority over a great part of north-western Europe.
He was count of Anjou in Maine after the death of his father; he was Duke of Normandy by right of his mother and Duke of Aquitaine by right of his wife, Eleanor, the divorced wife of King Louis VII of France.
The only part of France which the French kings could claim as independent territory was restricted to north-eastern France and what is now Belgium.
Such was the extent of the Angevin Empire.
After decades of civil strife, Henry II was able to strengthen England and leave a vast domain to his sons — as previously described.
The extent of the territory to be administered and the fact that Henry and Eleanor had four strong sons to inherit these lands was to prove a problem.
For though Henry I had left England in a very confused state because he had only a daughter to inherit his title, Henry II's problem was quite the reverse.
Armour and weapons from the First Crusade were closer in style to those of the Norman Conquest.
A comparison with later styles shows the way in which armour developed in the years separating the first and third ventures into the Holy Land.
With England once more stabilized, it could now afford to look beyond its own divisions and take a role in the affairs of Europe.
Henry's  life-long role had been the Kingship of England, it was for his sons to look abroad for glory in battle.
Crusader King
Ever since the end of the First Crusade in 1100 and the unsuccessful conclusion of the Second in 1184, the tiny Christian Kingdom of Jerusalem — Outremer or the Land Beyond the Sea — had maintained a slender toehold on the eastern seaboard of the Holy Land.
Surrounded on every side by the followers of Mohammed — who also laid claim to Jerusalem and its lands — it was only a matter of time before war broke out in earnest.
Then news reached Europe in 1187 of a great battle fought at Hattin, close to the Sea of Galilee.
Here the Christian army, lead by Guy of Lusignan, the King of Jerusalem, had been utterly overwhelmed by a
Moslem army lead by Al-Malik al-Nasir Salah ed-Din Yusuf, better known as Saladin.
Guy was himself captured, and every surviving member of the two great military orders of the Templars and Hospitallers were executed.
Jerusalem, the very heart of Christendom, had been captured and it could only be a matter of time before the remaining Christian forces, still holding on at Tyre, Tripoli and Antioch, were overcome or expelled.
A cry for help went out to Kings and Princes of the West, and Richard was one of the first to respond, receiving in November 1187 the piece of material cut into the shape of a cross which was the badge of all crusaders.
He did so without waiting for his father's permission.
It was not until the end of the same year that Henry and Philip of France followed suit.
Neither really wanted to take the Cross, being more concerned with their own affairs and plots against each other.
However, public opinion and a gathering tide of religious fervour forced them to join their brother monarchs in swearing to raise armies to recapture the Holy City.
The rewards offered to those who did so were not inconsiderable.
There were plenary indulgences, which meant the immediate forgiveness of all past sins and the promise of a place in heaven if they fell in battle.
Also, on a more mundane level, there was the postponement of any financial debts then owing until such time as they returned from the crusade.
This lead to numerous less-than-chivalrous characters joining the Christian armies for their own reasons.
Yet there was also a genuine upsurge of religious feeling, of anger and hatred towards the infidels who had dared seize back the ‘holy earth’ so dearly bought with the blood of the First Crusade.
Mail hauberk of the kind worn by the crusaders in Richard's time.
Nonetheless, that inspired teacher Bernard of Clairvaux, who later on founded the Cistercian Order, knew well the innermost hearts of the army when he preached a sermon containing what must surely be the earliest ever advertising campaign.
O mighty soldier, O man of war, you now have a cause for which you can fight without endangering your soul…
Or are you a shrewd business man, a man quick to see the profits of this world?
If you are, I can offer you a splendid bargain.
Don't miss this opportunity.
Take the sign of the Cross…
It doesn't cost much to buy and if you wear it with humility you will find it is worth the Kingdom of Heaven!
Stirred by thoughts of heroic deeds against the cruel and monstrous Saracens, Richard chafed, waiting for his father and Philip of France to settle their differences.
Meetings between the two monarchs were arranged, but rather than bringing peace to the two countries, fresh hostilities broke out.
Richard, alarmed that his father would appoint his younger brother as heir, tried to force Henry's hand by allying himself with Philip.
In 1189 they invaded Maine and Henry, his tireless energy at last exhausted, fell ill.
He withdrew to his favourite castle at Chinon and there, on 6th July he died, having learned at the last that his favourite son John had joined the rebels against him.
Richard was now King by right of birth and seniority.
He visited his father's body where it lay in the abbey church of Fontrevault.
Showing no emotion, he remained only a few minutes before turning away.
It is said that as he left, blood flowed from the nostrils of the dead king, a fact which some took as a sign since the body of a murdered man will bleed in the presence of his murderer; but Henry's death was the outcome of a life lived at full tilt.
Richard's only part was to hasten his father more quickly towards his end.
Richard I was crowned in England at Westminster on 3rd September 1189 and immediately set about raising money for the crusade.
He sold castles, manors, privileges, public offices, even towns.
He is said to have remarked: ‘I would sell London, if I could find anyone rich enough to buy it.’
Finally, he sailed from Dover on 11th December 1189.
Before he departed, he did his best to curb Prince John's ambition by giving him several huge tracts of English land in Derbyshire, Somerset, Dorset, Devon and Cornwall.
At the same time, John was made Earl of Gloucester, and awarded the lands of Mortain in Normandy — to which he was instantly banished for a term of three years, Richard's clearest vote of no confidence in his brother.
The plan was for Richard and Philip to meet at Vézelay on 1st April 1190 and then to leave together for the Holy Land.
Then news came that Philip's wife, Queen Isabel, had died suddenly.
A further delay ensued and it was not until July that the two great armies finally set forth on the third anniversary of the Battle of Hattin.
When Richard finally took up the scrip and staff of a pilgrim, the latter broke under him.
Undeterred by  this ill omen, he set forth, intending to win not only fame and fortune but lands as well, which he had agreed to share equally with Philip.
Their army has been estimated at between 6000 and 8000 men — a huge number for the time.
It would be some four years before Richard saw England again.
In the intervening time, he would become a changed man, as would many who set out with such high hopes to win back the holy earth of Outremer.
So-called ‘banded mail’ from which crusader armour was made.
It could withstand all but point-blank arrows.
The helm of Richard Coeur de Lion.
The Third Age
The journey from Marseilles to the Holy Land should have taken fifteen days.
It took Richard ten months; having set out filled with enthusiasm and burning ambition, the whole of the journey was fraught with disasters and setbacks.
At Lyons, the bridge over the Rhone collapsed from the weight of the men trying to cross — though fortunately only two were drowned.
Richard had to organize a bridge of boats before he could cross.
When he finally reached Marseilles, he expected to find the fleet of over a hundred ships which he had commissioned in advance.
Instead, he found that they were still in Portugal, where their captains had become involved in the war against the Moors.
Furious, Richard hired thirty ships from the Marseilles merchants and set sail for Genoa, where Philip had arrived before him and promptly fallen ill.
When the two kings met they had the first of many quarrels.
Philip asked for the loan of five ships; Richard offered three.
Philip refused and the stubborn men parted with harsh words.
Richard now pressed on to Salerno, where he wanted to discuss a recurrent ague with the city's famous doctors.
There he learned that the original fleet was now in Sicily and he hastened on to Messina to join them.
He found Philip there before him and about to disembark.
It seemed the two kings were trying to race each other to the Holy Land; certainly they wanted as little of each other 's company as possible.
Philip sailed but was forced to turn back almost at once by the weather.
Once again, the two kings were stranded together at a time when the kingdom of Sicily was at a particularly explosive juncture in its long and turbulent history.
Embarkation for the crusade, from a fourteenth century miniature.
After the death of Sicily's most recent king, William II, a dispute arose over the succession, which should have gone to William's aunt; she was related to the son of the German Emperor, Frederick Barbarossa.
This so alarmed the Sicilians, who wanted nothing to do with a German prince, that they gave the throne to William's illegitimate cousin, Tancred of Lecca, an ambitious man famed for his ugliness of both temper and physique.
The problem which arose when Richard's army arrived was caused by Tancred's withholding of a dowry promised to Richard's sister Joan — as well as the small matter of a legacy left by William II to Henry, who had been his father-in-law.
Henry had died only a few weeks before William and this, so far as Tancred was concerned, meant that the arrangement was void.
Of course, Richard disagreed and demanded payment in gold and ships for his army.
For a time, things hung in the balance, until Richard finally lost patience and took the city of Messina.
This act was in opposition to Philip, who when the city had fallen, demanded that his own flag be raised over it, thus adding his own stake to any claim made upon Tancred.
Reluctantly, the Sicilian monarch paid up 20,000 ounces of gold for the unpaid dowry, and a further 20,000 ounces when Richard arranged a marriage between one of Tancred's daughters and his nephew and heir, Arthur of Brittany.
In return, Richard promised military aid, if it should be needed, against the new German emperor.
(Frederick Barbarossa had been drowned while his own crusading venture had barely started.)
By this time it was towards the end of October 1190 and too late to make the sea crossing to the Holy Land.
Richard and Philip decided to  winter in Sicily, and there celebrated Christmas in style, while the Christian forces across the sea suffered terrible privations from disease and starvation.
Also, while he was in Sicily, Richard heard that the current abbot of the monastery of Calabria, Joachim of Fiore, had announced a unique system of prophetic insight based upon Biblical references.
According to this divination, there were three ages of mankind, the third of which — the Age of the Spirit — was about to dawn.
This would be signified by the defeat of Saladin, whom Joachim saw as the current Antichrist.
Richard at once demanded to know when this would happen and was told 1194 (four years hence).
‘Then,’ said Richard, ‘I have gone on crusade too soon.’
Joachim reassured him that he was needed and would have God on his side.
Richard had to be satisfied with this response, but he was clearly convinced thereafter that he was destined to overcome Saladin.
Helmets of the kind worn by the men who marched to the Holy Land with Richard.
Mediterranean Marriage
February of 1191 came and still Richard delayed.
A fresh quarrel broke out between him and the King of France.
Richard had been engaged to Philip's sister Alys since 1169.
Suddenly, Eleanor of Aquitaine, seventy years old but as active as ever, arrived in Messina with a new bride for her son.
Berengaria was the daughter of the King of Navarre and a good match for Richard — but Philip, needless to say, was furious.
The argument raged for days, then Richard suddenly declared that he would not marry Alys because she had been his father's mistress and had borne him a son.
This may or may not have been true, though knowing Henry II, it may well have been.
Nevertheless, Richard declared that he had witnesses to prove it and Philip made a tactful withdrawal, secretly plotting with Tancred.
Richard, however, had already made overtures of friendship to the Sicilian king and cemented this by giving him a rich and generous gift — Excalibur, the magical sword of King Arthur.
(Quite how he had come by this weapon, since it was cast into the lake at the conclusion of that great king's reign, is not recorded!)
By then, it was the season of Lent.
Since he could not get married (marriages were never solemnized during Lent) Richard decided to delay no longer, Philip having sailed already.
Also, Richard thought to have the marriage ceremony performed in the Holy Land.
Thus, on 10th April 1191, he finally sailed from Sicily.
His fleet is said to have numbered more than 200 vessels and his army had grown even larger since leaving France.
But he was still fated not to complete his voyage without problems.
A storm blew up before they were three days out from Sicily, and several ships were either wrecked or blown off course.
Among the latter was the ship carrying Berengaria and Richard's sister Joan.
Reaching the island of Rhodes, Richard decided to wait there while he sent fast ships in pursuit of the missing vessel.
He soon learned that it had come ashore on the island of Cyprus, where the ruler, Isaac Ducas Comnenus, had already seized several survivors from other wrecks and now virtually held Richard's bride and his sister to ransom.
At once, Richard set forth for Cyprus and after unsuccessful negotiations with Isaac, laid siege to Limassol.
He captured this easily and chased Isaac inland, having ensured the safety of Berengaria and Joan.
At this juncture he received a visit from the leaders of the Christian forces in the Holy Land, who came to ask for his support against Philip of France.
That wily monarch had reached Acre in April and at once began plotting to make himself King of Outremer, pushing the incumbent Guy of Lusignan off the throne.
Richard at once agreed to help in return for assistance in his immediate design, the conquest of Cyprus.
He received the help he needed and in the next three months showed his superb generalship by totally subduing the island.
He captured Isaac's wife and daughter, and having promised not to put the former ruler in irons, had silver chains made for him.
Richard now married Berengaria in a wedding long remembered for its splendour.
He seems to have been content with his wife, though he saw little enough of her in the years which followed.
Kolossi Castle near Limassol, Cyprus.
Richard landed here in 1191 in pursuit of his bride Berengaria.
He conquered Cyprus in three months and established there a base of operations for the Christian forces in the East.
The Christian base on Cyprus was of immense strategic importance for the crusaders, who now had both a jumping-off point for their armies and a supply base which was virtually impregnable.
On 5th June, Richard finally set sail on the final leg of his long journey, reaching Tyre next day.
Here the garrison, acting on advice from Philip, refused to admit him.
Enraged, Richard sailed on and landed at Acre, joining the besieging army on 8th June.
For Richard, the Third Age foretold by Joachim of Fiore had now begun.
Further examples of crusader helmets.
Weapons and Warfare
The period between the end of the twelfth century and the middle of the thirteenth saw several crucial innovations in weaponry and armour which helped make the medieval knight what he was always intended to be: a superb fighting machine.
Within a space of some twenty years, chain mail virtually replaced a variety of earlier forms of armour.
Additionally, the development of the huge ‘pot’ helm, which enclosed all of the head rather than just the skull, made its wearer virtually invulnerable against anything less than a blow delivered with the full weight of a sword or axe.
We take chain mail very much for granted, seeing it depicted in paintings of the time, or in recent cinematic extravaganzas.
Yet it was by no means easy to manufacture.
We tend to forget the immense labour involved in forging the literally thousands of wire rings, which had then to be beaten flat, holes drilled into each end, and rivets added.
For additional strength, mail coats were constructed from patches of four links to one.
They were then further riveted, welded, or soldered and various parts strengthened even further by doubling or even trebling the rings.
Providing it was kept free from rust, a good coat of mail, made by a master armourer, would last its owner a lifetime.
It was kept clean by the simple method of scrubbing it with fine sand — a commodity in no short supply during Richard's desert campaigns!
The helm evolved gradually from the conical Norman helmet, ear flaps being added.
These flaps gradually grew larger until they met the nasal and became a single sheet of metal, with slits to allow vision and holes for breathing.
These massive objects sometimes weighed several pounds, and with the addition of padding must have been unbearably hot.
If we imagine the knight of Richard's time riding into battle with a padded gambeson (quilted body-armour), chain mail shirt and hose, topped by the huge helm, and swinging a heavy longsword — all in the blistering heat of the desert and against a much lighter-clad adversary — we may wonder that the crusaders managed to win any battles.
But these were superb fighting men, forged by the iron wills and driving energy of their leaders until they could master any terrain or circumstance.
Origins of Heraldry
With the development of the all-enclosing helm came a further necessity — that of recognition.
It is generally accepted that during the period of the First Crusade knights began to wear distinguishing marks of one kind or another.
Such marks were either on their shields, or in the form of an effigy attached to the top of the helm.
Thus Richard himself is depicted on his Great Seal with a lion passant on the side of his helm, topped by a fan-shaped ornament.
A Spanish poet of the eleventh century describes how:
Some of the Knights placed upon their armour
signs that were different from one another 
in order to be known thereby, while others
placed them upon their heads, or on their horses.
(Lays de Partida )
These distinguishing devices developed in time into the system we now know as heraldry.
Knight in crusader style of mailed hauberk and surcoat with helmet, shield and sword: from the effigy on the tomb of Lord Robert of Tattershall at Kirkstead in Lancashire.
An axe-head from the period of the second Crusade.
Arms and Weaponry
The sword and mace were still favourite weapons for hand-to-hand fighting, though the famous charge of the Frankish knights with levelled lances was still an awesome and terrible thing to the lightly-armed Saracens.
Swords were about thirty inches in length, the blade two-edged and tapering towards a diamond-shaped point.
The quillons were short at this time, curving slightly towards the blade, while the grip was short without a swell, the pommel being usually a simple knob or wheel-shape.
Richard is said to have favoured the axe as a hand-to-hand weapon, and a contemporary poem records that he had one made specially before departing for the Holy Land:
Then King Richard I understond,
Ere he went out of Engilond,
Let make an axe for the nones,
Therewith to cleve the Saracens' bones.
The head in sooth was wrought full weele,
Thereon was twenty pounds of steele,
And when he came to Cyprus londe,
This iron axe he took in honde.
Against this armoured might the Saracens had little or no defence save superior numbers and the horrors of heat and sickness.
Their armour, though skilfully made and often beautiful, was far less durable than that of the crusaders.
They had always relied on speed and skill in horsemanship, which enabled them to dash in upon their adversaries, fire off a salvo from their short but deadly bows, and then retreat before any reprisal.
But Saracen arrows did not have the power of penetration necessary to pierce the heavy mail hauberks of the Christian knights, and whenever their numbers were inferior they were frequently overwhelmed by the sheer weight and ferocity of their opponents.
Cavalry Tactics
The great hero Rodrigo del Bivar — El Cid — had been the first person to use the weight of heavily armed cavalry against the more lightly clad Moors.
Richard and the Crusaders adopted this method of battle, countering the Saracens' horsemanship and displaying great military skill against the Turkish cavalry of Saladin.
In a sense, Richard consolidated the supremacy of the Christian cavalry which El Cid had established over Islam in Spain and he proved this to great effect in the running battles which followed the siege of Acre.
Two knights in quilted armour of the type called gambeson.
Though beginning to go out of fashion in Richard's time, many of his soldiers would still have worn it.
Richard leads a relief force to the aid of the beleaguered city of Acre.
He is the first to leap ashore, to the delight and relief of the garrison commander.