

Living and Learning
David Lewis Gedge did not spend his childhood in a cruel orphanage, run by rotund gentlemen with a fondness for whipping pale young boys.
Neither was he born in a fabled rock 'n' roll city like New York, London or Berlin.
Gedge's background is noteworthy chiefly for its delightful ordinariness.
He refers to his upbringing as: ‘Average, working class.’
By ‘working class’ he means the variety that keeps a tidy front garden and teaches its children impeccable manners, not the type with no curtains and eight, moulting dogs.
He was born in Bramley, near Leeds, to Brian and Marjorie Gedge on April 23, 1960.
His father, a trained butcher, currently works as a bus driver, and his mother is a clerk.
Gedge's unusual middle name was his mother's maiden name.
Courtesy of a restless mother, the family moved many times while George was young.
In the space of only a few years, they regularly flitted around Manchester.
‘I think my parents were just the sort of people who did not like staying in one place for very long.
Perhaps they were criminals keeping one step ahead of the police!’ jokes Gedge.
He is unsure whether the constant upheaval affected his development.
‘I think it was good to meet lots of different people but on the other hand, I have never really felt settled or had lifelong friends like most people,’ he says.
He feels the nomadic lifestyle contributed to a shyness which has made it difficult for him to establish close friendships ever since.
As recession-hit Britain steadied itself in the seventies, the Gedge family made a drastic move.
Encouraged by stories of sun, sea and wealth from Marjorie Gedge's brother, who was living in Cape Town, South Africa, they decided to uproot and join him.
By this time David had a brother, Philip, five years younger.
Obviously, 11-year-old Gedge had no understanding of the situation in South Africa.
‘I was too young to notice most things.
I just knew there were certain places I couldn't go because they were for blacks only,’ he says.
He settled into the new way of life and rarely thought about Manchester, a place where he could not recollect the sun ever shining.
‘My parents do not share the same repulsion of apartheid that I do.
It is more of a personal thing.
They did better off out there.’
They enjoyed a vastly improved standard of living, but Marjorie Gedge soon felt homesick.
The suitcases were  repacked and it was back to Harpurhey in North Manchester, after just one year in the sun.
The young Gedge steadfastly applied himself to school work throughout the constant shifts.
His parents believe he immersed himself in his studies as a form of compensation for not having many friends.
‘He was always in his bedroom, either reading or writing.
He really worked hard at it,’ says his mother.
Gedge matched the effort with ability.
Resplendent in National Health glasses (he now wears contact lenses), he cut the perfect figure of the swot.
His school reports testified to a faultless pupil; adjectives that constantly recurred were: ‘Conscientious, pleasant, quiet, helpful, and promising.’
In February 1973 his geography teacher warned him in his report to: ‘Be more aware of the influence of ‘friends’ who might adversely affect your future progress.’
Teachers clearly admired the qualities instilled in Gedge by his parents.
‘I have always been one for good manners, I like people to say please and thank you,’ says Marjorie Gedge.
Even she was surprised at Gedge's tenacious loyalty to her ideology when she called at a local shop with him.
The shopkeeper had not realised the boy was connected with her and immediately offered congratulations.
‘He is the most well-mannered, well-behaved boy that comes into the shop,’ said the shopkeeper.
Like many staunch, working class families, the Gedges were keen on discipline and Gedge was brought up in quite a rigid environment.
He was also taught to respect money and the process through which it was earned.
The inviolable Gedge formed character traits as a child that give a fascinating insight into his later life.
He fastidiously collated his belongings and protected them.
‘He kept everything in perfect condition.
He would never scribble in his annuals and had them all in order.
I think he has still got them to this day,’ says his father.
He is correct, Gedge still has Beano and Dandy annuals filed next to his records and many other souvenirs.
His parents were not surprised when he asked for a lock on his bedroom door before he had reached his teenage years.
He was worried that his robust younger brother would disturb both his studies and his filing system.
‘Sometimes we used to think that he was a bit too shy and quiet.
He was never any trouble but we used to think perhaps he should go out a bit more,’ say Brian Gedge.
There is ostensibly more than a passing similarity between Gedge and another famed Mancunian  bedroom termite, Morrissey.
Unlike Morrissey, however, Gedge's thirst for knowledge was mainly academic, rather than fuelled by literature or art.
He might have been shy but he was not overtly quirky, poetic, or obsessed with icons such as James Dean or Oscar Wilde.
After two years on the outskirts of Manchester city centre, the Gedges moved to Middleton, a few miles away.
Although now swallowed up in the borough of Rochdale, Middleton people forever affirm their loyalty to Manchester, a city to which they naturally belong.
It is an Accrington brick-built town with few pretensions and it no doubt contributed to saving Gedge from a terminal dose of wetness.
In later life, the town would seem to provide the backdrop to many of his lyrics, most notably ‘My Favourite Dress’.
Gedge does not feel the place held any unique fascination.
‘It was just a normal place to grow up in.
It was about the age when I started thinking about things.
I lived there the longest so I had more friends there,’ he says.
He survived the senior schools by developing a wit to match his intelligence.
One of his best friends at both Hollin and Moorclose high schools was Dave Fielding, who later played in a band with Gedge and went on to form the Chameleons.
‘Gedgey used to have glasses and was dead brainy.
He was definitely a swot,’ says Fielding.
Evidently, he was also a likeable swot.
‘He was always acting the goat, that's why I got to know him.
He was dead serious in class and was the one that passed the exams.
If it hadn't been for him, I would have had a bad time because I hated school.’
Gedge met Peter Solowka at Hollin High and found someone who challenged his own definition of a swot.
‘He was a weird kid.
I was swotty but he was just a brain.
He was a real teachers' pet, worse than me.
He was far more uncool than I was,’ says Gedge.
The pair became good friends and shared the same haughty view of their futures.
‘We both knew we would go to university and not have to get rubbish jobs like a lot of our mates,’ says Gedge.
At 14, Gedge was outstanding in several subjects, especially French, and for a while harboured dreams of travelling the world as an interpreter.
His logical mind lent itself superbly to maths and he began to excel in the subject.
He scored a grade A in his maths ‘O’ Level and naturally entered the sixth form where he flourished.
‘I got more popular in the sixth form.
All the prize guys who were brilliant at football had disappeared and I was left with the swots.’
He was a member of a quite superlative class, one that has stuck in the memory of Gedge's former maths teacher, Peter Mildenhall.
‘It was one of the best classes the school has ever had, quite an academic one.
You didn't have to make them work, they had a desire to study,’ says Mildenhall.
Mildenhall ran the school's operatic society and was pleased when Gedge and several friends offered to take part.
‘A lot of the kids stood on the fringe and would have like to join in, but their friends would have called them puffs.
When they reached the sixth form all the ones that would have called them names had left.’
Opera and its inherent dressing up has always been considered rather girlish.
It perhaps reveals Gedge's ever-growing confidence that he could see beyond the macho nonsense and enjoy himself.
Gedge made his first public stage performance at Moorclose High's performance of Gilbert and Sullivan's Iolanthe in 1977.
With Britain in the midst of a supposed punk revolution, Gedge followed this up a year later in swashbuckling style with an appearance in another G and S production,The Pirates of Penzance .
The famous gruff voice was hardly heard in his role as a chorus member.
‘He never sang solo but I'm sure David was not one of those duty bound to mime,’ says Mildenhall.
At the end of the second year in the sixth form, Gedge formed his first proper relationship with a girl.
Janet Rigby, who was in the lower sixth, was about to board the school bus for home when Gedge attracted her attention.
‘He came legging up behind and just asked me out.
It was completely out of the blue.
I think I told him I had too much homework that night but I would be free on Saturday.’
Their first date was at a pub in Middleton town centre.
Rigby was surprised when Gedge turned up beforehand at the town's Tesco stores where she had a Saturday job.
‘He came in to the shop and asked me what he should wear on the date.
He was really, really shy.
He asked me what I was going to wear and said his mam had just bought him a new duffle coat and did I like it,’ she says.
The pair had much in common.
They were both keen on school work and enjoyed reclusive pastimes like reading and writing.
‘He was shy and very much anti what was going on.
He had a small circle of friends.
He didn't go out much.
We both hadn't seen much or done much.’
He was not someone whom Rigby or her classmates had seen as a pin-up type.
‘He always wore a red knitted jumper and jeans bought from Tesco's,’ she says.
The relaxed atmosphere of the sixth form was exploited to the full by Gedge and he made his first naïve steps into a political arena, ones that ended at the school's perimeter fence.
‘I got a bit carried away but people tend to do that  until they become politically aware,’ he says.
He edited the school magazine and was a leading figure on the school's workers' council.
Like most of the pupils, Gedge had not actually done any proper work but did not see anything anomalous about such a grandiose body.
One of its main decisions was to abolish the school's head boy and girl system.
To Gedge, the council was a game he took part in during lunch hour but Solowka found him quite influential.
‘He was certainly an inspiration to me with his left-wing views.
I thought being rebellious was being a Liberal!’ says Solowka.
Gedge and Solowka became interested in Socialism and actually tried to discover more about it outside the school.
They found themselves among a throng of about 10 at a Workers' Revolutionary Party meeting at a local community centre.
The hardened regulars were very interested in two fresh-faced, possible comrades and singled them out.
The duo pretended to listen intently but were more concerned about getting home safely than true political enlightenment.
‘A bloke told us to watch it because there was a police car around the corner taking names and addresses.
We thought they were going to follow us, so we took a really weird route home,’ says Peter.
Another attempt at politicising themselves ended in similar embarrassment.
At a rally addressed by Labour's Dennis Healey, they spent most of the time trying to avoid one of their school dinner ladies, who was forever shouting to the platform: ‘You're just feathering the beds for the Tories.’
Both Gedge and Solowka view their teenage exploits with fondness.
‘It was youthful adrenalin, which we still have in a way and that is why we are probably in a group,’ says Gedge.
The Wedding Present have often been accused of lacking political commitment.
It does not inspire Gedge on a lyrical level but Solowka and himself have maintained many of their earlier convictions, although they remain fairly concealed.
Gedge has standing orders with Greenpeace and the Anti-Apartheid Movement and Solowka has the same with the African National Congress and Oxfam.
The studies went well and Gedge got the top grade in his ‘A’ Level maths exam.
He did less well in biology and physics with two D grades, but notched up enough points to secure a place at Leeds University while Solowka headed for Liverpool University.
This boy can wait
It was on Sunday October 29, 1989 that many people heard the name, The Wedding Present, for the first time.
Their first RCA single, ‘Kennedy’, went straight into the Gallup chart at number 34.
Millions of television viewers got their first glimpse of the band when their photograph was featured on the Top Of The Pops run-down four days later.
Typically, teen magazines like Smash Hits , were soon on the case and presented them as a ‘new’ band, although none went as far as dubbing them the customary, overnight success.
In chart terms the band were new, but in reality their roots can be traced back an incredible 15 years.
Gedge cannot remember a time when he did not want to be in a pop group.
It is difficult to pinpoint the source of his life's inspiration.
Apart from an uncle who played in a cabaret band, his family was non-musical.
In fact, his parents discouraged Gedge, especially when they suspected it was infringing on his studies and attempts to find a job.
As a youth, he was never an avid record collector and he had no real interest in applying himself to mastering an instrument.
Perhaps his imagination was fuelled initially by the comradeship of a group and the creativity it could galvanise.
He formed his first band at the age of 14 with three friends from Moorclose High School: Dave Fielding, Kevin Rosbottom and Chris Seddon.
Collectively they were known as Sen.
The word ‘Sen’ was a favourite with Gedge.
He had heard Yorkshire people substitute it for the word ‘self’, as in: ‘I've been there me sen!’
As the name suggests, the sole purpose of the group was to have fun, and perhaps show off to a few friends.
Rehearsals were held in Gedge's bedroom where he would play a toy electric organ and everyone would take a turn drumming on a Smash tin lid.
‘It was not a proper band.
I was just a doss.
We used to do daft songs like ‘Twist And Shout’.
If we were doing The Merchant Of Venice at school we would use it for lyrics,’ says guitarist Dave Fielding.
Gedge has a rather cynical disdain for his early involvement with music but he nevertheless recognises its lasting influence.
‘At the time I had no real plans but just knew I wanted to be in a group.
I was doing things I knew that I would be doing properly in a few years.
I suppose I am one of those people with drive, I was always the one who started the groups.’
Gedge was far from the star man in Sen, as he freely admits.
‘They kicked me out at the end.
I was pretty useless.
I think they thought, who is this bloke that keeps turning up for practices but doesn't actually do anything and has never heard of the Who!’
He struggled to match the already competent Dave Fielding, but was soon applying himself to pecuniary areas.
They came up with a visionary scheme to raise money for musical equipment.
They let it be known around school that they were collecting waste paper and asked the others to do the same so they could weigh it all in.
The plan backfired when they realised they would need mountains of paper to earn just a few pence.
‘Loads of kids were coming up to us and complaining that their dads were getting on their backs about their garages being full of paper.
It was quite funny really, garages all over Middleton overflowing with paper,’ says Dave Fielding.
Long before button badges made their punk-inspired debut, Gedge and Co had realised the earning potential of such merchandise.
The band made badges using felt tip pens on ruled notepaper.
They charged their hapless school mates a penny for the privilege of sporting a Sen product.
‘We used to find them later all over school.
We'd brush them down, rub the dirt off and sell them again,’ says Fielding.
The band played a handful of concerts, mainly to an audience of less than 20 in Gedge's parents' garage.
They issued three ‘albums’ on cassette, each of them wonderfully titled: ‘Sennies From Heaven’, ‘A Man Called Sen’and ‘Sen The Buccaneer’.
Few copies of these gems travelled further than Gedge's bedroom.
A nation of music lovers mourns…
Despite his lack of musical ability, Gedge became interested in writing songs.
He was not concerned with lyrics but was more keen to assemble chords on his acoustic guitar.
‘I have always wanted to write songs and you find yourself having to learn to play the guitar.’
he says.
He finished with Sen when he teamed up with Peter Solowka, who was also learning guitar.
While Gedge was back in his bedroom strumming with Solowka, a group called Years grew out of Sen and eventually merged with the Clichés to become the Chameleons.
The development of Gedge and Solowka to The Wedding Present was a much more intricate and lengthy affair.
Their first band was Mitosis, a name the two swots hit upon after learning it was the name of a cell division during a biology lesson.
It was 1977 and everyone under the age of 21 was allegedly pogoing like crazy to The Sex Pistols and The Clash.
Gedge, instead, had been introduced to the dubious charms of ELP, Yes and Genesis by Dave Fielding, who had in turn been influenced by his older brother.
Gedge saw such bands as an alternative to chart fodder but his own group's lack of musical finesse gave them a decidedly punky touch.
Joining Gedge and Solowka were drummer Brian Schofield (later a Chameleon) and bassist Tim Duncan.
Schofield found them a rehearsal room at Middleton Cricket Club where his father was on the committee.
By this time the Smash tins had gone, but the replacements were not a lot better.
‘Pete's brother-in-law built him a massive speaker cabinet with 12 speakers in it.
It was as big as a settee but it was dead quiet.
You could hear him hitting the strings more than anything else,’ said Gedge.
Girlfriends and mates often watched them run through their set and on the two occasions they appeared at Gedge's school and Queen Elizabeth High School, where Solowka was a pupil.
‘When we played my school a bloke managed to wangle some dry ice from work and he dropped it into a bucketful of warm water.
It just didn't look right.’
says Solowka.
Mitosis lasted two years during the period between the pair leaving the sixth form and attending university.
They recorded one demo tape at Cargo Studios in Rochdale which at the time was being patronised by a legion of new wave bands spanning Joy Division to Orchestral Manoeuvres in The Dark.
In just one session, Mitosis recorded eight songs.
The opening track was the sprightly, ‘Thatcher The Snatcher’.
Tightly played, it was typical of their material with a strong power pop edge and a striking similarity to The Jam.
They rarely strayed out of Middleton but Solowka remembers with perverse affection a gig at Liverpool University, where he was studying for his degree in environmental biology.
‘It was a Christmas Ball and every one turned up in jackets and bow ties.
It started with 200 in the hall but they began walking out.
After we'd done five songs they turned the disco on dead loud.’
By 1979, the members of  Mitosis were dotted around Middleton, Liverpool and Leeds and it was clear that the future held no promise for them.
Their farewell, to a world that had not really known of their existence, was at the Royal Park pub in Leeds.
Gedge continued to reach for his guitar while at university and drifted in and out of various lineups.
He played for a while in a group called Meterzone who appeared mainly at student parties.
The frontman was an intriguing-sounding character called Tony Dardis who wore a white suit on stage and whom Gedge refers to as ‘Mr Entertainment’.
Gedge and Solowka kept in touch throughout their university days and met in Middleton at weekends.
Gedge had still not fully applied himself to music and was quite happy to play board games with Solowka rather than the laborious task of writing songs.
Throughout his time at university, Gedge was still seeing Janet Rigby, although they were separated for a year while she finished her ‘A’ Levels in Middleton.
‘It was awful, I could not concentrate on my studies at all.
I used to go to Leeds one weekend and he would come to Manchester the next,’ she says.
The situation was not helped by Rigby's parents who originally would not allow her to stay overnight in Leeds.
Eventually they were unable to stop her.
There was further antagonism when she failed to get into Leeds Polytechnic but wanted to be with Gedge so much that she still moved to Leeds anyway.
‘I was on the dole for three months and then got a job.
Although we had separate houses we were practically living together,’ she says.
She was accepted by the polytechnic a year later.
As someone who knew Gedge in both Middleton and Leeds, she was in the perfect position to notice the personality changes brought on by university life.
‘It definitely changed him.
He got into a good crowd, people that thought like he did.
He gained lots and lots of confidence.
We both altered so much that when we went back to Middleton, Dave Fielding saw it in both of us,’ she says.
Rigby grew tired of her role as one of the official band girlfriends and told Gedge she was no longer willing to attend the concerts of his various line-ups.
He encouraged her to become more involved and she bought a drum-kit.
After just six weeks, Rigby was playing her first gig behind Gedge and Solowka in a band called The Truth, who were obviously nothing to do with the chart group of the same name.
The Truth played together almost solely during the early hours when they would return from the pub and thrash their instruments until sleep beckoned.
Little progress was made and matters came to a head when Rigby told Gedge she wanted Solowka out of the band.
She had known Solowka since infant school and thought he was often arrogant.
Placed in this awkward position, Gedge stayed loyal to his long-standing girlfriend and asked Solowka to leave.
‘David is very malleable when it comes to girlfriends,’ says Solowka.
‘I think she didn't like me because me and David used to play games and things like that and act like we always had done.
She probably felt a bit left out.’
The fired guitarist did not mope and soon found himself playing in two Leeds groups, U.V And The Free Radicals and The Chorus.
He beat Gedge by almost two years when he made his vinyl début with The Chorus, which included drummer Simon Smith who was later to join The Wedding Present, and John Parkes who roadies for the group.
The single, on AAZ Records, contained three songs, ‘These  Stones’, ‘Diamond Mine’ and ‘The Verse’.
The West Yorkshire-based fanzine,Tongue In Cheek , deemed the A-side (‘These Stones’) to be: ‘A bouncy, powerful, entertaining ditty with a high-energy chorus.’
Incidentally, on the next page it carried a demo tape review of an up-and-coming Hull band called The Housemartins whom it dubbed, ‘Fresh, crisp and spiky.’
The fresh and crispies went on to receive a great deal more acclaim than The Chorus who were hardly noticed, even within their hometown.
University life had developed many of the traits Gedge first revealed while he was in the sixth form.
He was still interested in politics, and for a while a fairly active member of the Labour party, especially during the miners' strike when he and Solowka canvassed on their behalf.
Gedge largely preferred late night debates to attending stolid committee meetings in upstairs pub rooms or pushing by-election leaflets through doors.
He became quite well known for his extreme left-wing views and often aired them on rare visits home.
‘I would say that some of the things David was saying approached Communist.
He once said he thought inheritance should be banned and I asked him if that meant I should leave all our money to his brother!’ said his father.
His often scruffy appearance also perturbed his parents.
Like thousands of students before him, Gedge merely adopted the clichéd student maxims of leftist rhetoric, irrational idealism and an Oxfam season ticket.
His musical tastes changed radically and the world's coolest two groups, The Velvet Underground and The Fall, replaced his previous very uncool progressive rock favourites.
He might have missed the first onslaught of punk, but he caught a lot of its stylish offsprings, especially Postcard Records' Orange Juice and Josef K. He was smitten with the sound of rhythm guitars meshed together to form pop melodies and was beginning to realise precisely how he wanted his own band to sound.
The Lost Pandas
His first proper group was The Lost Pandas, built around himself and his girlfriend.
Finding a permanent bassist proved difficult and at one point Gedge almost wrapped up the group completely.
‘I was getting so sick of trying to form groups and they weren't working.
I was just about to pack up when Keith came along.’
Fellow student Keith Gregory responded to an advert Gedge had pinned up on a university notice board which sought an ‘Introverted bass player, influenced by The Fall, The Chameleons, The Velvet Underground and The Sound.’
He wanted a reserved figure because previous applicants had all been loud and pushy.
Durham born Gregory had only been playing the bass guitar for a few weeks when he joined.
He had dropped out of his studies for an English degree but stayed in Leeds because he enjoyed the social scene.
He was educated at a boarding school in Darlington and his family moved many times due to his father's job in the Royal Air Force.
‘I'm not sure what my dad does.
I think he is a teacher in the Air Force.
I stayed in Leeds because I had a circle of friends there.
I was just playing bass in my bedroom before I joined The Lost Pandas,’ he says.
Gregory filled the bill ideally but his diffidence surprised even Gedge.
‘He was really quiet, a weird person to be in group I suppose.
He was dead modest.
He would kneel down and play next to the speaker because he didn't want us to hear.’
Gedge's studies came to an end and it was at this point that he realised his obsessive interest in music could not be satisfied by part-time activity while he searched for a ‘proper’ job.
He had mooted the idea of becoming a teacher but made no serious attempts to do anything about it.
During the summer breaks from university, he had worked at the sausage factory where his father was manager.
‘It was absolutely terrible,’ he says.
‘My parents made me do it.
I was really tired afterwards.
I suppose it was an experience in a way.’
At the age of 20, Gedge was willing to placate his parents by taking on such a squalid job, but just a few years later, he was more than prepared to stand up to their well-intentioned pressure.
They could not understand why their exemplary son had left university with an excellent degree and was  content to submerge himself in dole culture as he waited for his band to make it.
‘To us he was throwing away all he had worked for.
We thought he was wasting his time after all the hard work and studying he had done,’ says Brian Gedge.
Gedge remained in Leeds and visited home infrequently, no doubt to avoid the inevitable arguments.
He continually told his parents he was going to be famous but, like legions of other parents before them, they treated his claims with contempt.
‘He was right at the end,’ admits Marjorie Gedge.
‘He proved us wrong and we've apologised, but I think most parents would have reacted exactly the same way.’
He kept a close watch on friends he had left behind in Middleton, especially Dave Fielding who was enjoying a fair degree of success with The Chameleons.
The exciting outfit were constantly recording John Peel sessions and playing to ecstatic audiences, which often included Gedge.
‘They certainly inspired me.
I was wondering how everything happened in the pop world and they demystified it and showed me it could be done,’ he said.
He also drew musical exaltation from The Chameleons.
His own brawny, Mancunian accent was obviously akin to The Chameleons' Mark Burgess, and combined with the haunting guitar riffs of Gedge's early songs, it all became very uncanny.
‘I did like The Chameleons and I still do.
They made me try twice as hard.
It's funny, but people who used to say we sounded like The Chameleons were mainly from Middleton.
I was more worried early on about being compared to the Postcard groups like Josef K.’
Soon after Gedge had left University, Rigby ended their relationship.
It gave him more time to devote to music and allowed him to pour his suffocating feelings of negativity into songs.
‘I think The Lost Pandas were his first really serious band.
He was an absolute perfectionist.
He always wanted to work hard.
We'd be in the pub planning to have a couple more pints and he'd always want to go back and rehearse again,’ says Rigby.
The group recorded three demo tapes and Gedge made two abortive trips to London to try to persuade John Peel to give them a session.
They were beginning to lay down a sound that would later become synonymous with The Wedding Present, but it missed the energy of what would come later.
‘Looking back, I'm glad we did not make any records because we were rubbish.
We were dreary and would have made fools of ourselves.
The lyrics were really embarrassing,’ he says.
Gedge is wrong to understate the importance of The Lost Pandas.
The group was crucial to Gedge's musical education.
Unlike most of his earlier groups, they recorded and rehearsed regularly and had an identity, albeit one that was somewhat confused.
He has guarded fiercely against the band's tapes being made public but listening to them years on, it is difficult to understand his uneasiness and it seems a loss to fans.
Lyrically, he is very direct and his anguish is undiluted.
On ‘Send Me A Flower’ he sings of ‘dying inside’while on ‘Below’he all but drowns in self-conscious misery: ‘Somebody cried, nobody hears today, I wonder if they did before, I'm hopelessly lost inside.’
The music itself is reminiscent of The Cure and Joy Division, he sings extremely well and the songs have an unsophisticated beauty.
It would seem that much of this period is viewed by Gedge as an unsettled, painful time and in retrospect this may have affected his view of the material.
What have I said now?
All you need it love.
It's the oldest lyrical theme in the world and David Gedge adheres to it with laudable steadfastness.
He rarely veers away from the subject of relationships (‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy!’,
‘All About Eve’ and ‘Kennedy’, are some of the few examples) and even after more than 50 lyrical outings, the one-track mind persists.
‘Falling in love, falling out of love, being jealous, hating somebody.
It's about ordinary people in an ordinary world and the most special thing that can happen to anybody is to fall in love, and the worst is to fall out of love.
You can be the Prime Minister or a dustman and it's still the most important thing in the world.
It's the only thing that moves humanity forward.
What else is there to write about?
Other subjects appear frivolous in comparison,’ Gedge told NME in February 1988.
When the group began, Gedge was not particularly interest in lyric-writing, and like singing, he considered it a necessary evil.
He had no desire to use his lyrics to sloganeer or weave colourful, cinematic plots.
A man of refreshing modesty, he was fearful of appearing pretentious or august.
However, he appreciated the cathartic nature of expressing himself through the written word.
His parents remember his fondness for writing, and in the groups that preceded The Wedding Present, he was clumsily relating the world in which he lived and trying to understand it through his own lyrics.
It was not surprising that the initial source of inspiration was the breakdown of his first serious relationship, a subject to which he would later return with regularity.
He had shared his life with Janet Rigby since he was 18; from gawky, introverted schoolboy to self-assured undergraduate.
When he was jilted after five years together it had a devastating effect.
Everyone grieves for lost love, but for an acutely sensitive figure like Gedge, it was a trauma from which he will always struggle to recover fully.
‘The majority of my early songs were about my first girlfriend.
I suppose the early days were more exciting to write about, distance lends enchantment and when you're younger, things have more impact on your life,’ he told the NME in September 1988.
In interviews, and less directly in lyrics, Gedge has always championed the virtue and importance of live, in its myriad of states.
One of his more excessive claims was that the abrupt ending of a  relationship could be more damaging than bereavement.
Death was final but a severed love affair had the added conspiracy of jealousy, anger and the possibility of future revenge.
The break-up with Rigby was complicated because the couple were at the core of a group which were the direct forerunners of The Wedding Present.
The only other band member was bass player, Keith Gregory.
After Rigby ended the relationship, she began living with another musician, Michael Duane, at his flat in Leeds.
She did not see Gedge until six weeks later when he arrived at their door after a minor road accident.
‘He looked absolutely ridiculous.
he was wearing pointed black shoes.
He said it was just a phase he was going through.
He was sleeping around a lot, which was something he had not done before.
He was a different David but thankfully he soon got out of it all,’ she says.
Up until the moment he was jilted by Rigby, Gedge had lived a fairly sedate and straightforward life.
It was his first real tragedy and he took it very badly.
During the weeks directly afterwards he confided his distress in Keith Gregory and it established a strong bond between them.
Gedge's infatuation with Rigby was so powerful that it led him to agree that Duane, a guitarist, could join the group.
‘I really loved her and to be with her again in the group was quite nice, even though she had a new boyfriend.
I did resent her quite a lot for what she did but it gave way after a few months.
I was still thinking we might get back together one day.
I was confused really,’ he says.
Superficially at least, Gedge controlled his emotions, but underneath he could not really accept the peculiar situation.
‘He came around a bit to Michael but I  don't believe he ever liked him.
In all the letters I received from David he was always slagging him off,’ says Janet.
Being usurped in Rigby's life by Duane was especially painful for Gedge because the two men were almost the antipathy of each other.
Gedge's resentment of priggishness would seem to have its configuration in the outlandishly dressed Duane.
‘Michael annoyed David no end.
I suppose Michael was quite a superficial person but to me he represented excitement and it was a period I had to go through.
If David was to have a few drinks it would all come out.
I remember a couple of scenes when David would just go on and on asking me what I was doing with Michael,’ she says.
Rigby deluded herself that Gedge had a basic acceptance of the situation.
Gregory was caught in the middle of the emotional triangle and Rigby sympathised with him.
‘Keith felt very, very sorry for David and he always made me feel that I was a real bastard.
I know for a fact David confided in Keith when we split up and told him everything.
Keith was with him through all of it and I think it made them very close,’ adds Rigby.
On photographs of The Lost Pandas, Gedge wore make-up and looked uneasy and awkward.
Fans of The Wedding Present would not recognise the owner of such a vacant expression.
‘It wasn't him at the time,’ says Rigby.
‘He was really sad, and you can tell that in the pictures.
He was really miserable.
The songs he was writing were very death-oriented.
I think that was a reflection of the time as well.
He came across as a very angst-ridden man.’
Supposition is a dangerous practice, but the song ‘Everyone Thinks He Looks Daft’ could easily be about Gedge losing Rigby's love to Duane.
Gedge writes: ‘Guess who I say by your house just the other day/ That kid we used to think was mad, but now he looks okay.’
In his heart, Gedge had mapped out a life for Rigby and himself.
They had grown up together and their relationship was not one of repose or listlessness.
In her own words, they were: ‘Madly in love with each other.’
She is an unusual mixture of frankness, charm and beauty; assets which would lead Gedge to believe their relationship would transcend the ardour of youth and become increasingly secure.
There was no acknowledgement of betrayal in his orderly world and it left him floundering.
The first reaction of seeking cheap thrills in the form of elaborate dressing up (for him at least) and one night stands were perfectly normal acts of self-pity and desperation.
The acute depression lasted for a few months but the wounds healed enough for Gedge to build up a friendship with Duane, whose latent qualities he later recognised.
Duane's artistic bent has been shown off frequently in the group's Invasion of The Wedding Present fanzine.
Gedge showed an extraordinary reluctance to loosen his grip on Rigby.
He continued sending her letters in which he would religiously detail the fortunes of The Wedding Present and continually reaffirm his deep love for her.
He channelled a great deal of effort into his group, almost as an act of revenge.
‘It dragged on for a long time afterwards.
I got a lot of letters from him, some of them were quite sad.
I saw him again after the first single had been released.
I was still in love with him in a way and he was certainly in love with me.
It went on for a long time afterwards, I don't know if he's still in love with me,’ she says.
Debbie Kaye, who had a two-year relationship with Gedge, feels the split with Rigby indelibly marked Gedge.
‘They were very close friends and I think she hurt him more than anyone else ever could,’ she says.
‘She was the closest girlfriend he has ever had and I can't imagine anyone getting that near to him again.’
There is no lasting acrimony between Gedge and Rigby and when they meet up he often jokes that she provided him with enough material to launch and sustain a musical career.
In the early days of The Wedding Present, she would read his lyric book and ask him in which songs she featured.
‘David brings up situations that happened five years ago and still writes about them.
I think it is a bit pathetic in a way.
I'm surprised he has nothing to write about.
I think love and splitting up is more important to him than anything else.’
says Rigby.
During their time together, Rigby recognised the steely determination Gedge applied to the group.
The later success of The Wedding Present was no surprise because Gedge's belief in himself made it inevitable, rather than just a possibility.
Many of Gedge's songs deal with betrayal, but he says the most noted, ‘My Favourite Dress’, is not particularly autobiographical.
‘People do get strange ideas,’ he says.
‘I think the more arrogant or full of themselves they are, the more they think the songs are about them.
People actually say they can remember the bits I mention in the songs and usually it's completely not the case.
I tend not to tell people a song isn't about them because it disappoints them.
If people want to think a song is about them, it doesn't bother me.
That's why lyrics are good anyway, they can actually say something different to everyone.’
His pre-Wedding Present songs were either naïve social commentary or guileless recitals of his own life.
‘I have got better at using less pretentious imagery.
If your girlfriend leaves you, you don't really feel like you're dying inside.
Local bands write about death because it is an obvious, powerful image.
In think you can write about it a bit more meaningfully than that.’
Danny Kelly, writing in the NME, said experiencing Gedge's songs was like ‘overhearing one side of a telephone conversation or catching edited highlights of an argument.’
It is an accurate description because Gedge's lyrics are laden with questions, to which the listener never hears the answers.
It leaves precious few clues for anyone in search of lines that trace directly back to Gedge's own life.
The scrutiny is then made almost pointless by his desire to interweave fragments of other people's lives.
‘I've grown to learn that a bit of mystery is not a bad thing.
I think a song's power is reduced if it is accompanied by a monologue which tells you exactly what is going on.
When you go to see a film you don't get subtitles at the bottom explaining all the scenes.
A lot of pop music is cheapened by musicians badly trying to explain what their songs mean.’
Gedge is often regarded as candid, but he has designed a style of lyric-writing that effectively camouflages his true self.
He refuses to explain lyrics or is the listener is getting uncomfortably close, he is deflected by a reminder that the songs are as much about other people as himself.
‘I thing it is my forte to take something like a relationship, and then  examine it and mirror it in different songs, it's actually the same relationship but looked at from a different way.
You might get the baddie's view and then the goodie's.
Sometimes it is me being the bad one,’ he says.
The vagueness accommodates a high degree of self-protection, whether it be deliberate or coincidental.
There is no reason why a lyricist should elucidate but in Gedge's case the lack of chimera can make surveying his words an unrewarding exercise.
On a song like ‘What Did Your Last Servant Die Of?’ he provides neither food for thought nor reveals anything about himself.
He sometimes borders on triteness, but more often his straightforward approach allows him to speak in an authentic language which is easily understood and brilliantly evocative.
He uses words like ‘daft’; phrases and dialogue that are rarely heard in songs but immediately provide flavour.
Songs are set in everyday situations and many listeners appreciate the gritty realism, although others consider the earthiness intolerably shallow.
The songs are simplistic but still reveal an imaginative, sensitive mind at work.
On ‘Don't Be So Hard’ he appears to be empathising with a woman who is overpowered and made to feel insignificant by her partner: ‘At home, she tells him little lies, like onions always make her cry.’
He is correct to highlight his flair for adding new insights on the theme of relationships.
On ‘Give My Love To Kevin’, he typifies the questioning tone of the rejected boyfriend, desperate to know all about his girlfriend's new lover but recognising the futility of his inquisitiveness.
In the same song, the narrator asks: ‘What does your mother think?’, a perceptive remark, showing a depth of thought rarely crystallised into a pop song.
His lyrical images get more convoluted by ‘Bizarro’, with the exception of ‘Brassneck’.
In it, Gedge finally appears to be exorcising ghosts, and more poignantly, banishing his own first rejection to the lyrical out-tray.
‘That's all in the past, there I've said it now at last.’
The humorous line ‘It means I've got to grow up, it means you want to throw up’ shows that the narrator appreciates the stupidity of clinging to lost love and its souring effect on a former partner.
In the disposable, flippant world of pop, people do not tend to write earnestly about the real world and the few that do are seen almost as gurus or counsellors.
‘There have been about half a dozen desperate letters over the years.
But there's nothing I can do.
A pop group is not a group of social workers.
All you can do is give them a bit of comfort in that their letters have been read.
I think that itself is quite important in a lot of ways,’ says Gedge.
The group's mail, except for the personal letters to band members, is usually opened by Sally Murrell, Gedge's girlfriend and the band's permanent secretary.
‘We had a young lad ringing us from Manchester.
He was in tears because he though the band was splitting up.
Most of the letters are jokey.
They say things like David's sexy legs are going to stop them passing their Chemistry ‘A’ Level,’she says.
At Christmas, some fans send two cards to the band.
One is for the group and the other is for them to sign and send back.
Happily, not all Wedding Present fans are hopelessly in need of affection.
After a performance in Manchester towards the end of 1989, Gedge was accosted by a group of fans who told him vehemently that the band's new songs were poor compared with previous material.
It's what you want that matters
The name The Wedding Present rattled around Gedge's head for a while before he decided on a name for his next band.
The Lost Pandas were no more and he needed a name for a group he was forming with Keith Gregory.
He later realised that the name was very similar to The Birthday Party, a group and a name he had always admired.
‘I think The Wedding Present is a classy and romantic name.
It is also quite strange.
I think it sounds more like a play or film than the name of a group,’ says Gedge.
He replaced Michael Duane with his old friend, Peter Solowka, who was disillusioned with the jobs opened up to him by a degree in environmental biology.
‘The only things they can offer you is things like making grass grow on colliery spoil heaps or being a world expert on how a locust eats grass,’ says Peter.
They had difficulty finding a drummer and went through 10 in a year, recording several demo tapes with different people, before finally settling on Shaun Charman.
Charman had moved to Leeds from his home town of Brighton to study economics and sociology at the university.
He was educated at Lancing College, a public school near Worthing.
His family own a bakery and have two shops on the south coast.
His father, George Charman, is noted as one of the country's finest cake decorators but his eldest son showed little interest in the family business.
A staunch socialist, Charman strongly opposes the privileged education he received and the values it tried to instil in him.
‘I think public school should be abolished,’ he says.
‘I really hated it, it was horrible.’
Gedge thought Charman was technically the worst of all the contenders but he liked the right bands in The Folk Devils, Josef K and The Three Johns, and more especially, he had an obsessive interest in The Fall.
Charman was pleased to see Gedge return to demo tapes recorded before he joined and write on them: ‘The Wedding Present, featuring Mike Bedford.’
Bedford was the drummer to precede Charman.
‘It was as if The Wedding Present only formed when I joined, which was nice in a way,’ says Charman.
Gedge was determined that the band would release a single, despite an acute shortage of money.
They decided to put five pounds a week into a fund from their dole giros.
Charman chipped in half as much as the rest because he was  not sure whether he wanted to stay with them — and actually played only half the record.
Gedge made many sacrifices to maintain payments and Charman remembers it even affected his diet.
‘David really saved.
He was on the dole for a long time and he used to just eat mashed potato and things like that.’
They decided to record ‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy!’ in preference to the early favourite, ‘Will You Be Up There?’.
It posed a problem for Charman because he could not sustain the song's frantic pace.
In a move that revealed an unusual lack of ego and a large amount of common sense, he suggested that his friend, another drummer, Julian Sowa, would do a better job.
‘I used to get really tired.
I sat with him and told him basically what to do,’ says Charman.
Charman was able to drum on the B-side track, ‘(The Moment Before) Everything's Spoiled Again’.
They were still unsure about what to put on the B-side, and only made a final decision as they travelled to the recording studio on the bus.
‘It had a slow bit in the middle.
I would go at it like mad and when the middle bit came I would think, ‘Thank God, I can have a rest,’ says Charman.
The ‘slow bit’ to which Charman refers was an emotional tract of music, over which Gedge made forlorn vocal pleas, sounding very much like The Chameleons.
Gedge conceded the point in a humorous letter to Dave Fielding, admitted that he could lay claim to a proportion of the royalties accrued by the song.
They spent £100 on recording the two songs at the tiny Billiard Room studio, which is housed in a garage connected to a large house in a residential part of Leeds.
Gregory's bass guitar was out of tune because of a wayward string and none of the group had guitar tuners.
They sent a demo tape of the planned début single to their local branch of the independent Cartel network, Red Rhino in York.
‘It came to us out of the blue.
The song just seemed to have something.
It was loud, aggressive and it had a good tune,’ says Peter Thompson, head of distribution at Red Rhino.
Red Rhino declined their request to manufacture the record but agreed to distribute it.
The group spent a further £400 on pressing up 500 copies and £40 on the sleeves.
Gedge was anxious to save money and went down to London on a coach to pick up the singles.
At the current price, 400 copies of their now much sought-after first single would mean Gedge was carrying the equivalent of £40,000 in his two suitcases.
They glued the sleeves themselves and to tie-in with the band's name, they called their record label Reception Records.
Despite his later fixation with relationships, Gedge's first song on record did not deal with the subject.
Gedge explained its meaning to Splutter fanzine: ‘It concerns itself with those factors which cause men to conform to a particular form of sexual stereotyping.
Boys are told — be John Wayne, be top of the class, score goals, don't cry, make sure your pose is suitably heroic as you wipe someone's face off your boots.’
He continued to expound for several more paragraphs, assessing both the growth of feminism and outlining the songwriter's own inescapably, hypocritical stance.
Gedge later became much more clandestine and unpretentious when asked about the lyrical content of his songs.
Debbie Kaye, Gedge's girlfriend at the time, worked hard on the band's behalf and became a manager-type figure.
‘I used to ring places up and try and get them gigs.
I had nothing to do with the recording and creative side but I changed guitar strings and that kind of thing.
Some of the band were keener than others.
Keith couldn't give a damn about anything but the music and I think Peter only really got into it when it was financially viable,’ she says.
Early concerts were hectic affairs with guitar strings repeatedly snapping.
At one show Kaye replaced 12 strings during one half-hour set and in some songs up to three strings would succumb to the leathering.
Kaye felt Gregory was a crucial influence on The Wedding Present's music.
‘When David first started he was totally crap.
He couldn't sing and he couldn't write songs.
Keith has a lot of talent and I think David used to go to him and Keith would rearrange the songs and make them sound good with his bass lines.
It was a bit of a mad thrash early on and I wasn't into it a lot.
I much prefer the stuff they are doing these days.’
Before the music papers had a chance to review the debut single  John Peel discovered it and began playing it, almost on a nightly basis.
‘It really came to people's attention through Peel.
If Peel had not got into it I think it would have still been well received but it would have taken longer,’ says Gedge.
Peel told the NME: ‘The Wedding Present's virtues are that they make records which are direct and uncomplicated and it seems that these are now being regarded as vices in some quarters.’
The single was warmly received in practically all quarters.
Melody Maker said it was, ‘The finest sustained, emotionally fuelled guitar/vocal attack of the year so far.
Superb.’
New Musical Express said it was, ‘Cheap and nasty; a beautiful noise.’
The band were formally introduced in print on July 10, 1985 with both NME and Sounds ran short interviews.
Previously, they had been presented in the basic, unaffected prose of fanzines but knew they had officially arrived in the real world of music journalism when Neil Taylor asked them to pose outside Buckingham Palace.
He wrote to the NME: ‘They are the victims of bathos, and life is mimicking the ultimate economic distinction in the this absurd scene: the rich and the poor, the landed and the lost, the Royal Family — regal and splendid — and The  Wedding Present, recently starved, surviving on cheese sandwiches.’
In a more direct moment, he said they were: ‘The loudest, fastest, freshest guitar group in England.’
Peter Picton in Sounds described them as: ‘A chaotic collapse of jangling guitars protecting the sweetest melodies.’
Relations in the group were fine, but in a rare heated moment Gedge and Charman rowed about who would receive the publishing money from the sales of ‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy!’.
Charman felt it should be split four ways between each band member, but Gedge thought he should have most of it because he had actually written the songs.
Mike Stout, the band's sound engineer, also ran a small publishing service for bands called Cubic Music and the band released the single through Cubic.
He was travelling back from a gig in the band's van when the argument broke out.
‘It was a huge row, one of the biggest I have ever seen in the group.
David was driving and Shaun was leaning over.
He was being his usual ethical self I suppose, calling David a capitalist swine,’ he remembers.
Gedge was keen to keep parents and old friends informed and began corresponding with the local paper,The Middleton Guardian .
Many in the music business sneer at coverage in the regional press but Gedge has always encouraged it, especially in the Middleton paper where articles take on the role of a public letter home.
‘I think it is great that he bothered sending their records to us.
It is something you don't expect.
He used to send me postcards from abroad and he popped in when ‘Bizarro’ was released to give me a copy,’says Graham Williams, the journalist who wrote the paper's weekly pop column.
‘Get Out And Get 'Em Boy’ still possesses a rare, blistering energy and like the very best records, it has hardly dated.
Gedge agrees it is a great statement, but not a very good song.
‘It is quite an exciting record.
I get the sense that it is a band's first single and they are trying to prove something.
If I was writing it now I would change it, it is too long for a start, there are about four different sections to it.’
It sold out quickly and after a repressing it reached number four in the independent chart published in Melody Maker .
Red Rhino were impressed with the reaction and decided to invest £400 in the band to record a follow-up.
Thompson was immediately impressed with the approach.
‘They were extremely organised,’ he says.
‘They wrote everything down and remembered the things we told them.
The kept receipts and always made sure the books balanced.
Everything was right from day one.
The band formed a friendship with NME journalist Neil Taylor, and he asked them to appear on a label he was starting called City Slang.
Flattered by the request, the band agreed that Taylor could put out ‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy’.
‘In a way it was one of our biggest mistakes,’ says Gedge.
‘It took ages to come out and we had no control over the artwork.
We could have done it better ourselves.
I think he fancied the idea of being a record company boss.’
Taylor pressed up a 1,000 copies of the single in a fold-out sleeve.
No contracts were signed and the pointless episode had no effect on the band's relationship with Red Rhino.
The band almost left Red Rhino, however, about a year later.
They were told Pinnacle were a more efficient distribution company and had several meetings with them.
They were undecided and called for advice at the home of Jon Langford, a former member of Leeds' bands, The Mekons and The Three Johns.
‘I think they were quite serious about leaving us at the time and thought they would get an objective opinion from Langford.
I don't know what he said but they stayed,’ says Thompson.
Before they recorded ‘Once More’, they contributed ‘Living And Learning’ to a compilation LP called ‘Raging Sun’released by the Leeds-based Rouska, an organisation comprising a record label, fanzine and promotion agency.
A low budget affair, among the other bands  showcased were The Shop Assistants, Bogshed and the curiously named Dik Dik Dimorphic.
It received a lukewarm reaction but gave the band much needed exposure.
They managed to avoid the panning reserved for contemporaries like Bogshed who were termed: ‘Four twisted misanthropes trying to make a career out of sneering at people’ by Dave Jennings in the NME .
Fanzines spread the word about The Wedding Present.
Gedge always replied to letters from aspiring editors and made himself readily available for interviews.
His group was a homespun affair and he wanted to support people inspired solely by the love of writing and music, and with the verve to stand up for themselves in print.
The group still has a genuine commitment to fanzines.
‘They have always been approachable, that is their identity and their image.
It is the way they keep their finger on the pulse and keep in touch with their audience.
It is so unusual, most bands are surrounded by such security at gigs and anyone who wants to get near them is thrown out on their ear,’ says their London based press officer, Mick Houghton.
In the name of controversy, Gedge told a few white lies in early interviews.
He preached the importance of youth (‘Everyone over 25 should be shot’) when he was himself about to enter his late twenties; he said his band was a singles band with a short life span (‘We'll made four great records and retire’); and he said Wedding Present songs and sets would always be very short (sets now last an hour and songs like ‘Take Me’, for over eight minutes).
Gedge still enjoys spinning yarns and his old friend Dave Fielding was amused to read in an interview that Gedge did not like The Buzzcocks.
‘The fucking lying bastard.
I used to go and watch the Buzzcocks with him.
I think The Wedding Present are very much in the guitar style of The Buzzcocks,’ he says.
Thanks mainly to John Peel's patronage, 1985 was an amazingly successful year for the band.
The début single had the desired effect of stirring up a wealth of excitement.
Only months after its release, the advertisements appeared in the ‘musicians wanted’ sections of the music papers asking for people influenced by The Wedding Present.
The record was voted to number 15 in Peel's Festive 50, a chart dominated by The Jesus And Mary chain, The Smiths and New Order.
Peel was undoubtedly their biggest fan but it was another Radio One DJ, Andy Kershaw, who gave them their first session as 1985 drew to a close.
They put four songs on tape, including ‘Once More’ and ‘At The Edge Of The Sea’, which later became the respective A and B-sides of their next record.
Gedge has often criticised ‘Once More’.
‘There has only ever been one criteria for choosing a Wedding Present single.
It must be our favourite song at the time and ‘Once More’ was, but in retrospect, it is probably my least favourite single.
I have grown to dislike it.
It is the things I liked about it at first, that made it immediate, that I don't like now.
Both  musically and lyrically I think it sounds clichéd.
It is a bit anthemic and I've never liked groups of that kind.
It has a seventies-sounding rock riff.
I don't think it's abysmal, I just think we have done better.’
The reviewers fawned regardless.
Danny Kelly made ‘Once More’ single of the week in NME and noted that The Wedding Present were: ‘A band growing up and bristling with confidence…they have let loose with a second exhilarating little peach of punky powerpop.’
Marvellous similes flowed from journalists' pens.
Mat Smith in Melody Maker thought ‘Once More’ was: ‘Catchier than clap and faster than a departing Heseltine’and Richard Cook in Sounds thought listening to it was like: ‘Eating a ton of nails.’
The band dropped ‘Once More’ from the live set as early as possible, despite it being a firm favourite with fans.
‘We don't write songs for other people, we never have done, we never will do,’ says Gedge.
‘To me,’ Once More‘sounds like a rock band going through the motions.’
The band have often been criticised for their imperious stance, especially in relation to early material and the decision to stop playing encores.
It is upsetting for fans to learn that the creators of one of their favourite records do not like it themselves.
However, if they are attracted to The Wedding Present because of their stark honesty, they must accept opinions contrary to their own emanating from the group, and at the same time, the band must not become contemptuous.
The songs on their first two singles were repackaged on a 12-inch EP called ‘Don't Try To Stop Me Mother’.
Many fans missed out on the limited runs of the seven-inch versions and the 12-inch was also more suited for export.
The group's first trip to Maida Vale on behalf of the John Peel programme was in February 1986/ They recorded four songs including a heady version of ‘Felicity’.
Gedge joked to music writers that he had accidentally played the original Orange Juice song at the wrong speed and thought it sounded great.
The session caught the group at their best.
The fun of the live set crossed over on to tape and the guitar-bashing spirit of The Wedding Present was captured perfectly.
Pleased with the group's healthy sales, Red Rhino allowed the band the luxury of a colour sleeve for their third release, the double  A-side, ‘This Boy Can Wait’ and ‘You Should Always Keep In Touch With Your Friends’.
Designed by student Jonathan Hitchen, the cover was described in a graphic arts magazine as: ‘Combining strong colour and semi-abstract line.’
It made a welcome change from the vague nostalgia of previous covers.
‘Your Should Always Keep In Touch With Your Friends’ was about a romantic incident from Gedge life years earlier.
On a visit to Scarborough with Janet Rigby, they walked over a bridge and said they would meet up again on it one day.
‘We made a pact, that even if we split up, we would meet up on the bridge again one day.
We never have done because we didn't set a proper date!’ says Gedge.
The sentiment behind ‘You Should Always Keep In Touch With Your Friends’ was lauded by the music press but Gedge was being more than a little hollow.
‘I've not kept in touch with mine at all.
I suppose it is a regretful thing.
When I meet them again it is so disappointing because I have changed so much, and they have changed so much, so it's completely worthless.’
‘This Boy Can Wait’ was seen in some quarters as possessing a strong gay message and Gedge enjoyed the ambiguity the lyrics encouraged.
By the third single, most people were familiar with The Wedding Present's pop thrash and all it really did was consolidate their position.
The group found themselves part of a movement called ‘Shambling’, which was largely a reaction to the po-faced stance of goth that had only just entered its coffin.
Fans turned up to gigs in ridiculous anoraks, sold fanzines with names like Frothy Pop and pretended they were carefree 18-year-olds.
The groups who were deemed worthy of attention played scratchy guitar music, usually very fast and The Wedding Present fitted the bill.
The movement was given credence when NME gathered together a host of itchy bands on a compilation tape called ‘C86’.
Appearing on the tape proved too much of a millstone for most bands and The Wedding Present were the only ones that carried on developing at a reasonable pace.
Gedge told Slag fanzine early in 1986: ‘I don't really know what shambling means.
I suppose it refers to those bands who need two or three goes to start every song.
I hope that doesn't include us because we work quite hard at what we do.
It's a bit annoying to be grouped with bands from that category.
It's probably just a label devised by some journalists to make their job easier.’
In April 1986, The Wedding Present recorded a session for Janice Long's early evening programme on Radio One.
It was a strong session but one track, ‘My Favourite Dress’, stood out and went on to become hugely popular with the fans.
The lyrics, about betrayal in Manchester town, were blunt and fulsome and the music was a brilliant hybrid of punk and pop.
Fans had to wait almost year before the song eventually appeared on vinyl.
Their Peel session, featuring ‘Felicity’, ‘What Becomes Of The Broken Hearted’, ‘You Should Always Keep In Touch With Your Friends’ and ‘This Boy Can Wait’was released by Strange Fruit in October 1986.
The group was voted ninth best new act of 1986 in the NME readers poll published in early 1987, just behind The Pet Shop Boys and Half Man Half Biscuit.
The notched up four tracks in Peel's Festive 50: ‘Once More’(16), ‘This Boy Can Wait’(18), ‘You Should Always Keep In touch With Your Friends’(28), and ‘Felicity’(36).
A Million Miles
The Wedding Present violently oppose most rock 'n' roll ethos, but perhaps one of the few areas where they have shown loyalty to tradition has been their gluttonous appetite for live work.
The seasoned rockers and cabaret bores at the local pub would appreciate the fact they have travelled up and down the country, playing every decrepit club and hovel on the way.
When the line-up was finalised with Charman in the spring of 1985, they already had a set of six songs which they rehearsed repeatedly.
Their début concert was in support of Dik Dik Dimorphic, at a pub called Shires in Allerton Bywater, Yorkshire, on March 1, 1985.
The first song The Wedding Present played to the world was ‘Will You Be Up There?’ which they had earmarked as a potential single.
Gedge glibly announced: ‘We're The Wedding Present, from Leeds,’ and they then crashed into ‘(The Moment Before) Everything's Spoiled Again’, ‘White’, ‘Pretty Blue High’, ‘Nervous Man In A Four Dollar Room’and the song that eventually became their first single, ‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy!’.
The evening went extremely well, especially for a début gig.
Allerton Bywater is hardly on the rock map and the locals made the most of a rate visit to their town, greeting every song with enthusiastic clapping.
Although Gedge's voice was high in the mix, the basic brew was unmistakably Wedding Present, even if more genteel than what followed.
All six songs were crammed with churning melodies and great choruses; with at least three of them worthy contenders for vinyl.
Charman, who originally considered himself a bass player, was not sure whether he was in the right band.
He did not enjoy relentlessly repeating the set during practices.
He was also not enamoured of the music, although he later found it much more enjoyable.
‘I told them I was leaving after the first gig and it was this bloke from Dik Dik Dimorphic who was going on at me saying that I shouldn't leave.
The Wedding Present didn't sound like they do now.
They used to sound a hell of a lot like The Chameleons.
It was really slow and a bit po-faced for me.
I started to like it more when we loosened up and it got less serious.
The other thing, and this was just as important, was that I didn't feel I could play the drums well enough.’
The success of their first show did not continue.
Charman, who decided to stay put, began logging gigs in a tour diary.
He classed their next three as ‘Okay — empty,’‘Okay — Unmemorable’ and ‘Unmemorable — again.’
Eight of their first 10 concerts were in Leeds but a rare excursion saw them appear at the Old Bell pub in Derby.
Only 11 people turned up but the football team-sized audience asked for an encore and Charman summed it up as ‘Good.’
‘The gigs went downhill very fast,’ he recalls.
‘We played all sorts of really funny ones, just little ones.
It was the four-people-and-a-dog type of crowd.’
Two of their early shows were reviewed in Leeds' Strawberry Match fanzine and the reviewer was highly perceptive.
He criticised the overbearing volume and the occasional out-of-tune playing, but still noted that: ‘If they continue to improve at this rate, they're going to make a name for themselves.
Thoroughly recommended!’
Gedge paid tribute to the postage by firing letters off to every small-time promoter whose address he could find.
He also scoured the music paper gig guides for phone numbers of venues.
Sending out copies of ‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy!’ brought a much more positive response than demo tapes, which are largely scorned by the music business.
The band had a policy of not turning down any gig offer, regardless of whether playing it would be profitable.
They found themselves sharing stages with other guitar bands like The June Brides, Big Flame, and Age of Chance; outfits who were later viewed as part of a new scene with The Wedding Present.
By the autumn of 1985, they were playing an average of two concerts a week.
They always travelled home after shows.
Their first real taste of life on the road came in December when they stayed over after playing London and Brighton for four days.
Charman's curt reviews got slightly more excitable as the year drew on.
Three of the last seven concerts of 1985 were described as: ‘Excellent’ and one was ‘Quite good — sold three T-shirts!’
The complimentary press prompted some excitement to reverberate around the A and R departments of most of the major record labels.
Korda Marshall, who was later to sign them to RCA, was one of the first to check them out when he attended a gig at London's Bull And Gate.
‘It was a raucous noise but there was a lot of excitement and it was great.
It was at the time when The Jesus And Mary Chain were just beginning to bumble along.
You could hear little melodies and little guitar  riffs hidden away underneath The Wedding Present's noise.
They were quite shambolic and too loud.
They weren't loud, loud; they were Motorhead loud, like really loud,’ he remembers.
Gedge, with help from Debbie Kaye, did most of the band's administration and had an unquenchable thirst for hard work.
It was almost as if he had found his raison d'être because beforehand he had shown little motivation to find conventional employment.
When the group travelled further afield, they often slept on floors at the homes of fans or friends.
They built up a friendship with the Scottish band, This Poison! /‘It was really cold at their house.
It was like a fridge,’ says Solowka.
They learned that the only way to get back to Leeds with any cash in their pockets was to adopt a tight monetary policy.
They played a concert in Lancaster and managed to make a profit on a £40 fee, after playing for van hire and petrol.
‘I don't know how we did it.
We would not eat anything.
We were so tight.
The only treat we allowed ourselves was a bar of chocolate each when we called at a petrol station,’ says Solowka.
At the early shows their basic set was augmented with frantic cover versions like Orange Juice's ‘Felicity’ and The Gang Of Four's ‘I Found That Essence Rare’.
They were soon incorporating new songs into the set like ‘Shatner’ and ‘Living And Learning’.
Their performances were shambolic with guitar strings snapping — as ever — and the timing fluctuating erratically.
Fans and reviewers enjoyed the raw edge and revelled in the energy and melody thrown out of the guitar crashing mayhem.
One of their first live reviews appeared in Sounds in November 1985.
Reviewer Ron Rum said of their show at London's Old Kent Road Ambulance Station: ‘They play loud, fast, sharp and with a stringent discipline for guitar interplay which develops their sound into a splendid, if not technical, terse pop noise.’
Gedge's approach to stagecraft was largely to ignore all the rules and act almost the same way as he did off stage.
His presentation was a studied mixture of nonchalance, sheepishness, controlled aggression and deadpan humour.
He quickly built up a reputation for his dry wit.
He borrowed a guitar half-way through the band's set at Leeds' Astoria Centre and announced to the audience: ‘This one might sound a bit strange, the dots on the neck are in a different place.’
Gedge was, and still is, the perfect antidote to the bombast  favoured by the likes of Bono and Jim Kerr.
If Gedge inadvertently adopts a rockist pose, he instantly recognises the irony and sends himself up.
Often he takes on the legs-apart, guitar pose with Solowka mirroring his every move while massive grins threaten to slice their faces in two.
On tour in 1988, Gedge often shouted into the microphone ‘Status Quo— 25 years in the business,’ as he and Solowka got down to some mindless guitar boogie.
Gedge's amiable approach worked best in the smaller venues where he would chat with members of the audience and use his intellectual wit to demolish hecklers.
Very few people took Gedge's humour the wrong way, but on one of those occasions an NME reviewer labelled him a ‘gawky, arrogant mighty mouth.’
Gedge told The Legend! in an NME interview in April 1986: ‘When we play live I can sometimes come across as glib or arrogant and find that people take exception to what I say when all I'm trying to do is talk to the audience.’
The success of their first two singles meant that gig offers came in a flurry in 1986.
They played more than 80 shows, including their first dates in Europe.
In April 1986, they veered off the usual gig circuit to play a show in Gedge's and Solowka's hometown of Middleton.
They agreed to appear at a venue called Litchfields, basically a working men's club on one of the town's many estates.
It perhaps shows the group's laid back attitude that they were willing to appear at such an unlikely place.
They were told to keep the volume very low, there was no proper lighting rig and at 10.45pm an announcement was made while they were on stage: ‘Last orders at the bar now please!’
Not surprisingly, their performance was slack and many former friends and jealous local bands, who had charted their progress in the music press, were left wondering what all the fuss was about.
It was around this time that Gregory began to miss concerts spasmodically because he wanted to stay in Leeds for personal reasons.
The group's sound engineer, Mike Stout, deputised and also stood in on the few occasions Solowka chose to attend Leeds United matches instead of gigs.
Stout played guitar six times and bass 24 times.
‘I quite enjoyed playing the gigs,’ he says.
‘A lot of the side-show didn't interest me.
I did not think I would stay with the band forever.
I got a bit fed up after we'd toured Britain once, it got a bit boring seeing the same places.’
At a concert in Ilfracombe, Devon, both Solowka and Gregory failed to turn up and Sara Catt, Charman's girlfriend, learned the bass parts as they travelled to the town.
‘We only found out Peter wasn't coming at the last minute.
We were really pretty annoyed with him.
I think it was an important Cup match or something.
Keith always had a reason, so we didn't mind that much, but both David and me used to get quite annoyed with Peter.
Another thing we had a barney with Peter about at one point, was the fact that he used to be too drunk on stage,’ says Charman.
During the tour, Stout remembers that Charman and Gedge told Solowka to cut down on his drinking because it was starting to affect his playing.
Gedge does not think the absence of Solowka and Gregory was of real importance.
‘It didn't affect me in the slightest at first.
Even though I put a lot of work into the gigs, I was not foolish enough to believe they were important when we were playing to 40 people in London.
It doesn't matter who your guitarist is, as long as he can play the songs.
I think it probably bothered me later when we started getting a bit bigger.’
Charman thinks the band's ever-growing popularity influenced Solowka to take things more seriously.
‘He used to skip concerts when we weren't so big.
If we were still an indie band I don't think Peter would be as interested.
At the time we didn't have massive arguments about it.
There was more of a rumbling.
We always had a permanent stand-in with Mike around.
After a while, David said we were getting too big for people not to turn up.
He thought people were going to start noticing,’ says Charman.
Solowka feels the attitude of the group was different in the early days and the commitment was not  as strong.
‘We were all part-time in a way.
I was teaching for a while, I did not miss many gigs,’ he says.
Gregory missed the band's first trip abroad in September 1986.
The group played 10 shows in West Germany, Switzerland and Holland.
Typically, the tour was a do-it-yourself affair organised by Gedge with the help of Thomas Zimmerman, a fan of the group who ran an independent booking agency.
They toured with another Leeds' band, Age Of Chance, who were breaking at a faster pace than themselves.
The band were pleased with the excellent treatment they received from foreign promoters.
They were very well paid for concerts in Holland, where gigs were often sponsored by the local council.
‘We were absolutely amazed.
I thing the money we received from one or two gigs equalled what we had earned all year in Britain.
They actually treat you like human beings over there.
We were more used to being given a few cans of lager and that was it,’ says Solowka.
Despite the high fees, the concerts were not usually well attended.
‘No one ever came to the gigs in Holland, but those that did were usually out of their heads.
They would get the druggies in.
There would be abut 20 people in and they would not know what was going on,’ says Solowka.
‘At one of the Dutch gigs there was a man dressed completely in green, wearing a Robin Hood suit and leaping around.
It was really weird.’
Life on the road is supposed to be one long bout of drink, drugs and AIDS tests, but The Wedding Present have always shunned the much-fabled over indulgence.
‘To me, it is just nice to get out of Leeds for a few weeks.
It is a change of surroundings and a chance to meet new people,’ says Gedge.
Groupies have never been a realistic proposition because the group's entourage is largely made up of girlfriends.
Gedge's girlfriend, Sally Murrell, is a roadie and full-time worker for the band.
She replaced Debbie Kaye, his previous girlfriend, who also lugged amplifiers around on their behalf.
The girlfriends of Solowka and Gregory deal with merchandising on tour.
Murrell is often viewed as the group's fifth member.
She deals with the many administrative jobs, thus giving the band time to work on their music, especially when they are not touring.
Roadie John Parkes doubts whether groupies actually exist in the world inhabited by bands like The Wedding Present.
‘I have been around certain bands and been in bands and I've never actually seen a groupie.
I suppose one or two people have got off with each other on tour but that's about it,’ he said.
Mick Houghton believes the band's attitude to touring reflects their lifestyles.
‘When they are on tour you don't get wild, post-gig parties.
Some bands stay up most of the night and that is why they are never around during the day.
It doesn't mean The Wedding Present are boring people who go straight to bed after a show.
They are really good fun to be around, they are just not overindulgent or obsessive,’ he says.
They almost tarnished their clean-living image in Belgium when they inadvertently visited a brothel.
‘The hotel bar was closed and we were all famished so it seemed like a good idea to trek down to the local ‘pub’ to search out a few sarnies,’says Gedge.
‘It wasn't until we noticed the absence of female customers, the dim red lights, and the photos of naked women on the walls that we realised why the ‘barmaids’ were laughing at us.’
The band's approach to live work is idiosyncratic.
They employ the absolute minimal number of people and keep everything as tight as they did when they first set out.
The soundcheck is kept short and completed with little fuss.
This goes against the general rule that says the bigger the band, the longer and more excruciatingly dull, the soundcheck.
They each have a set job on the road.
Drummer Simon Smith, who replaced Charman at the beginning of 1988, deals with much of the tedious organisation like booking hotels and ferries, sorting out transport to and from concerts, and driving.
Solowka is the financial expert, keeping a watch on the merchandise, wages and general tour costs.
Gregory works on the technical side, liaising with the sound and lighting people and drawing up set lists.
Gedge is left with the more pleasurable job of general promotion.
He takes on the role as band spokesman with relish and enjoys being interviewed, whether it be with the NME or a fanzine about to make its first appearance.
They set about their assigned jobs with a high degree of diligence.
It is such a cohesive, well-oiled unit that the band rarely has to call for outside assistance.
Gedge often appears to be the pivot around which it works, but the several parts are vital to the success of the whole.
‘You get some bands with 101 roadies.
Some of them have people there just to change the guitar strings.
It all comes back to The Wedding Present's common sense attitude and approach.
I see bands going out on the road with a dozen more people than they actually need.
Essentially, it is because they can't be bothered to do things for themselves.
They don't want to hump gear and things like that,’ says Houghton.
Their system of working can lead to extraordinary scenes.
Before a concert in Manchester on the ‘Bizarro’ tour, Gedge was holding court with about six fanzine editors while Solowka sat just outside the circle, counting out huge wads of money from a leather briefcase.
Such a scene could only take place in The Wedding Present's dressing room.
On the Ukrainian tour, Houghton thought the band were too fervid about keeping it in the family.
‘There were times when things were a bit tense because they were having to do so much for themselves.
There was a kind of tension that perhaps could have been alleviated if they had a couple more people with them,’ he says.
The group seems oblivious to accepted rock 'n' roll behaviour.
When they are supposed to be arguing about the rider or scrawling their name on the walls, they sit quietly down and start replying to fan letters, or in Solowka's case, it's off with the flat-cap and out with the calculator.
After Solowka finished his teacher training course in Leeds, he started working temporarily at Priesthorpe School, Pudsey.
It sometimes meant he lived a hectic life, especially when the band were playing far from Leeds.
One morning, he left Leeds at eight am and after interviews in London and a concert in Brighton, he arrived back at school at nine am the following morning.
‘I used to wear an earring at the time.
I remember that morning in particular because  I still had it on when I went in to school.
One of the kids said: ‘Sir, you've still got your earring in’.’
The infamous hippy convoy was being chased around Britain by police during the summer of 1986.
When the school children was Solowka boarding the van with the group, they naturally assumed he was off to join the convoy and teased him with shouts of ‘Hippy.’
Two of his ex-pupils contributed a cartoon to issue three of the group's fanzine.
Back in Britain, they found themselves being treated much better as they grew in stature.
After a concert at Stockton's Dovecote Arts Centre, they were afforded the luxury of bed and breakfast at a local hotel.
They lived just over an hour away from the venue but decided to stay to make the most of a rare luxury.
The band's 100th gig was at London's Thames Polytechnic.
It was spoiled when someone threw a glass on to the stage, stopping the band from playing an encore.
They were very keen on keeping both the songs and the set short but it was sometimes not appreciated, especially in Holland.
After a show in Groningen, several complained and the next night they played a mammoth set lasting more than a hour, boasting four encores.
By the end of 1987, they were playing live almost every other night, but they were still getting their share of badly organised gigs or ones that flopped for other reason, usually not connected with the band.
With Simon Smith newly-installed on the drum stool, they kept up the relentless touring pace in 1988 and found themselves playing sizeable venues like London's Town And Country Club.
Gedge's parents say the band live for the first time at Manchester's salubrious Ritz Club.
They had charted their son's progress from afar but had not realised the group's popularity.
It came as a shock to see the fervour the group inspired in fans.
Marjorie Gedge helped serve on the T-shirt stall and when fans realised her identity, they demanded her autograph.
Some even asked the bewildered woman to sign their jeans.
Gedge fixed it for his parents to watch the show from the wings.
‘He is not the same lad on stage.
He seems lost in his own world.
He is quite witty and his dry humour comes across well.
We were really impressed that night,’ says Brian Gedge.
In Aberdeen, Gedge was confronted by an exploding toilet.
While he was sitting down, it shattered and he was left with shards of porcelain stuck in his rear during the winter tour of 1988.
He did not realise the seriousness until his girlfriend told him he was covered with blood.
Poor Gedge had to attend the local infirmary where his misery was compounded when nurses found out he was in a band.
‘They were all looking round the screen saying they had not seen the bum of anyone famous before,’ he recalls.
Gedge played the concert with stitches in his behind.
It was afterwards, when the adrenalin had stopped flowing, that it began to cause him pain.
The NME was unusually acerbic about the incident, referring to Gedge's ‘fat arse’ and continuing: ‘This could of course explain the band's recent silence.
As everyone knows, David, at best, can only talk out of his arse.’
Smash Hits , more interested in other parts of Gedge's body, featured his well-scrubbed face in the magazine.
The two newslines were the fact that the band all possessed degrees or that they had chosen George Beat (v. old footballer, as they would say).
The man who had previously been compared to a dissected rabbit (Barry Egan,NME ) and a pale, sad faced, First World War Volunteer (John Peel,The Observer ), found himself as a viable alternative to Brother Beyond, Wet Wet Wet and the Goss twins, for a bedroom wall appearance.
Before a concert in Dublin, a hand-written note was pinned to the front door of the venue.
It was from a group signing themselves ‘Imogen, Sarah, Katy, Jonnie and Jef.’
It opened with the ultimate statement, ‘We love you all.’
Sarah went on to ask Gedge to dedicate ‘Shatner’ to her while risque Katy invited him to the Plaza after the concert!
John Parkes feels they attract a different kind of girl fan from the ones normally associated with rock groups.
‘I think The Wedding Present have shy groupies.
Some of these girlie fans must think that David is wonderful but I don't think they want to grab hold of him and shag him to death.
They are shy, sensitive types.’
The youngest fans at Wedding Present concerts tend to be in their early teens and the oldest are middle-aged.
In Europe, where music fans are usually more broad-minded, people in their thirties and forties often attend Wedding Present gigs.
One of the biggest attractions for fans is that they like to identify with the group; they want to be part of The Club.
In the early days, the band's self-image was completely true because they would walk from the floor of the club on to the state and then mingle with the punters afterwards.
These days, Parkes finds fans scrapping to get their hands on set lists, drum sticks, and towels.
Many Wedding present fans have the arrogance to believe they are somehow different from fans of other groups.
In some cases, this is true, but as the band have become bigger, the mentality of the typical fan has changed.
Many do not recognise the irony of liking the band because of their ordinariness and then venerating Gedge by asking him to sign the cover of a single.
The process of becoming successful makes it impossible for fans and the band to visualise and treat each other in the same way.
The band used to give out their addresses and phone numbers without hesitation.
Gedge has now learned to protect himself and even when he gives his number to friends, he implores them not to pass it on.
To the group's credit, they have tried to minimise the distance between themselves and the fans.
Their fanzine,Invasion Of The Wedding Present , is an attempt to keep in touch with the grass roots following.
It is a vital read for the fan, but in it the group become parodies of themselves.
Solowka is the old, flat-capped Northerner forever dreaming of ferrets and Ukrainian records; Gregory is the quiet, slightly mysterious one; Gedge is the older brother keeping a paternal watch over everybody; Smith's traits, apart from an unruly fringe, have not yet been distilled into comic book form.
Another example of their do-it-yourself attitude to touring is the band's total control of merchandise.
While other groups give outside contracts for T-shirts, badges and posters, The Wedding Present do it themselves.
‘It's better that way.
We have total control over everything from what designs we use, to actually selling them at gigs,’ says Solowka.
It is a highly profitable business.
On an average tour it will make the band up to £20,000 profit, a figure they rarely reach on ticket sales.
‘We had a band chat and for ages we were saying we should not do merchandising at all, because it is a sign that you are a really big band and that you are trying to cash in.
It has never been my view, I must admit.
If we don't do it, the bootleggers will, and their designs will just not be as good,’ he says.
The man who handles the live sound is another former Leeds University student, Joe Hickey.
He replaced Mike Stout at the end of 1988 after Stout began to suffer hearing difficulties.
The band cannot justifiably claim to have sent  him deaf because Stout also ran discos in Leeds.
Hickey thinks the group take almost a unique standpoint.
‘Most bands are all drums and vocals but they are mainly the guitar and everyone else is really quiet,’ he says.
Often Hickey is besieged by fans who want him to turn up the vocals and they make their point forcibly.
‘I have had funny letters put on the mixing desk.
In Europe one said: ‘It's too loud — why kill the voice?’
I've had no proper death threats yet,’ he says.
Hickey's hearing is standing up quite well to the constant battering but he finds his ears ringing after concerts.
New material from the ‘Bizarro’ album was previewed when the band played the massive Reading Festival in August 1989, alongside bands like New Model Army, The Wonderstuff and New Order.
Gedge wore his shorts and dapper white socks.
The band, who were originally considered the epitome of a brilliant small-venue outfit, went down extremely well despite the vastness of the occasion.
On the autumn tour to promote the album, several reviewers noticed the change in presentation of material and its harsh, lugubrious sound.
Dave Simpson in Sounds described it as: ‘Serious dinosauric dripping death guitar noise.’
Most writer were left a little bemused by the change and few viewed it with the clarity of Lorraine Edwards in the Nottingham Evening Post .
She queried what had turned a band that had formerly written, ‘Sweet, enticing ballads’ into one which was: ‘Brash and abrasive, pained and persecuted.’
Bob Stanley in Melody Maker also recognised a band entering a new phase after witnessing their 45-minute long set at London's Kilburn National.
He wrote: ‘George Best is almost certainly over.
In the Gents there is sick all over the floor.
On the stage, The Wedding Present are beginning to see the light.’
It was a different Wedding Present to the one that had toured two years earlier.
Gedge smiled less and the attitude was so workman-like, it all seemed hurried and obdurate.
Fundamentally, liking the ‘new’ Wedding Present was of a question of taste.
Fans who revelled in their former three-minute long pop simplicity found it hard to recognise the new solemn might.
Likewise, those that thought they were too ephemeral and effervescent, began to appreciate them.
The group has always followed its collective heart, sometimes to a dangerous degree, and future development would take them practically anywhere, as long as it centres around the guitar and Gedge's lyrical obsessions.
At the end of the ‘Bizarro’ tour, they decided to stop playing encores.
Gedge pointed out the inherent stupidity of the famous theatrical cliché.
He assumed the best approach was to try and joke with the audience and he asked: ‘You wouldn't say to Shakespeare, that was a good book, can we have another chapter now?
Or you wouldn't ask Van Gogh to add more detail to a picture after looking at one of his works of art would you?’
The strange analogy was delivered earnestly but also with a definite air of conceit, or at the very least, stroppiness.
Korda Marshall at RCA does not believe they will be true to their word.
He offered Gedge a bet that they would play an encore again sometime in the next five years, but he refused.
All this and more
The Wedding Present entered 1987 with an experienced ally by their side.
Brian Hallin, who had formerly worked for Island and been financial controller for IRS Records, was appointed as their manager.
When he left IRS, he formed companies representing bands and producers.
His first signings were The Shop Assistants, whom he helped sign to Chrysalis after they notched up several hits in the independent charts.
The deal came too soon and they broke up almost immediately after crossing the threshold to major label status, although they later re-formed.
Hallin decided to adopt a softly-softly approach with his next signings, The Wedding Present.
‘It was the live side that struck me as being a bit special,’ he says.
‘They could create a really special atmosphere at a gig.
I thought that was important for the long-term development of a band.
I also think David has a special character, he has a charisma to him.
He also has a good talent for writing songs.’
He thought the band needed to develop, and they were best left alone to do it.
‘I am not the type of manager to go in and say right, I'll take this and create it into something else.
I don't think they are that type of band anyway.
They want to have total creative control of their own development, and I like bands that have really strong views of what they want to do.’
The Wedding Present had managed themselves with a satisfying degree of success until Hallin's arrival and it would appear that at first there was little for him to actually do.
A quietly-spoken man, he is not the pushy type of manager who makes sure the sandwiches are folded properly backstage or that the plectrums are of the right elasticity.
In practically all aspects, the band can well look after themselves.
Hallin rarely attends concerts and it can sometimes be days before the two parties make contact with each other.
Hallin always recognised his role would be specific, but felt he still had one to play.
‘In some ways, they are usually well organised, although I think that one of the features of the indie scene, if one can use that expression, is that bands are used to doing a lot of basic things for themselves.
It is another system of its own.
I think of my role as trying to guide them with the interface of the business side, the bits that they might not be interested in or don't want to be involved in.
In the early stages it was finding them a deal, or moving them to the next level up.’
Mick Houghton finds the group's relationship with Hallin  highly unusual.
‘It's a weird one, unlike anything I have come across before.
I don't ring Brian up to tell him what I'm doing, I ring the band up.
If it was any other manager, I would have to keep him informed, because in theory he is coordinating the whole process.
With them, they coordinate it themselves.
I know RCA find it very bizarre, they are not used to dealing directly with bands.
The manager is usually a buffer.’
During 1986, when several of The Wedding Present's contemporaries were signed to major deals, they told the press they were quite content to stay on their own label but, in reality, they wanted to sign with a major label too.
‘Red Rhino were doing their best for them but there was still trouble.
They would do a tour and their singles would still be in the warehouse because Red Rhino couldn't afford to pay for the pressing and things like that,’ says Debbie Kaye.
The group wanted to tour further afield but Red Rhino were unable to distribute records into shops throughout the world and this inevitably caused frustrations within the band.
Hallin managed to alleviate some of the problems with Red Rhino, and as the band found themselves more and more entangled in the music industry, he became a king of protective figure for them, a buffer against the business world.
‘At first we wanted him to contract the majors for us and go and talk to Mr CBS or whoever,’ says Gedge.
‘He was able to to go back and forth with them, a thing we could never be bothered to do.
He over-saw the RCA contract.
I think he would like to do more for the band but we are completely stupid and like do everything for ourselves.
Obviously, his main role of finding us a deal doesn't exist any more.’
The group resent any excess and many people have been surprised at their loyalty to Hallin.
‘I think there has always been a slight fear of making massive steps on our own,’ says Gedge.
‘At first, we were apprehensive about the process of signing, then it was the same about deals in Europe and now I think Brian will be helpful when we sort out the American side.
So far, everything has been fine with Brian but whether it will keep like this forever, I don't know.’
Few Wedding Present records have found their way to the United States and Hallin, obviously backed by RCA, wants to introduce them to this most lucrative market in the world.
‘The whole of the overseas side is going to be very important, particularly America.
A lot of people are of the opinion that they are a very English band and of no interest elsewhere, but I don't agree.
You could have said The Beatles were too much of a Liverpool band or that Woody Allen is too New York.
They already have support on the college radio there,’ says Hallin.
The manager's first job on the band's behalf was to negotiate a new deal with Red Rhino, so that they would be presented in a more important light.
‘Before that, they had just sent them into a studio with a few hundred pounds and the records were almost souvenirs of the live side.
Their approach was just to stick out the records, but more thought went into later releases and we had a structure where the label was treated with more importance.
It was second best to a deal with a major label.
Looking back, I think it was a good thing for the band at that point,’ says Hallin.
Hallin also represented producer, Chris Allison, and thought he might form a partnership with the band.
It seemed a strange assumption because Allison was known chiefly as a Fairlight programming expert and in the past had worked mainly with mainstream artistes like Elkie Brookes.
‘I was really excited about getting involved with the band,’ says Allison.
‘I had seen them live and thought that they had an energy.
I had worked with Fairlights and I was bored with machines and wanted to do something else.’
The first result of the liaison was the single, ‘My Favourite Dress’.
Although it missed the clarity of the session version, it was still strong enough to make number one in the independent charts and NME picked it as its single of the week.
The reviewer accused Allison of ‘Scraping a little from the edges’ but still guessed that: ‘If it was played near a poster of George Michael, it would cause the corners to curl as the paper spontaneously combusted.’
‘My Favourite Dress’ cost £1,000 to make.
Gedge was asked by a fanzine whether spending such a comparatively large amount meant that The Wedding Present had lost their edge.
‘Going into a better studio with a producer makes things easier, if anything,’ he says.
‘At first, I had a few reservations but we got it mixed in a day.
I don't think we lost the urgency because the producer understood what was going on.
Because it sounds good, it sounds urgent.’
Allison feels the single's production was bettered on later records.
‘They were not really interested in having a listenable type of sound.
They wanted it to be rough sounding and we had a lot of discussions.
It is one of the most difficult types of music to record.
The guitars always end up loud in the mix and obliterate everything else.
I had to be careful in the recording.’
Hallin touted the band around during 1987 in the hope of finding a major deal but few were positively interested.
‘There was a little bit  from IRS where I still had connections.
Through that, Red Rhino came up with a matching deal which was not very high in terms of money or anything but it gave them some status, certainly with promotion.
The majors were quite polite and everything, it wasn't like they were saying it was a load of rubbish.
They were very much caught up in the opinion that if they were an indie band, it couldn't possibly be worth a major record company taking them seriously.
That attitude persisted until incredibly late in the day.
It really surprised me.
Even when we signed to RCA, they were the only company to actually make an offer to sign the band, although there were one or two others flirting with the idea.’
The band could probably have signed to IRS but Hallin does not think it would have been the right move.
‘We could have signed to they on the type of deal that would have worked against their own long-term interest in relation to creative control.
So we were better being turned down until we found a deal that suited us better.’
By ‘Anyone Can Make A Mistake’, Red Rhino were taking out quarter-page advertisements in the music papers to plug their brightest hopes.
The band agreed to let them issue a cassette containing a free badge and it was clear that both parties were supporting each other.
The band realised such novelties would help Red Rhino sell more records, so agreed to the slight compromise.
Peter Thompson remembers that the band did not want Red Rhino to set up record-signing sessions at shops.
‘They always said they thought no one was going to turn up, but we told them they had nothing to worry about.’
‘Anyone Can Make A Mistake’, featuring backing vocals from Tallulah Gosh's Amelia Fletcher, shuffled along in a fine pop style but, for once, the reviews were very unflattering.
The title set the song up for criticism.
Predictably,Melody Maker's reviewer simply stated, ‘And you just have’ while Record Mirror expanded on the same theme with: ‘They sure as hell can, and whoever let this loose in vinyl did.’
Sounds joined in the foray by dubbing it: ‘Nothing but a few scribbled lines and hastily arranged chords.’
NME stayed defiantly loyal and The Legend! said it was: ‘Effortlessly one of the singles of the week.’
Up to that point, reviews had been consistently agreeable and a touch of dissent was long overdue, if only to put the previous flattering write-ups into perspective.
Gedge is seasoned in receiving criticism and does not let it disturb him, but likewise, he does not pretend it has no effect.
‘Sometimes I am still thinking about it half an hour later.
It is bound to be hurtful.
An attack on the group is like one on me personally.’
Like the group's manager, their press officer, Mick Houghton, is also untypical of the genre.
He shuns the irritating forcefulness, with its overtures of hype common to most publicists and has an almost laid back way of presenting the group.
After the bombast to which they are often subjected, many writers find this refreshing.
The band's press coverage has generally been excellent and Houghton thinks it is a consequence of the group's organised, professional outlook.
‘I know that if someone is sent up to Leeds to interview them, the band will meet them off the train at the right time.
Without naming names, there are some bands I work with and if they are doing an interview, I will have to be there in case they don't turn up and I end up making loads of phone calls.
Or sometimes they turn up and mess around.
‘It isn't to say The Wedding Present just treat it like a job, it is  just that they have natural courtesy and manners.
If they have an appointment with somebody they try and turn up on time or if they are going to be late, they ring up and apologise.
To me, that is just the way people should behave,’ says Houghton.
Every reasonably successful band soon begins to receive demo tapes from young hopefuls.
The Wedding Present were as helpful as possible in relating the rigorous mechanics of releasing records and the structure of the independent scene to anyone requesting the information.
By the end of 1987, they felt they were in a position to become more than just learned advisors, and actually released records on their own Reception Records.
Charman, whose address was printed on ‘Once More’ and ‘This Boy Can Wait’dealt mainly with the administration of releasing a record by another Leeds band, Cud, called, ‘You're The Boss’.
It was preceded by a single from The Wedding Present's long-standing friends, This Poison!
‘I spotted Cud and thought they were a brilliant band.
I really wanted to help them out and pointed them in the direction of Red Rhino and it was kind of their idea to put them out on Reception.
Cud were my favourite band at the time,’ he says.
Cud used the record as a stepping stone to signing with a larger independent label, Imaginary Records, but This Poison! found the going harder.
They were slated as Wedding Present imitators and never escaped the suffocating connection with the band.
Apart from letting them share the brand name and an instant distribution deal, The Wedding Present did not have the time to take on any record company functions for the bands.
Apart from a brief spurt of publicity, the futile exercise did neither The Wedding Present, nor the two bands involved, a great deal of good.
Gedge began spending time away from Leeds writing new material.
His father was running a small lock-shop in Bolton Gedge worked in the room above writing songs, many of which later appeared on the début album.
Since the beginning, song-writing had been almost totally Gedge's department but it later became more shared.
‘In the early days I'd say David was writing about 90 per cent of the songs.
He made my guitar riffs up for me and used to present the rest of us with tapes,’ says Solowka.
Gedge used the other band members as arbitrators of the material, especially Gregory who contributes his own bass lines to songs.
Every Wedding Present song has been credited to Gedge, but the publishing royalties are further broken down with every member receiving a share depending on their input to a particular song.
Chris Allison believes Gedge's forte is his knack of writing strong songs with a commercial edge.
He finds it hard to understand why he keeps his more melodic side hidden.
‘He has a lot of ideas that he has not yet shared with the public.
I hope he will eventually dip back into that area.
I think he is a bit worried about doing something too different.’
Throughout 1987, the music papers constantly referred to The Wedding Present as The Smiths' second favourite group, and they were often compared to each other.
Superficially, it was an obvious and fairly understandable statement to make.
There were close Manchester links, Morrissey and Gedge wrote about the real world (in very different styles) and the basic mental line-up was virtually the same.
More closely examined, the comparison was hopelessly flawed.
Smiths' songs were liberally adorned with colour, shade and melody while The Wedding Present's are trusty, rhythmical battleships.
Morrissey writes flamboyantly while Gedge converses with the listener in a questioning, deadpan tone.
There are also the contradictory aspects of image and attitude.
Perhaps the only common ground the groups really share is their fan base.
They mainly attract a section of white, working class and lower-middle class youth, often college educated, that considers itself intelligent and individualistic.
Soon after The Smiths' split, issue two of the Derby-based fanzine,Punctured Bicycle , featured a photo of Gedge on the cover and one of Morrissey on the back.
The irony continued throughout its pages.
As the death of the Smiths was mourned, it came to pass that The Wedding Present rightfully took over their mantle.
After an interview with Gedge, it wrote: ‘The band know that out there lie thousands who would fight to the bitter end for The Wedding Present's name to be unblemished…
’ Powerful prose, and really fitting for The Wedding Present, who have always avoided preciousness and pretence, two qualities in which The Smiths wallowed.
The loss of The Smiths created a vacuum in the music business and in the lives of many people.
The Wedding Present probably benefited from their demise, mainly in terms of press coverage.
It would be presumptuous to assume fans switched allegiance overnight and started buying records by The Wedding Present instead of The Smiths.
The backlash is awaited with interest by everyone, even those with only a passing interest in the music scene.
Staunch fans are always prepared to reanalyse their  favourites in whatever blinding new light is thrown upon them by a probing music journalist.
It is as much a part of the music business as a 12-inch re-mix.
A band is discovered, lauded, and then examined with an intensity that would frighten vampires.
As always, the strongest make a steady recovery but the others either wither away because they actually believe their press or, more commonly, find themselves selling considerably fewer records.
The Wedding Present were long overdue a thorough overhaul when NME 's Steven Wells got his hands on them early in 1987.
Hitherto, they had been subject to largely servile pieces, containing five paragraphs of biographical detail, three to describe the speed of the music (with at least one simile) and two humorous asides from Gedge.
Underneath the headline ‘Prole Art Wets’ Wells went in search of weightier substance.
Opinionated and didactic, it was still a valid essay that was warranted on a group of the ever-growing stature of The Wedding Present.
In it, he tried to discover the source of the band's motivation.
He would not accept their continual bleatings that they just wanted to ‘be in a band and make great records.’
He wrote that he expected to find ‘ideology and purpose,’ but mostly discovered ‘cynical platitude and intellectual laziness.’
Before the finale, when he mystifyingly decided they were more important than they'll ever know,’ he accused them of speaking ‘piffle, tosh and cynicism.’
‘I thought it was an interesting piece,’ says Gedge.
‘The interview came at the end of a long day.
We were tired and hungry and couldn't be bothered.
He was forthright with his questions but he was also the perfect host.
We could not be bothered arguing with him.’
Mick Houghton thinks it was a mistake to line up Wells with the band.
‘I actually thought they would relate a lot more.
I think, in the end, they just didn't hit it off.
They did not like his approach to it.
I don't think that the band really cared.
They don't seem to be bothered about things that are written in the press,’ he says.
The group missed out on two magazine front cover appearances because they refused to oblige photographers.
‘I think it shows another side to them.
We were promised a front cover with International Musician and they wanted the band just to pose with their instruments.
The band said they would look stupid, standing there with guitars but not actually playing.
The photographer got pissed off and went back to the paper and said they were uncooperative and really difficult,’ says Houghton.
A photographer from Melody Maker wanted Gedge to pose with an accordion but Gedge told him he did not play the instrument, but Solowka did.
‘The photographer thought it was a great prop but wanted David to hold it.
David wouldn't do it, so we lost the front cover.
I admire them for their attitude.
Other bands just wouldn't give a toss, they'd pose like they were asked if they thought they were going to get a front cover.’
Bewitched
Everyone knows that albums, unlike most singles, make money, but albums are also costly to make and promote.
Therefore, a record company has to sell a large quantity of LPs before it can expect a substantial return on its investment.
Naturally, after all the positive reaction to the Wedding Present, Red Rhino were desperate for the début LP.
After years of ticking over, the company realised they had found a group with the determination and talent worthy of excessive backing.
They were well aware that large scale investment would make or break the company, but boldly followed their hearts and paid up.
It was a decision that was later to play a large role in their downfall.
The Wedding Present were given a budget of £30,000 to record the LP with the promise of up to £20,000 to promote it afterwards.
They booked time in several prestigious London studios and enlisted the help of producer Chris Allison, with whom they had first worked six months previously on ‘My Favourite Dress’, but the recording began on a sour note and remained agitated throughout.
The first argument centred on the producer's plan to sample Charman's kit, a process where pads are used to trigger off sounds in a computer.
Charman, a stickler for musical purity, did not relish the idea.
It is a method that is nearly always used there days but at the time it was quite a new technique, certainly for a band like The Wedding Present.
Solowka thinks Charman was unnaturally suspicious of anyone connected with the music business.
Charman considered that a producer's main function was to force compromises on bands.
The eventual sacking of Charman largely stems back to the rows with Allison during the recording of the album.
‘Allison kept wanting to put these fiddly little bits in and ideas that we all thought were naff,’ says Charman.
‘In some ways this was when I began to get my reputation for complete irritability.
The others were more quiet about it but I was telling him to fuck off.
I thought his job was to do a powerful production job, not rewrite songs.’
Allison acknowledges that there was a slightly strained period when he first began working with the group, but he found Charman particularly antagonistic.
‘Shaun had very, very strong ideas about how he thought things should go.
He took the lead and he was a difficult person to get on with.
He had a strange sort of attitude.
He is single-minded and it is hard to communicate with him.
I've never met anyone like him, he wanted to everything the Shaun Charman way and would not compromise.’
Although they agreed with many of Charman's sentiments, the other members tried to deal with Allison's unwanted musical suggestions in a diplomatic fashion.
‘Our method was to sit down and say: ‘Look, Chris, I'm not sure if this idea is working’, rather than Shaun's approach which was to say: ‘Allison, you're the devil and you're trying to destroy the group’,’ says Gedge.
At the outset of a partnership that was to lead to great success, Allison was placed on the front line of the band's paranoid attitude to outside influence.
‘I think it takes a long while for The Wedding Present to build up trust in someone.
At first, it became obvious to me that they were not interested in seeing someone else's approach.
They have become a bit more open-minded now but they like to make changes slowly.
It is frustrating as a producer, when you have so many ideas that are worth trying to make it better.’
The band, who had previously controlled every aspect of their working environment in the studio and elsewhere, misunderstood the producer's role.
They assumed he would provide a technical input but underestimated the degree of creative guidance he would proffer.
Charman bickered with Allison, often over irrelevant points.
Allison would respond by becoming moody and it soured many of the sessions.
‘I was always the most irascible with him.
I am not the master of tack and I always say what I think.
Unfortunately, in a way, it is a bit of a character fault.
It is a character fault, what am I taking about?
I get into rows with people.
Unfortunately at the end, I discovered the band were not with me as much as I thought.
I really genuinely thought I was speaking for everyone, but they would now say they didn't particularly agree with me.
The rest were not as aggressive as me.
At the time I  took it too far and probably they didn't agree with that,’ he says.
Standing as one during the vital mixing stage of the album, the group asked Allison to leave the studio when the atmosphere became too tense, and he waited outside while the band finished the job themselves.
‘It was embarrassing,’ says Charman.
‘Chris was hanging around in the pool room and we kept going out to play him the mixed songs on my ghetto-blaster.
There was some problem about him getting paid so he stuck around.
He spliced up the tape afterwards and things like that.
We just ran out of patience with him.
He was not giving us what we wanted.
He was making it wimpy.’
The group resorted to this unusual course of action because they were spending hours discussing points during the mix, and progress was laborious and troubled.
‘I wouldn't use the word ‘sacked’ to describe what we did with Chris.
It is too harsh, and word I don't like using anyway.
I think we actually said to him: ‘Chris — you're off the project’,’ said Gedge.
The group coped adequately without Allison because the engineer, Steve Lyon, was able to interpret their mixing ideas.
‘We were all grown men.
The band had strong ideas about production.
I don't think Chris and the band know each other well enough at the time.
Just because of that one incident, it didn't mean we felt Chris's point of view could never be valid again,’ says Gedge.
The band rejected almost all of Allison's arrangement ideas during the two months recording the LP, but were more receptive to his view on studio craft.
‘I think we tend to take up most of his engineering  ideas.
I think Chris's main dream is to be accepted as a songwriter.
I think he would like us to have a more commercial sound but that is not really what we want,’ says Gedge.
The job of promoting the LP was made simple for Red Rhino when the band decided to call the album ‘George Best’ in a tribute to the flamboyant Manchester United and Northern Ireland winger.
Although the record itself had no lyrical reference to the footballer, the cover and the promotion focused almost entirely on him.
The cover shot saw long-haired Best with the famous red United shirt hanging outside his shorts.
Rugged and handsome, Best evokes a myriad of different memories.
On the pitch he represented amazing, individualistic skill and off it he typified the so-called swinging sixties (although the picture was actually taken in the early seventies) of nightclubs, Manchester, and a time when footballers behaved like pop stars, not robots.
Red Rhino paid Best £500 (in cash, at his agent's request) to pose with the group and nabbed one of the bargains of the decade.
The media could not resist the combination of pop meeting sporting legend.
Red Rhino and the band were pleased to satiate the demand with posters, badges and even cardboard, 10-inch high George Best figures.
The band's only real reference point with Best was Solowka's love of soccer and the Mancunian roots of Solowka and Gedge.
They were both boys in Manchester in the late sixties and early seventies, when every United and City game seemed to be a 4–3 victory with Best or Colin Bell scoring the winner three minutes from time.
The Best image gave the group a nostalgic feel but it also provided an earthy, northern glamour.
It have been pouring down with rain on a wet Saturday afternoon, but the sight of Best, haircut shimmying in unison with his hips as he splayed three hard nut halfbacks, was Manchester's version of Hollywood on legs.
Just before the LP was released, the mood in the music press appeared to be turning slightly against the band, but the record reaffirmed their status as press darlings.
Ron Rom in Sounds said it was: ‘A great album, packed with great songs, great guitars and great lyrics.’
Danny Kelly in NME said it was: ‘An unmitigated delight, the best British debut of the year, and the most remarkable contribution to humanity ever achieved by supporters of Leeds United.’
Writers loved the George Best theme and for months afterwards footballing phrases were weaved into articles on the band.
Chris Roberts in Melody Maker suggested they needed ‘more width down the wings’ while Martin Aston in Q compared their guitar style to Best's deft footwork.
Most concentrated on the popular view of Best, with Smash Hits one of the few exceptions, as they churlishly explained to their readers: ‘He was a former footballing hero who used to get raddled a lot.’
In interviews, Gedge said he was fascinated by the downside of Best's character; the flaws in his make-up that led him to skip training session and stay in discotheques (as they were then called) for hours after he had officially opened them.
‘The George Best career was an attractive one.
He could have been the best footballer in the world if he'd have bothered turning up and stuff,’ Gedge told Sounds .
‘I kind of like that spirit.
He was really nice when we met him, he lives a life of total pleasure.
When he first came in I offered him a drink out of courtesy and I think he thought I was taking the Mick out of his drinking in the past.
He said ‘No thanks, I'm on the wagon now lads’.’
Of course, George Best and The Wedding Present have precious little in common .
Early on, Solowka and Gregory did their own bit of AWOLing but it was usually because of a Littlewoods Cup replay, not to escort a bevy of simpering temptresses in nylon flairs.
Like many people branded with the attributes of reliability, honesty, and politeness, the band were attracted to the George Best myth and basked in its reflected glory.
It might have been Best on the cover but the people behind the scam were more steady fullbacks than dazzling wingmen.
The outcome was that it attracted masses of press attention.
The papers received their photo of the band with Best but also scurried to their files to find their own action shots.
It was a marvellous plug for the record and probably the most deliberate piece of exploitation and manipulation  that Best has fallen for, although the band still claim this was not their intention.
It is to the band's eternal credit that the piece of plastic within the sleeve was worthy of the attention focused upon it.
Staying on an independent label had maintained their credibility and an album of itchy, irresistible pop was consummate for most observers.
Only Chris Roberts in Melody Maker mounted an attack of any substance when he accused them of sounding ‘one-dimensional’ and ‘piss-poor on mystery and magic.’
The album marked Gedge's arrival as a respected lyricist.
NME bracketed him with luminaries like Elvis Costello, Morrissey and Ray Davies.
Danny Kelly wrote of Gedge: ‘He has etched a dozen little lovescapes of sometimes quite breathtaking realism, a world fuelled by desire, lust, paranoia, romance and bitterness, yet distinctly more Dalston than Dallas , more Darlington than Dynasty .
There are songs about fleeting eye contacts, snatched and forever treasured, about drunken kisses and casual betrayals, about girls who walk home a different way each night to avoid the air-head wolf-whistles.
Real situations, real feelings, real people, real love.
The album sold 18,000 copies within two weeks and entered the album chart at number 47.
It displaced The Smiths' ‘Strangeways Here We Come’ in the independent charts and stayed there for several weeks.
It was widely recognised as an important landmark and NME readers voted it their fourth best album of 1987.
Typically, Gedge has since gone in for his usual strict self-criticism.
‘When ‘George Best’ came out I thought it was OK-ish, but didn't think it was brilliant,’he told Sounds .
‘I was a lot happier with ‘Bizarro’, the whole idea of it and everything.
I think the first LP was a bit one-dimensional, like an arbitrary collection of jangly pop songs.
A lot has happened musically in the world since.
There's been a lot of new groups who are maybe harder, which we're fans of, so they have probably influences us as well.’
In Red Rhino's terms, it was a fantastically expensive record to make but Korda Marshall at RCA did not see it that way.
‘It was an exciting record but I thought it was badly made.
Considering the confines of their budget, I thought it was a good one.
They didn't have a lot of time on it and it was effectively an engineer/producer, rather than a producer.
It could have been a much, much better album if it had received better technical production,’ he says.
Five songs from the CD and cassette version of the album made John Peel's Festive 50 of 1987 with ‘Everyone Thinks He Looks Daft’, the highest number three.
The other placings were ‘My Favourite Dress’(six), ‘A Million Miles’(eight), ‘Anyone Can Make A Mistake’(10) and ‘Getting Nowhere Fast’(31).
They did not want to pull another track from the album for their next single and recorded four brand new ones with ‘Nobody's Twisting Your Arm’ as the key song.
It was recorded with the original Wedding Present line-up but by the time it was released in February 1988, Shaun Charman had been replaced by Simon Smith.
Nothing comes easy
It seems to be an unwritten law in rock that when the going gets good, the drummer gets sacked.
It probably dates back to The Beatles when Richard Starkey became Ringo the millionaire and Pete Best kept his real name and ended up as a civil servant.
The aversion to drummers extends across musical boundaries and, like hundreds before them, The Wedding Present ousted their man from the drums.
In a fanzine interview, Gedge was asked why Shaun Charman had left.
He replied: ‘Because we sacked him.
He was going to leave anyway and we've had a succession of drummers really because he didn't play on the first single.
He's never been particularly happy about being in the group and it just came to a head.’
The statement is flippant, condensed, and a slightly contorted version of the truth.
The sacking was actually a complex and protracted affair.
In a much earlier article, both Gedge and Charman were asked their proverbial ‘miscellaneous likes’.
Gedge replied, ‘Winding Shaun up’ and Charman said, ‘Arguing with David.’
From the very beginning, there was a reasonably healthy dissension between them, although it did not evolve into anything serious until about 18 months into the band's career.
Charman complained if he felt gigs were not properly organised and quickly became frustrated.
‘He is aggressive but he is a very honest person.
He used to say he got angry because he cared so much.
He was always bothered about what people would think,’ says Gedge.
Gedge felt Charman's personality was at odds with the rest of the band and Charman regularly found himself isolated during discussions.
‘It got predictable that we would argue with Shaun.
We could not sit down and talk with him.
It was usually me arguing with him.
I felt I was arguing on behalf of myself and the other two, who never rose to the bait.
I felt really intimidated by him.
I used to tease Shaun a bit and I used to ask for it in a way.’
Unlike many disagreements within bands, it did not relate to Charman's actual playing and there was none of the usual ‘musical differences’.
Everyone was basically content with the music and there were no debates about the group's creative direction.
Charman was himself insecure about his drumming ability, but it  was not a factor in his departure.
He accepts that his contrary nature sometimes irritated the other members but feels his sacking contained an element of Gedge wanting to remove a strong influence from the group, an influence often opposed to his own.
The drummer fought battles that the other three say as largely irrelevant.
‘He was continually at loggerheads with David.
We were in a situation where we would not have been able to keep going.
It was never a power struggle because that assumes one person controls the group.
You never hear of groups being taken over by the drummer.
Shaun used to want to argue about essentially trivial things like whether we should appear on Top Of The Pops — and that was just after the first single.
He was easy to wind up and I think we used to do that a bit too much.
It was always important to him that he had a voice and it was difficult to work with him,’ says Gregory.
The disagreements between Charman and Allison were amplified in the airtight atmosphere of the studio, but they were always petty and did not run to bitterness.
‘I once travelled on a train from Leeds to London with Shaun and we got on fine.
He was perfect company in every way until it came to discussing music, and recording in particularly,’ says Allison.
By the end of 1987 the group were growing tired of the quarrelsome situation.
Matters came to a head in a break during the sessions for the first LP.
Gedge and Charman were playing pool when an argument broke out.
‘Shaun was getting really worked up and red and actually came at me with a pool cue,’ says Gedge.
‘It is the nearest I have come to being smacked.
It really built up inside him.’
The phone rang just as Gedge believed he was about to be belted and the situation was thus defused.
Charman thinks Gedge has exaggerated the incident and completely misread his intentions.
‘He was totally unreasonable about it.
I know how he interpreted it and I have told him so often about how it was.
We were talking about a point and I was not even particularly annoyed.
I was taking a shot.
He said something to me and I stood up and waved the cue around.
He was standing miles away and he thought it was an aggressive posture.
I did not mean it at all, I thought it was vaguely amusing.
I have not hit anyone since I was about 12,’ he says.
It seems Charman's main fault was his lack of self-confidence and deep mistrust of the music business.
It often led him to become aggressive, especially during band meetings.
The other band members later adopted the term ‘Shaunesque’, referring to aggressive discussion tactics or behaviour considered to show a degree of insecurity.
Considering how closely the band had worked with Charman over the past three years, their method of dismissing him seems to have been unduly formal in the circumstances.
Gedge drafted a letter, Gregory rewrote it in grammatical (and gracious) English, and Solowka produced a final copy in his neatest handwriting.
In view of the help she had rendered the group, Gedge also wrote to Sara Catt, Charman's girlfriend, informing her of the situation too.
Charman's letter was mailed to the home of his parents in Sussex where he had returned to spend the Christmas holiday period of 1987.
Unfortunately the letter to Sarah Catt arrived first and it was she who was the first to break the news — by phone — to Charman, a circumstance that only added to the unpleasant situation.
The drummer claims he had no idea that he was about to be sacked and was shocked to hear the news.
‘One of the most annoying things about getting kicked out is that I never once got a single warning,’ he says.
‘No one ever gave me the slightest inkling that they thought any different than me at the recording sessions and things like that.
It would have been the easiest thing in the world take me into another room and tell me they actually liked what Allison was doing, but they didn't.’
The group expected Charman to be upset but they were taken aback at his extreme response.
Several times, Gedge had persuaded him to stay with the band when he had become disgruntled and ‘warnings’ had not been given because he ostensibly wanted to leave anyway.
During most of Charman's time with the group, the bond between them had been very strong.
Members of groups, especially those in their formative years, find themselves thrown into unnaturally close contact with one another, squashed together in the backs of uncomfortable vans night after night, obliged to eat, live and even sleep together for much of their time.
Even the most tolerant and placid of personalities can find their nerves over-exposed.
But hitherto in The Wedding Present, apart from occasional irritability, there were no major disagreements and the band's set-up was extremely peaceable.
The mood was soured quite significantly during a European tour when Gedge began flirting with Charman's girlfriend, Sara Catt, who was roadying for them.
It obviously upset Charman and after the sacking he realised the strain it had put on his friendship with Gedge.
‘I was getting more and more irritable, partly because of David trying it on with Sara.
I was getting pretty furious about it.
When we got to gigs he would start helping Sara set up, helping to do her job, which he had not done before,’ he says.
Gedge confirms that he flirted with Catt but felt he considered it harmless and totally unrelated to Charman's dismissal.
‘I guess it is probably a bad thing, but I am quite a flirty person.
I think she took it more seriously than I did.
At the time she gave me the impression that she was enjoying the joke.
It was inappropriate of me but I have always been attracted to that kind of danger.
I think most people are.
I've always enjoyed flirting with people, I always have done.
I even flirt on stage.
I love it.
Maybe being abroad for three weeks in a band with seven people wasn't the place to do it because it was a bit contained.’
Catt accepts that it was only a minor detail in her boyfriend's sacking but feels it has a relevance.
She believes Gedge is anxious to play it down because it was he who took it more seriously than herself.
‘It was not the whole thing,’ she says.
‘I mean, it happened.
It is a thing that is only important if you are some sort of lonely fan who loves The Wedding Present and thinks that David is a lovely, sincere person.
It would be upsetting to know that he is really not like that.
It is wrong to think he is supposed to be telling the truth in his songs and presenting a true picture of his personality.
‘This business with me is not the only thing that makes that seem false.
You can be very good at saying these things about love, and doing it in a kind of way people can identify with, but it doesn't necessarily tell the whole truth about yourself.
It depends how you see the whole business of being a pop star.
It is not like being a priest.
At the time it did not matter to us because I didn't want to go out with David.
It didn't count until they kicked Shaun out,’ she points out.
Gedge would justifiably argue that his songs were neither personal statements about himself or a manifesto on which others should base their lives.
His lyrics take in many facets of relationships, including their positive and negative sides.
He has never deified himself; that role has always been taken on by the press, or more usually, the fans.
Charman did not confront Gedge over his flirtation with Catt because he didn't want to cause a  major disruption in the middle of a tour.
However, he did tell Gedge he was having thoughts of leaving, but did not say why.
As it happened, his musing about opting out were pre-empted when Catt received her letter from Gedge two days after Christmas Day.
‘It began with a general paragraph about Christmas: Oh isn't Christmas lovely?
This is what I did over Christmas, a few personal details.
It then told me, in some way, that Shaun was being kicked out and it said: Honestly, Sara, you don't know how difficult he is when you're not around,’ she says.
The letter went on to inform her that she was welcome to continue working with the group in the unlikely event that she would want to.
Gedge disagrees with Catt's recollection of the letter.
‘It actually you said something like: I know your answer to this will almost certainly be no, but if you still want to be involved with The Wedding Present, then don't let Shaun's sacking stand in your way,’ he says.
To confuse the issue even more, at least from Catt's point of view, her letter from Gedge, Solowka and Gregory arrived at a time when she thought that her role in the group was about to become more prominent.
She was in line as a possible replacement for Gregory, and had actually taken a bass guitar to her parent's home in Portsmouth over the Christmas holidays to set about learning how to play The Wedding Present's material.
Gregory was seriously thinking of getting out of the music business at the time.
After she contacted her boyfriend and told him the news, they immediately headed back to Leeds.
‘Sara told me my letter was going to arrive and we decided to storm up to Leeds really quickly.
I remember my dad saying he knew something was up because he could see it in my eyes,’ says Charman.
To this day the drummer has never opened the envelope containing the letter.
‘I couldn't face it because it was too horrible.
I knew what it was going to say.
I could never bring myself to open it.
I've still got it sealed.
It was really awful, travelling back to Leeds and finding your life cave in on you in a week.
It was a hell of a big thing, it was the most miserable New Year I have ever had.
I sat down and didn't say a word.’
As well as losing their positions in arguably Britain's most loved independent band, the couple were also upset because their circle of friends disintegrated around them.
‘It is not like a Dynasty or Dallas thing.
It is more sad than anything else,’ says Sara.
‘There were loads of horrible things after Shaun got thrown out.
One minute we were quite settled in Leeds and the next minute we were running around in the rain in Brighton trying to get a flat and not being able to draw dole.
The worst thing by far, and what I can never get used to, is that we went around Europe with them for a month, living with them, sleeping in the same room, and apart from the odd bit of nagging, everything was fine.
The fact that all of them together were plotting something is hard to get used to.
You don't expect that from people you have known for a long time.
The personal side of it all is unbearable.’
Murrell, who was not going out with Gedge at the time, was surprised when the couple suddenly packed up, tore down their Wedding Present posters and left Leeds.
‘For selfish reasons, I was upset and annoyed that I was left alone.
I was pissed off at them leaving me like that because I had hardly any other friends in Leeds.
Shaun confessed to me loads of times that he wanted to leave the band because it wasn't a good living and he didn't enjoy it that much.
I was sick of him moaning and moaning about being in the group.
I couldn't believe it when he was so upset about it,’ she says.
The couple decided to visit Gregory, who they say was very apologetic about it all.
While they were with him, the rest of the band pulled up in a van outside.
‘It was really nasty.
The others, including the new drummer, had come to pick Keith up for a practice while I was there.
They went off the next day and recorded the track for the ‘Sergeant Pepper’ LP, it was awful,’he says.
Gedge remembers long periods of silence each time Charman visited and begged to rejoin the group.
Charman thinks Gedge was partly inspired to write ‘Why Are You Being So Reasonable Now?’ about the whole incident.
Gedge will neither deny or admit it but Mike Stout also thinks the song is about Charman.
‘David played it at a soundcheck and when I asked him if it was about Shaun he just smiled and then denied it.
I think a lot of his songs are vaguely autobiographical,’ he says.
Charman returned to Brighton and took several temporary jobs before finding permanent work as a computer operator with the Inland Revenue.
He has joined a new group called The Popguns who have appeared several times in the independent charts.
Amazingly, Charman's departure and replacement by Simon Smith, received scant attention in the music press.
It was surprising because the group had always been perceived as a solid fourpiece and Charman was often vociferous during interviews.
In NME , which usually covered the band's activities in extreme detail, Charman was not even mentioned by name in the tiny news item informing readers of the band's new drummer.
Sounds did a more through job under the  headline, ‘Honeymoon Over?’
The tone of the article was that Charman was getting out because he did not want to commit himself to the group on a full-time basis.
A ‘spokesman’ was quoted as saying: ‘There are no fights or anything: it's just people adapting to changes in the group's status.’
It was a doubly unsettling time period for the group because Keith Gregory told the band he was seriously thinking about leaving.
‘It wasn't anything to do with the group.
It was personal things.
I had a lot to sort out.
I think I stayed out of a sense of loyalty and I began to enjoy it much more.
I'm really happy in the group now.’
The group's press officer, Mick Houghton, thought it was Gregory's departure that he would soon be explaining to the press when suddenly he was told Charman was out.
‘I expected telling questions about Shaun leaving, although in a way, without sounding insulting to Shaun, he was one of the more faceless members of the band.
I don't remember getting into any particularly heavy conversations, but that is symptomatic of the music press.
It is not very probing.
To me, a band with the profile of The Wedding Present, for Shaun to leave under the circumstances he did, it should have actually been a major story,’ he says.
Houghton was not briefed on how to break the news to the media but gave the impression that it was basically Charman's decision.
‘It kind of was, but it was more that he was forced into that position.
It does show the darker side of the band, I suppose.
It would have been my job anyway to make as little as possible of it, but it certainly wasn't difficult to do because nobody seemed that bothered,’ he says.
Brian Hallin believed the band lost faith in Charman.
‘It was very much something between him and the band.
It just fell apart once they had lost confidence in him.
He was a good person to be in the band in the early days but he might have held them back later on because he is not as good a drummer as Simon, and that's putting it mildly.
Shaun was more difficult as a personality, although I never had any fights with him myself.
I think he and David enjoyed a good debate, and there was always an element of that.
He was very geared to the principle of being in an indie band for the sake of it and he would have had difficulty signing to a major label on any terms.’
Solowka remembers band discussions turning into arguments because Charman took almost every point as a personal attack on himself.
It Charman thought the band was making too many compromises, his own paranoid attitude was not helping his views win favour with the rest.
He believes there were many contributory factors to his sacking but the prevailing  one was that his views often clashed with Gedge's.
He felt the other two were satisfied to play supporting roles to Gedge and to a lesser extent, himself.
By their third single, he believed he held an important position in the group because Solowka and Gregory were often absent from concerts.
‘David obviously wrote the songs and everything but I felt a lot of responsibility came on to me at that time, although it was nothing like David's,’ he says.
Around the time of ‘My Favourite Dress’, Solowka and Gregory began to call Gedge The Boss in jest, but Charman refused.
‘It was a kind of flippant remark, but I would not call David it.
David began signing his letters The Boss and I think he quite liked it,’ says Charman.
Gedge agrees that Solowka was almost like a part-time member of the band for a while but feels Charman flatters himself to consider there was any kind of parity between them in terms of power.
‘I think he is living in a bit of a dream world.
I was doing about 90 per cent of the jobs.
Shaun got the impression that he had responsibility but I can't remember him doing anything except organise a few gigs.
He had an equal voice in band meetings and an equal vote but he was only one out of four.
Simon now does about 10 times more than Shaun ever did.’
Several years after the sacking, it is difficult to assimilate conflicting evidence or make any real judgements.
There is certainly an element of closing ranks against Charman within the current band and their entourage.
They portray him as a confused mixture of honesty and cantankerousness: a big heart governed by a stroppy mind.
Obviously, it is in their interests to have him perceived in such a way.
For his part, Charman felt his arguments were extremely valid and was desperate for the group to remain loyal to their independent ideology, regardless of practicalities.
His refusal to compromise and his deeply suspicious nature was spoiling the pleasure of actually being part of the group.
None of the band are known for their excessive cordiality towards figures within the business, but unlike Charman, their misgivings did not manifest themselves in the form of ill temper.
It was childish of the group to continually bait Charman and the situation was not helped by Gedge's overtones to Catt.
This all simply helped to exaggerate the differences that always existed between Charman and the three other members.
When Charman first joined the band he told them that him ambition was to be as big as Marc Riley and The Creepers one day.
It is a remark that effectively sums up the difference between himself and the rest of the band.
They did not want success at all costs, but likewise they were not willing to jump off the pop escalator, or stand on the spot arguing among themselves.
In the end Charman had to go.
Otherwise the group might not have survived.
Hude dnipro hude
In the darkness of Middleton Civic Hall, a couple are intently watching the activities on stage.
Ivan and Rosina Solowka are noticeable for two reasons — they are older than most of the others at the concert and they have the broadest smiles in the hall.
It would be a massive oversimplification to see The Wedding Present's excursion into Ukrainian music as merely an attempt by Peter Solowka to please his parents.
However, there is still some truth in the statement because he believes he owes a debt to them and his East European culture.
Ivan Solowka was born in the Ukraine, near its border with Poland.
His family's small plot of land was stolen by the Russians.
At the start of the Second World War, when he was just 15, he was taken away by the German army.
He was made to work long hours as a farm labourer and, like thousands of others, he was classed as ‘Untermensch’(subhuman) by the soldiers.
After the war, he decided to emigrate to Britain rather than return to his homeland which was under Soviet rule.
‘He thinks of everything in his early days as claustrophobic and horrible.
He hated the Communists because they nicked his family's bit of land and he hated the Germans because they treated them like pigs,’ says Peter Solowka.
Coming from such an impoverished and oppressed background, it is not surprising that Ivan Solowka found life in Britain remarkably pleasant.
‘For him this place is like paradise.
He thinks it is great living in a wide open world,’ says his son.
Directly after the war, Britain was welcoming refugees to man its factories and Ivan Solowka settled in Middleton, Manchester, at the heart of the cotton industry.
Rosina, a Yugoslavian, and the woman who was to become his wife, arrived in the same town five years later.
The Ukrainian settlement in the north west has always been close-knit and Ivan Solowka soon found himself running a club for the 20 or so families in Middleton.
In Manchester itself there are a further 600 families.
As young children, Peter and his sister Norah, were brought up with a strong emphasis on Ukrainian culture.
Norah attended ballet classes and studied Ukrainian dancing and they both attended a special school for Ukrainian children on Saturday mornings.
At about the age of seven, for no apparent reason, Solowka began to dislike the classes.
‘I used to hate it, I don't know why.
I had friends there but I used to just start crying before I was due to go.’
His parent did not force him to attend and he now feels this might  have brought scorn from other members of the community.
‘I really wasn't exposed to any of the culture from the age of seven.
I think my dad wanted me to be.
I think he was regarded as a bit of a failure in Ukrainian circles because I didn't speak the language or dance.’
Many Ukrainians prized cultural education higher than academic.
‘You are a success to them if you fit in with the culture, particularly when they have gone thousands of miles and built up the clubs themselves.
I think my dad had a few differences with them on the upbringing of his children.’
The beginning of The Wedding Present's Ukrainian phase can be traced back to a John Peel session recorded in October 1986.
Solowka began playing a traditional song and the other members joined in.
‘It was just a tune I used to annoy people with.
I knew it from being a kid, but I didn't even know the name of it.’
They put it on to tape and called it ‘Cossachok’, but later gave it the proper title of ‘Hopak’.
It was seen as a one-off but the rest of the band recognised Solowka's zeal.
‘There were no words or logical words or logical argument about why we did it,’ says Solowka.
‘It was possibly my enthusiasm.
They could see I loved it.
Perhaps it appealed to the rest of them because it's very fast.’
A year later, at another John Peel session, they drafted in Len Liggins to help add authenticity to their new-found folk edge.
Liggins, who had studied Russian at university, offered to play balalaika, flute and violin.
The band knew him from his days with another Leeds' band, The Sinister Cleaners.
They recorded the usual four songs and gave them both English and Ukrainian names.
‘You Deceived Me’ became ‘Yikhav Kozak Za Dunai’, ‘Freedom Fighter’became ‘Tiutiunyk’, and so on.
Korda Marshall of RCA was impressed with the material and bought a bootleg tape of the session from Camden Market.
‘The Ukrainian Peel sessions actually made me sit up and take notice.
It showed that they had an intrinsic musical knowledge.
If you put that depth of knowledge with the normal Wedding Present, you can see the talent, musicianship and understanding of what it is they are doing,’ he says.
The response from the band's fans was mixed.
Some took it as a great laugh; others as a brave attempt to champion a little-known music; and others just hated it.
‘I'd say it was a 50–50 reaction.
Some thought we were wasting time,’ says Solowka.
A member of the Leeds' band Hang The Dance, Roman Remeynes, contacted The Wedding Present after hearing the  Ukrainian session and accused them of bastardising the music.
A fluent speaker in Ukrainian, Remeynes was invited into the band to show them how it was done properly.
He sang and played mandolin and flute on their short tour and on another John Peel session (their seventh) in May 1989.
It was obvious that the group were not approaching the material from a novelty aspect, although they were certainly not overserious or pretentious about it.
‘The more Ukrainian records I have bought, the more I have realised that we're really only dipping into it in a superficial way.
Some of the real Ukrainian bands, like The Black Sea Cossacks, are brilliant,’ says Solowka.
Solowka is refreshingly honest, but the band's efforts were legitimate enough to prompt the British Ukrainian Association to ask them to appear in a video newsletter and the set definitely broadened the band's appeal.
The Bradford Ukrainian Society was particularly supportive and provided them with dictionaries, contacts and artwork.
At a concert at London's Town and Country Club they were joined on stage by Metelic, a team of Ukrainian dancers from Reading who were given a rousing reception.
While long-standing fans either relished it or waited patiently for them to return to straightforward indie pop, more than a few older folk fans switched on the enigma of The Wedding Present.
Partly as a result of this unexpected support, the band decided to release the Ukrainian Peel sessions on a 10-inch mini-LP, ‘Ukrainski Vistupi V Johna Peela’, no doubt most fans just asked for The Wedding Present's Ukrainian album.
Getting the record into the shops was fraught with problems.
It was pressed at the time when Red Rhino were having their well documented financial troubles.
The company went through the whole process of licensing the tapes from the BBC, sorting out the elaborate artwork and manufacturing the records, cassettes and CDs.
In the end, the mini-LP initially catalogued as Reception Records' REC 010, did not actually leave Red Rhino's York warehouse, except for a few copies.
The band had already struck a deal with RCA who gratefully accepted the chance to put out a Wedding Present record earlier than expected.
The records in the warehouse were bought by RCA who overstamped them and later pressings bore no concealed reference at all to Reception.
However, several copies of the record are thought to be in circulation  carrying the original Reception logo.
A very limited edition single was put out by Red Rhino, to promote the album it was actually unable to release.
The sampler contained ‘Katrusya And Svitit Misyats’ and ‘Davni Chasy’.
When the tapes reverted to RCA's control, the company got a very pleasant surprise.
Hidden beneath the abstruse title of ‘Davni Chasy’, they discovered a rollicking number they knew better as ‘Those Were The Days’.
Back in the autumn of 1968 a version of the traditional folk tune gave Mary Hopkin a British number one and had a lengthy run of more than five months in the charts.
The zest and distinctiveness of The Wedding Present's version could mean only one thing, a certain chart hit.
The band were violently against the idea.
‘RCA were all into getting Mary Hopkin in for the video and everything.
It would have been the end of The Wedding Present,’ says Solowka.
RCA were displeased by the band's attitude.
‘They told us the Ukrainian single would have gone to number one and we told them we did not want to be number one.
No one in their history had ever said to them that they didn't want to be famous,’ says Gedge.
The band probably exaggerate the effect a Cossack-flavoured version of ‘Those Were The Days’ would have had on their career.
The Wedding Present have shown a refreshing disrespect for convention and largely won admiration for it.
The outcome of a blatant novelty song would have been lots of cash (something to which everyone had a liking) and a higher profile.
Following it up with a barbaric dose of guitar pop like ‘Kennedy’ would have seen off any new-found ‘fans’and old faithfuls would have welcomed back their indie darlings at the drop of a balalaika.
Incidentally, several Radio One DJs still spotted ‘Davni Chasy’, including Gary Davies.
The ‘Davni Chasy’ issue was important because it helped both the band and RCA learn a great deal about each other, although it is probably closer to the truth to say it was really a case of RCA simply learning more about the staunch and pedantic attitude of The Wedding Present.
The label was still left with a vibrant mini-LP that débuted in the charts at number 22 and went on to sell nearly 30,000, 6,000 of them in Israel.
Solowka believes it was due to its similarity to traditional Jewish music.
Critical reaction was generally favourable, although it was clear many writers found it confusing.
Andrew Collins of NME said it was ‘A bold experiment with verve and fresh breath’ Mr Spencer at Sounds said it was ‘spellbinding’and Tim Nicholson at Record Mirror thought it was ‘Riotously enjoyable and uniquely stupid.’
The only real criticism came from Melody Maker's The Stud Brothers who dubbed it ‘really embarrassing’ and stamped Gedge, ‘The most unscrupulous, manipulative, bandwagon-jumping  reptile in the history of popular entertainment.’
In a nasty, but highly entertaining tirade, one of the more perceptive remarks was that if it wasn't for The Wedding Present, Ukrainian music would be confined solely to Blue Peter specials; surely one of the main reasons the band did it in the first place.
In the spring of 1989, the augmented Wedding Present line-up completed a short tour to promote the record.
At many shows they actually supported themselves by playing a brief set of their usual material.
Gedge gracefully took a step sideways and let the likeable Remeynes take centre-stage.
‘I didn't mind moving out of the limelight.
I could enjoy the concerts more.
If you are the singer and guitarist it is difficult trying to remember the words, play guitar at the same time and think of something witty to say between the songs,’ he says.
The band's press officer, Mick Houghton, thought Gedge looked decidedly uneasy during the shows.
‘Maybe it just looked uncomfortable from the outside.
There he was at the side of the stage, looking pretty, inconsequentially strumming his guitar.
He made no attempt to talk to anybody, he didn't chat to the audience, which he did during the warm-up spots as the proper Wedding Present,’ he says.
Roman Remeynes took on the frontman's job with aplomb.
His infectious smile and sense of fun was highly reminiscent of Gedge anyway.
Liggins or Remeynes took time during the concerts to explain the lyrical similarities between Ukrainian and Wedding Present songs.
A lost love or family tragedy had the same impact on a Ukrainian living 300 years ago as it does today on a 30-year-old singer living in Leeds.
The concerts were not at well attended as normal Wedding Present shows, but this was partly expected because they had less promotion.
Those that did turn up enjoyed the jovial atmosphere and frantic dancing ensued, except at the home-town concert in Middleton.
A law as ancient as Ukrainian folk song, ruled that chairs had to be left out because it was a Sunday.
It was no sweat because everyone stood on the chairs and danced anyway.
Everett True, writing in Melody Maker , probably summed up the general reaction to the shows when he wrote: ‘It's rock.
It's foreign.
It's downright ridiculous.
But what the hell, it works.’
Sub-editors loved the Eastern excursion and imaginations ran riot when it came to headlines.
The most inspired included ‘East Bloc 'n' Roll’(The Listener ), ‘Three Steppes To Heaven’(NME ), ‘Ukraine, You Saw, You Conquered’(Record Mirror ) and, perhaps best of all, with its double pun, ‘That's My Favourite National Dress’(Sounds ).
Among the corny headlines, acclaim and criticism, it is easy to forget the motivation behind the music but Solowka puts it back into perspective.
‘It is pure nostalgia.
It is a way of relating to my parents.
If I know the tunes, the music and the moods in which they were brought up, I can feel more at home with them.’
The news will delight and horrify Wedding Present fans in roughly equal measures is that the band may follow up ‘Ukrainski Vistupi V Johna Peela’ some time in the future.
Be honest
Fans wondered whether there was anything sinister about the four tracks on the band's first record of 1988.
‘Nobody's Twisting Your Arm’, ‘I'm Not Always So Stupid’, ‘Don't Laugh’ and ‘Nothing Comes Easy’all expressed negative sentiments in their titles but Gedge did not realise this until it was pointed out.
Only NME welcomed it with excitement.
James Brown made it the perfunctory Single Of The Week and concentrated mainly on the depth of lyrical content.
He wrote: ‘If someone has just stepped out of your life you'll be better reaching for this single than a bottle, razor blade or handkerchief.’
David Stubbs, in the reliably rude Melody Maker said Gedge sounded like ‘an existentialist garden gnome’ and Andy Hurt in Sounds described it as having ‘hapless vocals, an oh-so-ordinary melody line and limp-wristed production.’
The band's weakest ever single reached number 46 in the Gallup charts, an achievement supported by their first proper video in which they frolicked among hundreds of balloons.
Gedge told Smash Hits he liked the texture of rubber against his flesh and was fortunate enough to be dubbed, ‘A bit of a perv.’
Hiding at ninth on the bill, beneath stars like Wet Wet Wet and The Christians, the band found themselves on a remake of The Beatles' ‘Sergeant Pepper’, called, with a high degree of originality, ‘Sergeant Pepper Knew My Father’.
They covered ‘Getting Better’ on the LP to raise money for the charity, Childline.
‘It was a rush decision to do it, we were phoned up and the next day after that we recorded it.
I don't like the original LP to tell you the truth, it's not The Beatles greatest LP, but ‘Getting Better’ is one of the best songs.
We did it in our style — sped it up, turned up the guitars and rattled it out,’ Gedge told NME .
The Beatles track was the first to feature new drummer Simon Smith.
He was well known to the band because he once shared a house with Solowka in Leeds.
Like Gregory, Smith has strong military element to his background.
He was born in 1965 at an RAF hospital in Lincoln where his father was serving as a flight sergeant.
Smith was brought up in Newark in Nottinghamshire and he left his home town to study mathematics at Leeds University.
He failed the end of year exams after the first year and changed his subject to sociology, in which he later attained a degree.
After leaving university he set up a roadying business on the government's Enterprise Allowance  Scheme.
It was hardly a success as he channelled most of his energies into drumming with local groups.
He had played drums since he was 17, including a spell with Solowka's old band The Chorus.
‘I had known The Wedding Present for a while and liked the music,’ he says.
‘I was aware of Shaun's style and quite liked it.
I think I began to have more of an influence as I settled into the group.’
Many new fans missed out on the spiky delights of their early material so Red Rhino did a mopping up exercise and put 12 songs on a mid-price album called ‘Tommy’.
All the tracks had previously been heard by the reviewers who, almost in passing, noted that it was ‘naive, energetic and uncomplicated.’
The group signed 1,000 copies of the record for sale exclusively in record shops affiliated to The Chain With No Name.
Most writers used the record as an excuse to reassess the group.
Paul Oldfield topped the lot in Melody Maker when he wrote of the track ‘Living And Learning’ that it ‘made me think of a man who favoured The Jasmine Minks and My Bloody Valentine, but whose bedroom was so damp that miraculous spores and mildew afflicted his brown suede and paisley.’
In the main, it was back to the ‘ordinary’ theme.
Record Mirror said the band ‘summed up the feelings of the nation's would be non-conformist youth by being irritatingly ordinary, by creating a neighbourly sound of overwhelming inconspicuousness.’
Stuart Maconie was more succinct in NME when he wrote that, ‘The Wedding Present should be cherished.
The celebrate the ordinary, glorify the every day.’
The group came even closer to a Top 40 spot with their next single, ‘Why Are You Being So Reasonable Now?’.
It reached number 42 before slipping down to 48.
The CD and cassette versions of the single contained five tracks and Gallup deemed them ineligible for the singles charts.
If their sales had been included, it would have been one of the few wholly independent records to reach the Top 40.
The Wedding Present have often talked about their ambivalent attitude towards chart success but just missing out upset manager Brian Hallin who complained to NME that Gallup had ‘moved the goal posts around.’
In terms of radio and television attention, a record at 42 in the charts might as well be at 92.
‘Why Are You Being So Reasonable Now?’, incidentally the group's fourth song with a question in its title (at that time), received the worst reaction of any of their releases.
Sounds said it, ‘lacked that vital emotional jackboot,’Melody Maker had the sprawling 13-word judgement: ‘Reasonable is the last thing I feel when I hear this shambling mess,’ and even NME took off the gloves with: ‘David Gedge's approach is as suitable as yellow and red check boxer shorts: piss stained.’
Gedge went on to regret persuading the rest of the band that it was good enough for release as a single.
‘I thought it was a great song, one of the best I'd written, but the rest of the group had their doubts, and looking back I was completely wrong, and made a fool of myself.
We've had lots of letters saying it was the worst thing we've ever done.
So now I take more of a backseat in group debates.
It might be that I can't be objective about my own songs,’ he told City Limits .
While the band were recording the single, Gedge either had a flash of sheer inspiration or hit upon an elaborate chat-up method.
He asked studio waitress, Emanuelle de la Lubie, to translate ‘Why Are You Being So Reasonable Now?’ and did another set of vocals in French.
The result was a cultural exchange trip with The Wedding Present becoming Cadeau De Mariage and ‘Why Are You Being So Reasonable Now?’ becoming, ‘Pourquoi Es Tu Devenue Si Raisonnable?’
‘It was just a whim.
I wanted to do a French record that would sell in France.
The French record market is very conservative and about 80 per cent of the records in their chart are actually French.
It's very difficult for an English group to make it there, so I thought it would be nice to a French one because I quite admire that conservative spirit.
We released it in Britain as well because we thought copies would be imported back to Britain at an inflated price for the British collector,’ Gedge told Scene And Heard fanzine.
The band contributed an acoustic version of ‘Give My Love To Kevin’ to a compilation tape given away with Underground magazine.
Fans wrote letters to the band enthusing and it prompted them to include the rustic version on the CD, cassette and French version of the single.
Throughout 1988 and early 1989, while The Wedding Present were heavily involved in talks with RCA, their backers Red Rhino, began to suffer financial problems.
An unpaid tax bill instilled fears into the companies who dealt with Red Rhino and everyone  slapped their bills in at the same time.
They could not secure enough cash quickly and despite several last ditch attempts, went into receivership.
Along with many other groups, The Wedding Present found their product on hold and their projected Ukrainian LP was stuck in Red Rhino's York warehouse until RCA moved in and took over the marketing of it.
It was reported that Red Rhino had debts of more than £300,000.
It is clear that their devotion to The Wedding Present was too strong, and they did not have the resources to see through the whole project.
Luckily, The Wedding Present signed to a major just before Red Rhino folded.
The band were still distressed at the demise because their working relationship had been excellent and they had built up good friendships with the staff, and did not want to seen them lose their jobs.
They also recognised the company's unwavering dedication to finding and supporting independent groups, even if they were not always the most professional marketeers.
The Wedding Present consolidated their reputation as a fine live band during 1988 but released a dearth of new material.
Apart from the two singles, the only new non-Ukrainian songs fans heard were contained on a John Peel session broadcast in May, and one of those was a madcap cover of Altered Image's ‘Happy Birthday’.
‘Take Me, I'm Yours’, an eight-minute guitar tirade later had its name shortened to ‘Take Me!’(although it was actually lengthened in playing time to nine minutes on the LP) after the 100th person pointed out to Gedge that Squeeze had a song of the same name.
It differed from The Wedding Present's title in that it did not contain a comma.
The few songs that The Wedding Present released in 1988 made their way into the various end of year charts.
‘Nobody's Twisting Your Arm’ was kept off top spot in Peel's Festive 50 by The House Of Love's Destroy The Heart’.
The Wedding Present made four more appearances with ‘Take me’(four), ‘Why Are You Being So Reasonable Now?’(eight), ‘I'm Not Always So Stupid’(15), and ‘Don't Laugh’(49).
The greatest distinction achieved by The Wedding Present, though, was to win the NME readers' poll for best band of the year, ahead of REM, The Fall and U2.
Take me!
We might never have this chance again…
An unusually mad-eyed Gedge stared from the cover of NME dated January 14, 1989.
Underneath, in massive letters, was the ‘Gotcha’ and in much smaller type, ‘The Wedding Present Sign Up’.
During the latter part of 1988, the music papers were full of gossip about the band joining forces with a major label.
‘George Best’ had confirmed the group's status as a major outfit and it became inevitable they would soon move on from their Reception Records.
Many of the stories were based on rumour, although others, like the ones about A&R men flying all over Europe to see them and high-ranking company staff jetting in from the States, were in fact true.
The band had wanted a major deal for at least two years previously, but were determined to play it cool.
They were quite happy with the job Red Rhino were doing; their basic view was that a major deal would be better, but not essential.
‘We wanted to tour and sell records around the world but we couldn't because we were locked in England on an indie label.
Our first aim was to stay on Reception and licence it, but no one was prepared to do that,’ says Solowka.
Few companies reached the stage of actually discussing a deal because negotiations invariably broke down early on.
‘They were taking us out for meals.
There was always the point in the conversation where we knew it just wasn't going to work.
They kept telling us what we'd have to do and we kept saying we were not prepared to do it,’ says Gedge.
RCA's Korda Marshall had watched the band's development very closely.
A former musician himself, he was struck by their determined outlook.
‘I say them two or three times and it became more obvious each time I say them that they had a real understanding of what it was they were trying to do musically.
When I met them, I did not come out with all the clichéd bullshit and all the record company going-through-the-motions kind of thing,’ he says.
He had signed The Primitives and the label was pleased with the outcome.
The band had made an album with RCA for £30,000 and sold 500,000 copies around the world and had a Top Five hit with ‘Crash’.
‘I'd taken a band out of the independent scene and guided them and refined them.
I went to my bosses and told them that, in The Wedding Present, there was another one out of the same rough balloon with the potential to be a long-lasting, album-selling, international act.
I didn't think they  could be like REM in seven album's time, but there was a lot depth in there and I knew it wouldn't dry up after one or two albums,’ he recalls.
Negotiations between the parties were protracted and expensive.
The band's legal bill alone was £10,000, about three times the usual cost.
Most of the deal was carried out in New York and this contributed to an air of confusion in the music press.
In the end, RCA was the only company the band felt comfortable about joining.
‘It must be just the personnel.
They are like a small major and they understand some of the things we are talking about.
We have met many A&R men but we felt we could not talk to most of them on any sensible basis,’ says Gedge.
The band were amazed at the high degree of autonomy they secured in the contract.
‘Our conditions were so strict, I'm surprised they signed us at all.
I was convinced that they would back out.
There are some strange things in there, that no group has ever had with a major.
We have complete artistic control,’ says Gedge.
Gedge recognises that the group are a novel proposition for label to take on board.
‘I think we are quite unique because we do not want to take their money and run.
We are also not bothered about being famous or number one in the charts.
We must be the first group they've ever had with such an attitude.
We made hardly any compromises.
Our line has always been, we are what we are, take it or leave it.’
Their extraordinary viewpoint obviously scared away many potential labels.
‘RCA have been really understanding in all the things we do.
They have pointed things out to us, how decision will affect record sales, but they have never got heavy,’ says Gedge.
Brian Hallin recognised the group's choosy approach to the issue of signing and realised he was representing a band with a highly unusual attitude.
‘I don't think they would do almost anything to sell records or to get on.
They are interested in doing it in certain terms.
They are solid in their approach.
The aspirations of a record company go towards mass hysteria but I don't think The Wedding Present see it in those terms.
They want to have an audience but I don't think they are worried about an ever-increasing one,’ he says.
One of the unusual features of the contract is that is not necessarily exclusive.
The band can release material themselves or take it elsewhere if RCA do not want to put it out.
The label also turns a blind eye to the live tapes released by the band.
They concur with the group in seeing it as a way of cutting down on bootleg tapes, though it will still reduce the impact of a future live album.
The group did not take a big advance.
They put the money into a bank account, out of which they pay themselves a monthly salary.
In the contract it states that they can chose their own producer, recording budget and studio.
RCA are also satisfied with the contract.
‘The actual contract itself is in many ways a bit of a red herring.
It is a fair contract.
There are certain things in there that say what we can and can't do, and certain things that say what the band can and can't do,’ says Marshall.
He seems to intimate that the contract is not as solid and as biased toward the group as they believe.
‘How do you define elements of the clauses depends on your perspective.
How do you put a definition on ‘By mutual consent?’
What does it mean?
What does the phrase really mean?
It all comes down to who holds the purse strings, and at the point when it comes down to that level, something has gone wrong.
We are both happy with the contract we have got and feel we have the ability to control the situation.
Although, you could view it as a bad contract, as there are some things in there that are slightly ambiguous.’
He agreed to the clause allowing them to release records elsewhere, after giving RCA the first option, because he say it as common sense.
‘If it is a great record I obviously won't let anyone else have it but if it is a record of David Gedge singing in the bath and only 13 people want to hear it, why bother putting it on RCA?,’ says Marshall.
He hopes the band will significantly expand their fan base.
‘If there is a fault at the moment, it is that they are a bit too élite and cliquey.
I'd say their average fan was under 25 and older than 13.
I'd say there was a large number of students.
I think they are a young audience and a gig-going audience who like to buy exciting records.
I don't think their audience cares about pop success, they don't buy stuff because it is in the charts.
It is more the other way round, they would buy a record because it wasn't in the charts.’
Although the band/label relationship is in its infancy, there have already been disagreements.
RCA was initially keen to release ‘Davni Chasy’ from the Ukrainian LP but eventually agreed it would be a mistake for the band's début single on a major label.
The label warned that fewer sales would result from not putting the group's name on the covers of the ‘Kennedy’ and ‘Brassneck’singles.
‘It presented our sales department with a strange problem.
They are used to selling ‘product’, and they could be selling butter or margarine.
It doesn't make a lot of sense to them to sell margarine without a name on the label.
Led Zeppelin didn't, and New Order don't have their names on the front of their records.
I understood that it was what The Wedding Present wanted, but explaining it to the head of the sales force was a problem.
He accepted it when it was explained to him in the right way.
The band are intelligent boys, they know what they are doing and we let them get on with it.
Obviously, if they wanted to put a lurid picture on the cover, or a picture of a cock, we would ask them why they wanted to do such a thing,’ says Marshall.
Marshall is in an invidious position trying to balance the resoluteness of The Wedding Present and his bosses' basic desire to sell as many records as possible.
He has an unusually high belief in, and loyalty to, the group, but often finds himself in a hopeless tug-of-war.
‘There is an element of confusion at RCA because some people can't understand a band not caring how  successful they are,’ he says.
After ‘Kennedy’ he knew that in terms of chart success, ‘Be Honest’or ‘Take Me’would be the best songs for release as a single.
However, he realised the band were moving in a harder direction so he suggested they re-recorded ‘Brassneck’ with Big Black's Steve Albini as producer.
‘It was not the most commercial thing to do, was it?
We didn't get it on the radio.
We didn't get many TVs out of the video.
It they were saying to me ‘Korda, we're pissed off with our records getting to 32 in the charts — what do we do about it?’
I could tell them exactly how we'd do it.
Hopefully they will one day get fed up of being in a ghetto of just satisfying 50,000 people,’ he says.
Drafting in Steve Albini was a classic case of Marshall supporting the group, but in so doing, indirectly penalising RCA.
It illustrates the fundamental dichotomy of a headstrong band trying to work with a major label.
Marshall admires The Wedding Present, but their position of strength will only last while record sales are healthy.
He can already foresee the day when sales begin to fall and he wants the group to readjust their stringent stance, mainly for their own survival.
‘The thing with The Wedding Present is that they can be as big and as successful as they want to be,’ says Marshall.
I'm not forcing them to be anything because we have other bands and artists who we can force and push to success.
I can very easily help them into a situation where they can be very much more successful than they are but that would mean compromises.
At this point, they don't want to compromise.’
He admits to feeling a fair degree of frustration.
‘There is an element of frustration because I thought ‘Bizarro’ was great.
I was frustrated because they wouldn't allow us to release more than two singles from it.
I knew that if we could have released three or four, we could have sold more records.
If we sell more records there will be more people who enjoy the band and like the album.
I think it is a shame because I think there are another 150,000 people in England who would really like the album if they were aware of it.’
Marshall would love to see the group enjoying Top 10 hits and he feels it could happen, if they soften their approach.
‘My philosophy disagrees with theirs in the long-term because I think for them to succeed properly, they have to subvert from within.
By subvert from within, I mean to actually be on Top Of The Pops and compromising in little bits so that they have big hit records.
I don't think they're in it to make zillions and zillions of pounds, I think they're in it to make great records.
I think their nonchalance about not caring or not giving a damn about record sales is just not true.
I think all that is because we're RCA and they're The Wedding Present.
It is a considered nonchalance.
I don't think they are going to change anything unless they are in the Top 10.’
Hallin also thinks that the group are content to under-achieve.
‘If they want to go at a certain pace and not become a Top Five singles band you have to respect them for it.
I think there is a lot of potential there that they are not even aware of.
I think they will be happy with a long-term development rather than a short term blip.’
Gedge admits the group reacted to signing by subconsciously toughening up their sound and becoming even more pedantic.
‘I think a lot of the time, they are trying to see what they can get away with.
It's not RCA they are trying to put one over, it is the system.
They're trying to beat it, so they bang against us.
I think there is an element of contrariness about them but if they were really honest with themselves deep down, I don't think they would be happy if their records went in at number 150 and they were still playing The Bull And Gate.
I think they have got a different view than they would lead people to believe,’ says Marshall.
The group has never tried to mislead anyone or appear contrary.
From the beginning, they have echoed their disinterest in matters like chart placings and mass popularity.
Hallin feels the band have a grim determination not to water down their sound having signed to a major label.
‘I think it might be a reaction but I think we'll find they do all different kinds of music as they go on.
I don't get the impression that they tried to make a statement by getting more and more obscure.
I don't think Steve Albini was brought in as a statement.
I think people read too much into it.
I think he was brought in just to do a good production job.’
Marshall does not believe they can succeed unless they adapt their approach.
‘If they continually try to buck the system, the system will destroy them in the long run.
If they compromise in very small amounts they will become a stronger and bigger band.
I have one role with The Wedding Present and that is to make them as popular and as successful as I can, while limiting the amount of things whey have to compromise.
One good thing is that we communicate with each other.
We have arguments but they are creative arguments.’
Poor Marshall unwittingly summarises the contradictions of the vigilant A&R man trying to placate two stubborn beast.
He says he signed the band because of their clear musical vision but already hints at wanting to change it.
When A&R men talk of, ‘compromising in little bits’ taken to its extreme, it often means more choruses, fewer verses and the vocals and drums well up in the mix.
He sees them as an ‘albums’ band but would like them to have Top 10 hits in the singles charts.
He acknowledges that the band have an élitist following that generally doesn't buy chart records, but thinks he can expand their fan base by getting in the charts.
The contradictions are not just one-sided.
The Wedding Present want to make records but say they are not bothered how many they sell.
They joined a major label so that they could sell records throughout the world and then made the job harder by keeping their names off record sleeves and rejecting full page adverts for smaller ones.
They want the group presented as an equal four-piece, and yet Gedge writes most of the songs, sings them, and is by far the most charismatic member.
RCA is content to let the group try it their own way and win a lot of the early battles.
The mood will change when the group's new record sells fewer than the last one.
Every group or artist reaches that point and there are two ways to respond.
Either the compromises begin and records become more accessible, or the band leaves the label, usually by virtue of being dropped or, in contract parlance, the record company failing to take up the next year's option.
Currently, the band say if the worst happens they will simply return again to independent status and carry on releasing records, if the desire is still intact.
Few groups take such a route but The Wedding Present's individualistic work structure and division of labour would seem to increase its likelihood.
Nevertheless, the fame and wealth provided by major league status can be very persuasive, even to the most uncompromising if indie outfits.
One day this will all be yours
The early part of 1989 was taken up touring and promoting the Ukrainian album.
As soon as the short tour was over, Gedge began working on new material for their début RCA LP.
They again decided to use Chris Allison as producer.
The earlier bickering had evolved into a solid, working relationship based on a mutual respect.
The records released featuring the partnership had a high degree of consistency, and the band felt comfortable with the familiarity of Allison.
Although now signed to a major, The Wedding Present still retained their parsimonious values.
The LP was recorded in just six weeks and the band snubbed luxuries like the studio's swimming pool.
‘You are in a studio to make records, not to go swimming,’ points out Gedge matter-of-factly.
‘If you want to go swimming you can do it for less than £800 a day.
Some of these studios are like holiday camps.
Most of the songs on ‘Bizarro’ had been regulars in the live set for some time but newer ones like ‘Crushed’and ‘Brassneck’were aired for the first time over the August Bank Holiday at the Reading Festival and John Peel's 50th birthday party on August 29.
As a devotee of Peel's programme, Gedge was delighted to appear alongside the DJ's other favourites, The Fall and The House of Love.
The Undertones were due to re-form for the night but John and Damian O'Neill had to return to Derry following the tragic death of their father.
Gedge has never underestimated Peel's role in breaking the group.
Peel carried on playing their records and booking them in for sessions, despite their high degree of success.
He usually stops playing bands when they break through, although unlike most, The Wedding Present's development has not incorporated the traditional blanding out.
Peel has very few friends in the groups he champions but Gedge is an exception.
On the night of the party, they hugged each other before Gedge, still in his black shorts, led the band through the kind of cultured noise which Peel loves.
‘Words almost fail me about John,’ Gedge told NME 's correspondent at the festivities.
‘I mean, the two reasons I even got involved in a group were at the party — Mark Smith and John Peel.
That was what made me so nervous when we played, knowing they were both watching.
I literally grew up listening to John Peel.
I remember clearly the first time he played our first single.
I ran all the way to Keith's house just to find out it he'd heard it.’
Solowka had a shock when he found himself berated by The Fall's maverick frontman for having  the audacity to share the same dressing room.
Smith obviously assumed that someone as badly dressed as himself could not possible be in a group and wondered why he was in the dressing room.
The first taster from ‘Bizarro’ came in the form of the single, ‘Kennedy’.
Against a thumping back-beat, it told of a love affair between ‘Harry and Johnny's wife’.
On the surface, the song was a summary of several theories from the late sixties relating to President Kennedy's supposed love affairs, but it embraced the typical Gedge trademark of someone stealing someone else's lover.
The song contained few words and had a different lyrical slant than most of his material.
‘I've often been guilty of overwriting and some of our older songs used to have two three pages of words,’ Gedge told Sounds .
It received several daytime radio plays and the chorus, containing the grunt ‘Lost your love of life?
Too much apple pie’, kicked its way into many ears that had previously been unaware of the band's existence.
‘The term, ‘apple pie’ is interesting.
The chemicals used by the CIA to kill people by inducing a heart attack were supposed to smell like apple pie,’ says Gedge.
In a band's career, two records are more important that any others; the first ever released and the first on a major label.
In that respect ‘Kennedy’ was as good as ‘Go Out And Get 'Em Boy!’
Both were brilliant statements, although ‘Kennedy’ showed off the mature sense of melody expected of band on a major label.
Its sing-a-long chorus was tempered with a churning ending that seemed to stretch for half the song.
All the music papers were quick to inform their readers that The Wedding Present had not gone soft after signing with RCA.
Andrew Collins wrote a clever parody of the Kennedy assassination on the NME : ‘Three shots.
BANG BANG BANG!
We interrupt this presidency to bring you a newsflash.
The Wedding Present have signed to an extremely big record company and LIVED to tell the tale.
‘Kennedy’ is as good as anything The Prez have recorded so far in their brilliant career.’
Sam King in Sounds said: ‘No concessions at all— the bass is as bossy as ever, a constantly straining leash of rhythm, while Gedge's guitar is as irritating as it's always been.’
Tony Beard in Record Mirror was even more to the point: ‘Indie kids the world over breathe a sigh of relief: this ain't no sell-out!’
In Melody Maker The Stud Brothers made their usual attack on Gedge.
In a childish rant they  speculated on the contents of Gedge's underpants, advising him that a guitar was an extension of the penis and should be ‘grasped firmly in both hands and thrashed and thrust and thrashed again’ and not ‘twiddled with’, as Gedge was allegedly prone.
John Peel fans approved of ‘Kennedy’ and voted it to number two in 1989's Festive 50, with four other Wedding Present songs also in the chart.
‘Take Me’ became the first song to appear in the charts two years running.
In 1988 it was selected from a session and in 1989 it won people over again when it was included on the LP.
The 12-inch version of ‘Kennedy’ included the band's cover of the old Tom Jones hit, ‘It's Not Unusual’.
It had previously been available only on the German import album, ‘Diamonds And Porcupines’.
‘I think we're more relaxed when we play covers because we're not so worried about them sounding good as when we're doing our own songs,’ says Gedge.
‘We have discussed the possibility of doing an album or EP of covers; the only problem I can see at the moment is that we tend to approach them all exactly the same way — speed them up.’
Gedge's mother was pleased to see the band put our a tribute to Jones but would have preferred her son's singing to be given a lot more prominence.
‘The guitars always seem to be drowning him out,’ she complained, with some justification.
The band were anxious not to repeat themselves with their second ‘proper’ album.
‘I wanted to do something which was not ‘George Best Part Two’.
We've tried to be a bit more daring.
I think it is advanced on ‘George Best’, it's got a different, rockier sound to it,’ Gedge told Sounds .
‘Bizarro’(Gedge liked the word) came in a dark green sleeve with a design that looked like a red-coloured star shooting across a night sky.
It show-cased a band in a state of flux.
Half of the record aspired towards the cacophony of grinding rock and the other half was still emphasising their pop flair.
Where the two met, on tracks like ‘Kennedy’ and ‘Brassneck’, it was bliss, but overall, it was a difficult record to feel comfortable with, although it still stood up to repeated plays.
The transition was summed up well in Sounds by an uncredited writer who noted that the band had changed from ‘Fumbling, self-conscious cuddly undergraduates to self-assured hardcore pop monsters…with the venom of a more tuneful and Lancashire-accented Sonic Youth.’
The music press were generally left unconvinced by ‘Bizarro’.
Writers were pleased that the group showed no hint of compromise but lamented on the record's lack of pop muscle.
Simon Williams in NME coined a telling phrase when he commented: ‘The Wedding Present are merely treading water when they should be walking on it.’
Everett True in Melody Maker felt the band were not stretching themselves.
‘The blade may be keener, the guitars may be sharper, the lyrics may be clearer, but how many times do you have to polish a knife before its cutting edge disappears altogether?’ he asked.
Tony Beard in Record Mirror described the group as ‘Rumbling rather than jangling’ and that songs like ‘Crushed’had more in common with Sonic Youth than Orange Juice.
The band's interest in American noise bands was taken to its logical conclusion when Steve Albini of Big Black produced ‘Brassneck’, their second single on RCA.
The group had wanted to work with Albini for a while and were pleased when Korda Marshall suggested the liaison.
‘He didn't really produce them at all.
He just recorded them, almost as if they were playing live,’ he says.
The song, featuring several different sections, was a fine summary of the band's sound at the time.
A curious mixture of shade, energy and colour, it transcended most of the other material on the album because it contained one of the group's main strengths — a great chorus.
The much underrated rhythm section of Smith and Gregory also showed up well pounding out the rock-solid bed for Gedge's plaintive plea.
‘I think we listened a lot to what Steve Albini had to say.
He has a track record which we admire.
He seemed to want to record everything quickly, which we were into anyway.
Sometimes I think we have been too conservative and worried about things like a hi-hat not sounding right and we have lost the edge.
There were things sticking out all over the place on the Albini recordings but we came away with a sound we liked,’ says the bass player.
The bassist is not sure whether the band will continue moving in a harsher direction.
‘We are developing all the time.
We never predetermine what we will sound like.
We have never thought, ‘Let's sound like Sonic Youth or Dinosaur Junior’, we just enjoy ourselves and see what comes.’
Everyone thinks he looks daft
A constantly recurring theme of The Wedding Present has been their overriding normality.
Some music writers have equated it with dullness, while others have championed their lack of image and ordinariness.
Within just one NME article, Stuart Maconie wrote that they ‘talked ordinary, dressed ordinary,’ and were ‘screamingly normal and terribly ordinary.’
The Wedding Present are seen by many as a victory for the ordinary and in a perverse way, their lack of image has become their image.
One of their keenest fans, Darren Belk, who attends whole tours, thinks it is one of their main attractions.
‘To me everyone in the pop has an image of being stoned and drunk every night.
They think if they swear at people all the time it makes them a pop star.
That's a load of rubbish.
I don't think the group have any pretensions to be pop stars.’
Gedge considers it an arduous task to create and conform to an invented image.
‘How can you not be normal?
I think that my image has appeared because it is me, I have not manufactured anything.
I am still me, and people like that.
It must be hard to contrive an image and keep it up all the time,’ he says.
Korda Marshall of RCA takes delight in the group's approach.
‘It is great to be involved with them because they are sane, normal human beings in the world of rock 'n' roll, where just finding a sane and normal human being is very hard.
They are just ordinary, normal people, which I like,’ he says.
Mick Houghton, who also works for the fashionable label Blast First, was asked why he had agreed to take on The Wedding Present.
‘They were desperately unhip at the start, and they probably still are.
I think ‘Bizarro’ made they more fashionable.
They are now being likened to bands like Dinosaur Jnr and Sonic Youth.’
Unlike many groups, The Wedding Present largely avoided the dubious pleasure of growing up in the public eye.
Gedge was 25 when their first single was released.
Their maturity and intelligence have been two vital possessions for survival in a business that is often evanescent.
Dave Fielding believes it is a vital factor.
‘They could all fall back on well paid jobs.
I believe a lot of what they have done has been in a calculated way, like getting George Best on the cover.
It was a good marketing move to have a worldwide celebrity on your  photographs.
The Wedding Present are very businesslike.
They are shrewd.
When I go to their gigs they all walk around with cartons of orange juice.
I can't relate to that.
They never seem to be having a great time.
When The Chameleons were going we used to have a riot.’
Gedge has seen at first-hand the reactions of people who have come into contact with the group.
‘They are always amazed that we are so un-rock 'n' roll.
We knew we would enjoy the wild times for two weeks and then regret it.
I am completely straight.
If anyone rings and they don't find me in, it's not because I am at a wild party or something, it's probably because I'm shopping or walking my dog.’
It is unusual for a small town like Middleton to produce two successful bands at the same time, playing similar music, and it is instructive to compare their very differing outlooks and fortunes.
The Chameleons were always well rehearsed, but outside the studio and off stage, their organisation was often chaotic.
They constantly fought with the music business and eventually drowned in a pool of legal wrangles, interband arguments and the inevitable financial problems.
‘The Wedding Present are all university wallahs.
They think logically,’ says Fielding.
‘We used to let our hearts rule our heads.
David has no street sense at all but he is academically clever.
It is funny because their lives have crossed over to what mine used to be.
In some ways I wish I had something to fall back on but I wanted to play guitar in a band, not waste time at university.’
Fame corrupts everyone, but Gedge has worked hard at resisting it, and on the surface at least, he remains self-effacing.
‘I don't think he has changed at all.
He still seems to me to be the same person now as he was when we first started working with them.
I have a lot of respect for David,’ says Peter Thompson.
The best psychologists focus their initial studies on the subject's childhood.
Gedge had a straight-forward upbringing, but one with a fair degree of discipline.
His parents were keen on the work ethic and equipped him with impeccable manners.
The popular image of him as a laconic, amiable figure is not entirely accurate.
There is a hard, gritty side to his character that was absolutely essential for his band to attain any degree of success.
He is also highly intelligent and far more complex than he likes to be perceived.
‘I think he has got my temperament,’ says Brian Gedge, David's dad.
‘It takes a lot to upset him but I should imagine he gets very angry when anything does get to him.’
Brian Gedge thinks his son has a strong side.
‘I remember he didn't cry at his grandma's funeral, but we knew he was upset.
I believe he is soft-hearted underneath.
I could tell you about the money he has lent to people and never got back.
Looking at his lyrics, it is obvious his love life has been in turmoil.
He doesn't tell us anything about that side of things but I can't imagine him ever finishing with someone.
Gedge found the experience of sacking Shaun Charman very traumatic but he still had the resolution to see it through.
He could have given in to his sympathetic side at any point but he was adamant that Charman had to go, even though he knew the hurt it would cause to someone with whom he had previously been close.
‘I feel tremendously guilty about what we did to Shaun.
It was just a case that being in a band would be much more enjoyable without him.
I felt responsible because I encouraged him to be in the group in the first place, I persuaded him to stay when he wanted to go and yet in the end we asked him to leave,’ says Gedge.
The decision to sack Charman was not Gedge's alone; it was joint one involving the other three members.
The band run themselves on a democratic basis and have their own voting system.
‘It is quite complicated.
As there are four members in the group, it is quite common for it to be two votes all, so we all have two votes each.
If you're really in favour of something, you vote for it twice but if you're just a bit in favour of it you vote once.
It is a bit mathematical I suppose but it works out really well in the end,’ explains Gedge.
He accepts that his input into the group is still the largest but believes the other members are contributing more on a growing basis.
Whether Gedge likes it or not, many people consider the band to be his creation.
‘It is his band, it is his songs and his ideas.
You have to have someone who is vaguely the leader,’ says Mike Stout.
Gedge's parents are impressed with the way he conducts band business.
‘His whole life seems to  be professional.
He and Peter have always been good friends and David is the type of lad that once he's made friends with someone, he has made it for life,’ says Brian Gedge.
His gregarious mother sometimes teases her son by accusing him of being too virtuous.
‘When we visit him and Sally they make me go outside to smoke.
He's teetotal, or very nearly.
He doesn't drink a lot anyway,’ she says.
Houghton does not think Gedge is overtly prim and feels he is sometimes quite tetchy and a difficult person for music writers to interview.
‘There is a kind of arrogance there, which you have to have in that position,’ he says.
He believes fans would have preferred a more lavish packaging for ‘Bizarro’ and that its fierce edge might have been a reaction to signing with RCA.
‘They are really stubborn about some things.
I think a lot of it is to test the record company or maybe they are testing the fans.
Maybe they are fed up of being seen as this natural type of band.
I think they have always come over as they really are, but there must be times when they want to tell people to sod off.
Everyone is that way sometimes.’
In their own newsletter, and often in interviews, The Wedding Present seem to adopt the frivolity and amiability of The Monkees.
Again, the picture is not true.
They are intrinsically shy people, with the same wariness of strangers as everyone else.
Many people write to the group and consider themselves ‘friends’ but Gedge himself concedes that there are precious few people with whom he is genuinely close.
‘I have a few friends that are not connected with the group in some way.
Most people I knew before the group started, I don't know any more.
It is worrying in a way, and Peter often goes on about it to me,’ he says.
Houghton has worked with them for nearly three years but at times still feels like a stranger.
‘I feel I know David reasonably well, but the others I hardly know at all.
I scarcely know Keith,’ he says.
Gregory is wrongly seen by many as a passive and reserved figure, when he is really a strong, assertive person.
Some think he plays the role of sage, especially to Gedge, with whom he has a solid friendship.
‘All I am interested in is that our records sound good to my ears.
At first it was quite nice attending interviews and things like that but after a while they all just become the same.
I am not in the slightest bit interested in the periphery,’ says Gregory.
There is a defiant honesty within Gedge's reserved character.
He might not volunteer information, but is he is asked, he supplies it in a flawlessly polite manner.
His devotion to The Wedding Present is fanatical and he no longer has two separate lives, one inside the band and the other outside.
‘The band is the only thing I ever thing about to any great extent.
I don't think the David Gedge that sat at home with his girlfriend exists any more.
I enjoy band work but it can be like a habit, to the detriment of our normal lives.
I can't forget about the band.
I wish I could.
I really do.
If I went for a walk now, I would still be thinking about band things.
I get told off by my girlfriend because I wake up in the morning and the first thing I say is, ‘Flippin' heck, have you sent those newsletters off yet?.’
Lost most people with a powerful central theme to their life, Gedge had to adopt an obstinate approach as The Wedding Present became successful and during their two-year relationship, Debbie Kaye felt it made him self-centred.
‘It became the most important thing in his life.
He is totally selfish about it and doesn't really think about anything else.’
The emphasis on the group can make life difficult for Gedge's partners.
Kaye enjoyed helping the group but found that it eroded her own identity.
While they were still together she started a video course and now works for an independent television company.
She thinks Gedge has lived an over-protected life and likes a steady partner to care for him and provide security.
‘He is very shy.
He is not the type to go to the pub and just pick someone up.
I think it is strange that he has had so few affairs and he is 30-years-old,’ she says.
At times she felt overwhelmed by his personality, which sometimes bordered on piety.
He vehemently dislikes smoking and while they were together she stopped smoking and cut down on drinking.
‘He is a nice, intelligent guy but I think his public image reflects only what he wants known about himself.
He doesn't approve of a lot of things.
If he knows someone smokes dope, he will go off them.
He thinks it is totally wrong and immoral to do things like that.
He is a really sober person, he can't handle a drink at all.
I think he is wrong to inflict his beliefs on everyone else,’ she says.
The couple are still close friends and Kaye enjoys having some distance between them.
‘I really respect what David and the band have done.
They are just four normal blokes and they have not compromised at all.
I don't think they have changed.
David was always really determined to do what he is doing,’ she says.
In Ket , a magazine published by Teeside Polytechnic Students' Union, Gedge explained the reasons why the group had become a magnificent obsession.
‘I think that it is crucial that I do it.
I can't imagine myself having the opportunity to do something as important ever again.’
Gedge has often reminded writers that pop groups do not last forever.
When he is asked what he will do after his own group splits, he usually resorts to humour.
‘I want to be a long distance lorry driver or one of those dispatch riders in London, that would be quite exciting.
I wouldn't mind being an actor as well.
The next James Bond or something,’ he told Ket .
In reality, Gedge is very worried about a life without the group.
‘I cannot imagine what it would be like without it.
It would be so weird.
It has taken so long, so much love and effort to create.
I don't think I would have it in me to start again with another group.
I would not like to do a Morrissey.
Everyone knows he is not as good as The Smiths were,’ he says.
When The Chameleons split, Fielding went from revered admiration (especially in the United States) to a council flat in Middleton where he had just enough money to get by.
Gedge will not slump in such dramatic fashion because of his businesslike constitution.
He has been thrifty and pored over contracts, although there is no preparation for the mental upset of a group folding.
Signing to RCA put Gedge into a new earning bracket and soon afterwards he and Murrell bought a terraced house in the leafy outskirts of Leeds.
‘I think we both realise that if we are booted off RCA, it's back to a bedsit.
We are not made for life or anything like that but there is a fair bit coming in.
I'm amazingly affluent compared with a few years ago, especially when I was on the dole for three years.
Our main concern as a group is that we do not waste the money.
There is so much waste in groups and record companies,’ he says.
Gedge recognises the irony of now being part of the property owning class he opposed just a few years ago.
He votes Labour but possesses many of the entrepreneurial traits so valued by the  Conservative party.
As Fielding jokes: ‘Margaret Thatcher could put him on a pedestal as a young fucking Tory!’
After the group does disband, Gedge might find himself employed in some other aspect of the music business.
He has often joked that he would like to take over from John Peel when he retires.
The two have a fairly close friendship and similar musical tastes.
Gedge would also be reasonably well at home in a record company's A&R department, or even running Reception Records.
He has enough knowledge of the music industry's workings and the business acumen to earn a living that way.
If he was to opt out of music, his next project could involve writing.
He has often told friends he would like to write and he obviously has the creativity that could be adapted to another form of expression.
Signed to a major label, The Wedding Present sit rather awkwardly on the edge of acceptance into mainstream pop.
Hopefully their individualistic approach will be supported by RCA because clearly there is no trace of compromise in the band's constitution.
Their music is too harsh for a crossover of the REM variety but they still offer a major label reasonably strong record sales and, more importantly, a fair degree of earthy, musical chic.
Many observers feel Gedge has already written his best songs, or the most commercial ones at least.
Their development as a popular force largely depends on the musical direction they follow.
If the tough edges of ‘Bizarro’ are reinforced on subsequent albums, they will find themselves remaining worthy of excessive press coverage but selling fewer records.
In commercial terms, The Wedding Present may have already reached their zenith and the manner in which they have done so is fantastically inspirational.
The group was built from nothing by Gedge and brilliantly nurtured without the sickening prevarication involved in most of pop's success stories.
They are a lesson in honesty and hard graft, and have also proved that continual capitulation is not the only way to sustain a musical career.
Indeed, they are often stroppy and apparently unreasonable, but they do things their own way and when they stop doing that The Wedding Present are finished.
They offer hope for thousands of guitar bands that have felt rejected and superfluous in a music business strangled by drum machines, synthesised dance music and passing fads.
Although the industry pretends otherwise, the guitar band is still the main voice of energetic protest and will outlast the hip-hop hyperbole, or more excitingly, embrace its best elements.
The future should always be a volatile mixture of trepidation and excitement and so it is for The Wedding Present.
While the future is unknown, their past is there for us all.
They might be marvellously unaffected and inherently ‘nice’, but far more importantly, they have produced several great records and, ultimately, that is all that counts.