

Taxation and Money
This chapter is concerned, first, with the fiscal activities of government and semi-government agencies, and second, with the banking system and monetary policy.
Section I will start with a description of the main sources of government revenue, transfers between different levels of government, and the main forms of public expenditure.
This will be followed by a review of fiscal policies.
Section 2 will follow a similar pattern in relation to banking and the monetary system.
Since it will become apparent that in Yugoslavia the division between fiscal and monetary policies is even less well defined than in many other countries, this latter section will contain a discussion of the combined effects of fiscal and monetary policies on the state of the economy.
Fiscal Structures and Policies
The structure of revenues and expenditures
Taxes are collected at three levels of government in Yugoslavia: by the federal government, by the governments of the republics and provinces, and by the communes, including some multi-commune cities.
(Some small levies by ‘local communities’ can conveniently be included with miscellaneous sources of revenue.)
The other main source of public revenue is ‘contributions’, collected by ‘self-management communities of interest’.
These ‘communities’ are of two kinds.
The first group, and by far the most important, consists of agencies for financing and managing the social services: education, health, pensions, child benefits, and some other minor services.
The second group consists of agencies that the residents of a commune may decide to establish for the financing of local housing, utilities, roads, and other  purposes.
Table 8.1 gives a picture of the relative importance of these different sources of revenue in alternate years of the period 1979–87.
For convenience of comparison, the original data in current dinars have been expressed as percentages of adjusted social product in the corresponding year.
During this period, total revenues of these agencies amounted to between 40 and 46 per cent of adjusted social product.
But there is some duplication in the figures of government revenues, because in the years covered by the table about half of the gross revenues of the republics and provinces was transferred to the federation (where it again appears as revenue).
There was also a smaller counterflow of grants made by the federal government to the republics and provinces.
Consequently, as will be seen below, the consolidated revenue of these agencies represented a share of adjusted social product which was between 2 and 3 per cent less than the totals shown in Table 8.1.
Some of the noteworthy features of the figures in Table 8.1 are as follows.
In the first place, although Yugoslavia has a low per capita product (about $2,000), the government takes a large share of its total product.
The costs of defence and administration are heavy, and the scale of social services is large for a fairly poor country.
Second, the share of total (gross) revenues fell from 1979 to 1983, but rose sharply in 1987.
The latter change seems to have been mainly the result of a large rise in revenues collected (and disbursed) by pension funds, which was partly the consequence of an improvement in pension benefits.
Third, from 1979 to 1983 there was a considerable fall in the proportion of social product collected to finance education and health services.
(As Table 8.2 will show,expenditure on education was higher in each year than the figures shown in Table 8.1, but it also had a declining trend as a proportion of social product up to 1983.)
Data on consolidated government revenues and expenditures come from a different source, and are differently classified.
Table 8.2 shows these data as percentages of adjusted social product in alternate years from 1979 to 1987.
The figures show a similar fall in the share of social product taken by government between 1979 and 1982, of somewhat more than 6 per cent, followed by a substantial recovery in 1987.
On the expenditure side, the fall from 1979 to 1983 was an even greater 0.7 per cent; but the recovery to 1987 brought the percentage budget surplus back in the latter year to almost the same insignificant level obtaining in 1979.
Moreover, as will be shown below, since much of government spending was financed outside the budget, by expanding the money supply, the government continued to run a very large overall deficit.
The table shows the unusually large share of social product used for national defence and administration.
The fall in this share from 1979 to 1983 was mainly the result of the nearly 10 per cent decline in that period in the personal incomes of government employees in comparison with incomes of employees in productive industries.
Expenditure on education was affected by the same influence, although this accounts for only part of the large decline in its share from 1979 to 1983.
Since 1984 the   relative incomes of workers in the non-productive sector have been allowed to recover; and by 1987 they were back to the position which they occupied in 1979.
Separate figures are available in the OECD reports of the revenue and expenditure of the federal government; and these throw some further light on the sources and uses of federal government revenue, and of the fiscal relations between the federal government and the governments of the republics and provinces.
In 1985, for example, of total federal revenue of 686 billion dinars, 110 billion dinars was derived from customs duties, 264 billion  dinars from basic sales tax (of which the federal government was entitled at that time to one-half), and 251 billion dinars from transfers from the republics and provinces.
While all customs duties accrued to the federal government, it received only about one-third of total sales tax revenue in 1985.
The other two-thirds of sales tax revenue (about 481 billion dinars) was taken by the republics and provinces and the communes and cities (of which the communes and cities appear to have received about 170 billion dinars).
Out of an initial tax revenue of 442 billion dinars in 1985, the republics and provinces transferred 251 billion dinars to the federal government, but received back grants to the value of 60 billion dinars.
This implies that the disposable income of the republics and provinces in 1985 was about 251 billion dinars.
The income of the communes and cities in that year was 229 billion dinars.
On the expenditure side, the federal government allocated 460 billion dinars to defence, and a further 106 billion dinars to pension funds, much of which was probably in respect of pensions of military personnel and veterans.
Federal expenditure on administration was 48 billion dinars, and, apart from the grants to the republics and provinces of 60 billion dinars, only 19 billion dinars was used for other purposes.
Direct expenditure by the federal government on investment has been virtually eliminated since the adoption of the 1974 Constitution, but, as we shall see below, the federal government continues to have an important indirect influence on investment through its control over the level of bank credits.
Although expenditure on administration by the federal government appears to be modest, total expenditure on this item by all government and semi-government agencies is considerable.
In 1985, total expenditure on defence and administration was 863 billion dinars, of which defence expenditure by the federal government was 460 billion dinars.
This implies that the cost of administration was 403 billion dinars.
Since federal expenditure on administration was only 48 billion dinars, expenditure on this item by all other agencies appears to have been 355 billion dinars, or about 3.8 per cent of adjusted social product in that year.
This is one indicator of the extent to which Yugoslavia is ‘over-administered’.
Fiscal policies
This topic falls under four main headings.
First, we shall consider the aggregate effect of fiscal policy on the balance of the economy, which is especially relevant to the problem of inflation.
Second, some issues arise in connection with the tax structure, i.e. of the kinds of taxes imposed.
Third, we shall consider some aspects of the redistributive effects of the tax system.
Fourth, we need to take note of the multiplicity of taxation and expenditure agencies.
Macroeconomic policy
We have seen that the bulk of taxation in Yugoslavia is raised by governments or communities of interest which are outside of the direct control of the federal government.
It is also the standard rule in Yugoslavia that these bodies are not entitled to run surpluses or deficits, except for short periods as a consequence of unforeseen events.
Any macroeconomic fiscal policy would, therefore, have to be carried out through the federal budget.
But the republics and provinces are strongly suspicious of federal financial power.
They have the final authority, through the Chamber of Republics and provinces, over all economic and financial policies, and it would be difficult in normal circumstances to get their agreement to substantial federal surpluses or deficits.
However, a determined federal government could overcome this difficulty.
At present, even when government sector budgets appear to be approximately in balance, government policies exert a powerful inflationary influence on the economy through their instructions to the banking system to cover various forms of expenditure by increasing the volume of credit.
One of the most important examples of such expenditure is the payment of interest on loans originally raised in foreign exchange and re-lent to domestic borrowers, mainly social sector enterprises, in dinars.
As the value of the dinar sinks, the interest paid by the final borrowers in dinars becomes less and less adequate to pay the foreign exchange interest.
The ‘solution’ found for this problem has been to finance the uncovered interest by expanding the money supply.
In other words, when the dinar interest payments by final borrowers are insufficient to cover the interest  paid on these loans, the National Bank simply buys additional foreign exchange with new money.
Other expenditures that are dealt with in a similar fashion will be described in the second section of this chapter.
It is obvious, however, that the decision to make the banking system responsible for covering such expenditures out of new credits has a major inflationary effect on the economy.
This effect would be avoided if the responsibility for these expenditures was taken into the budget, and the necessary taxation was raised to cover them.
Instead of collecting these resources by disguised taxation, through inflation, they would then be collected by open taxation, and the public sector would no longer be exerting a substantial inflationary influence.
Tax structure
Some Yugoslav economists and politicians believe that an important cause of the country's poor economic performance is the inappropriateness of its tax structure.
For example, the Long-term programme of Economic Stabilization recommended that there should be a shift away from indirect taxation towards direct taxation.
But there are no convincing reasons for believing that this would have a beneficial effect on economic performance.
In many Western countries, in fact, the majority of ‘informed opinion’ favours a shifts in the opposite direction.
Underlying this argument there may well be a different one, namely, that there is a need for a more progressive tax structure, and that this cannot be achieved without a greater emphasis on direct taxation.
Up to now, the republics and provinces (or at least the more prosperous ones) have shown a strong resistance to allowing the federal government to enter the field of income tax.
In Yugoslavia, as will be seen in Chapter 10, there is a wide dispersion of incomes between different regions.
At the extremes, per capita income in Slovenia is about five times as large in real terms as per capita income in Kosovo.
If the federal government were allowed to levy an income tax, there would always be a risk that it would move towards introducing some degree of progression in the tax structure; and this would automatically cause a large redistribution of resources between the richer and poorer  republics and provinces.
That is probably the (unspoken) reason why federal government tax powers have been kept strictly within the field of indirect taxation, which is mainly proportional in its incidence.
The only government authorities that collect income tax at present are the republics and provinces.
They have imposed a small amount of progressiveness; but it is related strictly to the average level of income within each republic or province.
Some economists have also suggested that the present sales taxes should be replaced by a valued added tax.
Existing sales taxes vary somewhat between republics and provinces, and even between communes, but probably not enough to cause significant economic distortions.
A small part of these sales taxes is raised from industries other than wholesale and retail trade, but in 1985 74 per cent was collected from retail organizations and nearly 13 per cent from wholesale organizations.
So it seems that these sales taxes are not very different in their incidence from a value added tax.
The taxes now levied on enterprise net income are essentially equivalent to value added taxes, although they are not completely uniform across republics and provinces.
The federal government is trying to persuade the communes to give up their existing sales taxes and rely in future either on transfers from the budgets of the republics and provinces or on revenue raised by taxes on local incomes and property.
It is scarcely feasible for the communes to set up the apparatus to assess local household incomes; this is a matter that is best left to the republics and provinces.
Taxation of local property, on the other hand, would be a useful addition to commune revenue.
But the local bureaucracy would not be pleased by a proposal to impose significant taxes on their villas, flats, and weekend houses.
It would also be inequitable if taxes were levied on houses built by modest households, while the occupiers of ‘social flats’ were allowed to enjoy the privilege of heavily subsidized accommodation, which they often — illegally — rent to subtenants at very high rents.
There may, after all, be something to be said for allowing the communes to retain their sales taxes, which at present account for about 60 per cent of their revenues.
Another proposal, which has been included in the set of draft amendments to the Federal Constitution, is that the income of ‘organizations of associated labour’ that arises from monopoly  power, or from other special advantages, should be transferred to the federal government.
This is an old story.
Under the Law on Associated Labour, ‘organizations of associated labour’ are not supposed to distribute ‘extra’income arising from these sources among their workers.
Instead, all of such income is meant to be saved and reinvested in the enterprise.
But no one has yet been able to identify ‘extra’ income, and enterprises do not show it as a separate category.
If any government were to try to force them to do so, there would interminable arguments about its definition and measurement, especially at a time when price controls and other government interventions are causing enormous distortions in enterprise incomes.
Indeed, in the current situation, many enterprises would have a good claim for reimbursement on account of the receipt of ‘sub-competitive’ incomes.
As many economists have pointed out, the first priority is to reduce government intervention and permit real competition.
After that, if differences in income per worker in different enterprises still seemed to be excessive, it would be reasonable to introduce a progressive tax on enterprise income within each republic or province, based on the level of the enterprise's net income per worker.
Redistribution between income groups
All republics and provinces have progressive income taxes on total personal income, but their present coverage is quite small.
The usual rule is that the tax is imposed only on income exceeding about three times the average net personal income per worker in the social sector of the given republic or province.
According to Danas (9 September 1986), in 1985 the number of persons subject to this tax was a little over 13,000 (compared with about 9 million persons in employment or self-employment in that year), and the tax raised was about 1 3 billion dinars (compared with a total gross public revenue in that year of 3,736 billion dinars).
The marginal tax rates on these incomes rise to as much as 80 per cent in some republics, but there is a great deal of evasion.
It would be much more sensible if, as a staff writer in Ekonomska politika (15 February 1988) has suggested, the minimum point for assessing personal income tax were to be brought down to approximately the average income of each republic or  province, and the scale of progressivity were to be less steep.
There is also a case, as mentioned above, for an effective tax on house property.
The present taxes are inequitable, and largely evaded.
But this would be a minefield for any Yugoslav government, and it might be better to accept the fact that, at least under present conditions, house property is largely immune from taxation in Yugoslavia.
The multiplicity of tax authorities
In addition to the federal government, the eight republics and provinces, and over 500 communes, Yugoslavia has more than 5,000 ‘self-management communities of interest’.
Every one of these agencies is a tax authority.
Although, in principle, the communities of interest are allowed to raise in ‘contributions’ only the amounts agreed by the delegates from their member ‘organizations or associated labour’, in practice, such organizations have little option but to agree with proposals presented to them by the community managers.
There seem to be two main disadvantages of this system of fragmented tax authorities.
The first is that, since it is difficult for each authority to make its decision within the framework of a general view of social needs and social capacity to pay, the total amount of taxation tends to be raised above what it would be in a more unified system.
The second is that the multiplicity of authorities increases the number of administrators and clerical workers, so imposing a heavy cost on an economy that can ill afford to use its resources in this way.
According to Ekonomska politika (11 March 1985), the creation of the self-management communities of interest has often amounted to no more than the conversion of a previous government bureau into a new organization.
‘So society has been burdened with one more bit of government.’
The result has been a duplication of administrative personnel in a society that is ‘already exhausted by the increase in its apparatus of officials’.
Opinion, the paper reports, is moving in favour of the idea that in future self-management communities of interest should be regulated by general laws instead of by social compacts, which have practically no authority, legal or otherwise.
Monetary Institutions and Policies
In Yugoslavia, as in other countries, the structure of monetary institutions, rules, practices, and flows of funds are extremely detailed and complex.
Moreover, each of these characteristics tends to change rather rapidly over time, as the monetary authorities try to establish controls that are more or less effective.
It is beyond the scope of this book to enter deeply into these problems, a full understanding of which would demand of the reader a specialized knowledge of monetary economics.
Nevertheless, since it is impossible to obtain a clear picture of the Yugoslav economic system, and of the origin of its present economic difficulties, without giving attention to its monetary institutions and policies, this section will contain an outline of the main characteristics of these institutions and policies.
We shall start with a description of the banking system, and then proceed to consider the types of monetary policies that have been used in recent years, and their effects.
The section will conclude with some remarks on two topics of special interest: the effects of exchange depreciation on the balance sheets of Yugoslav banks, and the revealing light thrown on the Yugoslav financial system by the recent collapse of the Bosnian firm of Agrokomerc.
The banking system
Banks are virtually the only financial intermediaries in Yugoslavia.
The post Office Savings Bank is of little importance, and other savings banks, although permitted to exist in principle, are negligible.
There are no building societies (or savings and loan associations), no private pension funds, and life insurance scarcely exists.
Virtually all financial assets and savings are held in banks, or kept in cash in the form of dinar or foreign currency notes.
In principle, therefore, the banks are in a very strong position to influence decisions about consumption, saving, and investment, both by households and by enterprises.
Day-to-day banking business in Yugoslavia is carried on by ‘basic’ banks, of which there are about 170.
Some large  enterprises with many component ‘organizations of associated labour’ also have ‘internal’banks, which are largely a means of pooling enterprise liquidity.
In addition, most basic banks are members of an ‘associated’ bank, almost always within their own republic or province, whose main function is to arrange finance for major projects and to handle foreign exchange transactions.
‘Basic’ banks are essentially local or regional organizations.
Their legal status is that they are controlled by their ‘founders’, which are local enterprises and, in some cases, local communities of interest.
The founders send delegates to the bank's assembly, which is supposed to exercise ultimate control over the bank's affairs and to elect its director and its ‘credit committee’.
In practice, however, banks are primarily the agents of the local and regional political bureaucracy.
No one in Yugoslavia disputes that this is now the position.
For example, an article in Ekonomska politika (27 July 1987), after pointing out that, according to the law, banks are independent organizations and carry the risks of their own decisions, continues: ‘But it is not so in practice.
All the more significant credit decisions are made under the orders, or with the approval, of politicians, who maintain their ‘strongholds'’ and influence in the banking system through their control over appointments (no management position in a bank can be obtained without political approval).’
The director of a bank in Ljubljana has said (Politika , 8 October 1987): ‘It is clear that none of us has become a director without the approval of the Party's cadres section.
Hence, resistance to various pressures has its limits.’
What are we to do, he asked, when the local political assembly has approved a particular investment?
A banker from Skopje, capital of Macedonia, when asked whether banks can carry on their work independently, replied (EP , 22 June 1987) that they can make an independent assessment of a proposal but that, after that, there are pressures from various quarters to alter the assessment.
These pressures come from the ‘organizations of associated labour’, from the top management of the banks, and from governments.
‘Then there starts a game whose aim is to reverse the bank's assessment.’
Since the total volume of bank credit is restricted by federal government regulation, and the real rate of interest on bank loans has almost always been negative, and since, in any case, socially owned enterprises are not too worried about their level of  indebtedness, there is an enormous excess demand for credits.
Some credits are earmarked by federal policy for particular industries or purposes (e.g. for agriculture or for exports), but the rest of the permitted amount of credit has to be allocated by ad hoc decisions.
In this process, great influence is exerted by the larger local enterprises, which are usually also the larger debtors, and by the local political bureaucracy.
Since virtually all credits are given to local or regional enterprises, much of the money thereby created returns as deposits to the credit-giving banks.
In the words of the vice-president of the Associated Banks of Belgrade (EP , 24 February 1986), ‘We have shut our banks up within the boundaries of the republics and provinces, and each bank finances the projects of its own members.’
There is, however, inevitably some leakage to other regions and to the rest of the world, so that allocations of net new credits do not fully determine the increase in the local or regional money supply.
Despite great efforts to ‘bottle up’ sources of funds within regional boundaries, some banks find themselves with excess liquidity which they are not allowed to use for expanding credits to local enterprises, and this has led to some inter-regional flows of bank funds (and to the uncontrolled expansion of bank lending to firms such as Agrokomerc).
Deposits at basic banks can be made on various conditions and at correspondingly different interest rates.
‘Giro’ deposits, which can be transferred by cheque, yield no interest.
Other dinar deposits are classified according to their period, ranging from ‘sight’ to two years or more, and their interest rates vary accordingly.
There are other varieties of deposit, which are made for special purposes, e.g. for housing, and which are subject to special conditions.
Of great and growing importance are foreign exchange deposits, which can be made both by enterprises and by persons in any foreign currency.
They earn interest in dinars, calculated at the current exchange rate, and the principal can normally be withdrawn at any time in the given foreign currency.
The existence of these foreign exchange deposits has created some unusual problems for the Yugoslav banking system, which will be considered further below.
The other main part of the Yugoslav banking system is the National Bank of Yugoslavia.
Although this is a central bank, it consists in fact of one federal bank and eight national banks, one  for each republic and province.
To a considerable extent, each republican or provincial national bank acts autonomously, and keeps a watchful eye on the financial position of its own republic or province.
The Board of the National Bank of Yugoslavia consists of the governors of the national banks of the republics and provinces, each of whom has an equal vote.
Unanimity is required for all important decisions, although in cases of disagreement the matter may be referred to the federal government for decision.
There is much evidence that the federalization of the National Bank has been an obstacle to implementing a coherent monetary policy.
According to the vice-governor of the National Bank (EP , 22 February 1988), the governors from the different republics and provinces prevent the formulation of effective regulations to put a stop to illegal, or ‘grey’, increases in the money supply, which has been a persistent problem in Yugoslavia.
‘Grey’ issues of money occur whenever enterprises that are short of funds to pay their obligations insist that the banks should make them the necessary advances to restore their ‘liquidity’.
Under political pressure, and in part because the banks are in any case controlled by their customers, the banks usually comply.
As a result, the state of illiquidity is partly shifted from the enterprises to the banks.
It was recently estimated (EP , 22 February 1988) that 80 out of 170 basic banks in Yugoslavia are ‘illiquid’ or, strictly speaking, bankrupt.
It is not really clear what is the role of the National Bank of Yugoslavia.
Monetary policies are determined by the federal government, and targets for increases in credits, decisions about ‘selective’ priority credits, and the levels of different interest rates are included in the annual Economic Resolution adopted by the Skupština.
In principle, the National Bank has the function of implementing these policies.
In practice, it gives the impression of being feeble and ineffective.
It shows no evidence of resisting the demands either of the federal government or of the national banks (and hence the governments) of the republics and provinces.
From the point of view of policy, it might just as well not exist.
Basic banks are obliged to maintain certain reserves, which consist of cash in hand and deposits at the National Bank.
Although there is a ‘reserve ratio’ and a ‘liquidity ratio’, these are  mere formalities which have no practical bearing on the credit policies of the banks, whose credit targets are determined by the federal government.
There are also targets for the growth of the money supply (M1, defined as cash in circulation and deposits in cheque accounts), but these are invariably adjusted upwards during the year, and then exceeded.
Monetary policies
According to the 1984 OECD survey of Yugoslavia (p. 19), ‘In Yugoslavia, monetary policy has typically played an important role in demand management.’
If this were really true, it would be difficult to account for the fact that, in the ten-year period 1977 — 87, the total money supply (M 1 at the end of the year) rose approximately thirty-fold, and the cost-of-living index (average for the year) rose more than fifty-fold.
In spite of this experience, there are still some people who try to argue that increases in the money supply have no effect on the rate of inflation.
In November 1985, for example, a round table of ‘eminent monetary experts’ in Novi Sad (in Vojvodina) agreed unanimously that under Yugoslav conditions monetary restriction would have no effect on inflation (EP 11 November 1985).
They argued that enterprises would not reduce their prices but simply would accumulate stocks of finished goods, financing this by the issue of bills of exchange.
The Mikulić government, which took office in May 1986, was clearly influenced by such attitudes when it set out to curb the rapidly rising inflation of that year by it policy of ‘programmed inflation’.
According to Professor Aleksander Bajt (Danas , 14 April 1987), who was economic adviser to the previous government, the idea behind ‘programmed inflation’(to which he was totally opposed) originated in the National Bank in the autumn of 1985.
The idea was that, if the government simply ‘announced’ that the rate of inflation in the coming year would be such and such, and reduced the rate of interest in line with that forecast, public expectations would adjust accordingly, and the rate of inflation would come down to that level.
It was this comforting idea that was put to the test by the Mikulić government.
On assuming office, it stated that the curbing of inflation was its first priority (EP , 11 May 1987).
One month later, it raised taxes on  some products and put a four-month freeze on the prices of a further 42 per cent of products.
At the same time, interest rates were reduced, the supply of money was relaxed, and the National Bank forecast that by the end of the year the annual rate of inflation would be down to 55 per cent.
The actual outcome was that in the twelve months ending in December 1986 the money supply rose by 109 per cent(the highest on record) and the cost-of-living index rose by 90 per cent .
When at last the government saw how matters were developing, it began to reproach industry for failing to respond to its ‘anti-inflationary’ measures.
More than a year later, in an interview with Politika (14 August 1987), the prime Minister was still of the opinion that the responsibility for curbing inflation lay with ‘everyone’, not just with the federal government.
‘How’, he asked, ‘can the Federal Executive Council [the government]be solely responsible for reducing inflation when there are thousands of self-management and government agencies making decisions about economic development, consumption, their market share, the level of prices, and so on?’
He pointed out that the federal government was directly responsible for determining the prices of only 11.5 per cent of industrial products and 14.5 per cent of retail prices, and concluded from that that the government played only a minor role in generating inflation.
It is no wonder that most Yugoslav economists consider the Mikulić government to be a disaster.
But the economists are not entirely blameless.
They are so afraid of the label of ‘monetarism’ that most of them (with some honourable exceptions) avoid facing up squarely to the role of expansion of the money supply in generating inflation.
Quite rightly, they place much emphasis on the importance of introducing genuine market relations in Yugoslavia; and increasing numbers of them are including in this the right to establish competing private enterprises and self-managed enterprises in which the workers own shares.
But many give the impression that, if only such market reforms were implemented, the problem of inflation would disappear.
They do not seem to have noticed that many predominantly market economies suffer from inflation, and often very rapid inflation.
The market is of crucial importance for efficiency, but the control of inflation is a separate problem.
An alternative line of defence offered by the National Bank for  its failure to curb inflation (EP , 10 November 1986) is that it does not have the power to prevent the money supply from growing faster than its planned rate.
Among the reasons mentioned are that enterprises fail to pay their debts to the banks, and that they fail to deposit dinars when they purchase foreign exchange.
These reasons throw a revealing light on the level of financial irresponsibility of the Yugoslav system.
Another reason given by the National Bank is also instructive.
During the last few years, Yugoslavia has been running a substantial surplus in its trade with the Soviet Union because, while there has been a sharp fall in the quantity of oil imported from the Soviet Union, as well as a fall in its price, the Yugoslavs have been unable to find other products worth buying from the Soviet Union.
Moreover, since roubles are inconvertible, the National Bank has been obliged to issue dinars to Yugoslav exporters in exchange for blocked roubles, and thus to increase the domestic money supply.
This is a penalty that Yugoslavia pays for the large share of its foreign trade which it carries on with countries having inconvertible currencies.
But these excuses for over-running the planned rate of increase of the money supply do not touch the central problem, which is the planned rate of increase itself.
This exists primarily because of the government's desire to finance a substantial part of its expenditure by cheap money rather than by taxation.
When the federal government wants to give ‘selective’ credits — at a cheap rate — to ‘priority’industries, or for ‘priority’purposes, it does not raise the taxes necessary to finance these credits: instead, it instructs the banks to give the credits.
Similarly, when the government discovers that a large part of the loans raised from abroad has been used to make dinar loans to Yugoslav enterprises, and that the dinar service payments on the latter loans increasingly fall short of the amounts required to meet the interest and principal on these foreign debts, it instructs the National Bank to cover the difference by issuing new money.
At a meeting of a committee of the Skupština in December 1986, the Federal Secretary of Finance said: ‘We must face our reality — that we have in this economy and in this country a very serious state of financial disorder…
In this country debts are not paid; in some cases not even is the interest paid.’
But the state of financial disorder starts at the top, in a federal government that   continues to assert its rights to print money to pay its bills.
The government's accommodating, or ‘soft budget’, approach to monetary policy is illustrated by its attitude to interest rates.
Throughout the 1970s, even when prices were rising quite rapidly, interest rates were kept low, and real interest rates were negative.
This policy was maintained even after the onset of the crisis in 1979.
As Table 8.3. shows, the discount rate of the National Bank, which is a fairly good indicator of the whole structure of interest rates, was held fixed throughout 1980 and 1981 at 6 per cent.
This was at a time when prices were rising at 30–40 per cent per annum.
As a result, the real interest rate in those two years, on any of the three estimates shown in the table, was about — 20 per cent.
It was not until 1982 that, partly under pressure from the IMF, rates were finally raised.
They continued to rise in the next three years, and in 1984–5. they were nearly equal to the current rate of increase of the cost of living.
However, if lenders and borrowers can be assumed to look further ahead than the immediate moment, and if their guesses about the future are anywhere near what eventually happens, the level of real interest rates in 1984–5 may be better represented by one of the last two columns of Table 8.3.
In that case, not even in 1984–5 were real interest rates positive.
In 1986 and 1987 the real interest rates again became heavily negative.
In the middle of 1986, under the influence of the doctrine of ‘programmed inflation’, the discount rate was cut to 56 per cent, but the year-on-year increase in the cost of living rose to 89 per cent .
In the first quarter of 1987 the discount rate was fixed at 61 per cent, but the cost of living for the full year increased by 120 per cent .
The plan for 1988 was that the discount rate was to be fixed each month at 1 per cent above the equivalent annual rate of increase in industrial prices in the previous month.
This system has produced violently fluctuating interest rates, and one suspects that it is either the result of incredible stupidity or designed to discredit monetary policy.
At the beginning of the year the government forecast that the rate of inflation for 1988 would be only 32 per cent.
But no one believed it.
In December 1987 the cost-of-living index was 170 per cent above its level in December of the previous year, and even under the ‘price freeze’ of the first few months of 1988, prices continued to rise at a rate equivalent to an annual rate of about 100 per cent.
As mentioned previously, the agreement made with the IMF in May 1988 sets a target rate of inflation for the end of the year of 95 per cent.
The actual outcome will almost certainly exceed this by a substantial amount.
Although the persistent maintenance of negative real interest rates is an indication of the government's underlying attitude to monetary policy, it is by no means certain that, under the conditions existing in Yugoslavia, high interest rates have a great deal of influence on expenditure.
So far as enterprises are concerned, their accounts are now in such a state of confusion that most of them no longer care about increases in their costs.
Nor do they even care very much about their state of liquidity, so long as they think that they can force the banks to bail them out.
All that they really care about is how to find the cash to pay their taxes, their imports, and the monthly incomes of their workers.
Until recently, they took it for granted that their supplies from  domestic sources could be obtained on credit and that, when these bills matured, any shortage of funds would be made good by the banks.
This was the reductio ad absurdum of socialist self-management.
This discussion of Yugoslav monetary policy is concluded with a summary given in Table 8.4, of the changes in the cost of living and the money supply in the period 1977–87.
From the second column of the table it can be seen that in 1977–8, before the crisis year of 1979, the money supply was growing faster than the cost of living.
Indeed, it had been rising much faster than the cost of living for a number of years.
For example, from 1973 to 1978 the   money supply rose by 306 per cent , while the cost of living rose by 123 per cent ; thereafter, for five or six years the rate of growth of the money supply was less than the rate of increase of prices, especially in 1981 and 1983–5.
But in 1986 the brakes were taken off, and in the twelve months ending in December of that year the money supply was allowed to rise by 109 per cent.
In the following year, as already noted, the cost of living rose by 120 per cent(average for the year), and by the end of the year the rate of increase for the previous twelve months had reached 170 per cent .
The third and fourth columns of the table indicate the importance of increases in the money supply as a source of funds for extra-budgetary government expenditure.
In the years 1977 — 83 the ratio of the increase in the money supply to consolidated government budgetary expenditure was about 15 per cent.
Thereafter, this ratio increased rapidly, rising to as much as 27 per cent in 1986.
When the increases in the money supply are expressed as percentages of adjusted social product, it can be seen that between 1977 and 1985 the government normally took about 6–7 per cent of the social product for extra-budgetary purposes (1983 was the major exception).
But in the following two years this proportion rose to an average of more than 10 per cent.
These figures show that the small surpluses and deficits that appear in government budget accounts (sec Table 8.2) are quite misleading indicators of the inflationary or deflationary stance of the Yugoslav public sector.
The Yugoslav government has always used its control over the banking system to cover expenditures in excess of its revenues, and this is a major cause of the current economic crisis.
The effects of exchange depreciation on the banks
One of the principal effects of inflation is to redistribute wealth between lenders and borrowers.
Unless both parties successfully anticipate inflation by fixing the terms of loans in such a way as to compensate for inflation, the lenders find that the real value of their loans declines, and the borrowers find that the real value of their debts declines to the same extent.
Moreover, everyone who holds cash or non-interest-bearing deposits in banks finds himself in the camp of the wealth-losing lenders.
One way in which  lenders (but not the holders of bank notes) can safeguard their position is to index the value of their loan against an appropriate price index.
An alternative is to make the loan in terms of a foreign currency which is expected to retain its real value.
If the borrowers accept the loan on either of these conditions, neither party has any basis for complaint if events turn out differently from what they originally expected.
Financial intermediaries, predominantly banks, are not particularly concerned about the effects of inflation on their balance sheets, so long as their loans and deposits are all made on a similar basis.
If both deposits and loans are non-indexed, the losses that the banks make on their loans are compensated by the losses that their depositors make on their deposits.
If, however, both loans and deposits are indexed, or are expressed in a foreign currency, the banks are equally protected.
(Indeed, they will make a gain from the issue of notes in domestic currency, which cannot be indexed.)
Banks in most countries, therefore, are careful not to make loans on one basis and to accept deposits on another.
But in Yugoslavia the situation is different.
During the period 1974–81, the Yugoslav banks borrowed, or gave guarantees for, a very large foreign debt, mainly expressed in dollars.
A considerable part of these funds was passed on as dinar loans to domestic enterprises.
This meant that the banks were accepting the exchange risk on these loans.
And the risk has turned out to be a disaster.
In 1974 the official rate for the dollar was 17 dinars; by early 1988 it was over 1,300 dinars.
Since the average rate at which the foreign debt was raised was probably about 25 dinars, its dinar value in early 1988 was about 50 times as great, approximately the same as the change in the cost of living over the same period.
Consequently, the enterprises that received the dinar credits have seen their real values fall to about 2 per cent of their original value.
Correspondingly, the banks have seen their dinar assets in respect of these loans fall to about 2 per cent of the dinar value of their foreign liabilities.
A further source of bank losses has been the acceptance of foreign exchange deposits from domestic residents, which have also been used to make dinar loans.
While, in the case of the loans raised from foreign sources, only part has been converted into dinar bank loans, the whole amount of the foreign exchange deposits has been converted in this way.
At the end of 1985 it was  estimated (OECD 1987, Diagram 5) that the value of bank debts to households in respect of foreign exchange deposits was about $9.5 billion.
These deposits were accepted by the banks and were lent, interest-free, to the National Bank in exchange for interest-free loans in dinars.
In principle, the banks are entitled to withdraw these foreign exchange ‘loans’ when necessary to repay their depositors.
But, so long as the net inflow of foreign exchange deposits is positive, as it has been up to now, there is no net withdrawal of funds from the National Bank.
Nevertheless, the banks still have to find the interest payable on these deposits.
Against the $9.5 billion of deposit liabilities outstanding at the end of 1985, the banks had at that time only about $1.5 billion of assets in the form of dinar credits.
Since the average rate of interest paid on the deposits was about 9 per cent(Mates 1986), the banks would have needed to charge an average interest rate on their counterpart dinar loans of over 50 per cent in order to cover themselves.
This they were not doing.
Although interest rates on bank loans have increased considerably in recent years, the higher rates are charged only on new loans, and the average rate charged lags well behind.
In the following two years the dollar value of the dinar fell to a quarter of its end-1985 value, and the proportion of the value of foreign exchange deposits covered by the counterpart dinar loans will have fallen to about 4 per cent.
Thus, in early 1988 the banks would have to charge an average rate of interest on their dinar loans of over 200 per cent to cover themselves.
This is probably the reason why the cost of the interest payments on foreign exchange deposits has now been accepted by the National Bank.
But since, as Ekonomska politika (18 January 1988) points out, the National Bank does not have a source of funds to cover this, it will be obliged to pay this interest also out of new money.
Another problem arises from the fact that most of the foreign exchange deposits have been made in  Deutschemarks , and that the value of the  Deutschemark has risen considerably in recent years compared with the value of the dollar.
Consequently, in spite of the fact that the net inflow of deposits in 1986–7 was quite small, the dollar value of the stock of deposits rose in those two years by nearly $2 billion to about $ 11.5 billion (EP , 7 March 1988).
While the uncovered debts of the banks in respect of residents'  foreign exchange deposits are known more or less precisely, the amount of the banks' other uncovered foreign liabilities is a matter of guesswork.
The gross foreign exchange liabilities of the banking system at the end of 1985 were estimated (OECD 1987, Diagram 5) to be about $23 billion, of which $9.5 billion was owed in respect of foreign exchange deposits.
These estimates also suggest that $9 billion of the remaining $13.5 billion was owed to the banks by enterprises, which would leave the banks with net foreign exchange liabilities of $14 billion (of which $4.5 billion would be in respect of liabilities other than foreign exchange deposits).
But, as Mates (1986) has pointed out, there is considerable doubt as to whether the banks have a legal right to such large claims against enterprises, since much of the foreign exchange supplied to enterprises by the banks was sold to them, not given on credit.
Mates estimated that the total uncovered foreign exchange liabilities of the banks at the end of 1985 amounted to $ 12.5 billion, and this suggests that at that time their total gross liabilities were substantially larger than $ 14 billion.
In a statement to the Skupština in July 1987 (Politika , 25 July (987), the vice-president of the government mentioned that the total foreign exchange losses of banks and ‘organizations of associated labour’(presumably at that time) amounted to 10,000 billion dinars, which would have been equivalent to about $15 billion at the current rate of exchange.
Whatever the exact amount of uncovered bank liabilities may be, it is clear that the financing of these debts will impose severe fiscal and monetary problems.
A side-effect of the right of citizens to make foreign exchange deposits has been that, as inflation has continued and accelerated, the dinar value of these deposits has grown much more rapidly than the value of dinar assets held by households.
While the net inflow into foreign exchange deposits in recent years has been fairly modest, the dinar value of the stock has risen enormously.
For example, from the end of 1982 to the end of 1986 the net inflow was less than 1,000 billion dinars, but the value of the stock of deposits rose by more than 4,000 billion dinars (EP , 14 March 1988).
In these four years the dinar value of these deposits multiplied by a factor of nearly 10, and by the end of 1987 this factor must have been more than 20.
Since the stock of dinar assets held by households has risen much more slowly than this, the proportion of household assets held in foreign exchange accounts has steadily grown: while in 1980 this proportion was less than 40 per cent, by the end of 1986 it had reached nearly 70 per cent .
As this process continues, the scope for further squeezing of the wealth of households through inflation is being reduced, and, so long as the authorities rely on inflation as a method of financing government expenditure, they will be obliged constantly to speed up the rate of inflation in order to achieve the same real effect.
The Agrokomerc affair
Agrokomerc is a large ‘complex’ organization, which in 1986 contained fourteen work organizations and thirty-four basic ‘organizations of associated labour’, mainly engaged in the production of food products.
In 1986 it employed about 11,500 workers, and a year later, when its affairs were the subject of wide comment in the press, it was said to be employing 13,000, or even 14,000, workers.
Its headquarters are in a small town in north-west Bosnia, a relatively poor region.
Twenty years ago, when the firm was of negligible size, Mr Fikret Abdić became its director and proceeded to build it up into a giant enterprise.
In 1986 Agrokomerc ranked, in terms of its turnover, as the twenty-ninth largest enterprise in Yugoslavia (EP , 7 September 1987).
The first mention of trouble in this previously highly regarded enterprise appeared in the press in August 1987.
Thereafter it gradually emerged that the firm had been issuing ‘uncovered bills of exchange’ to the tune of at least 250 billion dinars, but perhaps as much as 400 billion dinars (Politika , 20 August 1987).
According to a report in the London Times (3 November 1987), these uncovered bills were ‘promissory notes without collateral’, and their total value was $500 million.
It seems that for some time the firm had been issuing such promissory notes and having them endorsed by its local bank in Bihać (where, incidentally, the partisans held the first meeting of the Anti-Fascist Council for the Liberation of Yugoslavia).
The bank was completely under the control of Mr Abdić and his colleagues, and apparently complied with all their wishes.
Indeed, it even handed over several copies of its official stamp to Agrokomerc, so that the notes could be endorsed without the bother of sending  them to the bank.
Not only was this clearly illegal, but the bank was breaking the law by endorsing a quantity of ‘bills of exchange’ far in excess of its limit.
There is also some doubt about whether enterprises are entitled to issue promissory notes at all, and whether banks are entitled to endorse them.
Agrokomerc's promissory notes were sold to sixty-three banks in different parts of Yugoslavia, mainly in Slovenia, Croatia, and Serbia.
Apparently, it is permissible for banks to buy bills of exchange without limit, and they also have the right to discount such bills at the National Bank.
Normally, banks are unwilling to use their funds for financing enterprises in other republics and provinces, but it seems that in this case the banks in the more prosperous parts of Yugoslavia had funds in excess of the amounts they were permitted to use for giving credits to their own customers (Politika , 27 August 1987).
Moreover, the rate of interest offered on the Agrokomerc bills were ‘attractive’(presumably well over 50 per cent).
However, when these banks learnt, in the late summer of 1987, that the Agrokomerc bills were unsafe, perhaps even worthless, they were furious.
A campaign was immediately started to punish the people responsible for the swindle, and to discover who had abetted them.
Mr Abdić, who was a member of the Central Committee of the League of Communists of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also a member of the federal parliament, was soon dismissed from both these positions and placed under house arrest.
Meanwhile it emerged that the vice-president of Yugoslavia, Mr Hamdija Pozderac, who comes from the same part of Bosnia, had close connections with Mr Abdić and the firm of Agrokomerc.
His brother and many other relatives were employed in the firm, and there were suspicions that Mr Pozderac had used his political influence in its favour.
After a few weeks of agitation in the press, Mr Pozderac resigned from his high government office, although still declaring his innocence.
(He has since died.)
According to the London Times (3 November 1987), at that time more than a hundred party members were under investigation, and scores more had been arrested.
Meanwhile, the bank accounts of the firm were blocked, its workers were not being paid, thousands of turkeys were dying of starvation, and the whole enterprise was in danger of destruction.
Some Slovenian bankers pointed out that it would have made better sense to have carried out a  ‘consolidation’, which would have preserved more of the assets of the firm than the policy of attacking it from all sides (Politika , 1 October 1987).
The Agrokomerc affair has undermined public confidence in almost all of the political and financial institutions of Yugoslavia.
It has thrown a revealing light on the close relations between the local political establishment, the directors of major enterprises, and the banks.
It has also shown that these groups of people and institutions have been involved in widespread breaches of the law.
The vice-governor of the National Bank, for example, has said (Politika , 27 August 1987) that the issue of uncovered bills of exchange is illegal, and that the Bihać bank broke the law by endorsing bills far beyond its entitlement.
The manager of the Ljubljana branch of the Belgrade Bank has revealed that he was asked by a high official of the National Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina to purchase 3 billion dinars of Agrokomerc bills of exchange (Politika , 27 August 1987).
Apparently, he refused.
Petar Dodik, who is a member of the presidency of the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, said (Danas , 10 November 1987) that a main cause of the Agrokomerc scandal was the connection between the management of the firm and powerful politicians, especially the Pozderac brothers.
In this way, the firm's managers were able to obtain influence over the banks, not only in Bihać but also in Sarajevo.
They were also able to establish control over the Social Accounting Service, which is the official body through which all enterprises have to make their bank payments, and which has the specific responsibility of checking on the validity of bills of exchange.
A leading Slovene politician, Jože Smole, who has held many high positions, including a period as governor of the National Bank and another as federal minister of finance, maintained (Politika , 25 August 1987) that the directors of Agrokomerc would not have issued such a large number of uncovered bills of exchange without the approval of the local commune, the Bihać bank, the Associated Banks of Sarajevo, the National Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Social Accounting Service of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He did not specifically mention the party, but, since all the top personnel of these organizations are party members, its involvement is clearly implied.
Other commentators have pointed out that the lessons of the  affair do not apply only to Agrokomerc, its management, or the politicians of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Aleksandar Singer, who is a retired Belgrade banker, has said (NIN , 4 October 1987) that all the top bankers and politicians must have known that Agrokomerc was overspending.
What Abdić did, he said, is done everywhere.
His only mistake was in going too far.
And Professor Davor Savin, of Maribor University, has pointed out (Danas , 25 August 1987) that there are hundreds of ‘organizations of associated labour’ which have issued illegal ‘uncovered bills of exchange’.
In other countries, he said, such organizations would immediately be subject to severe penalties.
Although the laws will doubtless be tightened, no cure for the current state of financial laxity will be found so long as Yugoslavia has a ‘soft budget’ approach to monetary policy, and persists in its attempts to combine self-management with the doctrine of ‘social ownership’.
No increase in laws, compacts, and penalties can succeed in overcoming the fundamental contradictions of the system.
Foreign Trade
While general problems of balance of payments policy were discussed in Chapter 4, in this chapter attention will be concentrated mainly on commodity trade.
Section 1 will be concerned with trends in real exports and imports, the importance of commodity trade within the general balance of payments, and the structure of this trade, both by area and by commodity composition.
Section 2 will consider the methods that have been used to allocate scarce foreign exchange and their effects on export performance.
Trends and Structure of Commodity Trade
Yugoslav statistics of foreign trade are rather unsatisfactory and difficult to interpret.
There are two major problems.
The first is that until 1983 all exports and imports were valued in so-called ‘statistical’ dollars, by converting the original valuations into dollars at the rate of exchange ruling at the beginning of the year.
The consequence was that, when the value of the dollar against the dinar or other currencies changed during the year, the reported values of trade in dollars did not correspond to their values at the time of entry or exit from Yugoslavia.
When the dollar was rising, the reported values were too high, and vice versa.
If all exports and imports were originally declared in terms of dinars and then converted into ‘statistical’ dollars, it should be possible to reconstitute the original dinar values by multiplying up by the ‘statistical’value of the dollar in terms of dinars.
This has been the procedure followed by the Yugoslav statisticians for many years.
But it seems that the assumption underlying this method is incorrect.
For the years 1984–6, the statistical authorities have published  (Indeks , 1987, nos. 3 and 9) the values of exports and imports both according to the traditional method and in terms of current dinars, i.e. at the rates of exchange ruling at the time of the export or import of the goods.
And these latter values are very much higher than the values obtainable on the old system.
The increase in value, for both exports and imports, in 1984 was 18 per cent, in 1985 43 per cent ; in 1986 53 per cent for exports and 58 per cent for imports.
These figures suggest that there was also some degree of undervaluation of exports and imports in terms of dinars in previous years, although the amount may well have varied with the rate of depreciation of the dinar.
The second problem is that Yugoslav trade values appear to be substantially understated, even in terms of dollars.
This was clearly demonstrated in a special analysis made by OECD (1983, 51) of trade between Yugoslavia on the one side and West Germany, Italy, and all OECD countries combined in the years 1978–81.
In all cases, the reported values of imports into Yugoslavia were lower than the export values reported by the partner countries, despite the fact that the Yugoslav values were c.i.f. and the partner country values were f.o.b.
As regards Yugoslav exports, the values reported by Yugoslavia were usually lower than the values of imports from Yugoslavia reported by the partner countries — but frequently so much lower as to be implausible.
This difference was most marked in the case of Yugoslav exports to West Germany.
There seems to be no doubt, therefore, that Yugoslav trade values are (or at least were at that time) underreported in terms of dollars, and that the difference was especially large in the case of Yugoslav imports.
One can only guess at the reasons for such underreporting; but it seems possible that exporters understate values in the hope of retaining part of the foreign exchange that they would otherwise be obliged to surrender to the authorities, while importers may wish to minimize their import duties (and also avoid enquiries into the source of the foreign exchange used for imports).
For both these reasons, it is necessary to treat Yugoslav foreign trade statistics with a certain amount of scepticism.
Special difficulties of interpretation arise in the analysis of trends in trade expressed in dinar values, and hence in the relations between current dinar values of exports, imports, and social product.
It may be for this reason that Yugoslav official statistics of trade are  frequently expressed in terms of dollars or, strictly speaking, in ‘statistical’ dollars.
However, while these dollar values are better than dinar values for the years up to 1983, they are still not satisfactory, both for the reason given above and because the real value of the dollar has fluctuated considerably during the past ten years.
Despite these reservations, four tables based on Yugoslav official statistics of foreign trade and payments are presented for the reader's consideration.
Table 9.1 shows the dollar values of exports and imports in the years 1977–87, and the corresponding official volume indexes for the same period.
It will be seen that the dollar value of exports more than doubled between 1977 and 1981, but remained fairly stable thereafter, at least until 1986.
But these values were much influenced by the changes in the value of the dollar, both in relation to other currencies and in relation to world prices.
The export volume series shows a rather different pattern, with a more modest rise from 1977 to 1981 and a greater degree of fluctuation in the following years.
If the   volume index is to be trusted, the average annual rate of real growth of Yugoslav exports from 1979 to 1987 was nearly 2.5 per cent, although almost all of this occurred between 1983 and 1985, after which there was a slight decline.
On the import side, the dollar figures show a substantial fall from 1981 to 1983, followed by a fairly stable level until 1985 and a substantial rise in 1986 (the year of ‘programmed inflation’ and the Party Congress).
The volume series shows a much greater decline from 1979 to 1983, and a similar rise in 1986.
Table 9.2 is designed to indicate the relative importance of commodity trade within the framework of the general balance of payments of Yugoslavia.
For this purpose, the values of imports and exports have been expressed as percentages of total payments for imports and net interest.
For simplicity, the data are given only for every third year from 1973 to 1985.
This table  reveals a number of striking features.
First, there was a very large increase in the share of petroleum imports from 1973 to 1976, mainly as a result of the first oil shock; and again from 1979 to 1982, as a result of the second oil shock.
(Since 1985, as Table 9.3 will show, the cost of oil imports has fallen substantially, although not completely back to the 1979 level.)
Second, the cost of net interest payments rose considerably after 1979, reaching 12 per cent of total payments in 1985.
(This, again, will have fallen somewhat in the following two years.)
Third, on the receipts side, there was a large fall in the relative size of net remittances.
In 1973, net remittances from Yugoslav workers abroad covered about one-quarter of total payments for imports and net interest, but by 1985 this proportion had fallen to 7.2 per cent.
The combined pressure of the rise in the price of oil, the rise in net interest payments, and the fall in net remittances forced Yugoslavia to make other adjustments in its balance of payments.
But the response in the 1970s was very different from the response in the 1980s.
Between 1973 and 1979 Yugoslavia covered the extra cost of oil and the fall in the relative importance of remittances by letting the current account go into deficit.
As a result, in 1979 only 75 per cent of payments for imports and net interest was covered by exports and other net receipts.
In the new climate of the 1980s, Yugoslavia was obliged to follow a different pattern of adjustment and to concentrate on changing the volumes of its commodity exports and imports.
Unfortunately, most of these efforts were directed towards reducing non-oil imports, which had damaging effects on domestic production.
There was, however, some increase in exports, especially, as we have seen above, in the two-year period 1983–5.
The turnaround in the current balance was heroic, from — 25 per cent of total payments to +6.0 per cent.
But the cost to the economy of the method of achieving this result was enormous
The distribution of Yugoslav commodity trade by major groups of countries is shown in Table 9.3.
Although Yugoslavia does a substantial amount of trade with OECD countries, it also has large trade connections with the Soviet Union and the socialist countries of Eastern Europe.
Its trade with developing countries, especially those in the Middle East and North Africa, is also considerable.
The pattern of trade in recent years has been   much affected by the price of oil.
The rise in the oil price after 1979 was mainly responsible not only for the growth in the share of this group of products in total imports from 1979 to 1984 but also for its decline during the following three years.
This factor also accounts for the changes in the shares of imports taken from the Soviet Union and the developing countries in these years.
Almost all petroleum imports by Yugoslavia come from the Soviet Union, Iraq, Libya, and Algeria.
The commodity composition of Yugoslavia's foreign trade, averaged over the five years 1980–4, is shown in Table 9.4.
Here again, the importance of petroleum imports is apparent.
The other major import group was machinery and transport equipment, the largest sources of which were West Germany, Italy, the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, and Czechoslovakia.
Important suppliers of raw materials other than petroleum were the United States (oil seeds, coal), Australia (wool), the Soviet Union (cotton, coal, iron ore), and Egypt (cotton).
Major markets for Yugoslav products were Italy (hardwood), the Soviet  Union (machinery, transport equipment and parts, ships, furniture, clothing, and footwear), France and Poland (transport equipment and parts), Liberia (ships), the United States (furniture), and West Germany (clothing and footwear).
It is often said that Yugoslavia exports lower-quality products to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe than to the West.
For example, an article in Danas (6 January 1987) stated: ‘Up to now we have produced one quality of product for the home market, another for Western markets, and a third quality for the East.’
But Comecon markets may be becoming more competitive.
In 1986 the Soviet Union returned goods worth $7.2 million to Yugoslavia on the grounds of inferior quality, and a smaller quantity of such goods was returned also by East Germany (EP , 21 March 1988).
In that year inferior goods were returned by forty-nine countries in all, including all Yugoslavia's major Western markets.
Another reason for Yugoslavia's large exports to the Soviet Union is said to be that in this way the Soviet Union can obtain Western products which would not otherwise be so easily available to it.
In addition, since trade with the Soviet Union is intended to be bilaterally balanced, it has been necessary to find some Yugoslav products to supply to the Soviet  Union in return for its petroleum and other raw materials.
For this reason, the Soviet Union is still a ‘soft’ market for Yugoslavia, especially for Serbia, while higher-quality products are shipped to the West, especially from Slovenia and Croatia.
These regional differences in trade patterns are important in determining regional attitudes to alternative arrangements for allocating scarce foreign exchange.
The Allocation of Foreign Exchange
Throughout the postwar period, Yugoslavia has been short of foreign exchange, and never more so than in the 1980s.
Like many other developing countries, Yugoslavia followed a development strategy that was biased towards import replacement rather than exports.
This bias was strengthened by the nature of a socialist regime, which always has a preference for an autarkic system, which can be controlled and ‘planned’, over free trade, which is subject to the ‘unbridled forces of the market’.
Despite the fact that Yugoslavia was more market-conscious than some other socialist countries, the development of exports was never given priority in its industrial strategy.
The consequence was that very few Yugoslav enterprises were established mainly to satisfy export demand.
The need for exports is too often regarded by Yugoslav enterprises as a ‘necessary evil’ imposed on them by the government.
When a country has a persistent shortage of foreign exchange, two kinds of policy question arise.
The first concerns the best method of allocating the scarce foreign exchange currently available.
The second is how to move the economy towards a position in which the balance of payments will be closer to equilibrium.
The standard economic answer to both these questions is that the price of foreign exchange should be raised in terms of the domestic currency.
Then both the earners and the users of foreign exchange will know its real opportunity cost, and they will adjust their behaviour so as to economize on foreign exchange in the short term and to earn more of it in the long term.
But in a country such as Yugoslavia, which has a ‘structural’ disequilibrium in its balance of payments because of past mistakes and accumulated debts, the price of foreign  exchange which would bring current demand and supply into equilibrium might be so high as to be very painful to some well-entrenched interests.
This is one reason why the Yugoslav government has tried to avoid raising the price of foreign exchange.
But the other reason is that the price of foreign exchange can be raised only if the supply of domestic currency is reduced in relation to the available supply of foreign exchange.
This means imposing a tight domestic monetary policy, which, as already pointed out, is very distasteful to most governments, and especially to socialist governments.
If a government cannot bring itself to introduce a completely free market for foreign exchange (at least for current transactions), there are many possible alternative policies.
Usually, these involve the establishment of multiple markets and multiple prices for foreign exchange.
By this means a government can ensure that part of the supply of foreign exchange is surrendered to it at a low price to be used to satisfy the demands of privileged groups, including itself, while the remainder is left for more or less free disposal by the recipient enterprises, either on an official market at a more favourable rate, or on a free or ‘black’ market.
In an extreme case, the government may insist on the surrender to it (or to the central bank) of all foreign exchange.
In that case, it has to take responsibility for allocating all foreign exchange to the users by administrative methods.
For many years the Yugoslav system of allocation was to allow exporters to retain a certain proportion of their foreign exchange earnings and to surrender the remainder to the National Bank.
Since the purpose of allowing enterprises to retain part of their foreign exchange earnings was to enable them to finance their essential import needs, the retention ratios varied between industries.
But there was always much debate about the level at which each ratio should be set, and much bitterness when an industry considered itself badly treated.
The problem is, of course, that, with only a few exceptions, there is no unique relation between an industry's inputs of imported materials or components and its exports.
Imported materials are pooled with home-produced materials, and output consists of both exports and sales on the domestic market.
There was, therefore, usually some scope for an enterprise to substitute domestically produced materials for imported materials, and there was never any  guarantee that foreign exchange retained by enterprises would be used solely for producing exports.
Moreover, when one group of enterprises is given the privilege of retaining foreign exchange while others are obliged to apply for administrative allocations, which they know that they will frequently not receive, or to buy foreign exchange on the black market at a high price, the latter enterprises begin to think of all sorts of reasons why they too should receive part of the foreign exchange proceeds of exports.
After all, the exporters are not living in a vacuum: they rely on domestic producers for many of their materials, power, transport, and other services.
Logically, these latter producers can claim that they contribute to the value of exports, and are therefore entitled to part of the proceeds.
And the enterprises that supply them with goods and services can make a similar claim; and so on.
An input — output analysis would show approximately how much of every $ 100 of exports is ultimately produced by each domestic industry, and how much by imports.
But the argument would not even stop at that point.
For the producers of material X, for example, although not currently selling X to exporting firms, can argue that, if they were not supplying firms that sell only on the home market, those firms would have to buy imported supplies of X, and that, if the firms that now supply X to exporting firms were unable to do so, they would be able to take their place.
In the end, it must be accepted that exports are produced through the co-operation, to a greater or lesser extent, of every enterprise in the economy.
This was the kind of discussion that developed in Yugoslavia under the system of retention ratios.
And it led to all sorts of ‘self-management agreements’ between enterprises on the reallocation of foreign exchange.
But the agreements were not enforceable, or at any rate were not enforced.
For example, in 1985 the steel industry, which relies on imports of both coking coal and iron ore, and which does not export enough to cover these requirements, made an agreement with the metal-working industry, which is a net exporter, to sell it $67 million of foreign exchange during the year.
But up to the end of May 1985, the steel industry had received from the metal-working industry only $360.000.
Nor was it able to buy sufficient foreign exchange from other sources.
As a result, it decided to increase its exports of steel.
But it could do this only by making a substantial cut in its prices, in fact to  prices below the cost of steel imports (EP , 12 August 1985).
There is also a regional dimension to this problem.
For much of Yugoslavia's receipts of convertible currency are earned by Slovenia and Croatia, either from commodity exports to OECD countries or from tourism.
The retention ratio system ensured that a large proportion of these receipts remained in these two republics, either to be used directly by the exporting enterprises or to be sold to other enterprises in the same republic.
It was almost certainly the growth of dissatisfaction with this arrangement in the other republics and provinces that led to the abandonment of the retention ratio system at the end of 1985.
This feeling can be discerned in the comments of the Federal Executive Council (the federal government) on the draft of its new law on foreign exchange (EP , 15 July 1985).
It declared that the linking of the right to pay for imports to the receipt of foreign exchange was ‘an unacceptable principle’, because the system led to ‘the obstruction of foreign exchange flows between regions and banks, the reduction of the role of the dinar as a single currency and means of payment in a unified Yugoslav market…and the strengthening of autarkic tendencies’.
Against the strong objections of Slovenia and Croatia (but ultimately without their veto), the retention ratio system was replaced at the beginning of 1986 by a system which claimed to be directed towards the establishment of a free market in foreign exchange.
From that date, all foreign exchange receipts were to be surrendered to authorized banks at the official rates of exchange.
Enterprises that needed foreign exchange to pay for imports or for other purposes were then to make application to the banks, which were to determine the amount of each enterprise's ‘socially verified needs’, based on its use of foreign exchange in the previous year and its export performance in that year.
But this elaborate system of administrative allocation was not applied in practice, because there was not enough foreign exchange to meet all the ‘socially verified needs’.
In the event, the government had to resort to Article 110 of the law, which comes into operation when there is a shortage of foreign exchange at the rates determined by the National Bank.
Under this article, foreign exchange is allocated on a system of priorities (OECD 1987, 70–1).
The first priority is the servicing of foreign debts and other foreign contracts.
Then come the  foreign exchange needs of net exporters, followed by the needs of enterprises that could be net exporters if they were not obliged to give priority to the home market.
Next are the priority needs of federal agencies and organizations, then imports of energy, and finally imports of consumer goods.
The application of such a system must inevitably be arbitrary.
According to NIN (9 November 1986), since available supplies of foreign exchange have to be given to priority industries, non-priority enterprises have received nothing.
Yet there is no guarantee that the ‘priority’ industries contribute more to social product or to the balance of payments than ‘non-priority’industries.
In order to compensate firms for the loss of their retention rights, the federal government set up a scheme of export subsidies.
But it had great difficulty in finding the necessary funds for this purpose, and, partly for this reason and partly because of sheer bureaucratic inefficiency, the payment of the subsidies was always much delayed.
The incentive to export seems to have been considerably reduced, and in 1987 Yugoslavia found itself in an increasingly difficult balance of payments position.
In August the Slovene delegation to the Skupština launched a strong criticism of the new system, which, it maintained (EP , 24 August 1987), had ‘irrefutably shown for a year and a half that it is inefficient, and that the centralization of foreign exchange, the administrative allocation of import entitlements, and priority for the servicing of debts have brought disastrous results for exports and for the inflow of foreign exchange’.
Among the reasons given for this conclusion were that the system imposes long delays in obtaining foreign exchange for essential imports, thus putting a brake on exports; that the rate of exchange was not adjusted sufficiently; and that in the absence of retention rights the exporters had lost their motivation for exporting.
The Slovenes, therefore, proposed that the existing foreign exchange allocation system should be abandoned, and that there should be a return to the previous system of retention ratios.
The Slovenes were given some support from Croatia, but the majority of the republics and provinces were unwilling to return to the old system.
A temporary compromise was found, without satisfying the Slovenes and Croats, and a new arrangement was promised for later in 1988.
In the meantime, some exporters had found a typically 
‘Yugoslav’ solution to the problem of paying for their essential imports.
They made agreements with their foreign customers to be paid in goods instead of money.
Apparently, such agreements are not contrary to the law, or else are winked at.
According to  Eknomska  politika (20 July 1987), these agreements covered at that time about half of the value of exports to the convertible currency area, so that only about half of these exports were generating an inflow of foreign exchange.
Such arrangements, although of advantage to the enterprises concerned, are clearly damaging to the rest of the economy.
It is not surprising, therefore, that in the latter part of 1987 the Yugoslav government failed, for the first time, to pay interest on its foreign debt.
Moreover, barter agreements are a very inefficient method of trading, and their continuation would have depressed Yugoslavia's economic performance even further.
An example, although perhaps a rather extreme one, of the disadvantages of barter concerns the case of some construction work done in Iraq and Libya (EP , 17 August 1987).
The original contracts were for payment in dollars.
But after a while the Yugoslav government took them over, and converted them into agreements to supply oil.
The result was long delays in settlement.
The foreign oil producers were slow in supplying oil, and there were delays in loading and off-loading it (and in waiting for a full ship-load).
Finally, the Yugoslav government held up payment to the construction enterprises for several more months, and then paid them in dinars at the current rate of exchange, which was considerably worse than the rate applicable at the time when payment was originally due.
As a result, one of the enterprises decided to sue the government for compensation.
While a system of retention ratios is certainly a ‘second-best’, it is clearly preferable to a system of administrative allocation according to‘priorities’.
For the latter system greatly reduces the incentive to export and leads to a progressive worsening of the balance of payments.
A system of retention ratios at least gives exporters part of the benefits due to them, since they are assured of most of their import needs, and can sell any surplus foreign exchange on the black market to other enterprises, who also benefit by being able to obtain foreign exchange at a price instead of being at the mercy of administrative decisions by bureaucrats.
In late 1987, a return to the retention ratio system  was favoured by the Economic Chamber of Yugoslavia, as well as by the governments of Slovenia and Croatia.
For many months the federal government seemed to be wavering.
Eventually, however, in May 1988 it signed a new agreement with the IMF, under which, in return for a supply of new foreign loans, it agreed to relax foreign exchange controls and open an effective foreign exchange market.
Since these measures were to be accompanied by a tight control over the supply of bank credits, there seemed to be a reasonable chance that the new policy would succeed in bringing the foreign balance closer to a state of equilibrium.
Regional Problems
When Yugoslavia came into existence in 1918 it was called the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.
Serbia, which bad been semi-independent from 1817 and fully independent from 1878, and which had played a considerable part in the First World War (and suffered enormous losses), was the nucleus of the new state.
Serbia already included present-day Macedonia and Kosovo; and, by the addition at the end of the war of Vojvodina and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the new state acquired a considerable addition of people of Serbian language and religion.
Montenegro, which had partially maintained its independence for many centuries, was another added area of people of mainly Serbian characteristics.
Serbia (including Macedonia and Kosovo) and Bosnia and Herzegovina had been under Turkish rule for four or five centuries.
They were predominantly small peasant economies, with scarcely any industry.
But the other two main additions to the new kingdom — Slovenia and Croatia — had been under the rule of Austria or Hungary for approximately the same period of time.
They were also mainly peasant economies, but they had a significant number of industrial enterprises (many of which were the ancestors of today's ‘organizations of associated labour’).
Both Slovenia and Croatia were Catholic and ‘western’.
They used the Latin script, and they had been part of the western world from the time of the Roman Empire.
Although economically underdeveloped by modern standards, they were more advanced than the rest of the new kingdom (except Vojvodina), and especially in comparison with mountainous Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and with southern Serbia, including Kosovo and Macedonia.
In the interwar period there was a small expansion of industry, but in 1941, when Yugoslavia was occupied by the Axis powers, the country was still predominantly a nation of poor peasants.
When the communists took over in 1945, they were determined to industrialize and, at first, to eliminate the private peasants.
They believed that Yugoslavia's backwardness was the fault of capitalism and that a period of socialism would put it right.
This doctrine, of course, implied that the large inherited differences in the level of economic development in the different regions of Yugoslavia would also disappear under socialism.
But, as they say in Yugoslavia, ‘it didn't work like that’.
In fact, although over the past forty years there has been a major transformation of the Yugoslav economy, inter-regional differences are at least as great as they were before, and in some cases even greater.
In the first section of this chapter we shall study some indicators of present inter-regional economic differences in Yugoslavia.
At the top of the league is Slovenia, and at the bottom Kosovo (although Macedonia is not in a much better condition).
The economic problems of Kosovo merge with — and accentuate — its political problems, which arise from the conflict between the majority Albanians and the shrinking minority of Serbs and Montenegrins.
The ‘Kosovo problem’ has had strong repercussions in Serbia and has stimulated a revival of Serbian nationalism, which now threatens the stability of Yugoslavia.
Because of the seriousness of this issue, the second section of this chapter is devoted to an analysis of the background to the Kosovo problem and an assessment of current policies towards it.
Inter-regional Economic Differences
Table 10.1 presents some estimates of differences in average levels of labour productivity and income in the six republics and two autonomous provinces of Yugoslavia in 1986.
It may first be noted, from column (1), that there is a fairly wide dispersion in population size between these eight federal components.
Their resident population ranges from more than 5.5 million in Serbia in the narrow sense (without its two autonomous provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo) to about 600,000 in Montenegro.
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina both have more than 4 million inhabitants, and the other four regions (Slovenia, Vojvodina, Kosovo and Macedonia) are all slightly below 2 million.
Serbia in the ‘wide’ sense, including Vojvodina and Kosovo, has a resident population of more than 9 million, although less than 7 million of these are Serbs.
There are, however, more than a million Serbs living in other republics, mainly in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Because of its federal structure and the close interest taken by Yugoslavs in differences between conditions in the different republics and provinces, there are abundant official statistics about each region.
(Indeed, there is even a large amount of  statistical information about each of the more than 500 communes.)
It is easy, therefore, to discover the average level of per capita social product in each region.
In 1986 these varied from 209 per cent of the Yugoslav average in Slovenia to 30 per cent of the average in Kosovo — an enormous range of difference for a single country.
These figures, or course, are measured in dinars.
But in a country with such wide differences in standards of living, the real value of the currency is not equal in every region.
According to an official survey, the income needs in terms of dinars of a family of four in early 1987 varied from 17 per cent above the Yugoslav average in Slovenia to 18 per cent below the average in Kosovo.
The nominal differences in real social product per head, therefore, have been corrected by this set of estimates to yield the figures in column (2) of the table.
Even with this correction, the range of variation in real social product per head between the republics and provinces is very wide.
At the extremes, there is still a 5:1 ratio between Slovenia and Kosovo; and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Macedonia are also much below the levels of the northern regions of Slovenia, Croatia, and Vojvodina.
There is, in other words, a marked difference in Yugoslavia between the ‘North’ and the ‘South’.
these differences reflect many influences.
In Kosovo there is a high dependency ratio, because the Albanians have large families with many children.
Moreover, among persons of working age in Kosovo, less than a quarter have jobs in the social sector, because there are many small peasant households (with very low incomes) and a high level of unemployment.
The proportion of persons of working age who have jobs in the social sector is low also in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and slightly below the Yugoslav average of 43 per cent in Montenegro, Macedonia, and parts of Serbia.
In Croatia, however, this proportion is 51 per cent, and in Slovenia 67 per cent .
Even when a worker has a job in the productive social sector, his or her output varies considerably between the different republics and provinces.
As shown in column (3), output per worker is twice as great in Slovenia as in Kosovo, and, in general, there is a difference between the levels of productivity in the North and the South.
These differences are reflected in the levels of net personal income per worker (or net money earnings) in the  different republics and provinces (column (4)), although the real differences, after correction for the variation in the cost of living, are somewhat smaller (column (5)).
Some additional indicators of regional economic differences are given in Table 10.2.
The first column shows that the poorest regions tend to have the highest ratios of foreign debt to social product.
This is partly because, at least in the cases of Montenegro and Kosovo, large foreign loans were raised for investments in infrastructure and heavy industry (much of which turned out to be unprofitable).
The second column also shows that there is a wide variation between regions in the proportion of exports to foreign debt.
Once more, it is Slovenia that excels, and Kosovo that brings up the tail.
Exports, of course, are not the only source of foreign exchange.
Croatia, Slovenia, and Montenegro (especially the first of these) have large earnings from tourism, and all regions receive substantial amounts from remittances.
But it is clear that both Montenegro and Kosovo have a critical foreign debt problem.
There are no reliable figures of unemployment, because no effort is made to distinguish between job-seekers who are available for work and those who are still at school or college, or working on the family-farm.
Nor are there reliable figures on the total work-force (which is always a problem in a country with a large peasant population).
The figures in column (3) show the number of registered job-seekers as a percentage of the number of workers in the social sector (both productive and non-productive).
These, again, show a remarkable variation between Slovenia, where there is clearly ‘full employment’, and Kosovo, where there is more than one job-seeker for every two workers at present employed in the social sector.
As usual, there is a general difference between the North and the South.
Apart from actual job-seekers, there are hundreds of thousands of Yugoslavs working ‘temporarily’ abroad, mainly in Western Europe.
These represent another 10 per cent in relation to the total number of workers already with jobs in the social sector.
If they were added to the registered job-seekers, the employment problem would appear to be even worse.
(And if the 1.5–2 million surplus workers now in jobs were added, it would be seen to be catastrophic.)
The final column of Table 10.2 gives the natural rate of growth of population in each region in 1986.
The rates of growth are lowest in the North, including Serbia, and highest in the South, especially in Kosovo.
This is probably a reflection partly of larger peasant populations in the South, but also of religious and cultural differences.
It is well known that the Albanians, who predominate in Kosovo and in parts of western Macedonia, tend to have very large families, Such rapid rates of growth of population in areas of poverty and high unemployment are naturally a matter of great concern to the authorities.
But attempts to encourage family planning encounter obstacles not only of an economic nature but also of a religious, cultural, and possibly also political nature.
Estimates of the net saving of enterprises given in Chapter 7 showed that the amount of net saving had become more and more negative in the 1980s.
Table 1 o.3 throws some light on regional differences in enterprise saving in 1987.
In that year, even the official figures show that total net saving of all enterprises was negative, at a rate of approximately $250 per worker.
But there were also wide regional variations.
In Slovenia net saving was positive, and in Croatia nearly so; but in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Kosovo net saving was approximately — $800 per worker.
When these figures are compared with the amounts of net personal income paid in the same period, it can be seen (column (4)) that about 40 per cent of net personal income in these three regions was financed out of net dissaving (or losses).
The Yugoslav government has always been very concerned   about the wide regional differences in economic achievement.
Since the early 1970s it has attempted to raise the level of the less developed republics and provinces (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Kosovo, and Macedonia) by heavily subsidized loans from a special fund financed by the other republics and provinces, in 1987 at the rate of 1.56 per cent of their social product.
In addition, the federal government makes grants for current purposes to the less developed regions.
In the 1970s the total volume of transfers through these two channels was nearly 3 per cent of the social product of the more advanced republics and provinces, and even in the more difficult 1980s this ratio has amounted to almost 2½ per cent.
When the size of this transfer is compared with the volume of similar international transfers between rich and poor countries, it can be seen as being a very considerable effort; and it imposes a heavy burden on the more advanced regions, especially on Serbia, which has an average social product per head below the Yugoslav average.
Despite this large volume of inter-regional aid, there is no evidence that the relative position of the less developed regions has improved.
A comparison of social product per head in the 1950s with that in 1986 (in current dinars, unadjusted for regional differences in the cost of living) shows a significant improvement for Montenegro (from less than 60 per cent of the average to 77 per cent) and, at the other end of the scale, for Vojvodina (from less than the Yugoslav average to 21 per cent above it).
The main losers in this period were Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, while the relative positions of the other regions (Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, and Macedonia) did not change significantly.
But most of the changes that did occur took place over 1950–70; since the latter year there appears to have been little change in the relative positions of the different republics and provinces in social product per head.
Why is it that, despite such large financial contributions to the less developed regions, there has been no appreciable improvement in their relative economic performance?
Difference in birth rates is clearly one reason.
But the more important reasons are ‘economic’, and arise from the nature of the economic system.
The bulk of the transfers have been made to the governments of the less developed regions to be used at their own discretion.
According to NIN (23 November 1986), the developed  regions have no influence on how the Federal Fund for the development of the less developed regions is spent.
‘Any suggestion of this kind is rejected as an infringement of sovereignty.
The local bureaucracies of the less developed regions have unfettered freedom in spending these funds, and they have made many disastrous mistakes.’
An article in Politika at the end of 1986 (10 December), when the rate of inflation was moving up towards 100 per cent, reported that loans from the Federal Fund were given at 10 per cent (9 per cent in Kosovo) with a repayment period of twelve years.
In some cases this money had been spent on ‘magnificent sports centres, public buildings, and libraries’, as well as on useless projects such as FENI.
Such hard experience has taught the Yugoslavs that there is no guarantee that ‘foreign aid’ solves the problem to which it is directed.
Since 1976 they have tried to encourage the donor regions to use part of their contributions to the Federal Fund for direct investment in enterprises in the less developed regions.
From 1976 to 1980 they were allowed to use 20 per cent of their contributions in this way, from 1981 to 1985 they were allowed to use 50 per cent, and since then the permitted ratio has been 60 per cent .
It is reported (EP , 28 December 1987) that in the past five years Slovenia has taken full advantage of this arrangement.
However, in another report (EP , 26 January 1987) it is said that the average proportion of all contributions to the Federal Fund used for direct investment has not exceeded 2.5 per cent.
There is, in fact, very little incentive for enterprises in the more developed regions to engage in such investments.
Because of the sanctity of the self-management system, any enterprise that makes a direct investment in another enterprise (through so-called ‘pooling labour and resources’) has no control over the activities of the recipient organization and can expect no return other than interest on its investment (at a sharply negative rate).
In a few cases, investing enterprises may have hoped to ensure supplies of scarce raw materials or energy supplies.
At one time, some enterprises in the more developed regions invested in hotels on the Dalmatian coast in order to obtain scarce foreign exchange through the retention ratio system then in operation.
But this is no longer feasible.
In any case, as NIN (26 January 1986) pointed out, many enterprises that built factories in other  areas in order to supply materials or for other reasons have had these factories taken away from them, often through their conversion into independent basic ‘organizations of associated labour’.
The incomes of these basic organizations thereafter belonged to the area in which they were located and were lost to the parent organization.
‘Not long ago a campaign was launched in some republics and provinces to convert the branches of ‘foreign'’ organizations into separate basic organizations.
The campaign was successful, but it put a stop to any interest in investing in ‘foreign'’ territory.
The outcome has been that, over the past fifteen years, there has been ‘a huge expropriation of accumulated labour, several times greater than the expropriation which immediately followed the war’.
In spite of this, new efforts are still being made to encourage enterprises in the more advanced regions to make direct investments in the less developed regions.
Under a social compact which runs until the end of 1990, the investing organizations will pay lower income taxes.
But, since this will be at the expense of their own republican or provincial governments, it is doubtful whether it will be regarded as a significant incentive.
The Yugoslav government has clearly been right to try to switch inter-regional aid from a grant (or ‘loan’) basis to a direct investment basis.
In principle, direct investment brings with it better management, improved technology, and marketing expertise.
Yugoslavia itself has benefited considerably from a few such direct investments from foreign countries, especially in the automobile industry.
But under the rules of self-management direct investment is heavily discouraged, since the investing firms can obtain no long-term control over the management of their ‘subsidiaries’, and have no prospect of receiving reasonable profits (or even other alternative advantages).
Thus, the self-management system creates insuperable obstacles to the mobility of capital, management, skilled labour, and technology; and this virtually guarantees that the less developed regions will continue to lag behind.
The great advantage of capitalism, recognized by Marx, is that it spreads capital and new technology wherever it is allowed to do so.
Marxist ideology, of course, adds that this brings ‘exploitation’.
State socialism has not been very successful in transferring technology between countries, and has brought its own kind of exploitation (as the Yugoslavs discovered in the first  few years after the war).
But Yugoslav experience has shown that self-management, and especially socialist self-management, is incapable of solving this problem, even within the confines of a single country.
The Special Problem of Kosovo
The area of Kosovo (which covers what was previously known as Kosovo and Metohija) is an approximate square with a side of about 70 miles, equivalent to half the size of Wales.
It is situated to the south-west of Serbia, bordering Montenegro, Albania, and Macedonia.
It is high country, with some moderately good agricultural land and substantial deposits of lignite and nonferrous metals.
Apart from products based on these natural resources, including electric power, Kosovo has little industry except some textiles and leather products.
It was occupied by Slav tribes in the ninth and tenth centuries, and it was near the heart of the Serbian Empire of Stevan Dušan in the fourteenth century.
Indeed, a large part of Serbian history and culture was centred on Kosovo until the Serbian feudal state suffered a decisive defeat at the hands of the Turks in 1379.
The battle of Kosovo Polje, in which the flower of the Serbian nobility was destroyed, is one of the legends of the Serbian national epic.
During the Turkish occupation, many Serbs migrated northwards across the Danube into the area now known as Vojvodina.
The lands that they abandoned were gradually occupied by Albanians, most of whom had been converted to Islam.
By at least the eighteenth century, the Albanians were in a majority.
In 1953 they constituted 65 per cent of the population, and in 1981 they were 77 per cent.
More recent figures suggest that by 1987 Albanians amounted to as much as 85 per cent of the population of Kosovo.
From the time of the re-establishment of Serbian rule over Kosovo in 1878, the Albanian population of the province was persecuted, and throughout the interwar period their hostility to Serbian rule continued to mount.
In 1941 Kosovo was occupied by the Italians and annexed to Italian-controlled Albania.
After the German invasion of the Soviet Union, the Albanian Communist Party organized resistance to the Italians, and many  Albanians in Kosovo participated in this activity.
At that time, there were good relations between the Yugoslav partisans, led by Tito, and the Albanian resistance.
But the Yugoslavs were worried by the links between the Albanians of Kosovo and the Albanians of Albania.
The Albanian Communist Party was in favour of the adherence of Kosovo to Albania after the liberation, and the Yugoslav Party was adamantly opposed to any loss of prewar Yugoslav territory (although insisting on the Italian surrender of Istria).
During most of the war, the partisan movement in Kosovo was weak, but at the end of 1943, after the surrender of the Italians, the Yugoslav Party organized a conference at Bujan, in Albanian territory, with the aim of establishing a national liberation committee for Kosovo.
This conference, all but three or four of the forty-nine delegates being members of the Yugoslav Communist Party, adopted a resolution which included the following passage (Danas , 2 June 1987):
Kosovo and Metohija is a region inhabited mainly by Šiptars [Albanians], and today, as always in the past, it wants to be united with Šipnija [Albania].
Consequently, we consider it our duty to indicate the correct path which the Šiptar people must follow if it is to realize its aspiration.
The only way that the Šiptars of Kosovo and Metohija can be united with Šipnija is through a common struggle with the other nations of Yugoslavia against the occupiers and their lackeys.
For that is the only way to achieve freedom, after which all the nations, including the Šiptars, will be able to decide their future, with the right of self-determination, including secession.
This is guaranteed by the National Liberation Council of Yugoslavia, as well as by the National Liberation Council of Šipnija with which it is closely linked.
With the help of this resolution, Albanian support for the partisan movement in Kosovo began to increase, although most of the partisans in that area continued to be Serbs and Montenegrins.
This resolution was not repudiated by the Yugoslav Party during the war.
Indeed, it was not repudiated until 1987, when, under pressure from the Serbian Party, the Presidency of the Provincial Committee of the League of Communists of Kosovo issued a statement ‘invalidating’ the Bujan Conference (Politika , 20 June 1987).
This statement referred to a letter sent by the Yugoslav Party Central Committee to the Kosovo Party in  March 1944 expressing some reservations about the decisions of the Bujan conference.
But the letter did not explicitly repudiate the promise of self-determination for the Albanian people alter the war.
Subsequently, the regional committee of the Communist Party of Kosovo and Metohija passed a resolution in June 1944 which referred to ‘some mistakes, errors, and failures’, but without explicit reference to the Bujan conference.
It was on the basis of these two documents that the 1987 statement declared that ‘From that moment the position taken by the Bujan conference is considered to be invalidated.’
At the end of the war, when the Yugoslav Party had established its complete control over Kosovo, the Assembly of Kosovo and Metohija decided unanimously that Kosovo and Metohija should form part of Serbia.
No opportunity was ever given for the ‘Šiptars’ to exercise their promised right of self-determination.
But some concessions were made to the Albanians.
Albanian become one of the official languages of Kosovo, and Albanian schools were established.
Under the 1946 Constitution, Kosovo and Metohija became an autonomous region of Serbia, like Vojvodina.
Finally, in 1974 both Kosovo and Vojvodina were given the status of autonomous provinces, nominally within the republic of Serbia, but in practice with semi-republican rights of direct access to the Yugoslav federal Skupština, the federal government, and even to the leading bodies of the Party.
But Albanian ‘nationalist’ feeling was not pacified.
More and more Albanians were recruited into the Kosovo Party, until eventually they became a majority.
The Albanian birth rate was much higher than the birth rate of Serbs and Montenegrins, and the composition of the population steadily shifted in their favour.
There was also some emigration of Serbs and Montenegrins, which accelerated after 1981.
Major demonstrations by Albanian ‘nationalists’ took place in 1968 and 1981, and smaller demonstrations in the mid-1970s and in 1983.
Their principal demand was that Kosovo should become a full republic, like the other republics inhabited mainly by one ‘nation’, of which Slovenia and Macedonia have only slightly larger populations, and Montenegro a much smaller one (see Table 10.1.).
Many Serbs believe that such a concession would soon lead to a demand for secession.
But the 1974 Constitution does not, in fact, give a republic the right to secede without the approval of all the other  republics and provinces (Article 5).
In any case it is very doubtful that the majority of Albanians in Kosovo would want to become part of Albania.
The Albanians of Kosovo have a legitimate grievance.
They have never been given equality of status with the other ‘nations’ of Yugoslavia, and even under the benign 1974 Constitution they are conscious that they are regarded as inferiors, barely tolerated by the Slav peoples of Yugoslavia, and especially by the Serbs.
Many of the latter, of course, regard Kosovo as a sacred part of historic Serbia which can never be ‘surrendered’.
The demonstrations of 1981 were more serious than on any previous occasion.
They were described at the time as an attempt at ‘counter-revolution’, and in subsequent years many thousands of Albanians have been arrested and punished.
There was also a party purge.
But the principal party leaders in Kosovo are still Albanians.
Many Serbs believe that they are secret ‘nationalists’ who, in the words of Svetomir Lalović, Serbian Secretary for Internal Affairs (i.e. the man in charge of the Serbian police), ‘work in the morning for us, and in the afternoon illegally’(Danas , 4 November 1986).
There is an undercurrent of anti-Albanian prejudice in Serbia which emerges whenever there is a new ‘incident’.
The Serbian press is full of anti — Albanian reports, and from time to time Albanian shops in Serbia are wrecked.
Very few Serbian leaders are willing to extend the concept of ‘brotherhood and unity’ to the Albanians in their midst.
The rise of Serbian nationalism
Although the general heading of this section is ‘the special problem of Kosovo’, it would be more accurate to describe it as ‘the special problem of Serbia’.
The problems of Kosovo, as we saw in the previous section, are mainly economic.
They are problems of poverty, inefficiency, and unemployment, which are reflected in other symptoms of backwardness, such as corruption and law-breaking.
But the ‘national’ problem of-Kosovo is a consequence of a long history of Serbian oppression and chauvinism, which has provoked the natural response of Albanian nationalism.
Short of mass expulsion or the annihilation of the Albanians of Kosovo, the problems of Kosovo will never be solved until the Serbs accept the Albanians as an equal national  component of Yugoslavia, entitled to the same treatment as all the other Yugoslav nations.
But in the past few years the trend has been in the opposite direction.
There has been an ominous growth of Serbian nationalism, which is independent of Kosovo, but uses the situation in Kosovo as a means of arousing popular sentiment.
The roots of Serbian nationalism go back at least to the Empire of Stevan Dušan in the fourteenth century.
Both the nineteenth-century kingdom of Serbia and the twentieth-century kingdom of Yugoslavia were triumphant demonstrations of Serbian revival.
But then came the collapse of 1941, the emergence of the communists as the leading force in the resistance, and the ultimate discrediting of Mihailović and the Četniks.
At the end of the war, under communist control, Yugoslavia became a federation, and Serbia lost not only its dominant position but also large areas that had previously been regarded as part of its territory.
Macedonia became a separate republic, and Vojvodina and Kosovo became autonomous regions, and eventually autonomous provinces.
Nevertheless, the Serbs continued to dominate the army and (until 1966 through Ranković) the secret police and the ‘nomenklatura’.
The fall of Ranković, after the Brioni plenum of the Central Committee of the Party, deprived the Serbs of their Yugoslavia-wide control of crucial appointments in the Party and the security apparatus.
From that time onwards each republic, and even each autonomous province, could select its own top officials, judges, prosecutors, and policemen.
Yugoslavia was finally ‘federalized’.
Since the death of Tito in 1980, and with the growing economic crisis, which is felt by Serbians to have particularly affected them (although there is, in fact, little evidence that Serbia's relative position has fallen in comparison with Yugoslavia as a whole), a growing number of Serb intellectuals have been looking back over the past and asking themselves whether Serbia was discriminated against under ‘Titoist’ rule.
In 1986 the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts appointed a commission of Serbian intellectuals to consider some of these problems, and by the autumn of that year a working group of that commission had prepared a draft ‘Memorandum’ which, although supposed to be confidential, was published in the Serbian press.
According to a report in NIN (9 November 1986), the memorandum  claimed that the prewar Comintern was hostile to Serbia, that the Serbian delegates to the second session of the Anti-fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia in 1943 (at which major decisions were taken about the postwar composition of Yugoslavia) were elected not by organizations within Serbia but by Serbian personnel who were in the partisan armies in Bosnia and Herzegovina at that time, and that postwar Yugoslavia was largely under the control of Tito, a Croat, and Kardelj, a Slovene.
Although this memorandum was immediately denounced and repudiated, there is no doubt that it touched some sensitive nerves.
Moreover, subsequent events suggest that Serbian nationalism is deeply entrenched in the Serbian Party.
As will be described below, the leader of the Serbian communists, Slobodan Milošević, has played a major part in whipping up anti-Albanian feeling in Kosovo.
In 1987 he and his supporters finally decided to have a ‘show-down’ with other leading Serbian communists who were urging a more liberal policy.
In October 1987 the Presidency of the Central Committee of the Serbian Party summoned a special meeting of the Central Committee to consider the case of Dragiša Pavlović, who was at that time president of the Presidency of the Belgrade City Committee of the Party.
Pavlović was accused of having spoken to a group of journalists and others about the dangers of Serbian nationalist attitudes towards Kosovo, and the importance of avoiding ‘direct action’ and using only correct legal methods to deal with Albanian nationalism.
It was suggested that he had implied a criticism of Milošević when he used the phrase ‘easy promises of quick success,.
The meeting of the Central Committee lasted two long days, during which eighty-eight delegates spoke, some of them at great length.
Commentators have described it as a ‘Stalinist trial’, not only of Pavlović but also of others who hold similar views.
By a large majority, the Central Committee decided that Pavlović should be expelled from its Presidency, and immediately thereafter Pavlović also offered his resignation from his post in the Belgrade City Presidency.
The Central Committee then circulated to the Serbian Party a document which was to form the basis of compulsory discussions in all party organizations, with the accompanying demand that there should  be a ‘differentiation’.
‘Differentiation’ means inquisition, witch-hunting, denunciations, and punishment (including in some cases expulsion) of any member who fails to agree completely with the current party line.
(This resurrection of medieval church practice was Lenin's special contribution to the modern working-class movement and the one-party state.)
Some of the early victims of ‘differentiation’ were the director of the firm that publishes Politika , the chief editor of the weekly journal NIN , and — the supreme prize — the Prime Minister of Serbia, Ivan Stambolić.
Stambolić was a long-time friend and ‘patron’ of Pavlović.
He held the same views about the dangers of Serbian nationalism, and he tried to defend Pavlović from his accusers.
The witch-hunt then moved on to try to unseat the editor of Borba and it is clearly the intention of the Serbian nationalists, who have seized control of the Serbian Party, that they should control all newspapers and journals published in Belgrade, even if they are federal organs such as Borba .
The Serbian Party is also beginning to put pressure on the press in other republics, especially in Slovenia and Croatia.
In December the City Committee of the Belgrade Party (which is the largest city organization of communists in Yugoslavia, with nearly a quarter of a million of members, many of whom are highly influential federal and Serbian bureaucrats) elected as its new president Professor Radoš Smiljković, professor of political science at Belgrade University.
In an interview with NIN (27 December 1987), Professor Smiljković announced his full support for the new political trend in Serbia, and in particular for ‘differentiation’, the rooting out of‘opportunism’, and the replacement of old cadres by new ones.
He claimed that there is a new surge of enthusiasm in the Serbian Party for crushing the ‘counter-revolution’ in Kosovo (which he also described as ‘genocide’), and for solving the economic crisis.
He expressed himself in favour of ideological purity, strictly in accordance with Marx, Engels, and Lenin, and for purging members who deviate.
He insisted on a greater commitment to Marxist education, and he expressed the belief that the Serbian revival was spreading to other parts of Yugoslavia.
This kind of combination of Serbian nationalism with dogmatic Marxism will create serious dangers for the future of Yugoslavia.
Serbian agitation in Kosovo
Parallel with these events in Belgrade, and in mutual interaction, there has been growing anti-Albanian agitation among the Serbs and Montenegrins in Kosovo.
A major complaint of the Serbs is that their proportion of the Kosovo population is steadily shrinking.
In the census of 1981, Albanians were 77.4 per cent of the population of Kosovo, Serbs 13.2 per cent, Montenegrins 1.7 per cent , Muslims 3.7 per cent , Turks o.8 per cent , and Gypsies 2.2 per cent (Politika , 1/2 May 1987).
NIN (29 November 1987) claims that the proportion of Albanians in Kosovo has now reached 85 per cent, which would imply that the proportion of Serbs and Montenegrins has fallen to about 11 per cent .
There are two main reasons for the changes in these proportions.
The first, and most important, is that the natural rate of increase of the Albanian population is about 2.5 per cent per annum, while the corresponding rate among Serbs and Montenegrins is probably below 0.5 per cent .
(The average rate in Serbia without the provinces is less than o.3 per cent.)
From 1981 to 1986 the total population of Kosovo rose by about 220,000, and of this increase about 200,000 may have been Albanians.
The second reason, which has attracted much more publicity, is the steady, but slow, net emigration of Serbs and Montenegrins from Kosovo.
In the same five years from 1981 to 1986 this amounted to nearly 20,000.
After allowing for a few thousand of natural increase, the Serb and Montenegrin population of Kosovo would have fallen from 237,000 in 1981 to about 220,000 in 1986.
This, in itself, is scarcely the disaster that Serbian nationalist propaganda makes it out to be.
But the degree of sensitivity on this issue is now such that the emigration of a single Serbian individual or family is blown up to a national crisis.
In view of the depressed state of the Kosovan economy and the high rates of unemployment, it is scarcely surprising that there is continual emigration of Serbs and Montenegrins from the province (and presumably also of Albanians, although no one bothers to record that aspect).
It is also claimed that there has been a great deal of harassment of Serbs and Montenegrins by Albanian nationalists, who hope to drive them out and establish an ‘ethnically pure’ Kosovo.
This harassment, according to Borba (7 November 1986), takes the form of writing slogans on walls (the principal slogan is ‘Kosovo republic’), shouting abuse, distributing pamphlets, stoning cars and buses, destroying tombstones, damaging crops, arson, and rape.
The emotive subject of rapes has been given a great deal of publicity, and every case of an alleged rape of a Serbian woman by an Albanian is used as a pretext for fierce agitation among the Serbian population.
Official figures for the period from the beginning of 1982 to October 1986 (Danas , 11 November 1986) report 118 rapes in Kosovo, of which 16 were by ‘Albanian irredentists’ on Serbian or Montenegrin women, 5 were by Serbs or Montenegrins on women of their own community, and 97 were by Albanians on Albanians.
It was further reported (Danas , 10 November 1987) that in the first nine months of 1987 there were 17 rapes in Kosovo, every one of which was between two members of the same ethnic group, and that in this period the incidence of rape in Kosovo was lower than in other parts of Yugoslavia.
The Albanians of Yugoslavia (not only those in Kosovo but also elsewhere, especially in Macedonia) consider themselves to be an oppressed people, who have always been discriminated against by the Serbs, whether under the monarchy or under communist rule.
They have never been accepted as an equal ‘nation’ within Yugoslavia; they have difficulty in obtaining recognition for their language (except in Kosovo, where however there is now a threat that in future the official language will be Serbocroatian, and that all Albanian children will be forced to learn it at school); and they consider that Serbs, in particular, regard them as inferiors and potential enemies.
They have also suffered much officially approved harassment.
For example, in the five years from 1981 to 1986, 1 76 Albanian teachers, 11 Albanian professors, and 511 Albanian students were expelled from schools or universities in Kosovo, and 1,600 Albanians were expelled from the Party (Danas , 11 February 1986).
No student can be enrolled at the university without a certificate from his local authority that he is ‘morally and politically suitable’(Politika , 8 September 1987).
From 1981 to 1986, more than 1,000 Albanians were prosecuted for political crimes, and more than 6,000 for offences with a political element (Danas , 11 July 1986).
In the middle of 1986, more than 150 Albanian members  of an organization called ‘Marxist–Leninists of Kosovo’ were on trial in Priština (NIN , 18 May 1986).
Moreover, under Kosovo law it is illegal for Serbs or Montenegrins to sell land or buildings to Albanians (Politika , 13 June 1987).
When a Serbian family in the village of Zakuti sold some of their land to Albanians, the local committee of the Party decided that this was an act of ‘treachery’, and demanded that in future the law banning sales to other nationalities should be strictly enforced.
They also decided that two Albanians who had recently bought land in Zakuti should be boycotted, and that they should not be accepted as residents of the village (Borba , 18 June 1986).
In 1985 the Serbs in Kosovo Polje, a suburb of Priština, collected 2,011 signatures to a petition, in which they complained of constant pressure from the Albanians, amounting to ‘fascist genocide’, and of the failure of the Kosovo government to protect them.
They presented fifteen demands designed to protect the rights of Serbs and Montenegrins in Kosovo.
These included a change in the constitutional status of the province so as to make it subordinate to Serbia, the imposition of Serbocroatian as the official language, the dismissal from the Kosovo government of ‘Albanian chauvinists’ and of Serbian ‘opportunists and careerists’, and the return to Kosovo of Serbian emigrants (NIN , 9 November 1986).
The Priština committee of the Party issued a statement which described the organizers of this petition as ‘nationalists, chauvinists, and fascists’, and alleged that they were in contact with‘hostile elements’ in Belgrade.
The Presidency of the Serbian party also issued a statement which, while attacking the organizers of the petition, admitted that there were some serious problems in Kosovo which demanded urgent attention (Danas , 31 December 1985).
On Wednesday, 9 April 1986, the Kosovo police (who are, of course, controlled by the Kosovo Party) arrested Kosta Bulatović, an agricultural engineer living in Kosovo Polje, on suspicion of ‘carrying out a criminal act of hostile propaganda’(punishable under Article 133 of the Criminal Code of Kosovo).
They also removed from his house a large amount of material, including copies of petitions signed by Belgrade intellectuals, copies of the ‘Petition of the 2,011’, and various letters.
The latter probably included correspondence with Colonel Filipović in Belgrade, who has been active for many years in agitating for firmer action 