

THE radio RENTALS MAGAZINE
SPRING 1990
WIN A FREE HOLIDAY TO: THE WORLD CUP FINALS FLORIDA PORTUGAL INSIDE THIS ISSUE
YOUR SERVICE
At Radio Rentals we are committed to service.
The kind of service you expect; the kind of service you deserve.
It's what sets us apart from the rest.
We call it Total Service.
If you want to arrange an installation, or service repair, you can contact us 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
Whenever you phone there'll be a friendly voice on the other end of the line to make all the necessary arrangements.
total SERVICE
We will call at a time that suits you — even if that's an evening or a Sunday and we guarantee to repair or replace faulty equipment within 24 hours of your call.
That's Total Service.
During normal working hours just phone your local service number or local shop.
After 5.30pm and on Sundays call our Customer Helpline on 0788 544535.
YOUR SHOPS
Radio Rentals is Britain's leading rental specialist.
We employ more than 1,500 highly qualified service engineers and have an extensive network of High Street shops.
Each of our shops is staffed by a small friendly team of experts.
Call in and meet them.
They'll be delighted to advise you on how to get the most from your current equipment or suggest a new model you might like to try.
If you're confused by the latest hi-tech advances in stereo TV or Satellite Television these are the people to cut through all the irritating jargon.
No matter what help or advice you need, call in or phone your local shop.
They'll handle it — no fuss!
You'll find the telephone number of your local shop on the back cover.
THE LATEST
The only certainty in today's fast-moving home entertainment industry is that advances in product technology will occur at an even faster rate.
No sooner does the latest model take its place in the market, than it is superseded by another development.
NICAM
We are currently witnessing the expansion of Satellite Television in Britain — providing more choice of channels, and this year sees the introduction of Stereo TV broadcasts.
Turn to pages 6, 7 and 10 where you will find the very latest news on these exciting developments.
It is only by renting your equipment that you can keep fully up to date with advances in home entertainment technology.
Here at Radio Rentals, we believe in bringing you the latest developments — as they happen!
THE FLEXIBILITY
As a Radio Rentals' customer you really can enjoy freedom of choice and total flexibility.
The freedom to choose the Television, Video Recorder, Washing Machine or Dishwasher that suits your need and your pocket.
The flexibility to change the equipment you have on rental as your circumstances change.
You are never stuck with less than up to date equipment.
If you like the sound of a Nicam digital stereo TV or long-play Video…it's just a phone call away at your local Radio Rentals shop.
Flexibility, freedom of choice — and complete peace of mind.
That's what Radio Rentals is all about.
 Dear Customer,
At Radio Rentals we believe in bringing you the latest in product developments — as they happen.
We want you to be among the very first in Britain to benefit from these developments and to enjoy them!
Remember, you can at any time exchange our equipment for the latest models as soon as they become available.
In this issue we feature the latest advances in TV and Video technology, plus special offers to help you get the most from your viewing.
Take a look at our range of Dishwashers and Washing Machines — all backed by our unique Total Service.
Read about the benefits of stereo television and the launch of BSB — the satellite broadcasting system that is set to revolutionise home entertainment.
All this, and the golden opportunity to win FREE Summer Holidays.
You can be sure of a great deal at Radio Rentals…and a promise of Total Service at a time to suit you.
Lindsay Robinson Divisional Director
CONTENTS
PAGES 4 & 5 Tomorrow's Technology…
Today
PAGES 6 & 7 More choice at your fingertips
PAGES 8 & 9 The Saint & Greavsie Show
PAGE 10 Stereo Television…
Sounds perfect
PAGE 11 Washing up is a waste of time
PAGES 12 & 13 Take a load off your mind
PAGE 14 Win free holidays
PAGE 15 Video those magic moving moments
PLUS MUCH MUCH MORE…
Here are four products representing some of the most exciting recent advances in TV and Video technology…the elegant Ferguson 51K4 TV and Ferguson FV37H Video, the portable Ferguson 41H3 and the giant screen Ferguson 68K4.
THE FERGUSON 51K4
With its tinted screen, Flatter Squarer Tube and matching stand, the Ferguson 51K4 TV is the epitome of elegance and a pleasure to welcome into your home.
But it's not just a ‘good looker’!
Its advanced design ensures you really do enjoy improved picture performance.
There's also fast access to hundreds of teletext information pages and because it's capable of receiving the new Nicam transmissions (see our article on page 10), you can start enjoying your favourite programmes in real stereo, as they become available in your area.
The Ferguson 51K4 TV…the latest in electronic elegance.
FOR ONLY £17.99 A MONTH
THE FERGUSON FV37H VIDEO
The Ferguson FV37H Video complements the 51K4 TV perfectly.
Capable of recording Nicam stereo transmissions and also playing the wide range of Hi-Fi pre-recorded video tapes that are now available.
The Ferguson FV37H sounds perfect!
Its programmable remote control enables you to operate all the key features such as Slow Motion, Tape Eject, Play and REcord, and allow you to set the timer to record as many as eight of your favourite programmes from the comfort of your armchair.
With the help of a special adaptor, the FV37H can add teletext to any non-text Colour Television and allow you to record teletext sub-titles and pages.
The FV37H…one of the most advanced and versatile Video recorders available from Radio Rentals today.
FOR ONLY £18.99 A MONTH 
RENT BOTH FOR ONLY £34.99 A MONTH
At Radio Rentals we believe in bringing you the very latest product developments — as they happen!
THE FERGUSON 41H3
Small in size…big in features!
The Ferguson 41H3 portable colour TV is a small, compact television with a wide range of top class features…41cm (15in) Flatter Squarer Tube with fashionable glass faceplate.
Fastext for quick access to teletext and a full function infra-red remote control make this small portable the second set you've been waiting for!
Update your existing portable or rent the 41H3 as a second set.
FOR ONLY £12.99 A MONTH
THE FERGUSON 68K4
The Ferguson 68K4 is a ‘giant screen’ Colour Television.
With its super planar black matrix tube and anti-reflective 68cm screen…you really do get a better, larger-than-life picture!
The 68K4 is capable of receiving Nicam digital stereo transmissions and with its impressive two-way speakers, allows you to enjoy top quality sound when watching your favourite programmes.
Fast access to hundreds of teletext information pages and a matching stand for your Video recorder, makes this one of the most impressive new products currently on rental.
The 68K4…a modern day black beauty.
FOR ONLY £23.99 A MONTH 
Tomorrow's Technology…
Today!
Satellite Television — Television for the 90's.
Pictures from outer space; satellite dishes, antennae, aerials, squarials, Astra, Sky, BSB…it all sounds pretty confusing.
Yet satellite television is revolutionising entertainment as we know it in Britain today — the trouble is sometimes it sounds as if you need a first class degree to join in!
radio RENTALS
This is where Radio Rentals can help.
All our High Street shops have resident experts to give you friendly and impartial advice.
We'll explain in layman's terms the benefits of the various satellite TV systems available and work out what's best for you.
All you need to do is pop in to your local Radio Rentals shop…or just give us a quick call.
You'll find the number of your local shop on the back cover.
We'll be happy to survey your home to ensure that you can pick up the necessary signals…and that you really will be able to enjoy perfect Satellite Television reception.
John the satellite revolution — today!
BSB — FIVE CHANNELS YOU WON'T WANT TO MISS!
The age of satellite television began in 1988 when the Astra Satellite was launched.
Shortly afterwards a wide range of new channels offered viewers a greater choice of television programmes from sport to movies and from news to music.
But now there's going to be even more choice.
Quality choice!
On the 27th August, 1989, British Satellite Broadcasting (BSB) launched their satellite from Cape Canaveral to join the Astra Satellite some 23,000 miles out in space.
With the introduction of BSB, British television's position as being the finest in the world is confirmed.
Five new quality channels will bring you the best in movie entertainment, many recently featured on the cinema circuits, and the best in sport, drama, music and comedy.
BSB is dedicated to quality choice — choice that is yours with finger-tip control from the comfort of your armchair.
Never again will you be able to say, there's nothing on television.
Five new channels offering Digital Stereo Sound and, with the new D-Mac transmission system, improved picture quality will be available in the UK for the first time.
All you need to enjoy the programmes is a BSB special antenna (squarial or parabolic dish) and a BSB satellite receiver.
The Movie Channel
Up to seven great movies every day.
The Sports Channel
More live sports coverage than any other UK TV station.
The Power Station
Latest chart-topping music videos, fashion and comedy.
Galaxy The Entertainment Channel
Entertaining viewing for the whole family.
NOW The Channel for Living
Stimulating news, arts, documentaries and information.
A GREAT BSB PACKAGE DEAL FROM RADIO RENTALS
Rent a BSB Antenna and BSB Satellite Receiver for ONLY £12.99 A MONTH.
Subscribe to the Movie Channel for around £9.99 A MONTH.
Receive FREE Installation plus one month's FREE viewing to the Movie Channel.
For further details Freephone our Satellite Hotline on 0800 622975 or call into your local Radio Rentals shop.
The Move Channel will be scrambled from 6.00pm midweek and from 4.00pm at weekends.
More choice at your fingertips…
THE radio RENTALS SAINT & GREAVSIE SHOW
‘Hey Greavsie…
Don't forget to pick up your Radio Rentals World Cup Wall Chart…complete with all the matches, dates and kick-off times.
It's FREE from your local Radio Rentals shop.’
‘Yeh Saint…and enter our FREE competition to win one of 6 pairs of tickets to the World Cup Final…just call into your local Radio Rental shop, pick up a leaflet, answer two simple questions — and you could be cheering your favourite team at the World Cup Final on July 8th.’
FERGUSON 14M1 PORTABLE COLOUR TV
The Ferguson 14M1 is a lightweight portable 14in Colour Television which can be moved easily from room to room — so the family can keep up with the soaps whilst you keep your eye on the ball.
The 14M1…the perfect antidote to World Cup fever.
FOR ONLY £4.99 A MONTH
BAIRD VC141L VIDEO RECORDER
Don't miss any of the World Cup action.
Update your Video Recorder to the Baird VC141L, a fine example of today's state-of-the-art technology.
It's long-play feature enables you to record up to eight hours of matches on one tape — twice as long as usual!
And with its slow motion feature you can watch the winning goal again and again and again…
The Baird VC141L…ensures you don't miss a thing.
FOR ONLY £15.99 A MONTH
BAIRD VIDEO TAPES
Don't miss the match…or the movie…or the soap…record it!
Three Baird E180 (3 hour) video tapes for only £7.95
WORLD CUP WINNER!
Save £4 a month.
Watch the World Cup on the Ferguson 51P7.
Its Flatter Squarer Tube offers superb picture quality and with fastext you can keep and eye on all the news and results as they happen.
The Ferguson FV32L with long-play, allows you to double your recording time making your video tapes last twice as long.
Its remote control operates the main features, including variable speed picture search for watching all the top class action in slow motion.
WORLD CUP PACKAGE ONLY £27.99 A MONTH
Phone through your order now on Freephone 0800 622975.
Free competition and wallplanner available from 23rd April while stocks last.
Competition rules and regulations available from your Local Radio Rentals shop.
NICAM
Stereo broadcasting started a little over six months ago when ITV and Channel 4 officially launched Stereo TV using a new digital sound transmission system, called Nicam.
With Nicam broadcasting you will be able to enjoy many of your favourite TV programmes in true stereo — you can listen to music that has the clarity of a compact disc; watch news, films, drama and documentaries enriched with the thrilling new dimension of real living sound.
And Nicam is here to stay.
By the end of this year ITV and Channel 4 plan to cover more than three-quarters of the country with predominantly stereo broadcasts.
If you are in the Thames, London Weekend TV Region you will already be able to enjoy Nicam Stereo.
The following ITV Regions will plan to launch Nicam later this year: Anglia TV — August 1990.
Central TV — November 1990.
TVS — Autumn 1990.
Radio Rentals take a pride in keeping up to date with new broadcasting technology.
As new products become available we ensure that you are the first to know about them…and the first to be able to enjoy them.
You don't have to change your aerial to experience Nicam.
All you need to do is choose one of the great Nicam TV or Video recorders we have on offer.
We feature a selection on pages 4 and 5 of this magazine.
In some cases, it may be possible to connect a Nicam Video to a non-Nicam TV with a link-up to your existing hi-fi system for top quality sound performance.
This is where we can really help.
Call into your local Radio Rentals shop — and get first class advice on how you can get the best from the new developments in Stereo Television — Nicam!
Stereo Television…sounds perfect…
15 days and nights at the kitchen sink!
That's the equivalent amount of time that is spent in the average household washing up in one year.
It's just time down the drain!
That's why more and more people are renting dishwashers.
Here's how renting a dishwasher can help you:
•
More time…for you to relax.
•
A cleaner, healthier wash…
•
Uncluttered kitchen surfaces…
•
Versatile programmes…
•
Easy to plumb in and cheap to operate…and say goodbye to tea towels!
A DISHWASHER THAT'S EXCLUSIVE TO RADIO RENTALS
Modern-day kitchens are now always as spacious as we would like.
That's why we can now offer you the new slimline Philips Whirlpool 942 Dishwasher.
This new space-saving model is less than 18 inches wide and is being produced exclusively for Radio Rentals.
It features seven place setting capacity and with its three programmes — pre-rinse, normal and superwash — you're sure of sparkling plates, glasses and cutlery every time.
FOR ONLY £13.99 A MONTH 
Washing up is a waste of time…
It's the moment you've always dreaded!
Washday…there's a full load on…everything's fine…then there's a terrible juddering noise…and silence.
The washing machine has broken down!
It's time we took a load off your mind.
When you rent from Radio Rentals Home Laundry range you say goodbye to costly repair bills.
If a fault develops you know you can contact us 24 hours a day, 365 days a year…and we'll get the problem fixed within 24 hours.
That's what we call Total Service!
Whatever you home laundry requirements, Radio Rentals has the package to suit you.
Our range includes Automatic Washing Machines and Tumble Dryers which can be rented separately or as a combination.
Or, for households with smaller families or limited kitchen space, the Philips Whirlpool AWG997 Washer-Dryer with straight-through wash and dry cycle and 1000rpm spin is ideal.
And when you've made your choice, we'll deliver your new machine and connect it to a suitable service point — completely free of charge and within 24 hours.
We will demonstrate your new machine, make sure you are happy with it and then, should you so wish, we'll take away your old machine and dispose of it for you.
Leaving you with complete peace of mind…and the Radio Rentals promise of Total Service.
TWO RADIO RENTALS SPECIAL WASHDAY OFFERS
CLEAN UP
Philips Whirlpool AWB949 Automatic Washing Machine.
•
10lb wash load.
Variable temperature control for saving energy.
•
Variable spin speed from 120rpm to 1000rpm.
•
Door safely lock.
•
Mobility trolley.
FOR ONLY £13.99 A MONTH
Rent both together for Only £19.99 a month and we'll give you a FREE Stacking Kit to help you make the most of your floor space.
HOME AND DRY
Philips Whirlpool AWB672 Tumble Dryer.
•
10lb drying load.
•
Two heat setting for cotton and synthetics.
•
Variable timer control, up to 120 minutes.
•
Reversible door.
•
Built-in vent kit.
FOR ONLY £7.99 A MONTH
WIN A FREE HOLIDAY COURTESY OF radio RENTALS AND TJAEREBORG
FIRST PRIZE A two week holiday for four in Florida
America's ‘sunshine state’.
Just imagine it!
The holiday of a life-time for you and your family.
One week in Orlando in a 3-star hotel…
Walt Disney World, Sea World, the Kennedy Space Centre…so much to see and do.
Followed by a week on the Gulf Coast at St. Petersberg in a 5-star apartment…soft, golden sands with lively beaches.
To help you get around there's an air-conditioned hire car available FREE for the duration of your stay.
SECOND PRIZES Five runner-up prizes in Portugal!
Each — a one week self-catering holiday for two — minimum Tjaereborg rating 3-star…in the Algarve Sun!
Sun, sea, sand, surfing and yes, you've guessed it, sunburn!
EASY TO ENTER
Just answer the two questions below, complete the coupon and post your entry in the special box provided in your local Radio Rentals shop.
Video those magic moving moments…
Capture those moving moments — forever, when you rent a video camera from Radio Rentals.
Our fully automatic video cameras are so easy to use — just point the camera and press the record button!
Christening, Birthday Parties, Weddings, Weekend Outings and of course the Family Summer Holiday — it's so easy to capture all the fun and excitement on video film as it happens.
Whatever the occasion, Radio Rentals has the ideal Video Camera Rental package to suit you…
Why not zoom down to your nearest Radio Rentals Shop and you could be watching your memories on video again and again!
The Radio Rentals Promise…
When you rent from Radio Rentals we make you a promise.
You'll get the most up to date equipment on the market today.
radio RENTALS
But you will also get something that money can rarely buy…complete peace of mind.
The peace of mind that comes from the Radio Rentals Total Service Guarantee.
You will be sure in the knowledge that if you ever encounter any problem with your equipment, help is just one quick phone call away — 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
Friendly, helpful service will be with you within 24 hours — and things will be put right a quickly and efficiently as possible.
That's Radio Rentals…
Total Service.
RAC February 1990
Introducing RAC MasterCard, the card to take with your RAC membership
 Dear Ms Barnett,
I would like to invite you to apply for a very different and distinctive credit card.
Designed for our members in association with Barclays, the RAC MasterCard is the ideal complement to your RAC membership.
The RAC MasterCard offer everything you would expect from one of the world's major credit card organisations.
And you don't ever have to bank with Barclays to apply.
Accepted in over 7 million places worldwide, you can use it wherever you see the familiar MasterCard, Eurocard or Access signs.
What's more there are additional benefits specially offered to RAC MasterCard holders:
•Up to £400 emergency credit reserve.
In addition to your normal credit facility, you will be able to call upon this additional reserve to help you cope with unexpected expenses such a last minute change to travel plans, or an unplanned stop over in a hotel.
•Valuable discounts negotiated on behalf of cardholders.
For example, you will receive a voucher enabling you to hire an Avis car one grade higher than you pay for — and you can book the car with as little as 4 hours notice yet be assured of your reservation.
Also when you next pay a visit to National Tyre Services, your RAC MasterCard will entitle you to savings on two new tyres, your car's exhaust and MOT test.
These are extra discounts on top of those available to all RAC members.
You will also enjoy the reassurance of free travel accident insurance with cover worth up to £50,000 for you, your spouse and dependant children whenever you buy travel tickets using your RAC MasterCard.
At petrol stations, shops, theatres…wherever you need the convenience of a major credit card, your RAC MasterCard will fit the bill.
Further details of the benefits are described in the enclosed leaflet.
Thousands of your fellow RAC members already carry the card, why not join them today?
Yours sincerely
Frank Richardson Director — Member Services
PS.
Many RAC members have already found their RAC MasterCard Emergency Reserve facility of up to £400 a ‘lifesaver' in an emergency.
It's just one of the benefits we're developing to make the RAC MasterCard the card to take out!
YORK PHOTO LABS
 Dear York Customer,
INTRODUCE A FRIEND TO YORK PHOTO LABS AND WE'LL SEND YOU A YORK FILM ABSOLUTELY FREE!!
That's all you have to do!
Tell your family and friends about York's great service, and when we receive their first order, we'll send you a 24 exposure York film absolutely FREE.
You already know about York's low cost high quality prints, our free address and film labels for safe and convenient ordering, and York's efficient and caring service.
There's no better way to have your prints delivered to your door.
So don't keep it all to yourself!
Tell everyone you know, and collect your FREE YORK FILM.
All you have to do is carefully follow the simple instructions below using the special envelope enclosed,(the one with the two address panels on the back).
1.
Place one of your personalised address labels onto the YELLOW section of the special film envelope.
2.
Tick the film size box above the address panel so that we know which free film size to send you.
3.
Then pass THIS envelope to one of your family and friends WHO HAVE NOT USED YORK BEFORE AND LIVE AT A DIFFERENT ADDRESS.
4.
As soon as we receive this envelope with their first order, we'll send you your FREE York film.
So hurry, pass on this special envelope today (with your address label attached), and while your friends and family look forward to receiving their prints, you can look forward to your free film.
Best wishes,
Mrs. Dell East Customer Service Manager
P.S. There's no limit to the number of free films you can receive.
Just make sure that each person has not used York before and lives at a different address.
For further copies of our special mailers, call our helpline now on 0626 67373.
A MESSAGE FROM OUR CHIEF EXECUTIVE
 Dear Customer,
At Thames Water, we take our responsibilities seriously.
In order to respond to our customers' increasing expectations for water quality standards and demands for an improved living environment, we are increasing our large programme of investment in water and sewerage services.
As a consequence we need to increase our prices by an average of 12.2% from 1st April 1990.
Your new Thames Water charges still represent exceedingly good value for a continuous supply of water and our sewage services.
If you paid a hosepipe fee in the past this has now been dropped.
We are proud that Thames Water's prices have been amongst the lowest of any of the recently privatised large water companies.
We aim to keep it that way.
Yours sincerely,
Mike Hoffman Chief Executive — Thames Water Utilities Limited
SAFE AND WHOLESOME
Thames Water supplies drinking water to more than seven million people in over three million homes and businesses.
Every week we carry out around 15,000 rigorous tests on water samples.
Of the half million tests carried out for regulatory purposes in the year up to June 30, 1989, we are pleased to report that 998 out of 1,000 met the strict specifications of the European Community Directive.
And from September 1 of last year, Thames Water is now aiming to meet new U.K. standards which are stricter than those of the Directive.
Right now, we are increasing our sampling of supplies in the home to further ensure the quality of your drinking water.
So, don't be surprised to see our quality samplers visiting homes in your area.
Access to the results of the analyses is freely available to all our customers.
PROTECTING AND ENJOYING NATURE
We care for and protect the natural environment, often working with national and local conservation bodies.
For example, in conjunction with Pond Action and the NRA, we are currently creating artificial wetlands next to Farmoor Reservoir to attract wading birds and encourage wetland wildlife.
Thames Water is also responsible for the management of many Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
Particularly worthy of note is the Brassey Nature Reserve in the Cotswolds managed in conjunction with the Gloucestershire Trust for Nature Conservation.
This is a site of national importance for its variety of wold flowers, including many species of orchid.
Meanwhile, at Newbury, our archaeologists have worked with the Trust for Wessex Archaeology and unearthed the remains of flint tools from a site dating back to the Middle Stone Age.
A LIQUID INVESTMENT
At Thames Water we place high priorities on your water supply, sewerage service and customer care.
Over half of our total investment of more than £350 million next year will be spent on refurbishment of our sewers and sewage treatment works — the vast majority of this investment being made outside the London area.
Apart form continuous investment in research and development, recent major capital investments include schemes such as a new trunk water main for Swindon, and the multi-million pound Tunnel Ring Main.
When finished, the latter will help secure London's drinking water supply well into the next century.
This way you will receive the high standard of services you have the right to expect.
OUR GUARANTEES TO YOU, THE DOMESTIC CUSTOMER
Thames Water has a code of practice which lets you know what we will do for you.
Briefly, the code of practice specifies standards for providing wholesome water, for supplying a constant water supply at the appropriate water pressure, and for treating sewage in a comprehensive and environmentally sensitive way.
In addition, we have a code of practice that outlines our procedures and your rights on disconnection.
This code is available at no cost upon request.
Guarantees to you are part of our domestic customer service —there is no direct cost to you .
A summary of our Customer Guarantee Scheme is given here.
Full details are available from the address opposite.
The Scheme ensures that you may make a claim for any lapse in service within the four specified guarantees.
If we fail, you may write and claim a payment as follows:
1.
Keeping of Appointments
We will keep all appointments on the day notified to you, or otherwise give you at least 24 hours' notice of cancellation.
If we fail to do this you will be entitled to a payment of £5.00.
2.
Responses to Enquiries about Accounts or Alternative Payment Arrangements
We will send you a full response to all reasonable written account enquiries within 20 working days of receiving your letter.
Should you make a written request for a change in your payment arrangements, we will act on this as promptly as possible and where we are unable to comply with your request, we will send a full response within 10 working days.
We will pay you £5.00 if we fail to respond within the given periods.
3.
Responses to Complaints
We will send a reply to all reasonable written complaints coming within the scope of the scheme within 10 working days of receiving them.
We will then either send you a full response, or if your complaint needs further investigation by a third party or a site visit, an acknowledging letter explaining the reasons why a full response cannot be sent immediately.
Our letter will give you the name, address and telephone number of the employee dealing with your complaint.
Whatever the circumstances, we guarantee sending a full response within 20 working days of receiving your letter.
If we fail we will pay you £5.00.
4.
Interrupting and Restoring Water Supplies
In order to improve our standards of service for the benefit of all customers, occasionally it is necessary to interrupt water supplied to undertake essential work.
Whenever we have given you advance notice of any such planned interruptions, we guarantee to restore your supply within the period notified to you.
In the event of an unplanned interruption when, for example, a water main bursts, we guarantee to restore your supply within 24 hours of our becoming aware of the problem.
In some circumstances, because of the nature of the fault, this may not be possible, but in these cases we undertake to restore your supply within 72 hours.
In cases of unplanned interruptions, our aim is to notify you as soon as practicable of when your supply will be restored.
If we fail to meet any of these timescales we will pay you £5.00 for every complete day your supply is interrupted.
Exceptional Circumstances
Our guarantee will not apply to certain exceptional circumstances when we are prevented form meeting our specified standards by events beyond our control.
These may include extreme weather conditions, strikes and the like; exact details are given in the full Thames Water Customer Guarantee Scheme, copies of which are available from the (Guarantee Scheme) address opposite.
How to claim
Naturally, we are going our best to ensure these standards of service are met.
We hope that you will never need to make a claim!
However, if we do fail to meet any of the above standards, providing your accounts is in good standard, you may make a claim by writing to:
Please note that, currently, the Customer Guarantee Scheme applies only to domestic customers.
All claims must be made within three months of the event.
Liability
Payments under this scheme do not affect any legal rights you may have to take action for any loss or damage sustained and do not constitute an admission of liability on our part.
WHY NOT FIND OUT MORE ABOUT THAMES WATER?
In this leaflet we have been able to detail only a small part of our activities.
If you would like to know more about the people and processes that keep water running for you 24 hours a day, why not send off now for the comprehensive free brochure below.
Just return this coupon by post (no stamp needed) to Thames Water Information, Admail, Freepost 23, Reading RG1 1BR.
Please send me your brochure (please tick box).
YOUR CHOICE ON MAILINGS
In the future you may receive mailings from other organisations which offer value to you as a customer of Thames Water.
All such offers will have been carefully checked before acceptance and the information provided will be limited to your name and address only.
If you do not wish to receive any of these offers — now or at any time in the future — please complete your personal details, tick the box below and return this form by post (no stamp needed) to Thames Water Utilities, Freepost, Swindon, SN2 6BR.
Customers who have previously opted-out need not contact us again.
I do not wish to receive special offer mailings under separate cover.
British Telecom June 1990
 Dear Mr Heaps,
Imagine not having to go into work every day.
It's something most of us just dream about.
But according to the questionnaire I recently sent you, over 20% of our customers are achieving this — by working or running a business from home.
If this appeals to you, why not send for a booklet we've written called ‘A Guide to Working from Home’?
It offers advice to both those considering using their home as a base, as well as those who've already made the break.
It also tells you about the communications and equipment that make working from home possible.
There are answering machines to help you avoid missing important phone calls.
And fax machines that enable you to send and receive pages of information anywhere in the world — in seconds.
Indeed, ‘A Guide to Working from Home’ gives you suggestions and solutions to meet most situations.
For your free copy, simply call us free on 0800 800 852 (or complete and return the coupon).
If you'd like details of the new products and services we've introduced, ask us to include the latest edition of our free 62-page catalogue —‘In Touch’.
Then you'll see how we can help you make your home a better place to work.
Yours sincerely, Philip Mounsey, Customer Marketing.