

LOYALTY IS SILENCE
There are times when your life seems to jump tracks.
Slow train to fast, local to express.
You have the sense that, from now on, you'll be travelling on a different line, you'll be seeing different views through the window.
It was November and Jed had just turned twenty-two.
Creed opened the glass panel one morning as they were returning from the airport and said, ‘Where do you live, Spaghetti?’
‘Mangrove East.’
Creed shook his head.
‘I need you closer.’
It was exactly what Jed had been waiting to hear, but he kept his voice level.
‘Where've you got in mind, sir?’
‘The Palace.’
Jed's heart lifted in his ribs.
The Palace was where Creed lived, in a penthouse suite on the fourteenth floor, so the idea made perfect sense.
But the Palace was also the most exclusive apartment hotel in the city.
It was located on Ocean Drive, between C and D; it took up the entire block.
With its two twin towers of baroque grey stone, it was just about the only building in Moon Beach that wasn't either white or pale-blue.
Its lobby was the size of a railway station, all peach marble and glass and gilded metal.
The central chandelier was gold-plated and weighed, it was rumoured, something in the region of half a ton.
Everyone had stayed at the Palace.
Heads of state, movie-stars, tycoons.
Just to be able to give it as your address!
‘You'll be in the basement,’ Creed said, ‘but it should be adequate.’
He allowed himself a smile.
‘It can hardly fail to be an improvement on Mangrove East, in any case.’
Jed moved that same week.
To reach his new apartment you had to use the old tradesmen's entrance: past the service elevator, down four flights of stairs, along a corridor with a linoleum floor.
The basement of the Palace was a lost kingdom of storerooms, washrooms and boiler-rooms.
Fat grey pipes hugging the ceilings, dull yellow walls.
The air smelt of lagging, paint, damp.
And also, ever so faintly, and inexplicably, of marzipan.
In the end you came to a door that said (and this was equally inexplicable) 3D.
There was no 3C and no 3E.
There wasn't even a 3A. 3D was unique and without context.
It was another dimension.
It was Jed's new home.
There were two rooms, both painted a tired pale-green.
There was a bed, a TV, a phone.
There was air-conditioning.
That was about it.
If you parted the net curtains and peered sideways and upwards you could see one tiny piece of bright blue sky, but you might pull a muscle doing it.
A constant clash and tinkle came from the kitchens across the courtyard, like the percussion section of an orchestra from hell.
At night the boiler took over, roaring and trembling until dawn.
During his first week in the Palace he hardly slept.
It was during the second week that Carol asked him to dinner at her parents' place.
As the taxi moved down off the harbour bridge and into the suburb of Paradise, he remembered what Vasco had said, and turned to her.
‘Your father,’ he said, ‘is he really the chairman?’
Carol looked embarrassed.
‘Yes.’
He sat back.
Jesus.
So her father really was the chairman.
Her father was Sir Charles Dobson.
‘Why?’
Carol said.
‘Didn't you know?’
‘No, not really.
Vasco said something about it, but I didn't believe him.’
‘I thought everyone knew.’
And she gave him a smile that resembled gratitude.
It was as if , in not knowing, he'd paid her a great compliment.
Sir Charles and Lady Dobson lived on Pacific Drive, a road that wound its way through the canyons, then doubled back towards the ocean to link, eventually, with the South Coast Expressway.
The house was one of the white, wedding-cake mansions in the 10,000 block, high wrought-iron gates and video security, and just the hills rising in silence behind.
Jed paid the taxi and stood still.
You needed millions to breathe this air.
This air exactly, right here.
Millions.
And suddenly he took the rumours and put them on like a coat.
Lifted and dropped his shoulders a few times, he'd seen people do it when they tried on clothes in stores.
Not a bad fit.
Maybe he really was a cunning son of a bitch, just like Vasco said he was.
Certainly he was thinking all those thoughts.
Jed Morgan, he was thinking.
Chairman.
Dinner was plate after plate of food he'd hardly ever set eyes on, let alone eaten: caviar, bortsch, salmon, duck.
And then, as if that wasn't indigestible enough, the conversation turned to the subject of  advertising.
The new Paradise Corporation commercial had just aired the previous night.
Jed had seen it.
It opened with a black screen and a voice that said, ‘This is probably the most frightening place in the world.’
It pulled back slowly to reveal a fringe of green around the black.
You were looking into an open grave.
The voice went on to say that, when you were faced with something as frightening as death, you needed the right people around you, and the right people were the Paradise Corporation etc. etc.
One of the papers had attacked the commercial for being too emotive.
People at the dinner table were springing to the commercial's defence, using words like ‘honest’ and ‘bold’.
‘Well,’ Jed said, speaking up for the first time, ‘at least there weren't any tolling bells in it.’
All the talk around him suddenly subsided; he felt strangely shipwrecked in the silence.
‘I used to work on commercials for funeral parlours,’ he went on.
‘I used to think that if I heard one more tolling bell, I'd go out of my mind.’
After the laughter had died away, he told a story about one particular commercial that he'd worked on.
It was a testimonial for a funeral parlour which had dealt with the victims of a forest fire.
He needed the sound of a forest fire running under the voice-track, but he couldn't find the effect on file.
It was seven at night and the commercial had to be presented at breakfast the next day.
In the end he had no choice.
He had to create the effect himself.
‘How did you do that?’
Lady Dobson asked.
‘I'll show you,’ Jed said, ‘but I need absolute silence.
Out of his left pocket he produced a handful of candy-wrappers and, during the hush that followed, he created a forest fire for the Dobsons and their guests in the  Dobson's very own dining-room.
It was a great success.
‘And these are only Liquorice Whirls,’ he said.
‘In those days I was eating Almond Toffee Creams and they came in much cracklier paper.’
Either Sir Charles had forgotten what Jed did, or else nobody had bothered to tell him, because he now leaned forwards and, impressed, it seemed, by Jed's ingenuity and verve, said, ‘Perhaps, young man, you should come and work for me.’
All eyes locked on Jed.
He waited three seconds.
You have to time things.
‘But Sir Charles,’ he said, ‘I already do.’
He looked round.
People were weeping with laughter.
He caught Carol's eye, and winked.
His skin had picked up a glow from the lilies  on the table.
The candlelight had taken his cheap suit and made it over in some priceless fabric.
The vintage wine had anointed his tongue with new and seductive language.
He could do no wrong.
When the meal was over, Sir Charles escorted him into the library.
He watched Sir Charles cut the tip off his cigar.
Being old had done something to Sir Charles's face, something that being poor sometimes did.
It had sucked the colour out.
Eyes, hair, skin: all different shades of grey and white.
Distinguished, yes.
But colourless.
And cheeks with folds in them, like old wallets.
He wondered how much Sir Charles was worth.
But now the cigar was lit and, turning to Jed, Sir Charles spoke through billowing smoke.
‘So who exactly do you work for?’
‘I work for Mr Creed.
I'm his driver.’
Maybe it was only a coincidence but, as soon as Jed pronounced the name of his employer, the cigar fell from Sir Charles's fingers.
It bounced on the carpet, shedding chunks of red-hot ash.
‘God-DAMN.’
Sir Charles spread his legs and stooped.
He flicked the ash towards the fireplace with the back of his hand.
Then he stuck the cigar between his teeth and slowly sucked the life back into it.
‘Let me ask you something, Jed,’ he said, when the smoke was billowing once more.
‘Have you ever been to head office?’
‘I have, yes.’
‘What did you think of it?’
The head office of the Paradise Corporation, as Sir Charles knew perfectly well, was just about the most famous building in the city.
Built entirely of black glass, it marked the beginning of what was known as Death Row, a stretch of downtown First Avenue where most of the big funeral parlours had their offices.
All night long lights burned in the central elevator shaft and in the windows of the twenty-fifth floor.
The result was a white cross that stood out among the familiar neon logos of airlines and oil companies.
The cross was a landmark.
You could even buy postcards of it.
Jed had only been inside the building once, and all he could remember was the angel.
She was part sculpture, part fountain.
Her head and body were metal and her wings were water, water that was forced through holes in her back and lit from beneath so it looked solid, like glass.
He remembered the hiss of those wings, the lick and swish of revolving doors, the warble of phones.
All tricks a hypnotist might use.
Forget your loss.
Forget your grief.
He remembered drifting, drifting close to sleep.
‘You walk into that building,’ Sir Charles said, ‘and you know you're in capable hands.’
Clouds of smoke trailed over his shoulder  as he paced.
‘You've got to win people's trust.
Trust is very important.
Without trust,’ and he came to a standstill and tipped his chin into the air, the thought still forming.
‘Without trust,’ Jed said, ‘we wouldn't be standing here now.’
Sir Charles swung round.
‘Precisely.’
For a moment he was rendered motionless by surprise, a kind of respect.
But only for a moment.
‘What I'm trying to say to you is, this is a hard business.
A cutthroat business at times.
But you should always remember one thing.
It's people that you're dealing with.
People.’
He thrust both hands in his pockets and rocked back on his heels.
‘I'm sixty-nine and I'm still working.
Nobody really retires from this business.
It's a way of life.’
He showed Jed to the door of the library.
‘Is there anything I can do for you, my boy?’
‘Not that I can think of.’
Then his face moved close to Jed's, and he said, ‘Are you interested in my daughter?’
‘I'll let you into a secret, Sir Charles,’ Jed said.
‘I'm not interested in your daughter at all.
I'm just pretending to be.
It's your money I'm really after.’
Sir Charles stared at Jed, and Jed stared back; he wasn't going to help Dobson out with this one.
At last a smile began to pull at the folds in Sir Charles's face, as if his cheeks really were wallets and his smile was going through them, looking for cash, then the smile turned to laughter, it pushed between his teeth, it was dry and rhythmic, it sounded uncannily like someone counting a stack of dollar bills.
Jed saw Carol at the end of the corridor and began to walk towards her.
‘You remember what I said,’ Sir Charles called after him.
The next day Creed asked Jed to drive him out to the Crumbles.
The Crumbles lay to the east of the city.
All the land out there had been under water once.
It was flat for miles.
There were a few wooden beach huts down by the shoreline.
Some old mine buildings in the distance, some gravel pits.
Otherwise just shingle, grey and orange, and a soft wind tugging at the heads of weeds.
He followed Creed's directions, leaving the road for an unpaved track that seemed to lead towards the ocean.
The track widened and then vanished.
Then they were driving over rough ground, loose stones popping under the tyres.
He parked close to where the land sloped downwards to a narrow pebble beach, and switched the engine off.
Creed stared out of the window, his chin cushioned on one hand, his eyes doubly concealed, first by the tinted windows of the car, then by his sunglasses.
Jed thought he understood.
It was like Vasco and the mudbanks of the river.
It was where Creed came to do his thinking.
Where was Vasco?
Jed wondered.
He'd scarcely set eyes on him since the night they'd had dinner together at the house in Westwood.
Nobody had mentioned him either, and Jed didn't feel he should ask.
He poured himself a cup of coffee from his private flask and watched the white gulls lift and scatter against the dull grey sky.
The glass panel slid open behind him.
‘I heard you were out at Dobson's place last night.’
‘That's right, sir.
I was.’
He'd known Creed would find out.
He'd even wanted him to.
He wanted Creed to be amused, impressed even.
A chauffeur at the chairman's dinner table!
‘Any particular reason?’
‘Carol asked me.’
‘Carol?’
‘His daughter.
The receptionist.
Creed said nothing.
‘The one with the limp,’ Jed said.
‘I know the one.’
Another silence.
Wind pushed at the car.
Then Creed said, ‘Dobson's on his way out.’
The chairman?
On his way out?
But Creed didn't give Jed time to think.
‘When a ship sinks,’ he said, ‘that's when you see who the rats are.
What interests me is which rats leave which ship.’
The glass panel slid shut.
One week later Sir Charles Dobson resigned as chairman of the Paradise Corporation.
The decision had been taken, the statement said, ‘for personal reasons’.
The new chairman, elected unanimously by the members of the board, was Mr Neville Creed.
Jed read the statement three times while he was eating breakfast that morning.
It sounded calm and measured, utterly reasonable.
But he couldn't make any sense of it.
He saw Dobson standing in the library.
Nobody really retires from this business.
It's a way of life.
He couldn't make any sense of it at all.
And then he saw Creed sitting in the back of a black car parked on the Crumbles.
Dobson's on his way out.
From then on everything that happened seemed to jar.
There were minor changes, subtle departures from routine.
Creed called at seven.
‘Meet me in the parking-lot.’
Jed usually waited in the car outside the  front of the hotel.
Now it was the parking-lot.
Underground.
When Creed stepped out of the service elevator he wasn't alone.
Flack was with him.
Flack was one of the corporation lawyers.
It looked as if both men had been up all night.
Except Flack didn't have a technique.
Flack's skin glistened in the white, gritty light, his thin face tight with fatigue.
Jed held out a hand as Creed approached.
‘I'd like to congratulate you, sir.’
At close range Creed looked bright, jagged round the edges.
as if he'd been cut out of tin.
He was staring at Jed.
He didn't seem to know what Jed was talking about.
‘Your new appointment.’
Oh that.
A nod, a quick smile.
And then Creed ushered Flack into the car.
It was as if Creed had something more important on his mind.
But what could be more important than his appointment as chairman of the largest and most prestigious funeral parlour in the city?
Up the ramp and out into the light.
That white winter sun, a magnesium flash.
At the first intersection Jed snapped his dark lenses over his eyes.
A calming green.
He glanced at the two men in the back.
Flack was crushed into a corner, gesticulating, a beetle turned on to its back.
Creed leaned towards him, his hand palm-upwards in the air, the fingers curved and stiff like the setting for a precious stone, but no stone there.
They were arguing — but what about?
It was a question Jed had never allowed himself before.
He saw old Garbett's tape recorder, he saw the wheels turning.
If only he could record what they were saying.
He began to imagine how he would run the wires under the carpet, and had to stop before it became too real.
Flack was dropped in the city at ten.
McGowan and Maxie Carlo took his place.
Carlo pared his thumbnails with his knife.
McGowan spat bits of words through pointed teeth.
Creed stared out of the window, as if it was the Crumbles he could see.
The mood was wrong, all wrong.
Creed had been appointed chairman, yet there was no sense of celebration.
The day was filled with whispers, echoes, nerves.
Towards midday they drove out to Dobson's house on Pacific Drive.
Carlo and McGowan waited on the steps while Creed went in.
Creed was inside the house for almost an hour and when he emerged on the steps it wasn't Sir Charles who was with him, but Sir Charles's wife.
At first Jed thought she was laughing.
Maxie Carlo must've cracked a joke.
But he saw her hand fly up and hold her mouth, he  saw Creed slide an arm round her shoulder.
It wasn't laughter.
She was crying.
The next stop was Butterfield, where they picked up Morton the embalmer.
This, too, was curious: Creed never had anything to do with embalmers.
In fact, Jed had only seen Morton once before.
He'd spent an afternoon with Morton when he first joined the company, as part of his induction.
He remembered the white room.
The tinkle of calipers and hacksaws in the sterilising bowl, the naughty smack of rubber gloves.
And Morton talking, talking.
‘I lie beautifully, that's my job.
Or not lie, maybe.
Turn the clock back.
Tell an old truth.’
A hole had opened in the floor and the naked corpse of a white woman rose into view.
Later Jed had lost all sense of time as the external heart slowly pumped a solution of formaldehyde into the dead woman's body, as the dead woman's body began to blush.
He couldn't help thinking of his radios, the way they warmed up, that slow suffusion of light behind the names.
Turn the clock back.
Tell an old truth.
The four men had lunch in the Palm Court Motel on Highway 23.
Jed waited in the car.
Ate half a chicken salad sandwich, threw the rest away.
Read the paper and couldn't remember a word of it.
He had no appetite.
Couldn't concentrate.
At two-forty-seven the four men pushed through the glass doors and out into the motel parking-lot.
They stood on the warm asphalt.
Creed opened one hand like a fan, words spilling sideways from his lips.
Morton dipped his head, his face pulled wide, excited.
Carlo and McGowan stood on either side of the embalmer, he might've been in custody.
They all wore suits.
They all had clean shoes and neat hair.
He watched them walk towards the car.
They looked like evangelists, or politicians.
When they were ten yards away they stopped talking, and they didn't start again till they were safely behind glass.
I need you closer.
That was a laugh.
He'd never felt further away.
And then Sir Charles Dobson died.
Just ten days after his resignation.
Suddenly, at home.
The papers bristled with tributes to ‘a man who stood for tradition and dignity in a business that has recently been rocked by scandal and corruption’.
Creed received a good deal of spin-off publicity.
The Herald called him ‘Dobson's understudy’ and ‘one of the new entrepreneurs’.
The Tribune said he exhibited ‘the cutting edge and thrust of an aggressive businessman on his way to the top’.
It was clear from the cumulative weight of these reports that Creed had already arrived.
Many of the papers carried photographs  of Dobson and Creed side by side, Dobson's arm around Creed's shoulder, as if Creed was not only heir to the business, but also a son.
On the morning of Dobson's funeral a bellhop knocked on 3D and handed Jed a big square box.
There was a card taped to the box: TO 3D.
A GIFT FROM 1412. 1412 was Creed's apartment.
Jed smiled at the anonymity.
All letters and numbers.
Like convicts.
Inside the box was a black satin top hat.
He tried it on.
It fitted to perfection, it even seemed to match his scarecrow face.
He decided to wear it for the rest of his life.
When he pulled up outside the Palace, Creed was already waiting by the entrance with McGowan, Trotter and Maxie Carlo (still no sign of Vasco).
In their black top hats and tailcoats they looked more like vultures than ever.
They studied him from their position high on the steps.
Creed turned to Maxie Carlo.
‘What do you think of Spaghetti, Meatball?’
Carlo scarcely had to look.
‘Dressed to kill.’
Laughter jumped from face to face.
Creed, Trotter; even McGowan.
Then, just as suddenly, they seemed to remember that this was a serious occasion, they were on their way to a funeral, the funeral of a great man, the chairman, their founder and benefactor, and they fell silent again.
The first two cars held the coffin (solid bronze with 24-carat gold-plated hardware) and several close members of the family.
Creed rode in the third car, flanked by two of the Corporation's top directors, with Jed at the wheel in his new top hat.
The vultures travelled in the fourth car, packed tight into the back, like pieces of a game.
Creed had organised the funeral himself.
The funeral to end all funerals.
A motorcade through downtown Moon Beach, a twenty-one-gun salute, a memorial service in the cathedral.
Creed had requisitioned an open car, and he stood for the entire procession, as a mark of his own personal respect for the deceased.
From time to time Jed tipped the mirror to the sky to look at him.
Hands clasped behind his back, face as grave as stone.
Jed could sense a question running like a breeze through the rows of people who lined the streets:Who's he ?
If they didn't know now, Jed thought, they'd know soon enough.
There was a clever piece of stage-management on the steps of the cathedral.
The city's funeral barons had turned out in an unprecedented expression of their admiration and their sympathy, and Creed took full advantage of the fact.
He engineered it so that he was standing head and shoulders above his rivals when they filed past to shake his hand and offer their condolences.
It was a symbolic moment, duly captured and enshrined by the massed bank of press photographers.
In the papers the next day it looked as if the funeral parlour heads were sanctioning the transfer of power, as if they were acknowledging Creed's pre-eminence, as if they were paying homage.
The funeral had become a coronation.
After the service Jed saw Carol walking across the lawn in front of the cathedral.
He hadn't spoken to her since the day before her father resigned.
She'd left Mortlake suddenly, without saying goodbye.
She wasn't limping today, he noticed; she must be wearing those special shoes of hers.
At that moment she caught a glimpse of him through the crowd and came over.
‘Jed,’ she said, ‘how are you?’
He caught Creed looking at him, frowning.
‘I can't talk now,’ he said.
‘Can I call you?’
He gave her the number.
‘I'm not there much, though.
Pretty busy these days.’
‘You're doing well,’ she said, ‘aren't you?’
He shrugged.
Her face bent close to his.
To kiss him, he thought, and he shrank back.
‘This whole thing's a sham,’ she hissed.
He stared at her, not understanding.
She nodded twice, almost to herself.
‘A sham.’
Then she was stumbling, legs of china, to her car.
The left side of his head began to beat.
What did she mean, a sham?
He saw one of her heels sink into the soft grass, she almost fell.
She seemed so exposed, so ridiculous, he wanted to point and laugh.
What did she know?
The loss of her father had opened her up like a can of something and tipped her out.
There was nothing holding her together.
He couldn't deal with that.
In the event he didn't have to.
She never called.
Vasco called instead.
At least he thought it was Vasco.
The voice just said, ‘Watch the papers,’ then it hung up.
He forgot about the call until the end of the week when the story broke.
It broke in the tabloids first, where it would do the most damage.
The Mirror's headline was a classic:
FUNERAL BOSS DIED TWICE
According to sources that couldn't be revealed, the Paradise Corporation had pretended that Sir Charles Dobson was alive for ten days after his death so that the leadership of the company could be handed over without shaking public confidence.
In a move variously described as ‘ghoulish’, ‘Machiavellian’ and ‘sick’, Mr Creed, it was alleged, had orchestrated this posthumous resignation, instructing expert embalmers to preserve the corpse and even arranging a photo session two days after Sir Charles's death (Sir Charles's lifeless arm around Mr Creed's shoulders) so a picture could be released to the press along with a transcript of the letter of resignation.
Only once the transfer of power had been smoothly effected and accepted by the general public, the paper claimed, had Sir Charles Dobson been allowed to die.
These were extraordinary allegations and they turned the city upside down.
For the first few days after the story broke Creed lived in the car.
He banished his vultures.
In the present climate of opinion they could only damage him.
Flack was his adviser now.
As they drove from press conferences to radio stations, from radio stations to television studios, Creed and Flack huddled in the back of the car hatching strategies.
Creed's statement seldom varied: ‘This entire story is a monstrous fabrication, an attempt to smear the good name of the Paradise Corporation.’
In between the public appearances, they were hounded by the press.
There were two or three car-chases a day, with Jed using every hidden fold and secret pocket of the city to lose some persistent journalist or camera crew.
They ate in the outskirts, obscure highway diners, and cafés in bleak residential suburbs.
They hid in the city's petticoats.
They stayed awake.
One night they almost snapped an axle when Jed's eyes fell shut and the car left the highway and began to lurch across dry yellow grass.
A strange closeness developed, a shorthand, a kind of telepathy.
Jed began to know where Creed wanted to go without a word being uttered.
There was the afternoon when he drove out to the Crumbles and they slept for three hours, the wind pushing at the side of the car like a crowd.
He woke suddenly and turned.
Creed was sleeping with his eyes wide open.
Jed saw Creed wake.
The only difference was a subtle shift in breathing.
‘I dreamt we were made of gold,’ Creed said, ‘and there were people trying to melt us down.’
One of his eyebrows arched ironically.
as if anyone could melt them down.
Jed knew the story in the papers was true.
He only had to remember the day after Dobson's resignation.
Creed's distracted blankness in  the parking-lot.
Flack's anxiety.
The tension on the faces of McGowan and Carlo.
Mrs Dobson's tears.
Morton's jittery elation.
I lie beautifully.
All those ambiguous, jarring pieces fell into place.
He remembered the picture in the paper.
He remembered thinking that the smile on Dobson's face looked false.
And it had been, of course.
Dead men didn't smile.
Not unless they fell into Morton's hands.
Turn the clock back.
Tell an old truth.
No, he didn't believe in Creed's innocence, not for a moment, but then innocence and guilt had never been the parameters, had they?
There was only one question in his mind when he read the papers: had they taken the story far enough?
It occurred to him as a possibility, for instance, that, prior to being ‘kept alive’ for ten days, Dobson might first have been murdered.
Was that what Carol had been trying to tell him?
The days passed.
Jed ate Liquorice Whirls, and virtually nothing else.
He hardly slept.
At times he felt himself departing into hallucination.
The rumours were still flying, but the proof was lying low.
Creed's vultures were out there, Jed was sure of it, sealing lips and twisting thumbs.
Sometimes Creed would turn his face to the window and smile.
Just the flicker of a smile when he thought that nobody was looking (but Jed had practised the deft glance in the mirror and he didn't miss much).
Creed was like a gambler.
Spin the wheel.
If you lose, just spin again.
There were always more chips.
It was down to nerve.
Who got chicken first.
Which rats left which ship.
Silence was descending all over the city.
The hollow roar of nothing being said.
The Dobson story had yet to be substantiated, and the family were still unavailable for comment.
The Paradise Corporation was suing three of the city's leading newspapers.
Creed met McGowan and Trotter at Papa Jim's Bone-A-Fide Rib Place on the South Coast Expressway.
A chequered tablecloth and lighting like melted butter.
Jed could see them from the car, drinking beers and swapping jokes.
It was real mood-swing.
They looked like three guys relaxing after a ball game.
Once again he wished he could've listened in.
Then, nine days after the story broke, the Tribunepublished a cartoon.
It showed a coffin with the lid nailed down and two candles burning at the head.
A voice-bubble rose from the inside of the coffin.
It said, simply, ‘I resign.’
The morning that the cartoon appeared, Jed overheard Creed talking to Maxie Carlo.
He had the paper in his hand.
‘The press are beginning to have fun,’ he was saying.
‘The worst is over.
There was a new confidence.
An air of leisure, recklessness, infallibility.
McGowan was seen smiling.
Maxie Carlo came to work in a yellow plaid suit.
Creed gave Jed two nights off.
Jed drove down to Rialto to see Mitch.
‘Ask him,’ Mitch said as Jed walked in.
‘He works there.’
Some friends of Mitch's had come round.
A couple of them had ridden in the Moon Beach chapter together.
There was a black girl there too.
Her name was Sharon.
She wanted to know what Jed thought about the Dobson affair.
Jed cracked a beer.
‘It's all true,’ he said, ‘every word of it,’and he sent Mitch a wink.
‘No, really.’
And suddenly he felt a slippage, a letting go.
His nerves had been on hold for days.
No sleep and all that road unwinding before his eyes, inside his head.
It only took this one slight pressure when he was least expecting it and he came loose.
‘How am I supposed to know?’ he snapped.
‘I'm only a fucking driver, all right?’
The black girl shrank.
‘Christ.
Sorry I asked.’
Jed drank two more beers and a couple of shots of tequila.
Suddenly the room smelt of dead flowers and stale smoke, and it was loud, even during silences, with the ticking of Mitch's clocks.
He went to the bathroom, hung his head over the toilet bowl.
The ammonia helped.
This hunchback darkness on his shoulder and the room behind him, high and narrow.
It was all the liquor, he wasn't used to it any more.
In the old days he could've swallowed a six-pack in half an hour and then gone out and walked a tightrope.
Not any more.
He shut his mouth and hung his head.
Waited for the darkness to lift.
‘How did you get to be a driver, Jed?’
He slowly looked up.
It was much later.
He was back in the lounge.
Mitch was rolling a cigarette, running the tip of his tongue along the shiny edge.
‘Somebody say something?’
‘How did you get to be a driver?’
Jed shrugged.
‘I'm pretty good mechanically.
I don't mind working long hours —‘
The black girl cut in.
‘It's his eyes.’
‘His eyes?’ one of the bikers said.
‘What d'you mean?’
She leaned forwards.
‘I've seen eyes like his in jails.
Eyes that've killed.
Or look as if they could.’
And she shuddered.
Jed stood up.
He stared into the mirror that hung above the mantelpiece.
He'd often asked himself the same  question .
What had  Creed seen in him?
He thought he had it now.
It was what that girl had said.
It was what he looked like.
‘He never blinks,’ he heard her say.
‘It's like those lizards.’
He was still looking at himself.
His qualifications, so to speak.
They were all there, in the mirror.
A tall thin body built almost entirely out of angles.
A body which, cramped in the black livery he wore, became still thinner, still more angular.
His face was flaky in some places, the texture of dried glue, while in others it bore the pin-prick traces of acne.
His glasses with their steel frames made his eyes look chilly, merciless.
He was ugly, there was no denying it.
He was verging on the grotesque.
And yet, looking at himself now, he couldn't help taking a kind of pride in his appearance.
For as long as he could remember, people had stared at him.
His ugliness set him apart; his ugliness had made him vain.
He was smiling now.
His lips didn't curve or pucker when he smiled.
They just lengthened.
His smile seemed to prove the point.
Later the black girl came and sat beside him on the sofa.
‘I want to apologise,’ she said.
‘I didn't mean to be personal or anything.’
‘What's your name?’ he said.
‘I've forgotten.’
‘Sharon.’
‘I'm Jed.
‘I know.’
She was staring at him intently.
‘Tell me something.
Are you a virgin?’
She was close to him now.
Her pink shirt blurred.
Her breath smelt of damp hay, hay that had been stored too long.
‘You are, aren't you?’
He admitted it.
‘You want to do something about it?’
He began to shiver.
‘What's wrong?’ she said.
‘You cold?’
‘Yes.’
Her voice softened.
‘Well, you're the driver.
Why don't you drive me home?’
They left in his Chrysler.
At the first stoplight she leaned over and kissed him.
Something flashed pale-mauve in the side of her teeth.
‘It's amethyst,’ she said.
‘It's my lucky stone.’
He was too drunk to be driving, he thought, angling a glance at her wide, sloping thighs on the seat beside him.
Her breasts slopped like water under that pink shirt of hers.
Like the bags of water you buy goldfish in.
Then a room with blue lights, the whining of a child.
A swirl of orange as he lurched to the window.
‘Baker Park,’ she said.
Her voice, the room, tonight.
All gritty and distant now.
Dregs in the bottom of a bottle.
One week when he was fifteen he'd slept under the pier.
Seaweed dangling from the metal struts like matted hair, wind so rough against his skin.
You could've used that wind to scour pans.
And the dragging of the waves all night.
Water like slurred words.
The bottom of the bottle.
And then marooned on her black flesh, two circles round her throat, and her chin pointing at the ceiling like the toe of a boot on a corpse, one arm bent backwards, nothing on except the slacks around her ankles, but no way in, at least none that he could find, and the cheap carpet burning his elbows and his knees, and sleep beginning to ooze from her ridged lips.
He woke on top of her, she might've been a beach, he might've been abandoned there by waves.
He rolled away from her and she woke too.
One absent-minded hand moved up to scratch a breast.
‘Did we do it?’
‘I don't know,’ he said.
‘I don't think so.’
She yawned.
A mouth like ice-cream.
Strawberry and chocolate.
‘Want to try again?’
‘When?’
‘How about now?
Morning after's always good.’
She reached for him with one blind hand.
He moved away, sat up.
‘Not now.
Maybe tonight.’
Her eyes opened.
She looked at him across her cheeks.
‘What's wrong?
Don't you like me?’
‘It's not that.’
‘You don't like my body.’
She handled one of her breasts sorrowfully, the way you might handle a bird with a broken wing.
‘It doesn't do anything for you.
‘It's not that.
It's just I've got things to do.’
It wasn't true.
He had the whole day off.
It was just that everything seemed too close, like staring at a light bulb.
He was looking down at her, and seeing green and purple on her skin.
‘I can't figure you out.’
He buttoned his pants.
‘Where did I leave my car?’
She was lying on the carpet, the lips of her cunt, soft and blunt, pushing up through a mound of black curls.
She shrugged at him, and he looked away.
She was still lying on the carpet five minutes  later when he left the apartment.
He saw her knees and calves through the half-open door.
‘Well?’ she asked him, when he showed up again that night.
‘Did you find it?’
He scowled.
‘In the end.’
It had taken half an hour, the inside of his head fitting loosely, like a drawer in an old chest.
He'd searched the streets around her house that morning.
Streets scratchy with children, broken glass and weeds.
He'd even searched the vacant lots.
A trunk with burst locks.
A drunk in a yellow armchair.
Those things shouldn't've been there, for some reason they'd infuriated him.
The night before he'd driven drunk.
OK, so he'd lost his virginity (well, almost).
But he'd risked losing everything else too.
His licence, his job.
His entire future.
When he ‘found his car he sat behind the wheel, gripping it so tight he could've snapped it.
‘I can't stay long,’ he told her.
‘You better get those pants off then.’
‘What's that round your neck?’
He'd noticed it the night before.
A small leather pouch on a string.
It was the only thing she'd been wearing that hadn't come away when they undressed.
‘It's nothing you need know about.’
His anger was still there, and he used it to break into her.
He liked the way her eyes widened in alarm, as if he was forcing a lock, as if he was breaking and entering.
It was the first time he'd ever slept with a woman and it felt like burglary.
That night, back in the Palace, the phone rang.
He switched the light on.
It was after two.
He thought it must be Creed and said, ‘Yes, sir?’
‘Christ, you even crawl in your sleep.’
‘Who's this?’
‘Who do you think?’
‘Vasco.
Where are you?’
‘I don't think I should tell you that.’
‘Creed's been looking for you.’
‘How about that.’
Vasco's laughter sounded tight.
‘Listen, you've got to meet me tomorrow.’
‘I can't do that.
You know what my schedule's like.’
‘Do this for me, Jed.
‘I can't.’
Vasco hung up.
Towards morning Jed dreamed he was waiting at a bus-stop.
When  the bus pulled in, hundreds of people pushed towards the door.
He managed to force his way on.
As the bus pulled away, he saw Vasco through the window.
Vasco was trapped on the sidewalk.
Vasco had been left behind.
That night the phone rang again.
He didn't want to answer it, thinking that it might be Vasco again, but he couldn't afford not to.
So he picked up the receiver and waited.
‘Spaghetti?’
It was Creed.
‘Yes, sir?’
‘I want you to pick me up.’
‘Where are you?’
‘A place called the Box.
It's a club.
You know it?’
The line was cluttered with background noise, and Jed had to ask Creed to repeat the address several times.
At last he had it.
75 V Street.
‘I'll be outside in half an hour.’
‘Don't wait outside.
Park the car and come in.’
‘Half an hour,’ Jed said, and hung up.
Ever since that story broke in the papers, Creed seemed to be testing loyalties.
Pushing those around him to the brink and saying jump.
Jed thought he understood.
It was like when his radios were thrown away.
You could shrug your shoulders, put on a face that said you didn't care, but you did and nothing could ever be secure again.
The next time security appeared as a possibility, you smashed it yourself.
And went on smashing it.
That, he was sure, was how Creed felt.
And the people round him weren't jumping.
Trotter had been away for two weeks.
Something to do with that twisted arm of his.
Meatball's sense of humour was fraying.
He still told jokes, but they were the jokes of a man who couldn't see anything funny any more, the jokes of a man with one eye on the door.
Vasco was nowhere.
A voice on the phone at three in the morning.
A dream in your head.
Only McGowan had lasted.
If Jed waited long enough, surely his moment would come.
The days of liquorice were over.
He'd started buying Iceberg Mints.
They were clear and cool.
They were how his thinking had to be.
He switched the light on and looked at the clock.
Two-twenty.
The smell of sex rose in a gust as he left the bed.
Sharon didn't wake.
He thought he'd heard of the Box.
It was down by the old meat-packing warehouses.
It was one of the hard-core gay clubs.
75 V Street was a black door with a small glass panel at head height where you could see your own face reflected.
A two-way mirror, presumably.
The knocker was a nude male torso in brass.
Jed took hold of the cold metal and knocked twice.
The buttocks hammered at the door as if they were fucking it.
The door opened about six inches.
A strong man with a beard stared down at him.
‘I'm with Mr Creed,’ Jed said.
The gap widened and he passed through.
He paused inside, adjusted his top hat.
The strong man was still staring.
‘Like the outfit.’
Jed stared back.
One thing he'd learned how to do.
learned early on and never forgotten.
‘I'm a chauffeur.’
‘That's what they all say.’
The strong man lit a cigarette.
It looked too frail for his hand.
They looked like King Kong and Fay Wray, that hand, that cigarette.
There was a movie going on right under his nose and he didn't even know.
The guy had about one brain cell and he was doing time in it.
‘Where is he?’
Jed said.
‘In the back.’
Creed was sitting in a booth.
McGowan on one side of him, a young blond guy with cheekbones on the other.
Creed told Jed to sit down.
‘This is Ollie.’
He meant the blond guy.
‘He's a tourist.
You know McGowan, of course.
Jed looked at the tourist.
‘I'm pleased,’ the tourist said, ‘wery pleased.’
Jed was still looking.
Weird stuff.
‘Sit down,’ McGowan said.
‘Have a drink.’
‘I'm driving,’ Jed said, ‘remember?’
‘Have some of this instead,’ and McGowan passed Jed a brown vial.
‘We'll get home quicker.’
Jed took the bottle.
‘What is it?’
Though he already knew, of course.
That little bottle with the plastic spoon attached, it had just taken him back about five years.
‘It's powder,’ McGowan said, ‘for your nose.’
The tourist laughed.
Jed felt Creed's eyes on him.
He had two spoons, one for each nostril, and handed the vial back.
‘Good boy,’ Creed said.
‘You know Gorilla pretty well,’ McGowan said, ‘don't you?’
‘Kind of.’
‘You're a friend of his,’ Creed said.
‘I used to be.
It was years ago.
We were kids.’
It was so strange  talking to Creed like this.
They never talked like this.
He felt as if all his teeth were stones.
‘You been seeing much of him recently?’
McGowan said.
‘Only in dreams.’
‘Only in dreams,’ Creed said, and laughed.
‘I'd keep it that way, if I was you,’ McGowan said.
‘Why?’
‘He's been a bad gorilla.’
McGowan swallowed the rest of his drink.
‘He got a bit greedy.
Too many bananas.
‘That's right,’ Creed said.
‘Hess been a bad gorilla.’
And he stared at Jed for a moment, then he smiled slowly.
Jed looked at McGowan, but McGowan was looking somewhere else.
Riddles.
The tourist wanted to go to another club, but Creed insisted on a drink in his apartment.
‘You're on vacation.
Relax.’
At last the tourist gave in.
Maybe he thought he was on to a good thing.
They took the scenic route back to the Palace.
Down through the old meat-market streets, into the tunnel with its rows of lights like neon stitching and its shiny cream tiles, up into Venus, then round the western edge of the harbour and back over the bridge to C Street.
The sliding glass panel was open for the first time ever.
‘He's a romantic,’ Creed said.
‘He wants to see the sights.’
‘We'll show him the sights,’ McGowan said, and he leaned back and laughed, and the city lights on his mirror shades looked like gold zips that had come undone.
The tourist laughed along with them.
In his rear-view mirror Jed saw the vial being passed round.
The tourist was sitting in the middle.
He was getting twice as much as anyone else.
No wonder he was laughing.
Slipping down into the parking-lot under the hotel was like being swallowed, the entrance a dark throat with the tongue cut out.
Loyalty is silence.
The tyres squealed as they braked, the concrete smooth as skin and slick with fluids that had bled from other cars.
Jed parked next to the service elevator.
He opened the doors.
And then Creed's voice soft against his back.
‘Why don't you come on up with us?’
Jed turned.
‘I ought to get some sleep,’ he said, but the coke had taken hold, it was lifting him, and he had such a good seat at the circus, he didn't really want to leave.
‘Come on up,’ Creed said.
‘We should get to know each other better.’
The wallpaper in Creed's lounge looked like zebra skin.
The curtains, so blue that they were almost black, were drawn against the view.
Creed gave Jed a drink.
‘After all, you don't have to drive to get home any more, do you?’ and then he went and sat down next to the tourist.
The tourist was talking about his homeland.
‘It's not, you know, it's not like here,’ and he waved a hand around to include the zebra-skin wallpaper, his new friends, the small brown vial on the coffee table.
‘It's more like,’ and his face lit up as he remembered the word, ‘like a willage.’
Jed turned to McGowan.
‘Willage,’ he said.
McGowan tipped his head back.
‘He's a long way from home.’
‘Maybe too far.’
Now McGowan tuned to look at Jed and Jed saw his own face twice.
‘You don't know how right you are.’
‘Don't I?’
They stared at each other for another ten seconds, then McGowan smiled.
There was nothing humorous or well-meaning about the smile.
McGowan had simply chosen it from among a number of possible reactions.
‘You know something?’
Jed said.
‘I've never seen you without those glasses on.’
With one swift motion McGowan reached up, took the glasses off and tucked them in his pocket.
His eyes seemed pinned wide open.
Too much white.
The irises looked oddly suspended.
Jed nodded.
‘Now I know why you wear those glasses.’
‘Oh yeah?’
‘You'd frighten too many people with them off.’
McGowan liked that.
He liked it so much that he decided to laugh.
Jed laughed with him.
He looked at Creed.
Creed had just produced a pile of leather stuff and dumped it on the coffee table.
Handcuffs, harnesses, ankle-holsters, studded chokers, and a mask with no eyes and a zip for a mouth.
‘Uh-oh,’ McGowan said.
Reaching forwards, Jed picked up a see-through zip-lock bag.
Inside was an assembly of metal rings and leather straps.
The label said THE FIVE GATES TO HELL.
Five?
Why five? he wondered.
Wasn't one enough?
And then he put the bag back on the table.
Creed was showing some of the pieces to the tourist and explaining how they worked.
His tone of voice objective, dispassionate, as if they were kitchen implements or gardening devices.
Then, without altering his voice, he picked the handcuffs up, snapped them on the  tourist's wrists, and flipped the key through the air to McGowan.
‘Uh-oh,’ McGowan said again.
‘Hey,’ the tourist said, ‘you guys are choking, right?’
Creed didn't appear to have heard.
He was looking at McGowan.
‘Choking,’ McGowan said.
‘We're choking.’
‘Hey, come on, you guys,’ the tourist said.
‘Get me out of this, OK?’
McGowan reached out and picked up the mask.
He dangled it from one finger, swung it slowly backwards and forwards in front of the tourist's eyes.
‘Only if you put this on.
Creed was nodding.
The tourist was well built, stronger possibly than either Creed or McGowan, but there was a pleading look in his eyes now, like a dog that knows it's going to be kicked.
‘OK,’ he said.
‘I put this on.’
Jed left the room to go to the bathroom.
When he returned, the lounge was empty.
He walked down the hall and stopped by a door.
Through the crack he saw McGowan holding the tourist down on a bed.
The tourist was lying on his stomach, his face twisted to one side.
He was naked, except for the mask.
McGowan had a gun in his hand and he was pushing the muzzle through the zipper and into the tourist's mouth.
Creed sat on a chair by the window, gloved hands in his lap, one wrist resting on the other.
His face had switched to automatic.
He looked up and saw Jed standing in the doorway.
‘Want some?’
The tourist might've been cake.
Jed shook his head.
Creed smiled.
Not so much a smile, perhaps, as a slackening around his mouth.
‘That guy,’ and Jed nodded at McGowan, ‘he's a psychopath.’
‘But he's loyal,’ Creed said.
‘He's very loyal.’
Jed turned.
‘I'll see you tomorrow.’
Suddenly Creed was standing next to him.
So suddenly that Jed jumped.
He wasn't sure how Creed had covered the distance between the window and the door.
Creed slapped Jed on the shoulder, a gesture straight out of the boardroom.
‘Get some sleep.
I don't need you till eleven.’
It was seven-thirty when Jed climbed back into bed.
Sharon was still asleep.
There was shine in the wings of her nose.
Her breath came in puffs, ruffling her top lip.
He lay down under the single sheet and closed his eyes.
Sleep slipped through his fingers.
His body itched  where the cotton touched it.
He had to keep scratching.
Always a different place.
‘Where've you been?’
His cock tightened at the sound of her voice.
‘I had to drive somewhere.’
‘What time is it?’
‘I don't know.
Eight.’
‘Christ.’
Both her eyes were still shut.
One dark breast spilled sideways across the sheet.
He bent down.
Bit the wide nipple.
Tugged on that glossy skin until her eyes stretched wide and her chin tipped back.
He slid between her legs.
She pushed a hand down.
‘I've got my period.’
‘That doesn't matter.’
But she twisted round and took him in her dusty hands, he felt the blood pump past her fingers.
He heard a clock strike eight.
And closed his eyes.
Soft shapes colliding, exploding.
One colour bled into another.
Like bacteria.
Her mouth round him now, her teeth grazing that tight skin.
Her back so hot, and slick as ice.
Their sweat pooling on the sheet.
And then the slow ink spreading outwards and the wheels turning and a voice, it was Vasco's, warning him.
He must record.
He must record again.
To protect himself.
To lay himself open.
To what?
From what?
Which rat leaves which ship.
That slow ink again.
His vision flickering, black round the edges, gaps in the tape.
Loyalty and silence.
Two wheels, round and round, he couldn't take his eyes away, and this time it'd be like worship, I dreamed that we were made of gold, he'd seen too much, his eyes were gold, they'd have to melt them down.
Turn the clock back.
Tell an old truth.
Lie.
Truth.
Maybe it had been like worship then, worship that begins in love and dovetails neatly into hate.
Bacteria and radios.
Zebra walls.
Leather masks and foreign names.
Moscow.
Brussels.
Ollie.
Vasco.
Vasco?
He called out, but the bus had gone.
He was alone.
Those five gates of hell, he'd be put through every single one of them.
Would he?
He couldn't see round the next bend, he must record, tapes were periscopes, his only chance, and the slow ink stolen and the wheels turning, and everything remembered, everything proved, he was whispering now, ‘Why five,’ he was whispering, ‘isn't one enough?’and a voice came back, a woman's, Sharon's, ‘One what?’
TEETHMARKS
Nathan called Dad long-distance from Seaview Lodge.
He didn't say anything about the letter that Harriet had written him.
In fact, he didn't mention Harriet at all.
He just said he was thinking of coming home for a couple of days, if that was all right.
‘Is that all you can manage?’
Dad said.
‘A couple of days?’
‘I'm working, Dad.’
‘Well, try and get here early.
I go to bed at nine.’
He took the train down, even though it was twenty-six hours.
He wanted to know exactly how far he'd come.
He wanted the distance to count.
They were held up just north of the city, repairs on the line, and by the time he reached the house on Mahogany Drive it wasn't early any more, it was after midnight.
He tried the front door.
It was locked.
He tried the french windows.
They were locked too.
He checked the other windows, knowing at the same time that it was pointless.
Dad had always been fanatical about security at night; he even bolted the inside doors.
Three years away, all those miles, and now he couldn't get in.
He had to laugh.
But it wasn't funny, not really.
When his laughter had gone, he realised that something was different: lights were showing in the windows.
In any other house this would've been normal, but in theirs it was eerie, unnatural.
Dad worried about electricity, how dangerous it was.
He never went to bed without making sure that every single appliance had been switched off.
He couldn't sleep if he thought there might be a plug in a socket somewhere.
He was always having visions of the house catching fire at night.
All this light spilling on to the driveway, it just wasn't like him.
It was asking for it.
Nathan's heart began to jump.
Suppose something had happened.
Maybe that was why Dad wasn't answering.
He knocked on the door, but much harder now.
And he was calling too.
‘Dad?
Dad?’
Nobody came.
He ran round to the back of the house for the second time.
He  stood in the garden, at the edge of the pool, and looked up at Dad's window.
The curtains drawn, no light.
Cupping his hands round his mouth, he called again.
‘Dad?’
He went over to a flowerbed and felt around in the mud.
He came back with a handful of pebbles.
He missed with the first.
The second just touched the glass and fell away.
The third almost shattered it.
He waited.
Nothing happened.
Moonlight lay on the glass roof of the sun-lounge, blue sheets of it, like lightning paralysed.
The rain, still fresh on the grass, began to seep through the soles of his boots.
He turned and stared at the pool.
Those black patches on the surface, they'd be dead leaves.
Every time he came home he had to scoop them off the surface.
It was one of his jobs.
But now the anger rose in him again.
All this way and fuck it, I can't even get in.
He ran round to the front door.
This could go on till morning, it was ridiculous.
He pushed the mailbox open, pressed his cheek against the metal, and yelled.
‘Dad?
Dad?
DAD!’
This time he heard a click and knew instantly what it was.
That click was printed on his memory.
It was the sound of Dad's bedroom door.
He took his mouth away from the mailbox, and put an ear there instead.
He could hear Dad's voice, distant, shaky.
‘Nathan?
Is that you?’
‘Yes, it's me, Dad.
It's only me.’
He saw Dad feeling his way down the last flight of stairs, the pyjamas, the slippers, the blue cardigan cut off just above the elbows, feeling his way through some kind of thick barbiturate mist.
He heard keys turning in the locks, bolts being drawn.
The door opened, and he moved past Dad, into the hall.
‘Sorry if I look odd, but I was dead out.’
Dad was bent over, locking the door again.
‘Sorry if I look strange.’
And he turned, shy, somehow, and they held each other.
Nathan smelt warm sleep, clean skin.
If someone had told him that he'd been angry a moment before, he would've denied it.
‘You go back to bed now,’ he said gently.
‘I'll see you tomorrow.’
Next morning, after breakfast, Dad said, ‘It was that calling, that word ‘Dad'’ in the middle of the night.
It took me back all those years.
You never forget it.’
They were sitting in the room that overlooked the pool.
Dad had taken his pills, and now he was relaxing.
Nathan sat next to him.
He could hear the au pair girl washing dishes, the mutter of Dad's radio.
It was all so familiar and yet, at the same time, it was utterly remote.
‘When I arrived last night,’ he said, ‘all the lights were on.
‘Were they?’
Dad was staring at the blank wall above the TV.
‘It must've been Helga.
She's new, you see.
I haven't trained her yet.’
He looked at Nathan.
‘Have you been eating properly?’
And then, before Nathan could answer, ‘You look thin to me.’
It was always the same when he went home: Dad didn't stop talking until his voice hurt.
That morning Dad told his favourite story again, the story of his drive along the coast with Kay, only this time he took it one stage further, down from the cliffs and into the house.
It had been lying empty for months, he said.
It was almost derelict.
A leaking roof, cobwebs slung across the rooms like hammocks, moss growing on the walls.
People had broken in too.
The downstairs was inches deep in sherry bottles, newspapers, strange men's shoes, and someone must've lit a fire in the kitchen because there was a big black patch on the floor, as if a rocket had taken off.
Later that day he found a letter for Kay's mother lying in the hall.
The address on the envelope was ‘Viviente’, 7729 Mahogany Drive, Moon Beach.
‘Viviente’ used to be the name of the house, Kay told him.
It meant ‘full of life’.
‘And you know what?’
Dad turned to Nathan.
‘It was almost a miracle, really.
The week after we moved in, we discovered she was pregnant.
With you.’
‘I never knew that,’ Nathan said.
‘Well, there you are.
You learned something.’
Dad sat back, looking pleased with himself.
Nathan smiled.
It was no wonder that Dad went back over that day so often, especially in the light of present circumstances.
He was returning to a world that had been kind to him, a past he could be sure of.
His love for Kay was one love that had never spoiled.
It was over, yes, but it would never end.
In the afternoon Nathan drove to Georgia's.
She had two rooms above a hardware store in Venus.
The place was littered, as Georgia's places always were, with science fiction, jewellery, sunglasses, invitations, tapes.
From the window you could see one thin strip of blue between the houses opposite; her view of the harbour.
She made coffee in a dented silver pot and served it in dark-green cups with gold rims and gold handles, cups she'd stolen from home.
‘They were Grandma's, I think,’ she said.
‘You know, before she went mad.’
She was so jittery at seeing him, she couldn't keep still.
Everything he said, she talked over the end of it.
‘I think I'll roll a joint,’ she said.
‘Might slow me  down.’
She spread her materials on the floor, her legs tucked under her, her tongue stuck to the centre of her top lip.
He remembered her painting on brown paper when it rained.
It was the same look.
It took her so long to roll the joint, she'd slowed down before she even put a match to it.
There was some party they had to go to.
As the taxi jolted through the streets of Butterfield, she linked her arm through his and kissed him.
‘You've been away so long, I almost forgot what you smelt like.’
‘Don't tell me,’ he said.
‘I don't want to know.’
‘No, it's good.
It's like,’ and she had to smell him again, to remind herself, ‘it's like fruit.’
Smiling, he stroked her hair.
In the three years since he'd last seen her she'd grown it halfway down her back.
‘Do you think Dad's all right?’ he asked her.
She frowned.
‘It's hard to tell.
All he ever says when I go and see him is, why do have to wear all that stuff on your face, why can't you be natural?’
He laughed.
She rested her cheek against his shoulder.
‘You know what I'd like?’
‘What?’
‘I'd like to be your brother.’
He smiled.
‘Sister isn't enough?’
‘That's different.’
‘What's different about it?’
‘Brothers tell each other everything.’
She nodded to herself.
‘Everything.’
And her dark eyes glittered and she ran her tongue over her lips, and then she said, ‘How about it?’
‘Nobody'll understand.’
‘They never do, do they?’
She smiled up at him.
‘Give me something.’
He stared at her.
They ran on parallel tracks, he knew that, but some nights, especially nights like this, she drew ahead of him.
‘You have to give me something,’ she explained.
‘To make it official.’
He unfastened the woven leather bracelet from around his wrist.
She watched, eyes wide, as if he was performing magic.
He reached into his pocket and took out a pen.
On the inside of the bracelet he wrote, ‘To George, my brother for forty years.’
‘Here,’ he said.
‘Put it on.’
She looked at it.
‘Is it special?’
‘It's very special.’
He told her about the woman with the flute.
He told her what he'd said to the woman and how stupid he'd felt.
He told her that the bracelet had the woman's music in it, and sometimes, if you waited for rain and then listened very carefully, you could just hear it, very faintly, like someone playing in the distance.
‘I don't know.’
Georgia was looking at the bracelet the same way she used to look at the hill when she was five, she was in awe of it, it might be too strong for her.
‘Maybe it's too special.’
‘Some things there comes a time when they have to go to someone else.’
It sounded exactly like something that India-May might have said.
She must be rubbing off on him.
‘You wrote something on it, didn't you?’
He nodded.
She read the words, then looked at him.
‘Why forty?’
‘It was the most I could imagine.’
He fastened the bracelet on for her.
She sat back, looking down at it.
Then, suddenly, she leaned forwards again and asked the driver to stop.
‘I've just got to get something,’ she told him.
‘I won't be long.’
Nathan watched her run into a supermarket.
Moments later she was out again.
She didn't seem to be carrying anything.
She slid into the car and slammed the door.
‘O K, go,’ she said to the driver.
‘Go.’
When they'd turned the comer, she pulled out a bottle of champagne from under her coat.
‘I stole it,’ she said.
She took off the wire that held the cork in position and put the bottle beside her, then she set to work.
In five minutes she'd fashioned a ring out of the wire.
She slipped it over his finger.
‘There,’ she said.
‘Now we're brothers.’
She glanced at the bottle thoughtfully.
‘I only stole it for the wire,’ she said, ‘but now we've got it I suppose we might as well drink it.’
They'd almost reached the place where the party was, but she told the driver to keep going.
‘Just drive around,’ she said.
‘Take us back in twenty minutes.’
They didn't arrive at the party until they'd finished the bottle.
They were both drunker than they'd been for years.
She had a bracelet and he had a ring.
They'd missed each other so much.
The cab fare was thirty-three dollars.
The next morning Dad woke him at eight.
‘You were naughty last night,’ he said.
‘You woke me up.’
‘Did I?’
Nathan said.
‘I didn't mean to.’
‘It was your door.
It made a noise.’
‘Sorry, Dad.’
‘You were very late.’
‘I know.
I went to a party with Georgia.’
Dad sighed.
He couldn't understand why anyone went to parties.
He even hated the word‘party’.
It was almost as bad as the word ‘hospital’.
In his head you probably went straight from one to the other.
‘Don't worry,’ Nathan said.
‘I'm staying in tonight.’
That evening Dad opened a bottle of wine.
As a rule he only drank one glass, but that night he drank three, and when he noticed the full moon in the window he became excited, almost too much white in his eyes and a bulb of spit shining on his front teeth.
He watched the moon rise through his binoculars.
After a while he offered them to Nathan.
‘Do you want a look?’
Nathan shook his head.
‘Maybe later.
When it's higher.’
‘It's so clear.
You can even see the holes.’
The holes.
It was the kind of thing a child might say.
Rona, for instance.
Yes, Rona might easily have said something like that.
He looked at Dad, but Dad was unaware.
Under the moon's influence his mind had flown giddily on, like a witch straddling a broomstick.
Here.
He was turning again.
With something else.
‘Did I ever tell you about Harriet and the spaceship?
No?
It was the strangest thing.’
Nathan could only stare.
He hadn't expected to hear her name mentioned at all.
It had to be the wine.
The wine and the excitement of having someone in the house to talk to.
‘I was down here one night, it was about nine, and there was a knock at the door.
It was Harriet.
She was wearing a dressing-gown, but it was hanging open, and underneath she only had a négligé on, one of those flimsy things, I could see everything.
She said she was frightened.
I asked her why.
She said she'd seen a spaceship and it had frightened her.’
‘A spaceship?’
Nathan said.
‘That's what I said.
‘A spaceship?'’
I said.
‘Where?'’
She said she'd seen it in her window.
Her curtains were open and it went across her window in the sky.
‘Did it go fast or slow?'’
I said.
‘Slow,'’ she said.
I asked her to show me where she'd seen it.
She went to the window, that window,’ and he pointed to the french windows that led out on to the terrace.
‘We stood over there and looked for it.
Of course there was nothing.
We were standing very close, and I got the feeling that if I opened my arms she'd come inside.
I didn't know what she wanted.
Me to kiss her or what.
Anyway I put my arm round her.
After a while I asked her whether she was all right and she said  yes.
Then she went back to bed.’
He sipped at his wine again, then put it down on the arm of his chair and, keeping a finger and thumb on the stem, twisted it one way, then the other.
‘At the time I thought it was so, I don't know, romantic.
Now, well.
It seems so obvious.’
His excitement had gone.
Now there was only bitterness.
His binoculars lay abandoned on the floor.
Two nights later, on the train, Nathan remembered the last fragments of that conversation.
His vain attempt to win Dad's mood back.
‘It sounds romantic to me.’
Dad shook his head so violently, he might almost have been in pain.
‘I should never have trusted her.’
Like the hospital, Harriet had cut something out of him.
He'd been exploited, hoodwinked, lied to.
The whole thing had been an elaborate deception.
He'd trusted for the last time.
There'd be nobody else now.
Nobody.
He'd gathered his life around him like a cloak in which there was only room enough for one.
On Nathan's last morning they'd driven down to the supermarket together.
When they returned, there was the usual ritual of putting the shopping away.
Dad squatted on the pantry floor and Nathan stood behind him, handing him the groceries.
‘You won't be able to help me again,’ Dad said.
‘Not till the next time you come, anyway, and that might not be for ages.’
Nathan felt the guilt rise into his throat, bitter as some half-digested thing.
‘Hold on,’ came Dad's voice from inside the pantry, ‘I've just got to clear a space.’
The shifting of packets and tins, and then a silence.
Then a soft sound, like a gasp or a sigh.
‘What is it, Dad?’
Still squatting, Dad turned round.
There was a block of raw jelly lying in the palm of his hand.
The packet had been ripped open and a small bite was missing from one corner.
You could see the teethmarks.
‘Rona,’ Nathan said, and Dad nodded.
She must've sneaked into the pantry one day when nobody was looking and taken a bite out of that jelly.
Orange flavour had always been her favourite.
Nathan looked from the jelly on Dad's hand to Dad's face, and saw the tears in his eyes.
Now, as the train swayed up the coast, there were tears in his own eyes too.
He didn't want anyone to see so he cupped his hand to the window and looked out.
The tracks ran alongside the ocean here.
He saw a pale strip of sand.
The ocean heaving, unlit.
No moon tonight.
Tight in his hand he held the silver coin that Dad had given him at the front door.
It was the same coin that Dad always gave him, every time he went away.
It was just a small coin, worth practically nothing.
Worth everything.
YOU, ME, AND THE CHAIRMAN
It had been a normal day.
In the morning Creed had a meeting with a city bank.
He lunched with the police commissioner at a fish restaurant in Torch Bay.
After lunch he spent half an hour with McGowan in an outdoor café by the river.
Then, during the afternoon he put in a personal appearance at three of the funeral parlours that he'd recently acquired for the company as part of his new expansion programme.
By late afternoon the sky was grey and the air seemed hard to breathe.
As they left the northern suburbs, the car began to tremble in Jed's hands.
He touched his foot to the brake and slowed to about thirty.
Creed slid the window open.
‘Something wrong?’
‘I don't know,’ Jed said.
Then the streetlights began to sway.
Dreamily, like charmed snakes.
‘Earthquake,’ Creed said.
They were on a raised section of the Ring, the road that acted as the circumference of downtown, and all Jed could see was freeway, sky, and rows of swaying grey poles.
He wanted to get back down to ground-level.
Then it was over.
Less than six on the Richter scale, he found out later, only a tremor, really, but it was enough to change Creed's mind about returning to the office.
He asked to be driven home instead.
Creed stood on the sidewalk outside the Palace Hotel.
Jed watched him in the wing mirror, watched him without seeming to.
Creed was looking into the sky as if scanning for omens.
Jed shivered.
He couldn't get that earthquake out of his blood.
He kept seeing the streetlights again, those streetlights trembling, as if the whole world was scared.
‘Do you need me again today?’ he said.
He hoped the answer was no.
He wanted to go home and lie down.
Creed's head turned slowly on his neck.
Every movement seemed to be performed in a trance that day.
Death had been and gone, but  it was still in the air, like static.
‘I want you back here at ten.
There's something we've got to discuss.
McGowan opened the apartment door that night when Jed buzzed.
‘Weird day,’ he said.
He was gloating.
It was going to get weirder, that was what he meant.
Jed's eyes flicked round the lounge.
He half expected to see some naked tourist in the corner, bound and gagged.
McGowan closed the door and slipped a small glass vial into Jed's hand.
‘It's going to be a long night,’ he said, and he turned to Creed, who had just walked into the room, and smiled.
Jed glanced round the room again.
Zebra walls, curtains drawn across the windows like a second night sky, carpet the colour of fresh blood.
None of this was strange to him, and yet he sensed something different.
A heightened atmosphere, an air of ceremony.
The skin seemed looser on Creed's face.
Some kind of decision had been reached.
He'd known he was going to be tested, and he'd prepared himself.
Mitch had given him the number of a guy called Turner.
Turner worked in a security systems retail outlet on Rocket Boulevard.
Jed had dropped into the store late one Saturday afternoon.
‘I'm doing a bit of surveillance,’ he told Turner.
‘Mitch said you might be able to help.’
Turner listened to Jed's requirements, then he led Jed to a glass display case.
‘This is what you need.’
He unlocked the case and lifted out what looked like a Walkman with a small black box attached.
A ballpoint pen slid into a hole in the box.
‘We call it the pen recorder,’ Turner said.
‘You take the pen out and it automatically activates the recording mechanism.’
He demonstrated.
‘Put it back again, and it deactivates the mechanism.
It's simple.’
‘How much?’
Jed asked.
‘Fifteen hundred,’ Turner said, ‘but since you're a friend of Mitch's.’
He scratched the back of his neck.
‘I could do it for thirteen.
Jed nodded.
It was still expensive, but he couldn't afford not to take it.
Turner showed him how to wire himself up.
The recorder slotted nearly into his jacket pocket.
The mike clipped to the inside of his cuff.
When Jed walked into Creed's apartment that night he was, in Turner's language, ‘live’.
He wanted to stay straight, but that small glass vial was always being pressed into his hand, it seemed bottomless, the hours passed and they never reached the end.
They were everywhere that night.
The  Bar Necropolis.
The Jupiter casino.
A private party in some high-rise apartment block; looking down into the city from the forty-second floor, it was like being inside a radio, one of those old valve radios, and Jed almost told Creed what he thought, he almost blurted something Creed wouldn't even have understood, You must've had radios thrown away some time, didn't you? but the rush blew over and he was still staring down into the forest of lit buildings and he still hadn't spoken.
Another bar, further west, in Omega.
It was like that game where you were blindfolded and spun round, and then you had to try and touch someone, Creed and the Skull, they were close one moment, then they were dancing out of reach, and nothing would sound like anything when he played it back, it would sound like interference, nonsense, silence, but he stayed with it, trips to the bathroom to sluice his nose and throat, more trips to replace the tapes, because he sensed they were leading up to something, there was something at the end of this rainbow of places, not gold but something.
At three in the morning everything suddenly moved back.
A clearing in his head, a sudden loss of sound.
It was a club.
They were sitting at a round table.
A candle in a red glass.
Drinks.
The faces of devils, all empty eyes and bright teeth.
Creed was drinking water.
He always drank the same brand.
Drained from a glacier.
Sodium-free.
McGowan was talking.
His words emerged from silence, as if they were the first words of the evening.
Jed stared at McGowan's face as it tilted and leered, all blocks of colour and deep shadows.
Jed listened hard.
‘We pick them up,’ the Skull was saying, ‘they're guys with no links, like on the pier or down in the meat streets, they're always suckers for a few lines and a limousine.
We pick them up, we take them somewhere, then we turn them blue.
There's a guy we know, works in the morgue, he gets the delivery.
Few hours later he calls, we're the funeral parlour, right? he's recommended us, we do the honours, bury them,’ and his mouth opened like a grave, you could fall into that mouth for ever and ever, amen, and all those crooked grey teeth of his, no names that you could see, no names or dates, just blank, so nobody could find you, nobody could visit, nobody could leave flowers.
‘I mean, if you're going to die you want a decent burial, stands to reason, doesn't it, and who better to give you a decent burial,’ he said, ‘than the Paradise Corporation.
You, me,’ and he levelled a hand at Creed, ‘and the chairman.
Creed put his glass of water down.
‘Skull,’ he said, ‘just shut up, will you?’
That vial again.
Some amyl too, which blew Jed's head up like a mushroom cloud.
In the distance, in a big gilt cage, he could see nude bodies gluing and ungluing, the sticky rhythmic contact of flesh.
Male or female, he couldn't tell.
Did it matter?
Flesh of some kind.
Tourists, maybe.
Kill them later.
His vision shrank.
Their table again.
McGowan was running on about his gun collection.
It was after four when they reached the Palace.
McGowan vanished with a couple they'd brought home in the car.
A buzzing started up.
Some kind of aid.
That psychopath.
Jed looked across at Creed and saw that Creed was already staring at him.
Jed didn't flinch.
He remembered what Sharon had said about him, remembered the chill in his eyes.
Eyes that've killed.
He never blinks.
It's like those lizards.
‘You remember what you said about loyalty?’
Jed snapped back at the sound of Creed's voice.
‘About it being silence?’
Creed nodded.
‘I remember.’
‘It's kind of passive, silence,’ Creed said, ‘isn't it?’
‘Well,’ Jed said, ‘you don't do anything.’
‘That's what I mean.
So would you go further?
Do something?’
There could be no hesitation here.
‘Yes.’
‘Make yourself comfortable, Jed.
Take your jacket off.’
Jed's stomach lurched.
Had Creed suspected?
‘No, it's all right.
1 think I'll keep it on.’
‘What's wrong?
You cold?’
Sharon's words.
In Creed's mouth.
Did he have another virginity to lose?
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Just a bit.’
Imagine if he had to take his jacket off.
All his insurance would be gone.
But Creed had turned away and Jed breathed easier.
‘Do you know who talked to the papers?’
Creed said.
Jed shook his head.
‘I've no idea.’
‘It was your friend,’ Creed said.
‘Your old buddy.’
Jed felt a trap closing.
‘I don't understand.’
‘Vasco Gorelli,’ Creed said.
‘It was Vasco Gorelli talked to the papers.’
‘How do you know?’
Creed traced the outline of his drink with one finger.
‘I put a couple of new vultures on it.
You know what those new vultures are like.
Keen isn't the word.
They get tight down to the bones of things.
They tear out the truth.
Blood, guts, organs, the lot.’
He paused.
‘Gorelli  said he was loyal,’ and he looked across at Jed and his eyes glittered.
Curiously it was Vasco's advice that Jed remembered now.
Be single-pointed.
No grey areas.
‘He sold you out.’
‘He lost his nerve,’ Creed said.
‘But you,’ again that glitter in his eyes, ‘you'd do anything for me.’
‘That's what I said.’
‘You'd lie.’
Jed thought of that night at Mitch's and what he'd said to Sharon.
‘I already have.’
‘You'd steal.’
‘No problem.’
He knew what was coming now.
It was like counting down to an explosion.
He waited for the blast.
He braced himself.
Creed's hand reached carelessly for his glass of water.
‘You'd kill someone.
This had to sound right.
First a chuckle, then the words, ‘Why?
You got someone in mind?’
Creed didn't lift his eyes from his drink.
He was watching that pure water the way you'd watch a fire.
The dread rose through Jed's body.
He had to speak before he drowned in it.
But he remembered to use names.
He was taping this.
He needed names.
‘It's Vasco,’ he said, ‘isn't it?’
Still Creed watched his drink.
‘Too obvious.
Jed tried to think.
His mind kept curving away, the way a golf ball curves when it's sliced or hooked.
That beautiful, lazy parabola into somewhere you don't want to be.
‘Think sideways,’ Creed said.
‘I don't want to kill Vasco, I just want him,’ and finally he raised his eyes and smiled, and the smile was almost benign.
‘I just want him to pay.’
Jed got it.
‘Vasco's brother.’
Creed lifted his glass.
‘Congratulations.
But Jed had to make sure.
‘You want me to kill Vasco's brother?’
‘That's right.’
‘How?’
‘Don't you worry about that.
It's taken care of.
It's nice.
Yes,’ and Creed leaned back in his chair, ‘we're going to send Gorilla a little Christmas present.
‘You're going to send him his brother,’ Jed said, ‘dead.’
Creed smirked.
‘Something like that.’
Jed left the apartment at ten to six, the wheels still turning next to his heart.
He couldn't sleep now.
He took the service elevator down  to the parking-lot and got into his car.
As he drove across Moon River Bridge, the day rose over the estuary, the colours you find in the skin of fish: brown and pink and palest blue.
He stopped the car at the Baker Park end.
Leaving the engine running, he went and leaned on the railings.
The metal cool against his palms, his heart still pummelling, he drew the fresh dawn air into his lungs.
The wind had blown the surface of the river into streaky lines, stretchmarks on the water's tired skin.
Gulls picked at the mudbanks where once he'd searched for jewellery.
He heard a voice call Vasco's name.
It was Vasco's brother, Francis.
The boy behind the door.
He turned to face the ocean.
Just before he left, Creed had given him the date.
Next Wednesday.
Exactly a week from now.
And as he leaned against the railings he suddenly tasted it, the moment Creed had planned for him, the moment he'd always longed for, dreaded now, still longed for, and it was burnt sugar, sweet and caustic, on his tongue, it was like the flight of a bird across a window, it was there and it was gone, he couldn't dwell on it, he couldn't let the terror in, all he knew was what it would do for him, he knew that it would give him membership, he'd be past the sliding sheet of glass, he'd finally belong.
During the next week he concentrated on his job to the exclusion of all else.
He was silent, deferential, precise — the perfect chauffeur.
He didn't need to wire himself.
There was nothing being said, nothing to record.
This was empty time.
He felt close to Creed.
Superimposed on him, somehow.
Bound.
He thought he recognised in Creed qualities that he had himself: the ability to wait and to charge the act of waiting with the current of anticipation, to check and double-check, so that when the waiting was over everything would go like clockwork.
He knew that, if he ever told Creed the story of the radios, Creed would understand.
It might even be something that Creed already understood, that he'd divined on their first meeting in the Mortlake office.
It was something they recognised in each other and shared.
It made them, Jed thought with satisfaction, extremely dangerous enemies.
Wednesday came around.
When Creed called, Jed was watching a news report about a vulture who'd just been arrested on a murder charge.
Apparently he'd brought the corpse in and then tried to claim commission on it.
‘It's the big night,’ Creed said.
Jed waited.
‘There's a warehouse in Mangrove.
United Paper Products.
He gave Jed the address.
‘Leave the limousine there.
Be back here at nine-thirty.
Under the building.
We'll be using your car.’
Jed wondered why Creed was dispensing with the limousine.
Too conspicuous, he supposed.
And, now he thought about it, he was glad.
Using the Chrysler would be to his advantage.
No glass partition, much less chance of Creed noticing anything unusual.
Jed spent most of the afternoon in the parking-lot, wiring up the back seat.
At nine o'clock he drove to the gas station two blocks south of the hotel.
He checked the tyres and the oil, and filled the tank.
When he returned to the parking-lot, it was nine-twenty-five.
Creed and McGowan were already waiting in front of the elevator doors.
McGowan wore the faded blue overalls of a city sanitation man.
He was holding a long canvas bag and a cardboard box.
Jed opened the door as usual, even though it was his own car.
Habit.
He watched McGowan lay the bag flat on the floor.
‘What's in there?’ he asked.
McGowan grinned.
‘Tools.’
In the car Creed leaned forwards.
‘Gorelli's brother lives in Los Ilusiones.
Housing project on North East 27th.
Lives with his girlfriend.
You're going to knock on his door and you're going to bring him outside and you're going to put him in the car.’
McGowan handed him a gun.
‘You might need this,’ he said, ‘to persuade him with.’
Jed put the gun in his jacket pocket.
Though he hadn't really looked at it, he was sure it was the same one that had been forced into the tourist's mouth.
‘Then what happens?’ he said.
‘Then what happens is, we take him for a little ride out to the Crumbles.’
Creed paused.
‘You got that?’
Jed nodded.
He moved off.
Past the security guard, up the ramp, out on to the dim street.
It was 89 degrees.
Clouds hung over the city.
There were more of them than there used to be, he was sure of it.
It was all the burning that was going on.
Sea burials were as popular as ever, but they weren't cheap.
The poor were still being burned.
And some of the crematoria were cutting corners.
There'd been a thing about it in the paper.
They were burning at temperatures of less than 1300 degrees, which meant that  dioxins were being released into the air.
Sometimes he looked at the clouds and wondered what percentage ashes they were.
Sometimes he wondered how many dead people  there were to a cloud.
How many dead people came down with the rain.
He was driving at a steady thirty-five.
Down First, left along G, right into Central.
They passed the viewing theatre.
Another mystery corpse: YOUR LAST CHANCE TO IDENTIFY! $100 COULD BE YOURS!
Someone's forgotten Grandma.
Some runaway.
Some drunk.
More smoke for the chimneys.
More clouds for the sky.
His throat was dry and he'd forgotten to buy any candy.
It was the big night.
They reached Los Ilusiones in less than half an hour.
Creed directed him to a narrow sidestreet.
He killed the engine and the lights.
Latin music took over.
Somebody's radio.
Los Ilusiones was 99 per cent ghetto.
It was bounded by Moon River in the east, and the suburbs of Mortlake and Rialto in the west and south respectively.
It had pretty much the same kind of reputation as Rialto, only more so.
A high-octane mix of racial minorities, a flair for riots and looting.
Taxi-drivers wouldn't take you there.
The only whites in the area were winos and dealers, and they mostly ended up in the river.
Jed wanted this part over with, and quick.
Creed leaned forwards and pointed through the windshield.
‘That's the building.’
It was a five-storey apartment block built in a C-shape.
The gap in the C faced the street.
Concrete balconies ran the length of each floor.
There was a courtyard below, lit by spotlights.
‘Looks like a fucking jail,’ came McGowan's voice from the back.
‘It's number 22,’ Creed said.
‘Second floor.’
‘You know which side?’
Jed asked him.
‘Take the stairs on the left.’
Jed stepped out of the car.
He was only aware of two things now.
The weight of the gun in his jacket pocket and the night air, thicker here than in the city centre, it was further from the ocean, you sometimes felt you couldn't breathe until you found your way to the end of the land.
He crossed the street.
It was bright in the courtyard.
Five cars.
A burned-out motorbike.
A drain.
He turned left, walked close to the edge of the building.
He sensed he was being watched, one of the balconies above, but he didn't look up.
He noticed the cars.
A Mercedes.
A Cadillac.
This was cheap city housing, and cars like that could only mean one thing.
Two things.
Armed robbery and drugs.
He suddenly felt he was facing impossible odds.
Once he reached the stairs he felt safer.
The walls were brick low down, then pale-blue and scarred with graffiti: SEX and a phone  number.
He smelt meat frying, then urine, then washing powder.
On the second floor he turned left.
The first door he came to had lost its number.
He swore under his breath.
The second door said 20.
That was good.
It meant that number 22 would be close to the stairs.
He could still feel eyes on him, they were like fingers, they poked him in the ribs, the shoulderblades, the neck, it was hard not looking round.
He reached number 22 and knocked with the flap of the mailbox.
He took the gun out of his pocket and held it at waist-level.
That way it would be invisible to anyone watching from the other side of the building.
The door opened.
A man in a white vest, grey flannel pants.
Ears like Vasco's.
Less fat on him, though.
No rings.
Jed moved the gun one inch to the left and back again.
‘Out,’ he said.
‘Right now.’
Gorelli blinked.
‘What?’
‘You're leaving.’
Jed grabbed Gorelli by the upper arm and spun him on to the balcony.
Out of the corner of his eye he saw a face appear in the corridor.
A girl in a yellow dress.
Hands in the air beside her ears.
Lives with his girlfriend.
Girlfriend was about to scream.
He slammed the door shut and shoved Gorelli along the balcony towards the stairs.
Gorelli turned.
‘What about my shoes?’
Jed shoved him again.
‘Keep moving,’ he said, ‘or I'll blow your fucking kidneys out.’
They reached the ground and the screaming began.
‘Francisco!
Francisco!’
The girl was swaying on the balcony above.
Her yellow dress, her hands searching her black hair.
For lice, Jed thought.
Lice like Gorelli.
His loyalty had come in a rush, like a drug, he had no doubts about which side he was on.
They were all playing by the same rules.
Gorelli, he'd won for a while, but now he was losing, and he was losing big.
Jed had to hate him.
It was the only way.
When Gorelli turned his face up to the balcony, Jed hit him on the shoulder with the gun.
Gorelli yelped.
His arm shrank, hung against his ribs.
The girl on the balcony was still swaying, screaming.
You want to do something about it, Jed thought, why don't you jump?
He shoved Gorelli against the Chrysler with his gun and pulled the rear door open.
He pushed Gorelli in.
McGowan was still sitting in the back, Creed had moved into the front.
Jed handed the gun to McGowan and climbed into the driver's seat.
‘Nice work,’ Creed said.
‘Now drive.’
Jed let the clutch out and the Chrysler took off.
He swung right  and took a bite out of the kerb.
The car rocked, straightened up.
He beat a red light and turned right again, on to the parkway that led along the river to the bridge.
‘The Crumbles, right?’ he said.
‘Yeah, and slow down,’ Creed said.
‘We don't want people smelling something funny.’
Jed slowed to thirty.
The lights of Rialto slid by on the right.
On the left: the boatyards, wire-mesh fences, metal gates.
Then a stone parapet and bright white globes on poles like giant pearl hat-pins.
The oily swell of the river beyond.
‘Who are you?’
Gorelli said.
‘You don't know who we are?’
McGowan said.
And then to Creed and Jed, ‘He doesn't know who we are.
‘He doesn't need to know,’ Creed said.
‘Where he's going he doesn't need to know anything.’
‘Nothing,’ McGowan said, ‘nothing at all,’and Jed could hear the cocaine in his laughter.
Jed glanced at Gorelli's face in the mirror.
It was grey, and strangely motionless, as if there'd been a sudden rush of concrete to his head,
‘I don't understand,’ Gorelli said.
‘Ah,’ Jed said, ‘he doesn't understand.’
‘I think he's going to start crying,’ McGowan said.
‘Anyone got a Kleenex?’
Jed laughed.
‘Look,’ Gorelli said, ‘I'm sure we can come to some arrangement here.’
‘Arrangement?’
McGowan said.
‘What arrangement?’
‘We've already made all the arrangements,’ Creed said.
‘We're funeral directors.’
Gorelli lunged for the door, but it was locked.
McGowan clubbed him with the butt of the gun.
Blood bloomed on Gorelli's head, a dark rose appearing from nowhere, a magician's trick.
He slumped back in the seat.
‘Any time you want a headache,’ McGowan said, ‘Doctor.’
Creed turned to Jed.
‘Take the old coast road.
Less traffic out there.
Jed left the expressway at the Baker Park exit and cut down through houses of clapperboard and dull red brick.
The old coast road ran parallel to the shoreline.
All shale and weeds and winds that picked up speed as they swooped in off the ocean, this strip of barren land prepared you for the final desolation of the Crumbles.
Baker Park  faded.
They passed a used-car lot, a twenty-four-hour café, a gas station, then darkness closed round the Chrysler like a fist.
After driving for about ten minutes Jed looked away to the right.
The old gravel mine crouched against the sky.
So still, so derelict, yet it looked capable of sudden movement.
All those metal limbs and struts, all those tense right-angles.
It could jump, land up fifteen miles away.
It could carry fear with it, like disease.
Some dead things seem more horribly alive.
Creed told him to take a right turn, down a narrow track that led towards the ocean.
A gate barred the way.
A notice hung on the gate and he read the words in the beam of the headlamps: DANGER.
NO ENTRY WITHOUT AUTHORISATION.
‘Don't worry,’ Creed said.
‘It isn't locked.’
Jed got out of the car and opened the gate.
He thought of the children buried alive at the bottom of the mineshafts.
He heard the click of small bones.
The track beyond the gate was all potholes and ruts.
He nursed the car along in low gear.
After half a mile Creed told him to stop.
He switched the lights and engine off.
Wind pushed at the car with spread fingers, whispered across the hood.
Creed inserted his voice gently into the silence.
‘Get him out of the car.’
They walked Gorelli across the stones to the edge of a gravel pit.
The moon dipped out of a cloud, and Jed shuddered.
The walls of the pit were almost sheer, falling fifty feet to smooth, dull water that was jagged at the edges, like the top of a tin can.
He looked into Gorelli's face, the face he'd never seen, the face he'd only heard, and so many years ago.
Gorelli was standing with his arms by his sides.
He was looking at the ground, he seemed to be concentrating; he might've been trying to remember something.
Then the moon went and Jed's vision shut down.
Then Creed's voice:
‘Give him the gun.
McGowan handed the gun to Jed.
A sliver of white that must've been teeth.
McGowan grinning.
‘I can't see,’ Jed said.
Creed's voice again: ‘Wait for the moon.’
He waited.
The night slowed down.
Time like a clock with its hands tied.
He felt the water in the pit rise up to meet him.
Rise up all silver, spill across the land.
Into the hands of the dead, the clawing hands and shifting bones.
Into their hands and never to return.
The moon came on.
He raised the gun and fired twice.
So loud suddenly, so bright.
A choir in his ears, a furnace in his eyes.
When he looked again he saw a black shape on the ground, another black shape crouching over it.
He heard McGowan's voice: ‘He's dead.’
Then Creed's: ‘Get the stuff.’
Jed lowered his arm.
McGowan walked to the car and returned with the long canvas bag and the cardboard box.
He unzipped the bag and lifted out a chainsaw.
A glimmer of silver as moonlight snagged on the serrated blade.
Like holly, Jed thought.
In two weeks it'd be Christmas.
When the motor started, distant and ragged, Jed looked away.
The wind blew soft across his face.
He was shivering.
He'd never in his life felt colder.
It wasn't until Creed took his arm and he looked into those black eyes that he remembered where he was.
‘Throw the gun,’ Creed said.
He stared into those eyes.
‘The gun,’ Creed said.
‘Throw it.’
He pulled his arm back and hurled the gun towards the pit.
He saw it drop out of sight below the lip.
He didn't hear it land.
Creed held a tiny bottle under his nose and the world turned white.
He gasped and shook his head.
‘Can you drive?’
Creed asked him.
Jed nodded.
‘I think so.’
When he climbed into the driver's seat he saw that McGowan was already sitting in the back.
The cardboard box sat next to him.
Everything seemed so bland and ordinary now.
‘Where's the rest?’
Jed said.
‘In the gravel pit,’ McGowan said.
‘With stones to hold it down.’
The clawing hands, the shifting bones.
Jed turned to Creed for solid ground.
‘Where now?’
‘The paper warehouse.
Change cars.’
When they reached the warehouse, he opened the door for Creed and McGowan as usual.
They climbed out and stood still.
He moved towards the Mercedes, and then stopped and looked round.
Creed and McGowan hadn't moved.
The canvas bag and the cardboard box stood on the concrete by their feet.
He could see the blood on McGowan's clothes.
‘What's going on?’ he said.
‘You're not coming with us,’ Creed said.
‘I don't understand.’
The words echoed.
He wished he hadn't said that.
But it was too late.
‘You killed someone,’ McGowan said.
‘You best leave town.’
Creed walked towards him and handed him an envelope.
‘It's the going rate.’
The going rate.
Jed stared at the envelope.
‘But,’ how could he put this?
‘I thought we —‘
‘We did,’ Creed said, ‘but it's over.’
McGowan was smirking.
Jed walked to the door of the warehouse.
He stared up into the sky, his vision pulsing.
The stars floated free like buoys cut loose on a dark sea.
No markings any more, no guidelines.
Adrift.
He saw the streetlights again.
It seemed as if they were laughing now.
Rows and rows of streetlights shaking with laughter.
It's funny, he thought, it's just funny, and he thought it hard to keep the fear and rage away.
A hand on his shoulder.
A glove.
‘I'm asking you to do something for me.
It's the hardest thing I could ask you to do.’
A slight pressure from the hand.
‘I think you can do it.’
McGowan still smirking.
Lies.
Not even clever.
Not even beautiful.
He felt the veins swell in his head.
And cried, ‘Why me?’
That soothing voice again.
‘There was nobody else.
Nobody we could trust.
Nobody,’ a pause, ‘close enough.’
‘What about,’ and Jed turned and pointed at McGowan, ‘what about him?’
A sad smile on Creed's face.
‘You used me,’ Jed said.
The same sad smile.
‘You'd better leave now.
‘You, me, and the chairman.’
Jed's lip curled.
‘Like fuck.’
McGowan took a step forwards.
‘You do this all the time, don't you?’
Jed said.
‘Pick people up and throw them away.’
He drew his arm back and hurled the envelope at Creed.
Money showered through the yellow air.
One note paused on Creed's shoulder, then launched itself again, one long swoop sideways, a flip, and it was lying on the ground.
McGowan positioned himself between Jed and Creed.
‘You better get going.’
Creed stood with his gloved hands clasped behind his back.
There was no warmth left in his face.
He could switch it on and off like central heating.
‘And don't come back,’ McGowan said, ‘not ever.’
‘What if I do?’
McGowan took Jed by the arm and led him over to the cardboard box.
He opened the flaps and reached inside.
He pulled out a transparent bag and held it up in front of Jed's eyes.
Gorelli's face stared at Jed through the bloodstained plastic.
Jed pushed past him.
He got into his car and switched the ignition on.
Without glancing at the two men, he drove out of the warehouse, through the metal gates and back on to the street.
He drove very calmly, the way he drove when he was working.
He even indicated.
He stopped at the Palace to collect a few things.
It took about twenty minutes.
By the time he left the apartment, it was raining.
That soft sound on the rooftops and the grass, someone putting a finger to their lips.
Instead of driving west, towards the expressway, he doubled back, crossed the bridge again, and cut down into Baker Park.
He passed a police car on the bridge.
It was parked in the safety zone with its headlamps off.
His heart surged.
The murder was still so fresh in his head, he felt that anyone could smell it.
Some cop's lucky night.
But the police car shrank in his rear-view mirror, and the lights stayed off.
He reached Sharon's house and then he wasn't sure.
He drove past once, then he drove past again, going the other way.
The last time he'd seen her she'd been drunk, they'd had a fight, he'd left her sprawling on the carpet.
There was too much to explain to her, and nothing he could say.
As he pulled away, the leaves on the trees shuddered and the rain began to fall so hard that it jumped back off the tarmac, turned to mist.
He had to hunch over the wheel to see anything.
It was almost three.
He felt he had to speak to someone before he left for good.
He thought of Mitch.
Mitch was often awake till dawn.
Mending his clocks and drinking beer.
He couldn't sleep when it was dark.
Something to do with what he'd been through in some war.
When Jed drew up in the alley behind Mitch's place, he saw an oil-lamp glowing in the kitchen window.
He parked his car and walked in through the yard.
He knocked on the back door.
Then waited, shivering, as the rain tipped off the brim of his top hat and spattered on the ground.
He had to knock twice more before Mitch heard and opened up.
Mitch stood under the light in a tartan shirt and jeans that hung off his buttocks.
Jed had turned up without knowing what he was going to say, but now he knew.
‘I know it's late, Mitch,’ he said, ‘but could you do me a tattoo?’
‘What's wrong with tomorrow?’
‘I won't be here.’
He saw Mitch hesitating.
‘It's a pretty simple job,’ he said.
‘No dragons or anything.
No fish.’
Mitch stepped back from the door.
‘You better come in.
Jed followed him into the kitchen.
He was still shivering.
‘Go sit by the fire,’ Mitch said.
‘I'll get the stuff ready.’
Jed took off his hat and sat down by the fire.
Taped to the wall above the mantelpiece was a large-scale map of Moon Beach.
Mitch knew the city better than anyone.
Jed had seen a street in Westwood that was called Success Avenue, and he'd told Mitch about it.
Mitch said there was a street called Failure running parallel.
The next time Jed drove through Westwood he looked for Failure, but he couldn't find it.
He reported back to Mitch.
‘There's no such street,’ he said.
Mitch just looked at him.
‘Of course there isn't,’ he said.
‘Who'd live on a street called Failure?’
Mitch returned.
‘So what do you want done?’
‘You got a pen and paper?’
‘Hold on.’
Mitch rummaged in a drawer.
‘Here.’
Jed scribbled seven numbers on the piece of paper.
‘I want these seven numbers,’ he told Mitch.
‘I want a gap between the second number and the third, and another gap between the third number and the other four.’
‘What's it supposed to be?’
‘It's my birthday.’
‘Today's your birthday?’
Jed nodded.
‘Happy birthday.’
‘Thanks.’
Mitch didn't ask any more questions.
They moved to the tattoo parlour.
Jed sat on the green plastic chair while Mitch selected the needles.
‘Blue all right?’
‘Blue's fine.’
‘Where do you want it?’
‘Here.’
Jed pointed at the inside of his right wrist.
‘It's more painful.’
‘That's the idea.’
One small pain to hide the larger one.
Mitch switched on the needle-gun.
A buzzing.
McGowan and his tools.
Zebra walls and all that talk of loyalty.
Why hadn't he seen through it?
But then, how could he have seen through it?
There hadn't been any cracks.
Mitch began to talk.
About his time with the Angels, about the day he met his old lady, about tattoos.
This was unusual, he almost never talked while he was working, but maybe he sensed that Jed wanted the silence filled and knew that Jed couldn't do it on his own.
Jed wasn't really listening.
Odd words and phrases came to him but, like sticks dropped into rapids, they were quickly whisked away.
Sometimes he felt himself wince and it was strange because he couldn't tell whether it was the needle or his memory.
In his head he was already driving through heavy rain to a life he couldn't imagine.
CATS FOR DROWNING
Nathan had been living at India-May's for almost three years when Donald moved in.
Donald was about forty-five, with short hairless arms and a belly that looked hard.
His face had an unpleasant shine to it, the kind of shine you get on the walls of places where they've been cooking in cheap fat since for ever.
He just showed up out of the blue one day while Nathan was working.
He'd taken a taxi out to Baby Boy's grave, and then he'd walked the rest of the way.
‘Five miles along a dirt track in his city shoes, can you imagine?’
India-May had that glazed look, as if she was describing a miracle, a miracle that she'd witnessed with her own eyes.
The arrival of somebody new, perhaps it was always a miracle to her.
Donald sat beside her, listening with a modesty that seemed sly.
A bandage round his head, a cup of tea in his blunt hands, he looked like the only survivor of some great catastrophe, and Nathan could understand exactly why he'd been able to move India-May to tears and why he'd been given a room on the first floor, one of the large ones, for nothing.
Donald came from an industrial town about fifty miles down the coast.
It was a town of factories and bars, its streets laid out on a grid pattern, its air a crude blend of oil, salt and gas.
(Nathan had passed it once, and remembered a sky lit by ragged flames, torches held aloft by the refineries.)
He'd been some kind of engineer.
Fifteen years working for the same company.
Then a merger, cutbacks at the plant, and he was out of a job.
When he walked through the factory gates that afternoon he'd walked away from everything.
The wife and kids, the mortgage loan, the car payments.
Down the chute with the lot of it.
He bought a bottle of brandy at the first liquor store he found and he began to drink.
Those bottles, strange how they multiply.
He'd drunk his way right from the north end of town to the south, one night in some woman's house, one night in jail, one night on the porch of a church in the rain.
Then he remembered a woman he'd met once on a train, she was singing hymns to the window, he'd been embarrassed at first, half her fringe was missing as if someone had  taken a bite out of it, only he knew she'd done it because she caught him staring and laughed and said, ‘I always cut it when I'm loaded,’ and he remembered something about a house, and because there was nothing left to cling to, because it was the only piece of wreckage left afloat, he remembered how to get there too, it was either remember or die.
‘You don't want to think about that now,’ India-May told him.
‘It was bad, but it's over.’
She patted his hand.
‘It's cats for drowning, Donald.
Just rats for drowning.’
Donald nodded.
He was quiet to begin with, he just stayed in his room.
For days this hush lay on the house like dust.
But a change was in the air, a season was drawing to a close.
Twilight left, as if he could smell the storm coming.
Pete and Chrissie's baby couldn't keep its food down.
Joan, the mad woman, stopped cooking.
The first time Nathan knew for certain that something wasn't right was when Donald smashed him over the head with a can of beans.
He'd come in after work and found two cans of baked beans in the cupboard.
He hadn't eaten all day, so he opened one of them and cooked it up.
He didn't think twice about it.
One of the house rules was, nothing belongs to anyone.
That was why India-May could handle being ripped off all the time.
So he was sitting at the kitchen table eating his plate of beans when Donald walked in.
Donald stood just behind him, that place where you can't see someone unless you actually turn round, that place where it feels as if someone's going to sink a pickaxe into the soft part of your skull, Donald stood behind him and took a deep breath, as if he was about to dive under a wave, and said, ‘Those are my beans.’
Nathan stopped eating and thought about it.
But there was really nothing to say.
Donald knew the rules, same as everyone else.
As he began to eat again he heard Donald move towards the cupboard.
The next thing he knew he was lying on the floor, half stunned, beans everywhere.
It's not stars you see.
You're too close to them to call them stars.
It's more like planets.
His head buzzed and sang as if power was being fed into it.
He saw Donald standing over him, a can of beans in his hand.
Those cans of beans, he thought, they're not safe.
Then he thought he could smell Donald's feet.
He wasn't particularly surprised.
Some people, all you need is one look at them and you just know their feet are going to smell.
‘Don't ever,’ and Donald took another breath, through his mouth  this time, as if he'd only surfaced for a moment, ‘don't EVER eat my beans again.’
That was the first time Nathan knew that something wasn't right.
He spoke to India-May about it.
She explained that Donald was going through a difficult time, ‘We all have our difficult times, right?’ and Nathan would have to be patient with him.
Patient?
He couldn't believe it.
How many times can you sit in your chair and let someone smash you over the head with a can of beans?
Nathan reckoned about once.
Definitely about once was the limit.
But he gave Donald another chance.
And wished he hadn't because, two weeks later, Donald was holding him up with a sawn-off shotgun for an hour and a half.
Nobody had called Donald down to supper, that was the reason, and he was holding Nathan responsible.
‘Why me?’
Nathan asked.
‘There's no one else here.’
Which may have been the reason, but also sounded like a threat.
‘What about India-May?
It's her house.’
Donald jammed the shotgun into the crook of bone under Nathan's jaw.
‘Shut up.’
Nathan wondered if the gun was loaded.
No way of telling.
But even if it wasn't, Donald could still hit him with it.
He hoped Donald wasn't going to do that.
He still had the bruise from that can of beans.
‘Next time,’ Donald said, ‘you CALL me, you understand?’
Nathan didn't want to move his chin.
But it's hard to say something without moving your chin.
‘YOU UNDERSTAND?’
‘Yes.’
Nathan managed to squeeze that one word through his clenched teeth.
He went to India-May again, and told her of his fears.
Donald was trying to take over.
Donald wanted an empire of his own, like some kind of Napoleon or something.
Donald would use force.
India-May was stoned that night.
She thought Nathan was making it up.
‘Napoleon?’ she said, and laughed until she couldn't see.
She said she was glad Nathan had moved in.
She said it made a real change to have a bit of humour round the place.
‘He held me up,’ Nathan said, ‘with a shotgun.’
‘A shotgun?
Napoleon?’
And she was off again, tears pouring from her eyes.
He could get no sense out of her.
Donald's son came to stay at weekends sometimes.
The boy was ten, and slight for his age.
Shy too.
He'd stand in the doorway and  watch Nathan tinkering with his bike and then, when Nathan looked round, he'd step back into the shadows.
One Sunday afternoon, as Nathan was leaving the house, he came across Donald and the boy in the yard.
Donald had one hand in the boy's hair, and he was whipping the boy with a leather belt.
There was blood on the back of the boy's legs.
Nathan stopped ten yards away.
Suddenly the sun felt raw against his neck.
‘What's going on, Donald?’
Donald didn't even break his rhythm.
‘Little bastard,’ he said, ‘he deserves it.’
The sweat evenly distributed on his face, as if he'd been greased.
‘What did he do?’
Donald's mouth swerved in his direction.
‘Is it time to eat?’
‘No.’
‘Then fuck off.’
That night Nathan went to India-May for the third time.
‘You've got to throw him out,’ he said.
‘You've simply got to.’
‘I can't,’ she said.
‘Imagine what it'd do to him.’
Nathan tried to hold his anger down.
‘What it'd do to him?’ he said.
‘For Christ's sake, India-May.
What about what he's doing to everybody else?’
Her mouth tightened.
‘I think you're over-reacting.
He walked out of the room and slammed the door.
He imagined Donald listening at the top of the stairs.
He saw the smirk on Donald's glassy face.
He walked until the farm was two small lights in the darkness.
Somewhere down the hill Lumberjack began to bark.
India-May had called him Lumberjack because his bark sounded just like someone sawing wood.
She called him Jack for short.
Suddenly his frustration with her turned to pain.
She was putting her trust in the wrong people again.
Her trusting Donald like this, it was lessening the value of her trust in him.
It made it so much cheaper, worthless even.
He wanted her to know the difference.
Out on the ridge that night he decided there was nothing for it.
He'd have to take the matter into his own hands.
He went and knocked on the door of Pete and Chrissie's room.
Pete opened the door.
Chrissie was sitting on the bed, the baby's head resting sideways on her shoulder, a bottle of Infant Suspension beside her.
The baby was whimpering.
The room smelt chalky and damp.
Sour milk.
Vomit.
‘How is he?’
Nathan asked.
Chrissie sighed.
‘The same.’
They talked about the baby's health for a while.
‘It's weird,’ Chrissie said, ‘but the moment that guy showed up, she got sick.’
‘Which guy?’
Nathan asked, though he knew.
He just wanted everything to be clear, like in a court of law.
This was, after all, the judgement of Donald.
‘You know,’ she said, ‘Donald.’
‘Yeah,’ he said, ‘and Joan suddenly stopped cooking.’
Chrissie's eyes opened wide.
‘That's right.’
She turned to Pete.
‘You remember, Pete?’
Pete nodded slowly.
He adored her.
He'd remember anything if she asked him to.
Nathan told them about the can of beans, the shotgun hold-up, the brutal thrashing in the back yard.
‘We didn't know,’ Chrissie said.
‘I did,’ Pete said.
‘I saw him beating one of the dogs.’
That clinched it.
They sat up late, trying to work out how to get rid of Donald.
He wasn't going to go peacefully, that was for sure.
One evening a friend of Pete's called Tommy came round with a bottle of something.
Tommy had been a marine.
Pete told him about Donald.
Tommy listened, nodding, as if it was a story he'd heard before.
When Pete had finished, Tommy said, ‘There's only one way to do it, and that's kill him.’
Silence in the room except for the bottle emptying into Tommy's throat.
It was strange but, since they'd started talking about getting rid of Donald, the baby had quietened down.
Now it was sleeping on the bed.
Tommy wiped his mouth and handed the bottle to Nathan, who passed it straight to Pete.
Tommy bared his teeth.
‘I'll do it.’
‘Listen,’ Nathan said, ‘maybe we can do this without making any mess.
Maybe we can do it clean.’
Though he hadn't sampled the contents of Tommy's bottle, he felt drunk.
‘What the fuck you talking about, clean?’
Tommy said.
So Nathan told him.
One night they were all sitting round the same as usual, in the kitchen this time, Pete and Tommy and a friend of Tommy's, they were sitting round drinking the whisky Tommy's friend had brought over when they heard footsteps in the yard.
They all watched the door as it opened and Donald's face poked round the edge, and then they all looked at each other and they all thought the same thought: Now?
There was a moment of absolute stillness.
Nathan thought of the  shotgun locked under his chin; he'd held himself so rigid that night that he'd ached for three days afterwards.
Only Donald was moving in the room — lighting his pipe, shaking a paper open.
That was when they jumped him.
Suddenly Donald was tied to his chair with the flex from the lamp, the plug still attached.
Pete gagged Donald with an apron that had a picture of a spaniel on it.
Tommy set fire to some of Donald's hair by mistake.
It must've been the pipe.
They spent some time telling him what they thought of him.
Tommy had to make it up, because he'd never met Donald before.
It's strange to see someone crying without using their mouth.
It's hard to watch.
They turn red and the tears fall out.
There's hardly any noise.
It's like those dolls.
They stood Donald in the back of Tommy's pick-up truck, then they climbed into the cab.
It was a thirty-mile drive.
They took the side roads.
They didn't want any cops pulling them over and asking them what they were doing with a man tied to a chair in the back of their truck.
Once they had to stop at a red light, and they heard Donald whimpering.
‘They're all cowards,’ Tommy said.
‘Deep down they're all fucking cowards.’
Most of the time they couldn't hear anything because of the engine.
Then it began to rain.
It was after midnight when they reached the place.
The gates were open so they just drove right in.
They got out of the truck.
That smell of rotten meat, and the warm rain running over their heads and hands.
Tommy shot the bolts on the tailgate and let it drop.
The chair had toppled over with Donald still attached.
His cheek pressed against the studded metal.
One eye blinked as the rain splashed into it.
He must've thought they were going to kill him, but that was why they didn't have to.
The fear was the same.
Tommy peered upwards, through the darkness.
The pyramid loomed above.
‘On top, you said.’
Nathan nodded.
‘I think so.’
‘Right.’
A dead dog lay close by.
Three of its legs had been sawn off.
Tommy's friend stood over it.
‘Who'd do that to a dog?’ he said.
‘Who'd do that to a poor, defenceless dog?’
Tommy took him by the arm and led him to the chair.
‘Get the front.’
He turned to Pete.
‘You help him.’
Tommy and Nathan lifted the back and, between the four of them, they half-dragged, half-carried Donald to the top.
Once there, they set him upright.
Stood back, breathing hard.
There was a curious  silence, a moment when it seemed that something might be said.
But nobody spoke.
The wind moved the hair on Donald's head.
They ran back down, huge crunching strides.
Tried not to think what they were treading on.
When they reached the bottom they automatically looked back.
Donald was an inch high.
Nathan nodded to himself.
It was right.
Donald had wanted to rule.
Well, he could rule that pile of trash.
He could be Pharaoh of that pyramid, a Pharaoh with a crown of flies.
Tommy's friend shuffled in the dirt.
‘Think the rats'll get him?’
Tommy laughed.
‘What about the gag?’
Tommy's friend said.
‘Think we should've taken the gag off?’
‘They'll find him tomorrow,’ Nathan said.
But it was hours till tomorrow.
There was plenty of time for Donald to think things over.
Smell the smell of his own foul behaviour.
Tommy looked up at the pyramid, then out towards the ocean.
‘Some view he'll have,’ he said.
Then they drove home.
The next morning India-May wanted to know where Donald had got to.
Nathan looked her in the eye.
‘He left.’
‘He left late last night,’ Pete said.
‘He didn't want to disturb you.’
India-May looked from one to the other, colour creeping up her neck.
‘Where's my chair?’
‘What chair?’
Pete said.
‘You know what chair.
‘I'll get you another one,’ Nathan said.
‘I didn't ask you to get me another one, did I?
I said, where is it?’
Nathan shrugged.
India-May turned and whirled across the kitchen.
Her dress shrieked as it caught on the comer of the table and tore.
‘Whose house is this,’ she said, ‘that's what I'd like to know,’and slammed the door behind her.
But they did get her another chair, and put it in the old chair's place.
She didn't thank them, but she did start using it, and perhaps that was all the thanks they could expect.
She was using it a week later when Nathan walked in through the kitchen door.
It was close to midnight and India-May was the only one up.
She was making necklaces, which was a form of meditation for her, a method of forgetting.
Coloured beads mingled with flecks of tobacco and grass on the surface of the table, and the air was draped with smoke that  smelt as sweet as creosote.
Lumberjack sprawled on the tiles at her feet, whining softly in his sleep like a damp log on a fire.
Nathan sat down.
She looked at him, her fingers threading the beads blind.
She might've been calculating something.
The amount of trust she had left, the days till the end of the world.
‘What's new?’
‘I've come to tell you that I'm leaving.’
She nodded.
‘I had a feeling you were going to say that.’
He told her it was like the moment when the tide stops coming in and starts going out again.
It seems like nothing, but suddenly everything's different.
And the longer you wait, the clearer it becomes.
It was a pretty lie.
But she was nodding.
She understood this kind of talk.
He'd almost learned it from her.
‘Where will you go?’ she asked.
‘I don't know.
Somewhere further up the coast.’
‘You going to work on the beaches?’
‘I think so.’
He pushed a bead around on the end of his finger.
‘What could be better than saving people's lives?’
She recognised her own line and smiled.
He knew how their voices would sound from above.
The hum of a plucked string.
Like warmth, if you could hear such a thing.
‘I wish —‘
‘What?’
He wished he could explain about Donald.
But he knew she'd cut him off.
That's old history, she'd say.
That's cats for drowning.
In any case, at some deeper level, perhaps she already understood.
And in the future would remember.
He shook his head.
‘Nothing.’
Lumberjack's paw tapped the floor.
Lumberjack was dreaming.
Once, last fall, he'd walked Lumberjack to the pine forest in the next valley.
Lumberjack had started barking and then, just as abruptly, stopped again, and in the silence he'd heard a tree come down.
Lumberjack had looked up at him, as if for approval, his tongue dangling from his jaws.
No wonder there were no trees left standing round the farm.
Lumberjack had sawed them all down with his voice.
And now he was dreaming, dreaming of some great forest stretching out in front of him…
India-May lit a joint.
‘When I first met you, in that bar, you were all cut out round the edges, like something out of a cereal packet that  doesn't stand up when you've made it.’
She touched the tip of her joint to the ashtray and smiled.
‘You seemed, I don't know, kind of brave, somehow.’
This woman, she was so vague, so blind.
But she could surprise you with moments of sharpness.
She was like a needle in long grass, a knife in fog.
The next morning he wheeled his bike out of the barn and into the winter sunshine.
Lumberjack lay panting in the dirt beside him while he changed the oil, checked the tyre-pressures, adjusted the tension of the chain.
In an hour he was ready, his map taped to the gas tank, his few possessions strapped on the seat behind him.
India-May came outside to wave goodbye.
She seemed to be frowning, but it was probably just a bad hangover and the white sun in her eyes.
His rear wheel spun on the loose stones, searching for grip, then he pulled away.
Lumberjack came leaping around his front wheel, and he had to go slow.
As he topped the rise he let out the throttle.
But Lumberjack was running alongside him now, a serious expression on his face, as if he saw this as a real test of stamina.
‘Go back,’ Nathan shouted, ‘go back,’and he pointed behind him.
But Lumberjack just leapt at his outstretched hand.
It was part of the game.
After three miles Nathan had to turn round and ride all the way home again.
India-May locked Lumberjack inside the house.
As Nathan pulled away for the second time he could hear Lumberjack in the kitchen, frantically sawing the legs off tables and chairs.
Somehow that was worse than anything.
But he rode hard to the end of the track and when he reached Baby Boy's white cross he hesitated, then he turned right, into the mountains, something that he'd never done before.
THE FIRST DROP OF RAIN
Jed drove north to begin with, his wrist a rectangle of heat and all that numbness just behind his eyes, but after two days the roads drew him inland, over high mountains, and soon he was heading due west.
The mountains lay down, sprawled on the land like tired dogs.
Then there were no mountains at all.
Sometimes he saw a row of trees on the horizon.
In the heat-haze they were saints walking on water, they didn't seem to touch the ground at all.
Towards nightfall the sun balanced on the end of the road and then not even his special lenses helped.
He'd be half blind by the time he stopped for sleep, his vision clunking with green and purple balls.
In the mornings, standing in some motel parking-lot, the air scorched his lungs, it was like breathing the air above a fire.
He drove with the windows shut.
It was cooler.
Skulls and dust outside.
Tornadoes that spun across the blue sky like vases thrown on some mad potter's wheel.
The weather was like a scourge, the land could kill you.
Out here, on the desert's edge, penance could be done.
Out here he could spend his years of exile.
The first time he drove into Adam's Creek he saw a picture of Creed in a store window and he stabbed the brake.
The car slewed.
A truck filled his mirror and overflowed.
A sneezing of brakes, a clash of gears, and it lumbered past, the driver glaring down, fingers twitching and a black hole for a mouth.
It wasn't Creed in the window, after all, it was just some advert for brilliantine, but his heart didn't know the difference and he sat there until it slowed.
Two miles out of town he pulled into a shallow ditch and switched the engine off.
Looking around, he saw that he'd parked outside a graveyard.
There was no church.
Only a tin shelter with three walls and a bench.
A few gaunt trees.
Some rocks.
It was the kind of place where you waited for a bus that never came.
He left his car and moved through the yellow grass, his arms clutched across his chest.
He felt the inch of bare skin above his socks as two cold metal bands.
He'd never thought that you could shiver in a desert, but it was late afternoon and the sun had fallen behind the  hills and a chill wind cut across the graves.
The wind dropped once, and he watched in astonishment as flies landed on his face and hands in clots.
Then the wind rose again and plucked his top hat off his head and sent it bowling among the stones.
He'd been sitting in the car so long, it was hard for him to run.
His ankles clicked, his knees snapped, but he was after it, past crosses, round tombs, over mounds.
Families passed beneath his feet, and he caught glimpses of their tragedies: TREASURED DAUGHTER.
OUR DEAR BABIES.
BELOVED WIFE.
Only two days before he'd called his mother from a pay-phone on the highway.
When she answered, he just listened.
‘Hello?’ she said.
‘Who's this?’
He waited.
‘That you, Henry?’ she said.
So.
It was Henry now.
‘Henry?’ she said, raising her voice now.
‘Is that you?’
He put the phone down.
He didn't exist for her.
Henry existed (whoever Henry was).
But he didn't.
That was the truth.
His BELOVED MOTHER.
‘Stop,’ he shouted at his hat.
‘Stop,’ he shouted.
‘Wait for me.’
All the biggest words rose off the stones towards him: mother, love, father, memory, son, heaven.
He felt nothing.
He was nobody his mother knew, and there were no beloveds.
He caught his hat and put it on.
He was so cold when he climbed back into the car, his lips mauve in the mirror, his teeth drumming in his head.
All week he'd been trying not to think.
He'd wanted to drive until anything he remembered would seem as if it had happened to someone else.
A movie, another person's memory, the words of a song.
And finally, that afternoon in the graveyard, he knew the door had slammed on his life and the door was one of those big silver refrigerator doors and he saw his life hanging behind that door like meat.
It no longer felt like a life.
His or anyone else's.
He fumbled the key into the ignition with numb fingers.
Once the engine caught, he turned the car round and drove back into Adam's Creek, population 2,200, elevation 21 metres.
When he arrived he found that he'd already become something of a legend.
The landlord of the Commercial Hotel gave him a nod as he walked through the door.
‘How are you doing?’
Jed nodded.
‘Not bad.
You?’
The landlord nodded.
‘Saw you earlier.’
‘Yeah?’
‘Yeah.
You were the one who braked on Main Street.
Denny Butler nearly crushed you flat.’
The landlord was smiling, his face broad and red and open.
Strange to be seeing still things, Jed thought.
He was used to white lines, asphalt, trees.
All moving.
Towards and past.
Faces didn't do that.
They just hung in front of you, like lamps.
He blinked.
‘You got a room?’
‘We got single rooms.
Seven dollars a night.’
The landlord licked his thumb and flicked the register open.
‘You going to be staying long?’
‘I don't know yet.
A couple of nights, maybe.’
‘ Name'sWayne,’ the landlord said.
Jed stuck a hand out.
‘Jed,’ he said.
‘Jed Morgan.’
He paid cash for the room.
‘Yeah,’ Wayne said, ‘just about everyone must've saw you this morning.
Not often you get someone braking like that on Main Street.
And wearing a hat like that and all.
Thought you were selling bibles, some of them did.’
When Jed said nothing, Wayne said, ‘You don't sell bibles, do you?’
Jed shook his head slowly.
‘No, I don't.’
‘So what do you do then?’
Jed couldn't figure out why, but he didn't mind the landlord's curiosity.
In other towns he'd left way before the question mark, his Coke still fizzing at the top of the glass.
Now it seemed like a relief to be talking, a novelty, a test of wit.
‘I used to work back east,’ he said.
‘Got laid off.
Thought I'd take a trip.’
‘You got here a week ago, you'd've cooked.’
‘Still pretty hot.’
‘You did right coming through Adam's Creek,’ Wayne said.
‘It gets a bit rough round here from time to time, there's a power station out past the ridge and the boys do their drinking here, but mostly we're pretty friendly.’
Rough.
Jed smiled.
They didn't know what rough was.
Wayne showed him to a room on the first floor, at the front of the building.
A cracked sink, an iron bed.
When Jed opened the wardrobe, the empty hangers jangled like wind-chimes.
It was a nice illusion.
Not even the faintest of breezes here.
The window looked out on to a wide wooden verandah with a few deadbeat chairs and a metal table that took one leg off the ground when you leaned on it.
‘Bibles,’ he muttered.
From the verandah you looked down on Main Street, with its asphalt all cracked and splintered by the heat.
A high wire-mesh fence divided the street from the railway tracks beyond.
The line wasn't used much any more, Wayne had told him.
Only for taking coal from the hills in the south to the power station just over the ridge.
The yard was a desert of flint chips and rolling stock that was almost extinct.
The signal box had shed its paint.
Weeds grew, mauve and yellow, between the rails.
He lay down on his bed that first night, his hands folded on his chest, his boots still on.
He'd been driving for days, he'd forgotten how many, and he was tired of the white lines painted down the middle of the highway, he was tired to the centre of his bones.
The trouble was, once you'd been driving for that long, you drove right through your tiredness and out into a dreamland where only the road was moving.
He'd driven into Adam's Creek the same way he'd driven into a hundred other small towns.
But he'd braked suddenly, and broken the momentum.
He'd looked round and it had seemed like just about the first place he'd seen, and some part of him deep down had said: It's got to be somewhere, why not here?
After all, he couldn't go on driving for ever, he'd just drive straight into another ocean, and that was what he was trying to get away from , wasn't it, the ocean?
At nine o'clock he left his room and went down to the bar.
Wayne drew him a beer.
‘Welcome to Adam's Creek.’
Wayne turned to the two men at the bar.
‘One creek that never runs dry, eh, boys?’
The laughter that followed was routine.
The echo of a million other nights.
Jed hadn't drunk beer since the night he met Sharon, but he didn't flinch.
He raised his glass.
‘It's good to be here, Wayne,’ he said, and swallowed half of it before he put it down.
He made that noise that men who drink beer make, and wiped his mouth on the back of his wrist.
One of the two men leaned over.
‘So where's all the bibles then?’
‘Bibles?’
Jed said.
‘What bibles?’
‘Ain't you selling bibles?’
The man had slack cheeks that shook like jelly when he spoke.
Jed smiled and took a risk.
‘I'd sell my sister first.’
Wayne spluttered.
He turned and yelled to the woman who was polishing a glass at the other end of the bar.
‘Did you hear that, Linda?
He'd sell his sister first.’
Linda took one look at Jed and went on polishing the glass.
‘Wouldn't fetch much by the look of it.’
Jed raised a grin.
‘What are you drinking, Linda?’
‘I'll have a beer,’ she said.
He got drunk that night, though not as drunk as he pretended to be.
He was a man drowning his sorrows, he'd decided.
He was a man drinking to forget.
And slowly he let his sorrows spill.
He'd seen a hundred funerals.
He knew how it was done.
Six or seven drinks inside him, he leaned on the bar.
‘I just want to forget her, Wayne.’
‘Who's that, Jed?’
‘My wife.’
You couldn't show up in a place like Adam's Creek without a few questions being asked, Jed knew that, so he'd dreamed up a story.
He'd got the idea from a song he'd heard on the radio while he was driving.
It was about a wife who'd cheated on her husband, she'd left him for his best friend, and now the man was on the road trying to mend his broken heart.
To him it sounded ridiculous, but he thought it was the kind of lie that people might believe.
People like feeling pity for people, it makes them feel lucky.
Well, he was going to give them the chance, wasn't he?
After being the man who'd sell his sister, he was about to become the man who'd lost his wife.
‘She made a fool of me, Wayne,’ he said.
‘I just want to forget the whole damn thing.’
‘You go ahead,’ Wayne said.
‘She wasn't worth it.
You just go right ahead and forget her.’
And because Jed couldn't picture the wife who was supposed to have left him, because he had no idea what she looked like, he found himself believing that he was doing a pretty good job.
When, just before closing, Wayne said, ‘So what's with the top hat, Jed?’
Jed knew what the answer was, and he was drunk enough to carry it off.
Slowly he removed the hat and slowly he looked down at it, his vision blurred by alcohol, but for all anyone knew it could have been tears.
‘This hat?’ he said.
‘This is the hat I wore to my wedding.’
He looked up.
There was a big rear-view mirror over the bar so he could see the glances being exchanged behind his back.
He could see the pity surfacing.
‘You know, it's strange, Wayne, but I've completely forgotten what she looks like.’
He smiled bravely.
‘It's almost like she never existed.’
And, looking down again, he felt the weight of Wayne's hand on his shoulder.
A couple of days, he'd said, but he ended up staying in the Commercial Hotel for almost a year.
During the first few months he worked with a gang of local road-menders, filling pot-holes on the highway, smoothing cambers, paving the dirt tracks that led to ranches.
He spent most of his daylight hours outside.
His lean pocked body tightened, turned brown, found a different shape.
In that clear air he felt himself settling into his new skin.
Some days he didn't say a word.
He just didn't have any.
Words would take longer.
Not that anyone noticed.
The road-menders were a sullen bunch.
Then, towards Christmas, the work dwindled and he was laid off.
He took the first job he could find, washing dishes at the Wang Garden, a Chinese restaurant two blocks down the street from the hotel.
Lunchtimes and evenings, $4.50 an hour.
Shortly after he started at the restaurant he told Wayne that he was moving to Mrs O'Neill's boarding house on the corner of Main Street and Railway Avenue.
‘How long are you going to stay there?’
Wayne said.
‘A couple of days?’
He laughed so hard, he almost pulled a muscle.
Mrs O'Neill had startled red hair and a face that was like a dried-up river bed.
She sat in her front room with the curtains drawn and the TV on and the door ajar.
All you could see through the gap was a strip of wall and half a fridge.
There were two pictures taped to the side of the fridge: Jesus and Donald Duck.
Mrs O'Neill had the sweetest tooth in Adam's Creek, and Jed won a place in her affections on his very first day by buying her a Rocky Road on his way back from work.
He'd just discovered Rocky Roads.
Made from peanuts, nougat, and chunks of glacé cherry, and covered in a thick coating of milk chocolate, it was the best candy bar that he'd ever come across.
Whenever he passed Mrs O'Neill's room after that, it was always, ‘Bring me a Rocky Road, would you, Matt, there's a dear.’
That was the other thing about Mrs O'Neill.
She thought his name was Matt.
‘My name's Jed,’ he'd told her, more times than he could remember, but every time he passed her door she called out, ‘Matt, honey, is that you?’
Maybe it was her way of telling him that she knew he was lying.
Not about his name, but about everything else.
But then, how could she know that? he thought.
How the fuck could she know anything with Jesus and Donald Duck taped to the side of her fridge and her brain blended to mush by all that TV?
She didn't know.
Nobody knew.
He had a large room on the second floor, with bright-green walls and a tangerine bedspread.
The curtains looked like spring, but a spring that had happened somewhere else: all green shoots and rainfall and blossom.
There was a plug-in kettle, an electric ring for cooking  on, and a Gideon's bible, for solace.
It was from this room that he wrote his first and only communications with the outside world.
One weekend he bought two postcards of the Adam's Creek power station at night (they were the only postcards there were) and sat down at his rickety table by the window with a pen.
He wrote the first card to Mitch.
He thanked Mitch again for the tattoo and said it was lasting pretty well, considering.
He told Mitch to say hello to his old lady.
He said the clock in the local post office was busted and maybe Mitch would drop by and fix it sometime.
Then he put, ‘But your bike probably wouldn't make it, would it?
Yours, Jed.’
Grinning, he turned to the second card.
This would be for Sharon.
There were times when he missed her; hers was the only woman's body that he'd ever known.
He remembered surprising her once at work.
She'd just got a job at Simon Peter's, a twenty-four-hour supermarket chain that catered for all funeral needs.
Their logo was a yawning grave (a black triangle with the top cut off).
Their slogan?
OUR PRICES ARE SIX FEET UNDER EVERYBODY ELSE'S.
His eyes lifted to the window, but they didn't see the telegraph wires or the railway tracks or the range of dusty yellow hills beyond.
They saw Sharon standing in the plastic-flowers aisle.
She was wearing a black nylon coat and a badge that said SHARON LACEY.
SECTION MANAGER.
Her eyes widened at the sight of him.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘Make like I'm a customer,’ he whispered.
‘Show me where something is.’
She took him to the far aisle and showed him the salt tablets.
They were called Weepies.
You took them to replace the salt your tears had bereaved you of.
Or so the packet said.
He noticed a door that said STAFF ONLY.
‘What's in there?’
‘Nothing,’ she said.
‘Just stock.’
He led her through the door.
She was right.
Boxes stacked in piles, nobody around.
He sat her down and began to unfasten her coat.
She smelt of ammonia, violets, sweat.
‘It must be hot wearing all this nylon,’ he said.
In the distance he could hear the requiem mass that was being piped at a discreet volume throughout the store.
‘You can't,’ she whispered.
‘I've got my period.’
‘I don't mind about that.’
‘It's not sale.’
‘Of course it's safe.
You just said.
You've got your period.’
‘It's not safe here,’ Sharon hissed.
‘My job.
They'll kill —,
He was inside her before she could finish the sentence.
‘They won't kill you,’ he said after a while.
‘You're too important.’
He tapped her badge.
‘You're Section Manager.’
‘That's the whole point,’ she said, but she was laughing by then.
‘I'm supposed to set an example.’
Afterwards Jed tore open the cardboard box they'd done it on.
Inside, conveniently, were hundreds of packets of black-edged tissues.
As he crouched behind her, mopping the blood off the back of her thighs, he could feel his erection returning.
It was the first time he'd realised that a woman's blood had the power to excite him.
‘You're crazy,’ Sharon said, ‘you know that?’
But he'd stopped now, he was staring at the tissue.
‘I know who invented these.’
He smiled up at her.
‘I lived in the same house as him once.
He thought walking was old-fashioned, so he used to go round in a wheelchair.’
Sharon was shaking her head.
‘Crazy.
Smiling, he lowered his pen to the paper.
He told her he was very far away.
He was working in a Chinese restaurant, he said.
He hoped she was all right.
He hesitated, then he wrote, ‘Remember that time in the storeroom?’
He never really expected to hear back from either of them.
He didn't know why he'd written, except maybe to let people know that he was alive.
If you could call working in the kitchens of a Chinese restaurant being alive.
The Wang Garden was like no Chinese restaurant he had ever seen.
From the outside it looked like a bank (and with good reason, if Wayne was to be believed: ‘That guy,’ Wayne said, ‘he's raking it in’).
It had a façade of brand-new brick, a solid wooden door, and no windows.
But walking inside was like walking into some hijacked piece of a South Sea island.
Fake sunbeams played on tables of polished black wood.
Guitars crooned softly against a rustling of surf.
The real highlight, though, was the grotto, which took up most of one wall.
If you looked past the rock pools and the exotic plants, past the miniature waterfall, you could see blue sky, a stand of coconut palms, and even, in the distance, a lagoon.
Through hidden speakers came the rhythmic itch of cicadas.
And, every twenty minutes or so, a storm broke: thunder rumbled, lightning flickered, and tropical rain came crashing down from the showerheads fitted in the ceiling.
The man responsible for all this, the ‘guy’ who was ‘raking it in’, was Mr Zervos.
Zervos had a huge dense beard that might have been a cutting from the grotto's undergrowth.
He stamped through the restaurant beating the pineapple air with his short muscular arms.
Zervos was the only Greek in town.
Everybody called him Adam's Greek.
The Wang Garden was the only restaurant in that part of the country, unless you counted the Paragon Café, which served pizza and eggs and didn't seem to know the meaning of its name.
At weekends people came from up to fifty miles around.
On busy nights like these Zervos paid Jed an extra $1.25 an hour to pack take-outs.
He made it sound like a fortune, this extra $1.25, it was only because he liked Jed so much, he didn't know what had come over him, maybe he had a fever, an extra $1.25, it was madness.
And Jed would be smiling, not at Zervos and his torrent of language, but at the memory of the $10,000, the eight thousand $1.25s, that he had thrown in Creed's face.
He spent most of his time in the kitchens, among blue neon flytraps and steaming silver vats.
There was no door between the kitchens and the alley at the back, only a curtain of brown and yellow beads that clicked when there was a breeze, which was just about never because it was summer and the only time the air moved was when Zervos waved his short arms or a truck went past outside.
It was one of the busy nights, a Friday, most likely, and he was just spooning some number 42 into a white take-out carton when a voice from behind him whispered, ‘Give me a bit of chicken, mister.
I'm going to die of hunger otherwise.’
He looked up and caught his first glimpse of Celia through the beads.
He saw some tangled blonde hair, he saw the white light of the kitchen catch on the rough edge of a broken tooth.
‘Go on, one of those little boxes, that'll do.
The curtain parted, clicking, and now he saw her hair all coarse and fraying like rope coming undone and her breasts pushing against an old green cardigan, and he knew who she was.
He'd heard men in the bar talking about her.
Men with nothing in their heads always filled them up with bits of women's bodies.
‘You can't come in here,’ he hissed.
She flinched, stepped back.
The bead curtain closed behind her, closed over her like water.
It was so sudden, so complete, that it unnerved him.
He went to the curtain and peered out.
She'd flattened herself against the outside wall like someone in a spy movie.
She was facing away from him, down the alley.
‘Why don't you go home to eat like everyone else?’ he said.
She kept her face turned away.
‘It's my mum and dad.
They locked me out while they throw stuff at each other.
And I can't buy anything  because I haven't got any money.’
Now she looked at him.
‘What's wrong with you?’
He stared at her.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Your eyes, they're pinned wide open.’
She grinned.
‘You look like an astronaut.
You look like you just landed back on earth or something and it's a real shock.’
He said nothing.
‘Where did you come from anyway?’
‘From the coast.’
‘I know who you are.
You're the strange one who turned up in a top hat.
I heard you shouting at it.
In the cemetery.’
He handed her the carton of chicken.
‘Here.’
‘Thanks.’
When she smiled her two front teeth stuck out.
One of them was chipped.
She caught him looking.
‘My brother hit me with a stone.’
‘I'd better go back in,’ he said.
She nodded.
‘I'll see you around.’
When he turned back into the kitchen, Zervos was scowling at him.
‘Where's the take-out?’
‘Problem with the chicken.’
‘Problem with the chicken?
What problem?’
‘It was bad, Zervos.
Bad chicken.
I had to throw it out.’
‘You throw out my chicken?’
‘It was bad, Zervos.
You can't give people bad chicken.
People die of bad chicken.’
‘My chicken, my chicken.’
Zervos was dancing on the tiled floor and beating at the air.
‘Chicken's a weapon, Zervos.
You can murder people with chicken.’
‘Just fix me some more, OK?
Good chicken, bad chicken, any fucking chicken.
Just chicken.
And fix it real quick, OK?
I don't pay you extra one twenty-five to throw my chickens in the garbage.
Jesus God.
I could get someone they do that for nothing.’
Jed didn't know it, but Celia was listening on the other side of the curtain, her laughter stifled by a mouthful of number 42.
The next time she said, ‘Give me some chicken,’ she said it in the vacant lot behind the Commercial Hotel, and it was a different kind of chicken altogether.
That first time, he couldn't be sure, it was after midnight, too dark to tell, her belly and her legs lay like patches of moonlight on the ground, he couldn't be sure, but as he lifted away from her he thought  he smelt that rich, metallic smell.
It was like scrapyards, old boats, money.
He had to check.
He jumped to his feet and pulled his pants up over his knees.
‘What are you doing?’ she hissed.
‘I'll be right back.’
He scrambled across the lot to a lit window, the men's room at the back of the hotel.
In the yellow light that fell all bleary through the frosted glass the blood showed up brown.
It excited him so much, he had to fuck her again.
He didn't tell her it was the blood, though.
Not then.
After the second time she stared up at him, her eyes wide.
‘Now who's the astronaut?’ he said.
‘You remember everything,’ she whispered.
‘No, I don't,’ he said.
‘Most things I forget.’
‘What about me?’ she asked him.
‘Will you remember me?’
He didn't say anything.
One frog croaked, and then another, and then they couldn't hear each other speak.
That was why she'd chosen the place.
It was dark, and there were two kinds of frogs, one fast, pitched high, the other deep and slow.
Nobody would hear them fucking with all those frogs croaking, that was the idea.
Nobody would know.
‘Why?’ he said.
‘You done this before?’
She grinned up at him.
‘Maybe.’
The next month they drove up to Blood Rock.
It was a place that Jed had found by chance during his first few weeks in Adam's Creek.
You drove east, up into the hills.
About ten miles out of town there was a turning on the right.
The track was two miles long and ended in a precipice.
It was a vantage point, marked on the map.
The Adam's Creek power station sprawled in the dust-bowl valley below, its chimneys lit as green as Mars.
Smoke poured upwards, pale-grey and blurred, like make-up smudged by tears.
Away to the east lay the cooling-water lake, known by local people as the Blue Lagoon.
To the west you could see a sprinkling of town lights and, further west, the hills where the coal came from.
West of the hills was the highway, a finger dipped in the dust of the mines and run all the way across the land to the horizon.
He parked two hundred yards from the precipice and let her walk the rest.
She reached the edge and stood still for a long time, only her skirt fluttering, and the ends of her hair.
It was obvious she'd never been before.
Later she told him that she was surprised he'd found the place, grateful that he'd taken her.
It said something about  what he felt for her.
It said something that she knew he'd never put in words.
The sun set in front of her.
It seemed too bright that evening, almost chemical.
A sulphurous yellow, the blue of gas.
He went and opened the trunk.
Lifted a sheet out and sent it billowing through the air.
Watched it drift down, settle on the ground.
Dusk made the white cotton glow.
‘What's that for?’
She stood ten yards away, her chin tucked into her shoulder.
He knelt down on the sheet.
‘I thought we could fuck on it.’
‘But it's my time.’
He liked the way she said that.
‘I know it's your time.
That's why I brought the sheet.
‘Don't you mind?’
‘Why should I mind?’
‘Some people think it's disgusting.’
‘Whose blood is it?’
Her forehead puckered.
One finger curled into her broken tooth.
It was as if she really didn't know the answer.
‘It's your blood,’ he said, ‘isn't it?’
She was grinning now, and once she'd grinned, of course, she had to let him.
She was too intrigued not to.
It wasn't actually called Blood Rock, that was just their private name for it, because it was there that Jed made his confession.
About what excited him most.
He'd timed that first drive with such care.
It occurred exactly four weeks after the frogs.
He'd been counting the days.
The summer passed.
Every month they drove up into the hills, their sheet folded neatly in the trunk, their lust, by contrast, scarcely containable.
One evening in August — it was their fourth night in a row; her blood kept flowing that month — he turned to her and saw an expression on her face that he didn't recognise.
It was like wonder, and he couldn't guess the root of it.
‘You know the weird thing?’ she said.
‘The weird thing is, you take my pain away.’
She told him how she used to dread her time.
There'd be one night every month when somebody took a knife to the softest part of her.
She'd twist and turn, she'd fold herself double, she'd cry out.
Nothing helped, not even aspirins.
It just had to be gone through.
Since she'd met him, though, it didn't happen any more.
It was because he fucked her at the beginning of her blood, she said.
It was like he loosened  her inside.
Her look of wonder deepened.
It was like they were made for each other, she said, wasn't it?
He was sitting on the edge of the sheet now.
In the valley below the power station was lit up like a tangle of pearls, like some romantic gift.
‘I wish I could give you that,’ he said.
She saw where he was looking, and laughed and kissed his face.
Soon afterwards he left the Wang (though Zervos tried to tempt him to stay by offering him an extra, wait for it,thirty-five cents an hour!) and started working days at the ice-cream parlour on Main Street which belonged, coincidentally, to Celia's uncle (or maybe not so coincidentally since, in a town like Adam's Creek, population 2,200, most people ended up being related sooner or later).
It was a move that sealed him in Mrs O'Neill's affections: he now brought her free ice-cream as well as the traditional Rocky Road.
One morning in October he was wiping the counter down when he heard a motorbike approaching.
He thought nothing of it at the time.
Two of the power-station boys had bikes.
They held races out by the railway tracks on Saturdays.
But he looked up all the same and saw the bike pass by, the rider wearing an unfamiliar black helmet and black leathers, the motorbike low-slung, bulging, making a noise that made him think of someone beating cream in a bowl with a wooden spoon.
Five minutes later the door jangled and the man in the helmet and the leathers walked in.
He looked at the card on the counter.
It said WELCOME TO THE WORLD OF 45 FLAVOURS.
‘Give me all 45,’ he said.
‘Large cone.
Jed smiled.
Mitch took off his helmet.
There were streaks of vanilla in his hair.
‘You're getting old, Mitch,’ Jed said.
‘Is that a nice way to greet someone who's ridden three thousand miles to see you?’
‘You wouldn't ride three thousand miles to see anyone,’ Jed said.
‘That's what I always liked about you.’
He vaulted over the counter and wrapped his arms round Mitch.
They didn't reach.
He smelled the dust and oil of three thousand miles on Mitch's jacket.
He spoke into the smell.
‘It's good to see you.’
Mitch sat down on one of the fancy white chairs with the scrolls on the back and the dainty feet.
‘I was doing a trip, coast to coast.
Thought I'd call in.’
After work Jed took Mitch to the hotel for a drink.
He introduced Mitch to Wayne and Linda.
‘He's an old friend of mine,’ Jed said.
‘Haven't seen him for years.’
‘I heard you come in,’ Wayne said.
‘Sounded like a jet plane'd landed on the street.’
Mitch nodded.
‘It's not built to go that slow.
Place to hear it is on the highway.
Sounds real sweet out there.
Sounds like sugar being poured in a dish.’
The door slammed open and Celia walked in.
She was wearing her short fluttery pink skirt with the flowers on and her denim jacket and a pair of pink hightops.
‘Hey, missie,’ Wayne said.
‘Why don't you bust right through the wall next time.’
He looked at Mitch and Jed, and shrugged.
Celia walked right over.
She gave Jed a slow wink and then leaned back against the bar, the points of her elbows resting on the old brass rail.
‘Who's this, Jed?’
‘This is Mitch,’ he told her.
‘He's an old friend.’
He turned to Mitch.
‘This here's Celia.
Mitch's chin dipped an inch and then lifted again.
‘Pleased to meet you, Celia.
How would you like to come for a ride?’
Celia just looked at him, running her tongue back and forward through that chip in her teeth, then she looked at Jed.
‘You say he's a friend of yours?’
‘Yes, he is.’
Celia looked at Mitch again.
‘What kind of bike've you got?’
Mitch smiled.
‘Harley.’
‘What the hell.’
She pushed away from the bar and linked her arm through Mitch's.
‘Let's see what it does.’
Jed played pool in the back with one of the power-station boys.
He was just losing for the third time when Celia walked back in, Mitch behind her.
She looked as if the wind had blown everything except sheer joy clean out of her head.
‘Oh Jed.’
She was still breathless and there was air in her words.
‘We went right out to the Blue Lagoon.
We did a century on the Power-station road.’
She put an arm round him and kissed his neck.
The buttons on her denim jacket were cold.
She smelt of speed, cool dust, high blood.
She broke away from him again.
‘Can I get you a drink, Mitch?’
Mitch smiled.
‘Beer.’
‘You, Jed?’
‘The same.’
Mitch sat down at the small round table in the corner.
Jed leaned his cue against the wall and joined him.
You better get a bike, Jed.’
‘Looks that way.’
‘So how long you been here now?
Five years?’
‘Close enough.’
‘How much've you told them?’
‘Nothing.’
‘They don't know anything about you?’
‘All they know is stuff I made up.’
Celia was returning with the beer, three glasses in between her hands, her tongue wedged in that chip in her teeth.
Mitch watched her.
‘Not even her?’
Celia put two of the beers on the table, then she stood back, knuckles of her right hand on her hip, and said she had to go and talk to someone.
Jed waited until she'd left and then he said, ‘Not even her.’
He swallowed some beer.
‘You seen Sharon?’
‘I seen her.’
‘How is she?’
‘She's fine.
She married some guy.’
Jed nodded.
‘I sent two cards, one to you and one to her.
That's all the remembering I've done.
And telling, even less than that.’
Mitch turned his beer can on the table, made a few new rings.
Then he said, ‘I heard a story that might interest you.’
Jed lifted his head.
‘You remember Vasco?’
‘Of course,’ Jed said.
Fear suddenly.
It had come from nowhere, out of a long silence, like something fired from a gun.
‘I did a tattoo for him.
One of those tombstones he always has, you know.
Only this time it covered half his back.’
‘What was the name on it?’
‘Francis.’
Jed looked down into his drink.
‘Where is he now?’
‘Two days after I did the tattoo they found him on a street in Los Ilusiones.
It was sometime after midnight.
He was all curled up in the gutter, naked.
No sign of his clothes.
It was in the papers.
They took him to that private clinic, the one in the hills.
Far as I know, he's still there.
Jed sipped his beer.
It tasted sharp and frothy.
He could see Vasco on the street, fourteen years old, face like a guitar.
It's not my time.
‘Seems a parcel was delivered to his house on Christmas Eve.
To be more specific, a box was delivered.
Seems his brother's head was inside it.’
Mitch glanced at Jed.
‘Kind of an interesting Christmas present.
When Jed didn't say anything, Mitch went on.
‘And here's the really interesting part.
Seems the box was delivered by none other than Mr Neville Creed.
In person.’
Jed could see it.
A ring on the doorbell and Maria's tights hiss their way across the hall.
A postman's standing on the doorstep.
‘Special delivery, ma'am.’
Maria's never seen this postman before, but it's not so strange, they always take new people on at Christmas.
She signs for the parcel.
‘Happy Christmas, ma'am,’ the postman says and, as he steps back into the darkness, she notices he's wearing gloves.
If anything's strange, that is.
Because it isn't cold.
Not cold at all.
Jed shivered.
He was imagining what happened next.
Christmas morning.
The tree's all lit up.
It's the moment everyone's been waiting for.
It's time to open the presents —
A sudden explosion of glass made him jump.
One of the power-station boys had knocked a table over on his way to the bathroom.
Drinks everywhere.
‘Creed had Vasco's brother killed,’ Mitch said, ‘and then he delivered the head himself.
What do you think?’
Jed picked up his glass and swirled the last inch of beer around.
‘I wouldn't say anything about it if I was you.’
‘I'm not saying anything about it.
I'm just telling you.’
‘How did you hear?’
‘I've got a couple of friends from the old days, they're vultures now.
One night I was down in a bar on V Street and their tongues got loose.’
Mitch looked up at Jed.
‘Why?
You think it's just talk?’
‘No,’ Jed said, ‘I think it's true.’
Mitch said nothing.
‘I worked for Creed, 'Jed went on.
‘I watched him.
Driving someone, you get to do a lot of that.
Stuff like what you're talking about, it's a game for him.
It's entertainment.’
He saw that face again, he heard the voice.
‘You know what he told me once?
He told me there are no borders.’
‘If you knew all that,’ Mitch said, ‘how come you worked for him?’
Jed just stared at him across the top of his glass.
‘Yeah, I know,’ Mitch said.
‘Stupid question.
Wayne came over.
‘You boys are getting mighty serious.’
Mitch laughed and drained his glass.
‘Give me another beer, Wayne.
Then we'll see who's serious.
Mitch left the next morning at dawn.
They walked to the edge of town and shook hands.
The sun lifted over the hills and threw their shadows across the road.
Mitch took a last look round.
‘You know what I like about out here?
The air's clean.
Jed didn't say anything.
Mitch swung his legs across the bike, braced his foot on the kickstart, and pushed down hard.
The engine fired.
Jed squinted into the low yellow sun.
‘Safe trip, Mitch.’
Mitch nodded.
‘Be well.’
He fitted his goggles over his eyes.
‘Sell lots of ice-cream.
The back tyre mimed a shallow S, then the bike straightened up, began to shrink.
The rasp and snap of the engine bounced against the walls of the houses behind him, tumbled over the rocks and dust beyond.
There were gaps as Mitch eased his wrist back on the throttle.
Then one long hum that slowly faded, became part of the silence.
When Jed turned round, he saw Celia standing on the road.
She was dressed in nothing but her cotton nightgown and her cardigan.
Her feet were bare.
He knew what she'd done.
She'd crept out through her bedroom window, but she'd left half a dozen coarse blonde hairs behind her, flickering on the damaged flyscreen wire, like evidence.
‘He's gone,’ she said.
He nodded.
‘I liked him.’
She tipped one ear to the road, listening to the last of Mitch.
The hem of her nightgown stirred.
‘Now he's really gone.’
She moved her toes in the orange dust at the edge of the road.
‘He didn't stay long, did he?’
‘Why would he stay?’
‘I don't know.’
She scratched her ribs through a tear in the cotton.
‘Why did you?’
He stuck his hands in his pockets.
Then took one hand out again and picked at his neck.
The sun prickled on his skin.
Those early rays could feel like insect legs.
After Mitch came through, things were never quite the same.
It was as if Mitch had left the freezer door ajar.
There was the distant drone of an alarm and things began to thaw.
Celia stole into his room one day while he was out at work.
When  he came home he found her peering into the well of his top hat.
He took it away from her.
‘Moon Beach,’ she said.
Her eyes were wide as new horizons.
He heard the voices of the power-station boys on the street below.
They always got drunk at the Commercial Hotel when their shift was over.
He wanted Celia to leave.
She pulled the blankets back instead and took off all her clothes.
‘What about Mrs O'Neill?’ he said.
Celia laughed.
‘If it's not on TV, she's not interested.’
But he wouldn't fuck her, so she went to sleep.
He paced round the bed.
Felt invaded, nervous.
‘You're not ugly,’ she said later, though nobody had mentioned ugliness, not even once.
‘You're more sort of, I don't know, hurt.’
She was lying on her back, pulling lazily at one of her nipples, watching it stretch.
‘Your skin,’ she said, ‘it shows it.
Like you had boiling water on you or something.
Like you were scalded.
Did that happen, Jed?
Did you have boiling water on you?’
Her voice had brightened suddenly.
She thought she was on to something.
She thought she could know him as well as he knew himself.
Maybe she thought she could know him better.
He turned away from her.
He didn't want to look at her.
He knew what the expression would be.
All blown-up with sleeping.
Fat with trust.
People were always telling you things.
What did they think they were, mirrors?
Did they think that was the only way you could find out who you were, by listening to them?
He went and stood by the window.
Adam's Creek, midnight.
View from the second floor of Mrs O'Neill's boarding house.
A yellow light in the street, the yellow smudged with coal or dust.
One telegraph pole, with a metal sign attached: MAIN STREET.
A railway line.
Just then a row of trucks rattled from right to left.
They looked like giant soft-drink cans on wheels.
They always passed at about the same time, right after midnight, and it was something he liked to watch, the way other people watch sunsets or the ocean.
It was like letting your breath out slowly, it took him far away from himself.
A man moved in front of the silver trucks, moved in the opposite direction.
Shoulders pulled back, fists knocking against his thighs.
‘He's late tonight.’
Celia shifted in the bed.
‘Who is?’
‘Wayne.
A silence.
‘You're all locked up,’ she said.
‘I wouldn't be surprised if you were all rotten in there.’
He turned again, surprised.
He saw her breasts spilling across her ribs and that chip missing from her tooth where her brother hit her with a stone.
She didn't know she was right.
She was just saying stuff.
He saw her breasts and her broken tooth, and he moved towards the bed, seconds away from fucking her.
It was best when it felt like you were fighting gravity, fighting the pull of forces greater than yourselves.
just now they were in the same place, like Wayne and the trucks, but sometime soon they'd be miles apart.
Still.
He'd allowed her closer than anyone else, and when his clothes were off and he was tired she read him the way she read the weather or the mountains or the dust, she ran her fingers over his pale, scarred body and she guessed close to the truth.
They were still driving up to Blood Rock.
Sometimes they'd fuck right away, or sometimes they'd wait till they were about to leave, but they'd always do it on the sheet, the same sheet he'd brought that first time, as if , without it, some spell might be broken and everything would fall apart.
By now it was stained with blood, but Celia liked that, she thought it was romantic.
‘It looks like flowers,’ she said, ‘like roses.’
The sheet was a diary of their meetings, a history of their love.
She suspected it might have special powers.
If you wrapped it round you, for instance, it'd keep you from feeling any pain.
Or if you spread it on the ground you could study it like tea-leaves and read the future there.
Jed wasn't so sure, he didn't like the idea that the future was all decided already and he didn't know anything about it, but he indulged her, and the bloodstains remained, and grew.
He couldn't have got rid of them anyway, even if he'd wanted to.
He'd tried once, secretly, in Mrs O'Neill's washing machine, but the powder wouldn't shift them.
It just wasn't true what they said in those commercials.
The last time they went to the rock, everything began the same way as usual.
The sun was going down, the power station laid a creased white sleeve of smoke against the darkening sky.
She sat and stared at the view, while he opened the trunk and lifted out the sheet, complete with its light-brown rose of blood.
When she turned and saw the sheet spread out on the ground she smiled and scuttled through the dust on her heels till she was next to him.
He put a hand on her shoulder.
Reached into her mouth with his tongue and moved it across her uneven teeth.
Felt that tiny missing triangle.
A murmur lifted in her throat like the sound of the wind  blowing.
His hand dipped through the buttons on her dress, grazed her nearest breast, felt the nipple gather.
They fucked and fucked, and the flower on the sheet blushed red and grew new petals.
A slow breeze moved across his naked back.
She smiled at him with her mouth, her eyes wide and still.
‘Where's your wedding ring?’
He wasn't quick enough.
‘What wedding ring?’
‘You've never been married,’ she said, ‘have you?’
And, to his surprise, he said, ‘No.’
He pulled out of her and lay down.
His face seemed pressed against the sky.
There was a long silence.
Then an aeroplane flew by.
It was so high up, it whined like a fly.
‘You've been lying all along,’ she said.
Sooner or later he'd known that he would tell the truth.
You can lie and lie beautifully, but sooner or later the truth comes back like a wave and sweeps everything before it.
The people of Adam's Creek had accepted him.
People like Celia.
People like Wayne and Zervos.
They thought he was a bit peculiar, maybe, but they'd accepted him all the same.
Peculiar, but not a liar.
Well, they were fools.
They were all fools.
He'd been like that once, he'd trusted and believed, and look what had happened to him.
He'd been thrown away.
Thrown away like a candy wrapper, thrown away like trash.
In his head they were trash too, for trusting and believing him.
Part of him didn't want to get away with it.
Part of him wanted to be found out and punished.
And so he'd told Celia the truth.
And now there was nothing else he could say.
There was one thing he hadn't lied about, and that was her blood, how much he'd loved and honoured it, that wasn't a lie.
But it wasn't enough to save them either.
And she wouldn't listen now.
She turned her face away.
He could only see one ear, some damp hair.
When he leaned over her, tried to bring her face back, she tucked her lips inside her mouth and wouldn't speak.
It wouldn't have been enough, though.
It really wouldn't.
She belonged in this stage set, among these lies.
She belonged here, where things weren't real.
It was a warp in time, a secret crease in space.
This precipice, this sheet.
She was here, but he wasn't.
Not really.
It wasn't really him.
After he dropped her outside her house that evening he never saw her again.
He woke up every day and went to work at the ice-cream parlour, but he began to hate the taste, the sight, the very thought of it.
It was his life, all that frozen mess.
His fury when the doorbell  jangled and a family of tourists in shorts and visors came babbling in.
His fury while they scanned the world of forty-five flavours.
‘Fudgana?’
They'd be blinking, their heads tilted at him, all at different angles.
‘What's Fudgana?’
‘It's our special,’ he'd hiss.
‘Four scoops of vanilla with hot fudge, banana wheels and whipped cream.
It's two-fifty.’
They often had Fudgana and they were often, he hoped, violently sick in the car about half an hour later.
His fury, his revulsion.
One day he took the afternoon off without telling anyone.
He drove out past the graveyard where he'd stood alone in the wind and hurt.
He drove out of town and just kept going.
There was nothing west of Adam's Creek, nothing for miles.
A low range of hills lifted in the north, yellow, rumpled, threadbare, as if someone had been carrying a lionskin and had grown tired of it and had thrown it down.
Otherwise the land was flat and hot, studded with dull stones.
Shreds of rubber twisted and coiled at the edge of the highway.
Just tyres that had burst.
When he first set foot in Adam's Creek he used to think they were snakes or lizards, some kind of reptile anyway.
It was that kind of country, somehow, safe things looked dangerous, specially in the corner of your eye.
Or maybe the landscape was his mirror, and he was just seeing himself.
In any case, he was still deceived sometimes, even after six years.
He drove further than he meant to.
The road was so straight, it was hard to stop.
Stopping would've been like looking away from a hypnotist's swinging silver watch.
His long spine ached, and his eyes felt hot and flat against the windshield, like eggs broken on to a rock.
The dense grey sky seemed denser than before, so grey in places that it seemed almost green.
Then he saw the sign.
A wooden sign stuck at the beginning of a red dirt track.
LAKE QUIRINDI, it said.
24 MILES.
He took the turning without knowing why.
Thinking, maybe, that it would break the monotony, the tedious spell of the highway.
He had to drive now, where before he had merely steered.
There were pot-holes to avoid, riverbeds to cross.
It seemed to give him a purpose which, up until he saw the sign, he hadn't had.
Though he couldn't have said what that purpose might be.
Soon there was nothing except the laboured surging of the engine and his head jolting on his spindly neck and a swarm of red dust in the rear window.
He seemed to have been driving for ever.
He'd be reaching the lake soon, and then what?
A sudden vision of Celia, and  the blood rushed to that part of him.
He took one hand off the wheel and tried to push it down.
He couldn't leave it there for long.
He was driving fast and the road kept surprising him.
Those riverbeds could snap an axle as crisply as the way that Zervos snapped his fingers when he danced.
One of those deep troughs of dust could suck his wheels down, and there'd be nobody passing on this road, not for days, maybe, maybe not even then, and he hadn't thought to bring water along or tell anybody where he'd gone, it had all happened too fast, there hadn't been a moment.
He sat up straighter and locked both hands on the wheel.
He could die out here, and he wasn't ready.
It wasn't his time.
The loud engine, the road slippery with dust.
And then he came over a rise and saw the lake below.
He stabbed the brake, stabbed too hard, and his back wheels slurred in the dirt.
There was no water.
Now he remembered someone telling him about this place.
The lake itself had dried up thousands of years ago.
It was some kind of ancient burial site.
Relics had been unearthed.
Pots, charms, bones.
There were sand dunes here, he remembered.
They'd been given names by the local people — the Grand Canyon, the Great Wall of China — on account of the strangeness of their formations.
He could just make out the sand dunes now, a blond strip on the far side of the lake, a good ten miles away.
He let the car forwards, down the hill, and on to the white road that led across the lake bed.
Halfway across he imagined the water there again, he saw the lake fill up, some ghost of the ocean haunting him, and shuddered at the thought of drowning in such loneliness, in such heat.
There were no animals here.
Only a twitching at the edges of his vision.
Snakes, he thought.
And then he thought: Tyres.
Just tyres.
He stopped the car where the road lost itself in sand and got out.
He stood still and listened.
Heard one bird.
It sounded like a tap dripping.
Give it time and it would fill the lake all by itself, just with its song.
The air was thick.
So thick that the oxygen seemed buried in it, hard to extract.
Breathing like mining.
He looked up at the sky.
Clouds on the boil, the whole sky simmering.
White cracks showed in the grey, white cracks fanning out like the bones in the wings of birds.
He looked down again and the sand seemed pink in this storm light.
He began to walk, his eyes still on the ground.
He passed scattered jawbones, pale twists of wood.
He stopped and picked one up, and  was surprised by how light it was.
Everything had been sucked out of it.
All the wood's blood gone.
He was climbing now.
The sand under his feet had been crusty at first, ribbed, but now it was turning smooth, soft, unmarked.
He'd left the castles and the monuments behind, he was climbing a dune that was featureless, untouched.
Another footprint would've been a shock, a threat.
The wind had risen.
His ear to a seashell.
There was only that now, the hollow roar and scrape of the wind and the scuffing of his feet in the sand.
He lifted his eyes and saw that he was almost at the top.
He was about to move on when something tapped him on the shoulder.
Someone.
He jumped, spun round.
Nobody there.
And yet he could have sworn that someone had tapped him on the shoulder.
And then raindrops began to fall in the sand all around him.
Fat drops of rain placed in the sand, almost one by one, like counters on a board game.
But there was no board.
Or was there?
And then, just as suddenly as they'd started, they stopped.
It was the shortest rainstorm he'd ever seen.
He could count the drops.
There were thirty-six of them.
And then he knew what it was that had tapped him on the shoulder.
It was the first drop of rain.
And he knew what it meant too.
He'd been singled out.
He'd been anointed.
He was special.
Places like this, they knew.
He moved past the collection of dark holes in the sand and, with half a dozen steps, he'd reached the top of the rise.
He half expected ocean, the white towers of Moon Beach, but there was only land, land that looked infinite, land without end, and he stood still and stared, as if by staring he could make something happen, the first drop of rain already drying on his shoulder.
HEAVEN IS A REAL PLACE
The phone woke Nathan out of a deep sleep.
He reached out, and picked up the receiver.
‘Yes?’
‘Nathan?’
He could tell it was long-distance, the line was so gravelly and hollow, but he didn't recognise the voice.
‘Who's this?’
‘It's Georgia.’
Georgia?
His eyes opened.
This was unheard of, Georgia never called.
He was about to make a joke about it when she said, ‘I don't know how to say this.’
She sounded strict, almost officious.
It took any jokes he might've made and threw them away.
‘I've never said it before.’
She paused.
‘My dad's dead.’
She paused again.
‘Sorry, I don't know why I said that.
He's your dad too.’
They were on the phone for an hour, not really speaking, a few words scattered among the silence.
They were linked, that was the important thing.
It was as if they were clinging to each other, and they couldn't let go.
If one of them hung up they'd be tom apart again, three thousand miles.
Afterwards he couldn't move.
Something lowered over him like glass, something seemed to be positioned between him and the world.
He could see his room — the white walls, the shelf of shells, the ocean in the window — but they could've belonged to anyone, they meant nothing.
Then the crying came, surprising him.
Came like a sudden gust of wind, banging doors in him, shaking him to his foundations.
Later, he sat on the bed, his insides chilled, his throat raw.
He tried to sleep, but sleep hid somewhere else.
He switched the radio on, just for the company of voices.
He thought maybe he'd make some soup.
It seemed absurd, everything ordinary did, but he made it anyway.
In the afternoon he ran through light rain to buy a plane ticket home.
An hour into the flight he noticed a woman in a black dress sitting across the aisle from him.
She clutched a bouquet of flowers in both hands, and her lips moved constantly, as if in prayer.
Then, as the  plane began to circle above Moon Beach, her head drooped and tears fell into her lap.
The stewardess tried to comfort her, but the woman waved her away without looking up.
Nathan turned to the window.
He had a curious feeling of release; other people had taken portions of his grief upon themselves, and they were expressing it on his behalf.
He was feeling lighter and lighter with every second that passed.
There was helium in his blood.
He could've floated clean away.
Was this how you were supposed to feel?
Dad's dead, he told himself, dead.
The way you might pinch yourself to see if you were dreaming.
But he felt nothing.
Nothing except this lightness, this elation.
The plane banked, and he pressed his face against the cold window.
The ocean tilted up to meet him, its dark surface studded with points of light that looked like constellations, fallen stars.
The tourist sitting next to him asked him what they were.
Nathan explained that the bright lights marked the boundaries of the ocean cemeteries.
The lights that were fainter were memory buoys.
They were the equivalent of tombstones on land: they marked the actual graves.
While he was talking he noticed scratch-marks on the water, hundreds of white gashes, and suddenly the captain's voice, crackling over the intercom, interrupted him.
The ships they could see on the right side of the aircraft were returning from a rehearsal for the service of remembrance that was held on the ocean every year.
Towards the end of the week, in case they hadn't realised, a unique festival was due to take place in Moon Beach.
It was known as the Day of the Dead.
Nathan leaned back in his seat.
He hadn't realised.
Of all the weeks to be flying into Moon Beach, he thought.
Of all the times for Dad to die.
When he was young, it had been one of the days he most looked forward to.
Yvonne would come and stay, and she'd always bring a fish with her, a huge fish freshly caught from the ocean, and she'd gut it on the kitchen table.
Fish should be eaten, she said, because fish were the guardians of the soul, and she was so powerful in her belief that nobody dared to disagree.
He remembered how the fish lay gaping on its bed of newspaper, the flesh dark-red and subtly ribbed where it was split in half, and Yvonne with her sleeves rolled back and her wrists dipped in blood that smelt of tin.
It was a day that abounded in peculiar traditions.
Pass any candy store in the city and there'd be marzipan skulls and sugar fish and little white chocolate bones for 5 cents each.
Pass any bakery and you'd see cakes slathered in blue icing, cakes sprinkled with sea-salt.
If you made a Day of the Dead cake at home you always hid a coin in it, and the person who found it was supposed to live for ever.
Once, when she was four, Georgia had swallowed the coin and almost choked.
It was still one of her favourite stories about herself.
In the afternoon there'd be costume parties.
You dressed up as Lazarus or Frankenstein, or you went as one of your dead relations.
Or, if you couldn't think of anything else, you just wore something blue because that was the colour you went when you were buried at the bottom of the ocean.
And everywhere there were bowls of candy and slices of special home-made Day of the Dead cake.
He could still remember the taste of that blue icing.
Nobody's mother ever got it right.
You always had to spit it out and shove it down the back of some chair.
Later, when it grew dark, a fleet of ships would set sail for the ocean cemeteries, and the remembrance service would be held.
Lying awake in his room, he'd imagine the boats rocking and the priest's voice pushed and pulled by the wind.
And then, later still, after the boats had gone, the dead would rise from the ocean bed and walk on the water.
They gathered the flowers that had been left as offerings, they blew the floating candles out.
Smoke that smelt of churches poured from the wicks, drifted over the slowly heaving ocean, hid their feet.
It was a night of strange occurrences.
It was the night that everyone was Jesus.
The plane landed.
He said goodbye to the tourist and wished him a pleasant stay.
From the airport he took a train into the city.
He travelled in the buffet car, leaning against the window with a drink.
The track ran parallel to the South Coast Expressway, through land that was flat, a wasteground of weeds and shale.
It was almost ten now, long after rush-hour, but the road was bright with cars.
Southbound there were tailbacks for miles.
Thousands drove in for the celebrations.
All Friday night the streets would be packed with people dressed from head to toe in blue.
Sometimes they painted their hands and faces too.
Sometimes they dyed their hair.
That was what you did in Moon Beach.
Turned blue once a year.
And then, sooner or later, you turned blue for ever.
Now they were racing through the inner-city suburbs on slick rails.
Rialto, Euclid, Mangrove West.
The eastbound helix coiled against the sky like a giant concrete snail.
Beyond the tenement blocks and the shopping malls lay the ocean, a black cloak spread on the ground, a hem of white foam where the waves broke.
The train pulled into Central Station and Nathan stepped down on to the platform with his case.
Moon Beach Central had been built in the style of a temple.
A  floor of polished marble, a domed ceiling of gold mosaic.
Footsteps merged with voices, merged and echoed, the air seemed to be filled with whispering, the sound of prayer.
Nathan walked swiftly to the exit.
He passed posters for funeral parlours and women shaking tins for God.
Heat, such heat, even at ten o'clock at night.
There was an old man from one of the doom societies.
He was raving about Armageddon and the fires of hell.
He had to keep breaking off so he could mop the sweat from his face and neck.
Nathan hailed a taxi on the front steps of the station.
‘The west shore,’ he told the driver.
‘Blenheim.’
The driver eyed his case.
‘You on vacation?’
‘I live here,’ Nathan said, then he corrected himself.
‘I grew up here.’
The driver was searching for a gap in the traffic.
‘It's like a fucking circus tonight.’
Nathan grinned.
Moon Beach taxi-drivers were famous for their pessimism, their own vicious brand of gloom.
‘The paper the other day,’ the driver was saying now, ‘you know what it said?
It said people aren't dying fast enough.’
He put a finger to his temple like a pistol.
‘Is that crazy or what?’
Nathan agreed that it was crazy.
‘The funeral parlours, that's a business, they got to expand, but people're living longer than before, advances in medicine, right?
So there's all this advertising to get people to move here.
Suntrap of the south, the gold coast, shit like that.
They're giving people tax breaks, casino vouchers, free cars.
You name it.
You know why?
They've got to feed the funeral parlours, that's why.
You listen to those buildings sometime.
You can almost hear them chewing, man.’
They passed the Moon Beach Hilton.
This was the traditional venue of the Annual Day of the Dead Ball.
Blue tie and tails, of course.
They passed the Paradise Corporation building.
That famous cross of white neon would soon be glowing blue.
You can almost hear them chewing.
‘Maybe you're right,’ Nathan said.
‘Sure I'm right.
You been away too long is all.’
The driver tipped his head back, without taking his eyes off the road.
‘How long you been away?’
‘About four years.’
‘What did I tell you?’
Nathan conceded the point.
‘And I wouldn't be back here now if my dad hadn't died.’
‘Your father died, you say?’
‘Yeah.’
‘I'm sorry, man.
‘It's all right.’
‘No, really, I'm sorry.
I wouldn't've talked that way if I knew that.’
They were in Blenheim now.
Nathan leaned forwards, stared at scenery that, even in the dark, he knew off by heart and could recite.
That tree, that store, that view.
And there was the gatepost Dad had driven into because he'd been eyeing some young girl instead of looking where he was going.
Nathan smiled.
Then they were turning into Mahogany Drive and something lurched inside him, as if it was love he was meeting, not death.
They pulled up outside the house.
He put his case on the sidewalk and paid the driver, then he looked over his shoulder.
Viviente .
The name had taken on an ironic, almost malicious air.
The whitewashed walls were stained with mould.
The windows skulked behind their black wrought-iron grilles.
The paint had chipped off the gate.
The house must have looked like this, he thought, when his parents first arrived, more than thirty years ago.
It had come full circle.
Now he could imagine children being frightened of it.
Only the bravest would break in, light fires on the tile floors.
He turned to thank the driver, but the taxi had gone.
He looked up just in time to see the two red tail-lights drop behind the hill.
He shrugged and, picking his case up, walked towards the house.
He rang the bell.
The door opened and Harriet stood in front of him.
He thought for a moment that time had been operated on.
A nip here, a tuck there, and it was seven years ago.
But then he noticed her hair, she'd dyed it black, it curved round and down, into her jawbones, and the skin above and below her eyes looked shiny and hard.
She'd aged.
This realisation touched him, took the shock of seeing her and softened it.
‘I tried to call you this morning,’ she said, ‘but you'd already left.’
‘That's all right,’ he said and, stepping forwards, he kissed her on the cheek.
As he moved past her, into the hallway, she took his arm.
‘About Yvonne,’ she said.
‘What about her?’
‘It's been very hard on her.’
‘Is she here too?’
Harriet nodded.
‘I just wanted to warn you.’
He walked down the tile hallway and into the kitchen.
It was a big room with a polished oak table and a door that opened to the garden.
Yvonne was sitting at the table with a cheroot and a tall glass of wine.
Veiled in smoke, only dimly visible, she looked like the result of a magic trick.
‘Yvonne,’ he said.
‘Oh Nathan,’ she cried out, ‘thank God you're here.’
They embraced.
He could smell jasmine, garlic, turpentine, and, closing his eyes, he could cling to the illusion that nothing had changed.
But she was talking into his shoulder.
‘You're so late.
We were worried about you.
Smiling, he pulled away from her.
Her hair was the same bright copper glow, and yet, below it, her face had collapsed in heavy folds, like cloth.
‘I know,’ she said, ‘I look dreadful.’
She shrugged and reached for her cheroot.
‘I suppose it's the grief.’
‘You look like nobody else,’ he said, ‘same as always.’
He held her again, then he looked round.
‘Where's George?’
‘She's going to be late,’ Yvonne said.
Harriet handed him a glass of wine.
‘She said she'd come and wake you up when she got back.’
‘You must be hungry,’ Yvonne said.
She made him a sandwich and brought it to the table.
He looked down at it, smiling.
‘What's so funny?’ she said.
He held the sandwich up.
‘It's the first sandwich you've ever made me that hasn't got any paint on it.’
They opened another bottle of wine and sat round the table.
He told them about the journey down, the woman in black, the taxi-driver.
Yvonne lit another cheroot, filled the room with the smell of the inside of cupboards.
Harriet washed the dishes.
They muttered in the background.
It all seemed quite familiar, ordinary, relaxed.
That, in itself, was strange.
He felt snapped back into a past that had never happened.
At midnight Yvonne went to bed.
There was still some wine left in the bottle, so he stayed up with Harriet to finish it off.
Harriet seemed to have forgotten the grievances she'd had against him.
It was as if that letter had never been written.
He remembered something Georgia had said about her once.
‘The fights we had, they blew away like bad weather.
Mostly I got on with her.’
He looked up again just as Harriet spoke.
‘You must've been surprised when I answered the door.’
He smiled.
‘Yes, I was.
‘You weren't angry?’
He shook his head.
‘No.’
Anger wasn't something he'd felt even a flicker of.
Her eyes lingered on him, then believed him.
‘You see, I had to come.
‘Why?’
She tapped her cigarette against the edge of the ashtray.
‘It was like an instinct.
I loved him.
When you love someone like that you want to say goodbye.’
‘I thought you said goodbye seven years ago.’
Her face hardened.
She crushed her cigarette against the side of the ashtray.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘I didn't mean it to sound like that.’
She stared down into her drink.
‘Just because I left him,’ she said, ‘it doesn't mean I stopped loving him.
I just couldn't live with him any more.
I couldn't breathe.’
She lifted her drink and swirled it around.
‘I just had to get away, that's all.’
He could imagine the suffocation, he really could.
The string that had once been fastened lightly round her toe had tightened during the years of marriage, slowly tightened into a leash.
And she'd strained at it, strained at it until it snapped.
But, looking into her face, it didn't seem as if her years of freedom had been particularly kind to her.
There were those, of course, who'd say that she'd only herself to blame.
She shouldn't have left, should she?
He turned his glass on its base.
‘What does Yvonne think about you coming back?’
‘I don't think she minds.’
‘I was going to say.
You seem to be getting on pretty well.’
She fastened on to his meaning.
‘Yes, that's funny, isn't it?
She never had much time for me before.’
‘She thought you were too young,’ he said.
‘She thought you were going to change everything.’
Harriet shook her head.
‘That wasn't the reason.
I think she was in love with him.
She wanted to look after him.’
He thought of those months after their mother died when Yvonne had come to stay.
He could still see her painting in the garden.
‘It would never've worked,’ he said.
‘Dad couldn't stand the smell of her cigars.’
They both laughed for a while and then fell silent.
‘Isn't it strange,’ she said, ‘how death can bring a family together?’
That night he decided to sleep in Dad's room.
When he opened the door and tuned on the light, everything was exactly as he remembered it.
The smell of vanilla and talcum in the air.
The glint of the green bottle on the glass shelf above the basin.
The seven pillows.
He thought of the last time he'd seen Dad.
When they said goodbye they'd embraced by the front door, a taxi waiting on the road outside.
He'd caught a glimpse of the two of them reflected in the hall mirror and his heart had lurched because it looked as if he was propping up a corpse.
Dad's body seemed to sag, as if his bones had turned to mush, and his breath, usually so fresh, smelled sweet, the sweetness of rotting plants or compost.
That sweet smell, it was strange how he'd recognised it.
That sweet smell was death's footman.
It was the announcement you heard just before death made its entrance.
Back on India-May's farm he'd hung that picture in his head.
He'd carried it around with him, framed by the mirror's gilt, like some kind of talisman.
So long as he remembered the frailty of Dad's grip on life, Dad's fingers would never loosen and let go.
That was how the superstition worked.
But time passed; the picture faded, moved him less.
He began to take Dad's life for granted again.
He forgot to remember.
Dad had lasted so long, it was tempting to believe that he would last for ever.
And that was fatal, of course.
He got into bed and lay down.
He thought he heard the foghorn once, off High Head.
Ten minutes passed, or maybe half an hour, it was hard to tell.
Then a voice rose out of the darkness, hovered in the air, almost visible, like a hallucination.
‘Nathan?
You awake?’
At first he didn't know where he was, whose voice it was.
He must have been asleep.
And waking suddenly like that, you woke in a thousand different places at once, all the places that you'd ever been.
It took him a moment.
‘Georgia?’
She was standing at the end of the bed with a candle.
The room bucked and tilted in the unsteady yellow light.
He watched her place the candle on the windowsill.
She came over and sat down and held him.
‘I didn't want to sleep in my old bed,’ she whispered.
‘I wanted to sleep here, with you.’
‘What time is it?’
‘I don't know.
It must be about one.’
The bed listed, creaked, as she climbed in.
‘Are you all right?’ he asked her.
‘I think so.
How about you?’
‘I'm fine,’ he said.
‘Just tired.’
‘Do you want me to blow the candle out?’
He shook his head.
‘I had a friend who used to say that if you burned a candle in your window and it burned all night, then the world wouldn't end while you were sleeping.’
Georgia smiled.
‘Who was that?’
‘She was called India-May.’
‘Funny name.’
‘She made it up.
It was the name she started using when she left home.’
‘Where is she now?’
‘I don't know.
I haven't seen her for ages.’
He'd called the farm about a year after he left.
He'd wanted to see how everybody was.
Pete had answered.
Pete was the one who'd told him.
‘She died, didn't she?’
Georgia said.
He looked at her across the pillows.
‘I didn't want to tell you.’
‘You did tell me.
You're my brother.
You tell me everything.’
He was silent.
‘How did it happen?’ she asked.
‘It was funny, people were always saying things about her, about how she'd come to no good —’ He stopped again.
‘Tell me.’
‘There was a bar in town, it was down at the end of the main street, right where the buildings ended and the scrub began.
There was a hill there, pretty steep, and the bar was at the bottom of it.
She went in for a drink one time, she liked a few drinks around midday, she used to say it helped the long hot afternoons slide by,’ and Nathan smiled to himself, because he could hear her saying it.
‘She met some guy in there that day, some guy she used to go with, and he must've said something because the next thing anyone knew, she was screaming at him, Pete was in the bar the morning after, he said the window was all over the floor, apparently she'd thrown an ashtray at the guy and it had missed and taken the whole window out instead, and when he took her by the arm and tried to calm her down, she shook him off and ran out of the bar, right out in the street, and like I said, it was the bottom of a hill and there was a truck coming —‘
He could see that part of Broken Springs so clearly, almost as if he was standing there.
There was a wall on the far side of the street which was always being knocked over.
Trucks would come hurtling  down the hill, their brakes would fail, and they'd plough right through the wall and on into the field beyond.
As soon as the wall was mended, another truck's brakes would fail.
He could see the bar opposite too.
The road dipping down into town and the bar with its brown tin roof and its dusty verandah, and a woman running out into the street, hair horizontal in the air behind her, strings of wooden beads swinging in a loop around her neck like a cow's jaw chewing, her mouth wide open, a wedge hewn out of her face, as if someone had taken an axe to her, as if her mouth was a wound and her screaming the bleeding.
He looked across at Georgia.
Her head on the pillow.
Her face still, as it sometimes was before she began to cry.
He felt for her hand and held it tight.
‘I didn't want to tell you,’ he said.
He watched their candle moving the shadows around, keeping the end of the world at bay, keeping the two of them alive.
‘I had to go to the hospital,’ she said eventually.
‘I had to collect his things.’
‘Did you see him?’
‘They asked me if I wanted to.
I said no.
I just wanted to get out of there.’
‘I think I've got to see him.
I haven't seen him for so long.
‘You'll have to call them.’
‘I'll call tomorrow.
‘Maybe I'll come too,’ she said, though her voice had shrunk at the thought.
‘My brother still,’ he said after a while, ‘aren't you?’
And he waited, and then he heard one word come back, spoken in a whisper, she must have been close to sleep.
‘Yes.’
The hospital lay in the hills, about an hour away.
Yvonne drove.
Georgia and Harriet sat in the back.
It was a bright day.
White, blinding clouds and a breeze in the treetops like hands in hair.
But Nathan felt a sickness rise in him at the thought of arriving, he didn't want the journey to end.
The sickness rose into his throat, and he had to keep swallowing.
He was glad that they'd all decided to come.
He wouldn't have liked to be doing this alone.
Nobody talked much on the way out.
As they climbed into the hills, the sky lowered over the car.
A light rain began to fall.
The road that led to the hospital sloped upwards through a forest  of pine trees.
It was a straight road, the kind of road that leads to a temple or a sacred monument.
Nathan looked out of the window.
Once he saw a glade, a secret place with a floor of pale, sandy soil.
Then the pines closed ranks again, their tall red trunks glowing softly in the gloom of the afternoon.
When they reported to the hospital reception, the nurse on duty showed them into a waiting-room.
They sat on orange plastic chairs.
There was a fish tank and a heap of magazines.
There were paintings of flowers on the walls.
A man in a white coat limped past the open doorway, pushing a trolley piled high with linen, a cigarette between his fingers.
Nathan stood by the window, and looked out into the gardens.
That morning he'd revived an old custom.
Leaving Georgia sleeping, he'd knocked on Yvonne's door and asked her if she wanted to go swimming.
They drove to a quiet beach west of High Head.
It was still early.
The sand took the glittery morning light and threw it back into his eyes like a mirror.
One wooden jetty crept out over the water on brittle insect legs.
And the waves, pale pale green and mauve between.
When he was tired of swimming he climbed a ladder to the jetty.
The wooden slats had bleached grey.
A creaking like old doors opening and closing.
The same rhythm as breathing.
He walked down to the end.
An old man was sitting on an upturned beer crate, a plastic bag for bait and a bucket of fish beside him.
He wore great clothes.
A maroon jacket and a panama hat with a shiny black ribbon.
White bristles stood out on his cheeks.
Nathan sat down.
The wooden slats were already warm from the sun.
He dangled his legs over the edge and let his body dry.
He could see Yvonne, she was floating on her back.
Beyond her, further out, a motor launch cut through the water.
Not long afterwards he felt the wash slopping against the jetty.
The jetty moved lazily, like someone in their sleep.
He watched the old man fit another piece of bait on his line and flick the hook backhanded through the air.
A prim plop as it landed, sank.
The old man tugged gently on the line.
‘What kind of fish are you catching?’
Nathan asked.
Smiling, the old man shrugged.
‘I don't know the name of it.’
It seemed right, what the old man said.
You sat in the sun, the hours passed.
In the end, sooner or later, something happened.
You didn't need to know the name of it.
After their swim, Nathan and Yvonne stopped for coffee and doughnuts in a diner on the highway.
They sat at a small table by the  window.
Sunlight on formica, salt on skin.
Yvonne began to talk about Dad.
‘I hardly ever saw him,’ she said, ‘but we used to talk on the phone for hours.
We used to send each other pictures.
Look,’ and she opened her handbag and reached inside, ‘this was one I'd been saving for him —’Her voice cracked and she began to cry.
He put his hand over hers.
‘It's all right.’
‘I'm stupid,’ she said.
‘No, you're not.’
‘All these people,’ she said.
‘I'm embarrassing you.’
He wanted to cheer her up.
‘Do you remember the time I was staying with you and that couple came round?’
‘Couple?’
She looked up, her eyes swollen.
‘That nervous couple,’ he said.
‘Their car broke down.
You let them use the phone.’
After they'd used the phone, Yvonne said they could wait in the lounge.
She sat them down on the sofa.
She gave them brandy.
The wife didn't know what to make of Yvonne at all.
Her eyes kept alighting on Yvonne and taking off again.
They tried the walls instead, but there were forty-six paintings on the walls.
Every colour moon you could imagine (and some you couldn't).
Nowhere to land, not unless you had a spaceship.
Her husband was braver.
He rose from the sofa and placed himself in front of a picture.
Green moon, yellow universe.
‘Very good,’ he said, ‘really very good.’
Yvonne was standing at the far end of the room in her red tent dress, her arms extended, a glass of brandy glimmering in one hand.
She looked like a sort of fierce lamp.
She took one step forwards and shouted, ‘Yes, I'm in the middle of my ball period, if you want to know,’ and the brandy slopped out of her glass and dropped into the part of the carpet that was orange and was never seen again.
‘I think they're moons,’ Nathan said.
Then he turned to the couple.
‘What do you think they are?’
But Yvonne couldn't wait.
‘Balls,’ she shouted.
‘They're balls.’
Yvonne was smiling down into her coffee.
‘Those were good times,’ she said, ‘weren't they?’
He pressed her hand.
They weren't good times, of course, they were terrible, but he knew what she meant.
‘I'm so sorry to keep you waiting.’
It was the sister.
She was standing in the doorway with a tight smile on her face.
‘We had an emergency.’
She ushered them down a long corridor through countless swing  doors.
The temperature dropped.
A morgue appeared on the left like a reason.
She talked to fill the silence.
‘Mr Christie was known here,’ she said.
‘He was lied’ well liked.’
These were dead sentences.
She might have been reading from a tombstone.
There was nothing you could say.
They passed through another set of doors and out into the open air.
It seemed cold up here in the hills.
Mist had collected in the trees.
There was a sense of abandonment and neglect.
A tip dripping endlessly.
They followed the sister across a lawn and into a small chapel built, like the rest of the hospital, out of crumbling red brick.
The vanished behind a velvet curtain.
They waited, not speaking.
A few moments later she appeared again and told them they could go in.
She warned them about the steep steps.
She said she'd be outside if they needed her.
Nathan passed through the curtain and stopped at the top of the steps.
Georgia stopped behind him.
She was peering over his shoulder, he could feel her breath on his neck, warm and then nothing, warm and then nothing.
Dad lay below, stretched out under a heavy cloth of blue and gold.
Two candles flickered at his head.
Nathan walked towards him, down the steps, across the stone floor.
They'd covered his face with a square of gauze.
It looked as if it had landed there by chance, like a piece of paper or a leaf.
The next gust of wind would blow it away.
Except there wasn't any wind.
The air was still, chilling.
His face was curiously smooth and youthful.
His mouth had fallen open in a kind of sigh.
There were no signs of violence, nothing to suggest that his death had not been peaceful.
He looked like a pope, Nathan thought, or a saint.
A holy man who'd prepared for his death, who might even, perhaps, have welcomed it.
It was only when he moved round to the side that he saw the blue, chapped ears and the hair, frozen and brittle, as if you could snap it off.
It was only then that he noticed how raw and scalded the neck looked, how it bulged.
Now that the death looked painful, now that he could see traces of a struggle, he began, in a kind of panic, to say things in his head, he began to talk to the dead man.
He said he was sorry for not visiting more often, sorry for not being there, for not, for not, for not, these omissions of his, these confessions, they rose into his closed mouth until it seemed that he might choke, they were  jumbled up, dislocated, like old bones in a crypt, but he knew they fitted together, he knew they would form a skeleton where he could hang the flesh and muscle of his guilt.
He looked at Georgia.
She tried to smile, but her smile wavered, didn't hold.
He remembered taking her to school, it was after their mother died, Georgia would've been seven, she didn't want to go, there were girls who tied her to trees, it was her accent or her looks, he couldn't remember now, but he had to take her because he'd promised Dad, Dad who didn't know anything, the scratches on her legs were brambles, the bruises on her wrists were something else, he couldn't remember now, how could they tell him the truth, how could they tell him anything when all he did was sit in dark rooms with his head in his hands, his head haunted by her ghost, and each dawn broke like the slow blow of a hammer.
It was a nice road, the road that led to the school.
High grass banks and trees for carving your initials on and ditches trickling with water.
One morning he saw a clock lying under a bush.
‘Look at that,’ he said, and crouched and peered, drawing her in, ‘a clock, how strange,’strange because it was an antique clock with inlaid wood and round brass knobs for legs, it should have been softly ticking away on someone wealthy's mantelpiece, a china shepherdess on either side, a marble fireplace below, and yet here it was, lying under a bush, and tilted at a curious angle as if it was drunk, and not ticking at all.
That morning they parted under the trees, he never took her all the way to the gates, that would only have made things worse, that morning she looked the way she always looked, rings under her eyes and her whole body braced for the ordeal that lay ahead, how hard it was to leave her always, maybe that was why they always drew the parting out, sometimes it took minutes, just the saying goodbye, they backed away from each other, then stopped and called something out, then backed away again, they called out special words that they'd made up, words to fill the distance between them, words for the things they couldn't say, they backed away till he was under the trees or she was through the gates, whichever happened first, she looked the same way she always looked that morning, except for one thing, she had a clock tucked under her arm, the clock they'd found together, the clock that didn't tick, the lonely clock.
It was the same thing, his sister then, his father now, Georgia walking towards a beating in the school yard, Dad fighting for breath in his red chair, he wanted to save them, only he could do it, who else was there, but he hadn't, he couldn't, not really, but the wanting to, the failure to, you couldn't get away from that.
Harriet climbed back up the steps.
Yvonne followed her.
He wanted to leave now too, but he had to make some kind of contact with the dead man first.
Touching the face through that gauze would have seemed like sacrilege, so he chose the hair instead.
He reached out cautiously.
It was stiff, chilled.
It was both wet and dry at the same time.
Like ice.
He shivered, turned away.
Georgia had been watching him.
‘What did it feel like?’ she whispered.
‘Cold,’ he whispered.
‘Not like hair at all.
She came closer, reached out, touched.
Then drew back quickly, as if she'd just been burned.
After leaving the chapel, they went walking in the gardens.
They set off from the same place but, like pieces of something that had just exploded, they each took a different course across the lawn.
Though later, driving home, Nathan saw it another way.
It wasn't like an explosion.
They were separate, there was space between them, but, like flowers in a vase, they were all standing in the same water.
The next morning Nathan and Georgia were required, as executors of the will, to meet with Dad's lawyer.
He was a dull man with bad teeth.
His jacket was ripped at the armpit.
They sat obediently in leather chairs while he read the document out loud.
A massive, antiquated fan whirred and clattered in the corner of the office, turning on its metal stem, examining them one by one.
The will was straightforward enough.
Dad had left slightly more money than expected, and that money was to be divided equally between Nathan, Georgia and Rona, Rona's share to be held in trust until she attained the age of eighteen.
The lawyer reminded Nathan and Georgia that the house on Mahogany Drive already belonged to them since, as they doubtless knew, their mother had died intestate and, when their mother's mother died some years later, the house, deemed to be two-thirds of her estate, became legally theirs.
(Yvonne, the other beneficiary, had received a cash settlement.)
Now their father was dead, the house was theirs to do with as they wished.
‘As for the manner of burial,’ the lawyer said, ‘it appears that your father wishes to be buried in the same place as his first wife.
In other words, a sea burial in Coral Pastures.Just in case there's any confusion,’ and he smiled, ‘he's written down the exact co-ordinates.’
‘Harriet's not going to like that,’ Georgia said.
‘Harriet?’
The lawyer's eyebrows lifted.
‘Our father's second wife,’ Nathan explained.
‘Our stepmother.
‘Of course,’ the lawyer said.
‘I met her once.’
And then he drew  his eyebrows down again.
‘Is she,’ and he hesitated, looking for the most delicate statement of his question, ‘involved in the proceedings?’
‘She's staying with us,’ Georgia said.
‘In the house.’
‘Ah,’ the lawyer said.
‘Yes, I can see how that might be awkward.’
He leaned forwards.
‘It will require,’ and he paused, ‘a certain amount of tact.’
On the way home Nathan turned to Georgia in the car and said, ‘It will require,’ and he paused, and then they both shouted, ‘a certain amount of tact.’
They laughed so hard that Nathan had to pull off the road.
Later, when they were over it, Georgia said, ‘I never knew death would be so funny.’
It was the morning of the funeral.
Almost twelve o'clock.
From where Nathan was sitting, in a chapel adjacent to the altar, he could hear the cathedral filling up.
Looking along the pew, he saw Georgia, Harriet, Yvonne, all three in profile, stern as the heads on coins.
He realised suddenly that he had to go to the bathroom.
He checked the watch on Georgia's wrist.
Five minutes till the service began.
There was still time.
Just.
He slipped out of the pew and hurried back down the aisle.
He was surprised at how crowded the cathedral was.
He hadn't realised that Dad knew so many people.
Once outside he paused.
He was standing in a square paved with dark-grey stone.
There were statues on pedestals, angels or statesmen, he couldn't tell.
A great many people sat at the feet of the statues or stood about in groups near by.
They were all dressed in black.
They were all crying.
Some dabbed at their eyes with handkerchiefs, others covered their faces and wept into their hands.
One man stood alone, his breeches held up with string, his arms pinned to his sides.
He shed tears the way a flower sheds petals, they fell to the ground, lay scattered round his feet.
It struck Nathan that these were all people who had been unable to get in.
But the pressure in his bladder was growing, and he set off across the square in search of a public toilet.
He turned down the first street he came to, turned left, right, left again, he walked down a hill, along an alley, through a deserted square, but still he couldn't find one anywhere.
He noticed a clock on the top of a building.
The two gold hands were almost one.
He had to get back.
And then, looking around him, he realised that he no longer knew where he was.
He began to run in what he thought was the right direction, but he didn't recognise  any of the buildings.
I was born here, he thought.
Surely I'll see something familiar soon.
He could hardly hear his thoughts above the rasping of his breath.
He saw an elderly couple approaching.
‘The cathedral?’
They consulted each other, they disagreed, they changed their minds.
At last they pointed back up the street, nodding and smiling.
‘Are you sure?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ they chorused gaily.
‘Yes, we're sure.
He ran off up the street, turned a corner, then another, and stopped.
Still no sign of the cathedral.
The elderly couple must have been mistaken.
He teetered on the brink of panic now.
One step forwards and he would fall headlong.
He looked one way, then he looked the other.
Sweat seeped into his eyes.
Thoughts came from all directions and collided.
He felt he might be going mad.
A car came towards him.
He stepped out into the road and waved his arms.
The man behind the wheel was only too willing to oblige.
‘Of course, of course ,’ he said.
‘Jump in.’
He seemed to think that Nathan was new to the city.
Every now and then he lifted a finger off the wheel and pointed out some famous bridge or statue or museum.
Nathan was about to free the man from his illusion when the man braked and, leaning across Nathan, opened the door for him.
‘There you are,’ he said.
Nathan got out and looked around.
‘But the cathedral.’
‘You're welcome,’ the man said.
And, shifting into gear, he drove away.
Nathan looked round.
Scrapyards, jetties, railway tracks.
The sun was setting.
He felt no sense of urgency now.
Waves were pages turning.
Railway trucks were edged in gold.
When he woke he was lying in Dad's bed.
Georgia was bent over the basin, throwing up.
It was the morning of the funeral.
The day proved awkward from the beginning, like a knife you can't pick up without cutting yourself.
Harriet slipped on the stairs and twisted her ankle.
Yvonne couldn't find the fish brooch that she always wore for funerals.
She lit a cheroot to calm herself, and promptly burned a hole in her dress.
Georgia had taken pills to settle her stomach, but she was still throwing up every hour.
The car arrived at two.
The funeral director had a cold; he had to keep reaching into the back for tissues.
‘Usually, of course, these are  for clients,’ he said, ‘but in this case, if you don't mind,’and he blew his nose again, and sighed.
Nathan glanced at Georgia.
She summoned up the makings of a smile.
‘I think the pills are beginning to work,’ she said.
He pushed the hair back from her forehead.
‘One thing about a sea burial,’ he said.
‘If you want to throw up, at least you can just do it over the side.’
They arrived at the Y Street wharf.
The chartered boat was already moored by the quay.
The traditional awning, white canvas with black edges, fluttered in the breeze.
A modest congregation sat underneath on benches.
As they waited for the casket to be hoisted on to the boat, Nathan noticed a preacher on the other side of the quay.
You could tell he was a preacher.
He had a microphone in his hand and his eyes were set way back in his head, as if he'd seen the Lord once too often.
Nathan watched him step on to a crate.
There was a crackle and a whine from the microphone.
‘This is God's distant early-warning system.’
A drunk lay slumped against an oil drum, a bottle wrapped in a brown paper bag beside him.
At the sound of the preacher's voice he twitched, wiped one eye with the back of his hand, and looked up, moistening his lips.
‘Heaven is a real place,’ the preacher said.
‘There are people up there right now, enjoying themselves.’
The drunk lifted his bottle and shook the last few drops into his throat.
‘Well, how about that,’ he said and, turning his head in the direction of the preacher, he shouted, ‘Hallelujah,’then he winked at Nathan, as if they were in this together, and fell back in a heap and shut his eyes.
The preacher turned his volume up.
His voice now carried across the quay to the boat, interfering with the sombre piped music.
Several members of the congregation looked round.
‘Seven years ago,’ the preacher informed them, ‘I was a useless person.’
He pointed at the drunk.
‘Seven years ago I was like him, but then Jesus,’ and his voice rose and wavered, and his eyes lifted to the sky, ‘yes, Jesus, he came to me and he planted the seeds of truth in me-’
A black woman stood below the preacher.
She tilted her head on one side as if she was trying very hard to understand.
Then she must've said something.
The preacher levelled a finger at her.
‘You've got a filthy mouth.’
His eyes scoured the small audience for support.
‘You see?
This here's what —‘
Suddenly Yvonne was standing below him.
She reached up, snatched the microphone out of his hands.
With two brisk movements she wrenched the wire loose and tossed the microphone into the water.
It was so brutal, and yet so matter of fact.
It was like watching somebody wring a chicken's neck.
‘Someone had to do it,’ she hissed through her black veil as she passed Nathan on the way back.
They followed the coffin on to the boat and took their seats in the front row.
The engines shuddered, the ropes were loosed; the quay slid backwards like a piece of moving scenery.
Nathan could still see the preacher standing, shocked and speechless, on his box.
The earthquakes in people's heads, half the city's population was cracked, a rabble of doom-merchants, psychos, ghouls.
They could smell a funeral a mile off, and out they crawled, out of the woodwork.
A funeral lit them up, it was like fuel, it kept them burning for days.
It wasn't just the old and the rich who moved to Moon Beach.
The city was like a dangerous bend in a road.
If you sat on that bend for long enough you'd be sure to see something.
A shadow passed the length of the boat and Nathan looked up.
The bridge arched high above.
This was where the harbour ended and the ocean began.
The boat lurched as the first real waves lifted the bow and dropped it again.
He glanced at Georgia.
Though pale, she seemed to be holding up.
She put her head close to his.
‘Everything's going wrong.’
He squeezed her hand.
‘It's so quiet,’ she whispered.
‘I hate it.’
He nodded.
Then he nudged her.
‘Dad would've liked it.’
She smiled at that.
It was quieter still when they reached the place.
They passed between two floating pedestals, the gateway to the cemetery.
YOU ARE NOW ENTERING CORAL PASTURES.
The engines cut out, some kind of anchor dropped.
Then only the slapping of waves against the hull, the creak and whine of timbers straining, the screech of gulls.
The priest rose to his feet and began to speak.
He talked of Dad's faith.
His courage and resilience in the face of adversity.
His sense of humour.
Nathan's mind wandered.
His mood seemed like a distillation of  his dream.
The panic, then the calm.
His eyes drifted over the side.
They were such queer, still patches of water, the ocean cemeteries.
The sites had been chosen carefully, between the main shipping lanes and north of the gulfstream, so they were free of disturbance, both from boats and from currents.
The ocean bed was a maze of fissures and ravines.
Nobody knew how deep they went.
There was a story about an oil tanker that had veered off course and steamed right through Heaven Sound.
That was the last anyone heard of it.
Helicopters were sent out, teams of divers too, but the water yielded nothing, not a single body, not a trace of oil.
There was a crash.
He turned just in time to see the coffin sink below the surface of the waves.
The engines spluttered, churned.
The congregation shifted on their benches, moved their feet.
Somebody coughed.
The boat swung round, cutting a neat sickle of white water on the ocean, and Nathan saw the city on the horizon, twelve miles away.
It must be a long time, he thought, since Dad had travelled this far.
The wake took place at the house on Mahogany Drive.
No more than a dozen people came.
Nathan moved among the guests, offering drinks, accepting condolences.
His dream came to him in flashes.
The packed cathedral.
All those people weeping.
How sarcastic that now seemed.
After an hour most people had left.
Yvonne looked round, assembling a courageous smile.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘at least they're together now.
Harriet was standing right behind her.
‘Who's together?’
And suddenly the air seemed deadened, as if there'd been an explosion.
The few guests that remained stood about in small, shocked groups.
It will require, Nathan thought, a certain amount of tact.
‘Who's together?’
Harriet asked again.
Nathan spoke gently.
‘Dad asked to be buried with our mother.
It was in the will.
Harriet put her glass on the table and left the room.
In the hush that followed they heard the back door slam.
Through the window Nathan saw Harriet stumbling down the garden.
‘I didn't mean —’ Yvonne began.
Nathan put an arm around her.
‘I know you didn't.’
‘Go after her,’ Yvonne said.
‘Make sure she's all right.’
She turned away.
‘I just wasn't thinking.’
Nathan left the house by the french windows.
He crossed the lawn  and passed through a covered archway.
The vegetable garden beyond had been allowed to run wild.
He walked between rows of fruit trees.
The fruit lay rotting, unwanted, in the long grass.
He passed through a second archway.
The wooden hoop supporting the foliage had almost collapsed beneath its weight.
He had to bend double to get through.
Once on the other side he stood still and looked around.
This was the part of the garden they used to call the Jungle.
There was something about the Jungle.
It wasn't big enough to get lost in, but almost.
When you stood in the Jungle, the house seemed dimensions away, as if , in order to get back indoors, you had to alter the way your mind worked, you had to think your way back in.
How foreign their names sounded when they heard them called.
How eerie.
And suddenly he remembered standing here, it was dark-green all around him, but the sky above was blue, the sun must've been setting, it was quiet, just the creak of a tree, the whir of an insect's wing, he'd been standing motionless, as if in a trance, and then he heard a voice, his mother's voice.
‘Nathan?’ she called, and he called back, ‘Yes?’but there was no second call, and he turned round, and there was nobody there, not a sound, and he felt strange then, he felt as if he'd been visited.
It couldn't have been far from where he was standing now, though he wouldn't have been able to say where exactly.
‘Harriet?’
He'd almost forgotten that he was looking for her.
If she was still in the garden, there was only one place she could be, and that was the summerhouse.
As he bent down and began to force his way through the undergrowth he could taste alcohol in his mouth.
It was a stale taste, musty, pale-grey.
‘Harriet?’
His voice only seemed to travel a few feet, then it stopped dead.
as if it had been swallowed up.
That was how that voice had sounded to him all those years ago.
Dead.
But near.
Against his ear.
That was why he'd turned round.
And then, when he saw there was nothing there, he ran.
He burst over the threshold and into the house, his right arm ripped open from the wrist to the elbow.
It must've caught on something, a thorn, a bramble, a sharp branch.
He hadn't noticed.
The blood ran down the inside of his arm, where the skin was pale, and collected in the palm of his hand as he held the wound out for Dad to look at.
He still had the scar now, twenty years later, a long thin groove down the inside of his right forearm, as if he was made of candlewax and someone had run their fingernail the length of it.
‘Harriet?’
He saw her as he called her name for the third time.
She was sitting on the steps of the summerhouse.
He was seeing small things with such clarity now.
A green leaf in her hair.
Part of a spider's web.
The whites of her eyes clouded with red.
She'd been crying, but she wasn't crying now.
When she saw him she attempted a smile.
It didn't quite work.
Her face was like a plate on a stick.
Spinning.
Balanced.
But only for so long.
The edges of her mouth were flickering, as if miniature hearts beat there.
He sat down beside her, put an arm round her shoulders.
He wanted to comfort her.
She turned and pressed her face against his chest.
She cried into the air below his chin.
He felt her shaking all the way through her bones and into his.
He looked up through the branches into the sky, waiting for her tears to pass.
The sun coloured the high branches a deep burnt orange.
Down below, where they were sitting, the air softened, became almost visible, as if shaded in with charcoal, closer to smoke than air.
A bird sang four notes and stopped.
The first three notes were identical.
The fourth started out the same way, then it stretched and lifted an octave.
It was as if the bird had asked a question in whatever language it spoke.
She looked up at him and her mouth, already close to his, moved closer, seemed to falter, then moved closer and they kissed.
He kept his mind completely still, it was like something preserved, like something in a jar in a laboratory, but his body came undone and shook, there was a sound inside him like the sound tracks make when a train's coming, that hiss and crack the length of his veins, that shudder in his blood.
He couldn't speak.
He knew this was something that had been happening slowly for a long time, something that had to happen or he was lost, but it was such a brittle structure they were building, one word would topple it, shatter it, one word would be enough to jerk them back into that ordinary daylight where nothing could be changed or righted, nothing could unravel.
He took her hand and led her up the steps.
It was the past inside, it was long ago.
A tennis racket, a pair of flippers, a garden hose.
The window with its barricade of foliage.
The light barely filtered through.
The smell of old dry rubber and dead grass.
The smell of the wooden handles of spades.
Two buttons of her blouse had come unfastened.
He could see her breasts tilting against the black silk.
She was sitting on his lap.
They kissed again.
He didn't need to see her face.
It was printed in his head, his memory.
His knees between the insides of  her thighs, she drew him sliding into her.
He bit her neck, that muscle at the back.
A gasp.
Her hair swung against his face, and something metal fell.
He heard himself, it sounded like a door opening somewhere inside him, it was an old door, it had been stuck for years, you had to heave on it, you needed all your strength, and then it gave a few inches, and cried out as it gave.
He felt silence descend and press on him.
He looked at her.
She was squatting on the floor, some distance from him.
‘Colours everywhere,’ he said.
She found a tissue, wiped between her legs.
‘You said that was what it was like,’ he said, ‘remember?’
She straightened her skirt.
‘We should go back.’
He watched her merge with the undergrowth until only her calves showed, pale as milk in the shadows.
It was done, she was gone; he was alone.