

ISSUE 68 £1.95
WEATHERED BUILDINGS
WATERCOLOUR
OILS
ART MATERIALS DIRECTORY
GOING WILD
GRAPHITE PENCILS
INSIDE ILLUSTRATION CHILDREN'S BOOKS
PASTEL PAINTING IN LONDON AT NIGHT, WAR ARTISTS — THE CHANGING FACE AT THE FRONT, ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT EASELS, PER HOWSON IN CONVERSATION AND ALL THE REGULAR FEATURES!!!
LETTERS
PAGE 5 
MIXED MEDIA
Maytime festivals, Pompeiian treasures, and the latest from the Art Materials Exhibition team.
Profile on Jane Bustin.
PAGES 6–9 
INSIDE ILLUSTRATION
ANIMAL MAGIC
The art of bewitching young imaginations is second nature to Tracey Boyd.
She reveals to Robin Loerch what illustrating children's books is all about.
PAGES 10–13 
IN CONVERSATION WITH THE ARTIST
PETER HOWSON
The grotesque becomes the sublime in Peter Howson's paintings.
Miranda Fellows reveals why Glasgow is a visual breeding ground for this artist.
PAGES 14–17 
STARTING OUT WITH GRAPHITE PENCILS
THE POWER OF THE PENCIL
Gary Hodges combines strength and subtlety in his animal drawings.
He demonstrates how the pencil is the perfect medium for his subject.
PAGES 19–21 
UNDERSTANDING PASTELS
NIGHTLIGHTS IN THE CITY
Nightfall beckons American artist Doug Dawson to take his pastels into the streets of London.
He explains how city lights make his pictures glow.
PAGES 23–25 
WORKING WITH WATERCOLOUR
TACKLING WEATHERED BUILDINGS
Urban decay and faded glory inspire Richard S Taylor to pick up his watercolours and go to town with the medium.
PAGES 26–29 
FOCUS ON EASELS
THE ESSENTIAL PROP
An easel makes light work of both studio and outdoor painting.
Our 20 point plan reveals all about the artist's most valuable piece of equipment.
PAGE 31 
ART MATERIALS DIRECTORY
OILS IN THE FRAME
Emma Pearce explores the creative options offered by oils, and weighs up the latest products on the market.
PAGES 32–35 
SERIES
FIGURE DRAWING WITHOUT A MODEL PART TWO
Ron Tiner takes you step-by-step through the methods behind figure drawing from the imagination.
PAGES 36–39 
SPECIAL FEATURES
PAINTING FROM THE FRONT
The depiction of battle has always been tempered by the social climate, as Ann Kodicek discovers in her study of war art past and present.
PAGES 41–43 
BOOK REVIEWS
We take a look between the covers at Alwyn Crawshaw's oil painting course, Bomberg's WW1 art, and working in mixed media.
PAGE 45 
QUESTION TIME
Making oil flow, drawing horses, the search for drawing pins and other queries from our readers.
PAGE 48  
Peter howson in conversation, Page 14 (left)
Gary Hodges, pencilling powers, Page 19 (ABOVE)
Oils in the frame, Page 32 (ABOVE)
Magical illustrations for children, Page 10 (ABOVE)
LETTERS
LETTER OF THE MONTH
The other day, I was having coffee with another mother/artist/housewife like me.
I showed her my January AIM, then she announced it was just like going to art school: she has had some training.
It struck me that since my discovery of AIM two years ago, my drawing, painting, and knowledge of other media and techniques have greatly improved.
So now I can say that go the AIM School of Art!
Keep up the good work as I still have a lot to learn.
Mrs E. Nichol Northumberland 
LETTER OF THE MONTH PRIZE
This month's letter of the month prize is a luxurious Cotman Watercolour Box from Winsor & Newton.
This polished wooden box is full of painting goodies, including 10x8ml tubes of Cotman watercolour, two Cotman brushes, a mixing saucer, cabinet saucer and artist's sponge to create special effects.
ILLUSTRATOR'S INVENTION
I'd like to say how much I enjoy AIM, and though the Illustrator 's is printed so much smaller than the Artist 's, please always remember that there are would-be illustrators — drawing and painting graduates, who rely heavily on any information on illustration that your magazine provides.
Certain issues are treasured by me, especially those mentioning where illustrator's material can be purchased.
I have never read of any firm in Britain from which I could purchase a light box.
However, with an old school desk whose lid is raised at an angle, an old glass oven door, and a table lamp minus shade, I've made one for myself!
So please, always remember the would-be illustrators!
Anne McGeogh Crieff, Perthshire 
TUTOR TROUBLE
I write with regard to the letter from JR Madelin in the January issue of AIM.
Several years ago, I embarked on a course in life drawing at a reputable London college, where the tutor would often make comments such as, ‘Splash it on, art is purely self-indulgence!’
Whilst ignoring his advice myself, I watched with great sadness as he gradually ruined the excellent draughtsmanship and ‘eye’ of two of my colleagues.
Several years later, I have found an excellent art group, where the tutor imparts actual technical knowledge rather than vague ramblings on the nature of art.
I believe it was Leonardo da Vinci who, upon receiving a missive from an acolyte asking ‘Who is thy master?’, returned him a single item: a pencil.
Keep drawing, Ms Madelin, you're in the best of company!
Jane Culmer East Grinstead 
RADIANT ROSES
Thank you so much for this month's beautiful surprise!
Opening February's issue at the Mixed Media pages.
I was amazed by the brilliance of Roses in a Jar by Marjorie Collins.
The flood of almost 3D colour and composition was one of the finest I've ever seen for colour flow.
The delicate painting of the rose petals invites one to almost smell the fragrance; how such a painting can be described as a still life is beyond me.
LJ Clews Rhos-on-Sea, Clwyd 
A MODEL EXAMPLE
As the 1992 Art Materials Exhibition looms over the horizon, I would like to share my experience from the last exhibition and make a plea for the next.
During the Saturday rush at the exhibition, I took breaks from working my way round the stalls to draw a model in the calm of the Hesketh Hubbard stand.
Through such breaks, an enjoyable day became memorable.
The model later came to Glasgow to pose for a life painting course.
She spent a week enjoying the beauty of Scotland and the beginning of the Edinburgh Festival, whilst I gained the opportunity to draw the most professional model I suspect it will ever by my privilege tow work with.
It made me wonder whether great figurative works owe more to the model or the artist.
My plea: give the Hesketh Hubbard society or similar a stand again so that people can escape the hurly-burly to an oasis of calm and do what the like best: draw!
Andy Beckly Carluke, Lanarkshire 
PENCIL NOTES
I have just read Tom Robb's article on watercolour pencils (AIM/Feb '92) and must comment on some of the statements made.
He states that the pencils do not contain watercolour medium.
The best pencils are equal in quality to watercolour and carry the term Artists , which is applied only to the best pigment-to-binder quality.
In my estimation, the best pencils are totally soluble, not relatively so as Mr Robb states.
Furthermore, Mr Robb's experiences of working onto damp paper seem at variance to my own trials.
An interesting effect can be obtained by brushing a few strokes of water onto the paper and drawing over the top.
When the pencil runs over the wet surface, the colour bursts and runs slightly, giving an out-of-focus effect, but returns to a crisp line on meeting the dry paper.
The best watercolour pencils are exciting to use, and are recommended to anyone looking to extend their media repertoire.
Jeffrey Perry, SWAG Worcestershire 
GOVERNMENT HEALTH WARNING
As a working journalist and keen amateur artist, I was particularly interested in the feature,Making TV News ,(AIM/Feb '92).
But, as I read the piece, I waited to arrive at a Government Health Warning, that sketching in court can seriously damage your reputation, not to mention your freedom!
Since I trained in 1969/70, it has always been drummed into trainees that taking photographs in court, or drawing, is regarded as contempt.
That is still the case and, comparatively recently, a South Wales editor was hauled before a Crown Court judge because a freelance artist had misinterpreted his instructions to do a sketch ‘from memory’, of certain proceedings involving the trail of a local man.
She positioned herself on a front bench, laid out her pastels and board, and began drawing under the eyes of the judge, who, be all accounts, turned a shade of puce.
I would hate to see any AIM readers get into any similar bother, and perhaps the matter can be clarified.
As I recall, the ruling is under the Criminal Justice Act, 1925.
Engraved on my memory are the words, ‘There is a complete embargo on taking photographs or sketching in the precincts of a court.
To take the photograph or make the sketch is an offence; so is it to reproduce it, wholly or in part, in a newspaper or elsewhere’.
Jean Parry Cardiff 
DUE TO LIMITED SPACE, AIM RESERVES THE RIGHT TO EDIT LETTERS WHERE NECESSARY.
We are always glad to hear your stories, complaints and, of course, your enthusiastic praise.
You haven't let us down yet, so keep those letters coming in!
The author of each issue's Letter of the Month will receive a special gift of art materials .
MIXED MEDIA
AMERICAN MYTHS
The repressive and censor-ridden atmosphere of the United States during the McCarthy era had a profound influence on the work of Abstract Expressionist artists.
In 1943, Mark Rothko attempted to deflect the notion that the movement amounted simply to escapism, stating, ‘We are concerned with primitive myths and symbols that continue to have meaning today…
There is no such thing as good painting about nothing.’
It is on this theme that the Tate Gallery Liverpool has put together a long-term display.
Myth-making: Abstract Expressionist Painting from the USA includes works by key artists of the movement, such as Pollock and de Kooning, and examines how the paintings capture the disillusionment with a failed society and the impetus to start anew.
Arshile Gorky, Waterfall, 1943, 154x113cm, oil on canvas.
Courtesy Tate Gallery Liverpool.
(ABOVE)
Since 1986, the Art on the Underground campaign has worked towards giving London commuters a taste for fine art.
The latest addition to the subterranean gallery is a depiction of rural Amersham by Dutch artist Lucas Kuys (RIGHT).
The subject is quintessentially British; the approach definitely European.
Look out for the posters.
ART FESTIVAL FOCUS
The month of May holds lots in store for eager festival-goers, as Oxfordshire, Dorset and South Wales all host their own art extravaganzas.
Oxfordshire's Artweek kicks off on May 16, with venues in and around Oxford , such as individual homes, studios, university buildings, shops and galleries throwing open their doors to exhibiting artists.
This year, Artweek celebrates its tenth anniversary, and events have a distinctly cosmopolitan flavour.
Guests artists from Eastern and Western Europe will be living, making and exhibiting work alongside their British hosts.
Information should be obtained from the director, Susan Brind.
Dorset Art week will take place from May 23.
Over 160 Dorset artists and craftspeople are opening their studios to public scrutiny, as 85 events simultaneously take place across the county.
Exhibitions of finished work are being held in galleries, craft centres, hotels and even churches.
Famous names such as Dame Elisabeth Frink and John Hubbard will be taking part in the activities.
Work in a diversity of media will be on show.
For details, contact Joanna Morland.
Ebb Bale in the heart of the South Wales valleys is the setting for the Garden Festival of Wales, May 4–October.
Artists have worked with the natural features of the landscape, creating sculptures from slag, mud and brick.
For further information, contact Jane Grundy.
ART UNEARTHED
In 79AD, the eruption of Mount Vesuvius submerged the Roman city of Pompeii in 15ft of lava and debris.
Since its rediscovery in the 18th century, excavation has continued to bring to light amazingly preserved artefacts.
Rediscovering Pompeii is a fascinating exhibition now showing at the Accademia Italiana London .
The reconstruction of a frescoed room takes centre stage at the show, as wall paintings portray an idealised and fantastic vision of a dream garden.
An array of sculpture is also on view, revealing the influence of mythology and foreign culture in classical antiquity.
Detail of a fresco found in a room with garden paintings, Pompeii, c 1st century AD.
Courtesy Accademia Italiana.
(ABOVE)
ART CLUB AND SOCIETY PROFILE
Before Marjorie Bridgman started Byfleet Art Group in 1968, local artists were compelled to make a weekly coach journey to the nearest available class.
When yet another painting was damaged in transit, common assent declared that enough was enough!
Now, the group has over 70 members and meets each Tuesday at the Youth Club, High Road, Byfleet.
Unlike many art groups, Byfleet's members actually paint and draw together, while tutor members are on hand to offer valuable and constructive advice.
The group also tries to cater for local artists who work fulltime and are unable to go to all classes.
Weather permitting, there are frequent painting and sketching expeditions available to all members.
The surrounding countryside offers plenty of creative scope, and so these trips are welcomed by the landscape enthusiasts in the group.
In addition, throughout the year there are demonstrations by visiting artists in varying media, such as Toned Paper Collage on May 5, and Light and Landscape on May 26.
The group welcomes amateurs and professionals of all ages and at all levels, and stresses that even the absolute beginner can come along unabashed.
Members are free to work on their own chosen subject if they desire.
The group also holds regular local exhibitions, open to all members, where works are snapped up by budding local art collectors.
The next exhibition will take place on July 25.
For details, contact Miss MR Bridgman.
Witty works are on show at the Ashmolean Museum Oxford , as the Art of Laughter brings together the cream of the caricature world.
But is it art?
Sir Ernst Gombrich, leading art historian certainly thinks so!
Go along and judge for yourself.
Literary giants have often been prime subjects for portraiture and George Bernard Shaw was no exception.
The National Portrait Gallery London brings together images of Shaw by artists such as Augustus John and Rodin, as well as photographic self portraits, to form a visual biography of one of Britain's greatest playwrights.
Augustus John, George Bernard Shaw, 1915, oil on canvas.
Courtesy National Portrait Gallery.
(ABOVE)
At the Whitworth Gallery,Manchester Discovering Sculpture brings together works ancient and modern.
STORAGE SOLUTIONS
Where do your art materials live?
We hazard a guess that they're lurking in a shoebox or, worse still, the ubiquitous carrier bag!
Adrian Arbib makes hand-crafted boxes which are useful not only for day-to-day storage, but also for outdoor expeditions and for transporting finished works.
The boxes are made from American cherry wood, and are French polished with maple veneer.
Dove-tailed assembly gives them added durability, and the corners are metal-capped to prevent scuffing.
Leather and brass fittings add a touch of luxury.
The boxes come in two sizes: 16x12ins (A3 size) and 16 by 20ins.
Prices available on request.
Available by mail order from Adrian Arbib, London.
Art MATERIALS EXHIBITION
THE ART MATERIALS EXHIBITION 1992
AT THE BUSINESS DESIGN CENTRE, LONDON
This year The Art Materials Exhibition will hold more new exhibitors, more new products and more new activities than ever before, with a strong emphasis on visitor participation.
Winsor & and; Newton will be creating six ‘mini studios’, each one dedicated to a different medium, where you will be able to sit down for 20 minutes and try out the materials whilst getting expert tuition in a small group.
To ensure you get a place on these sessions bring the free vouchers in the June Showguide to the studio areas on the gallery level and book yourself a place.
All participants will receive a free sample of the medium they have experimented with!
Levermore , also new to the exhibition, will be showing the exciting and versatile applications of their Markal paintsticks.
This highly original medium, oils and pigment in stick form, allows the artist wishing to work with oils to do so effortlessly, with no brushes and no mess.
The Exhibition Gallery Bays will also be teeming with diverse activities.
Try your hand at Batik painting with the Batik Guild or discover the fun of spray painting with ARCHTEC — a dynamic and talented group raising money for the homeless through art.
For budding artists who would like to stage their own exhibition, but are put off by the costs of framing, a visit to the Melford Fine Arts is a must.
They offer a variety of beautiful individual frames which can be hired for short periods allowing you to put together a professional exhibition at an affordable cost.
To book places on the many exciting seminars being run at the show and for further details of competitions and special offers call the Exhibition Hotline.
The Edding stand at the 91 Art Materials Exhibition — tailor-made to try their whole range.
(ABOVE)
‘Busy Bees’ by Rosi Robinson.
Batik on cotton.
See her at the exhibition and find out all about Batik painting.
(ABOVE)
MIXED MEDIA
MIXED MEDIA PROFILE
In Jane Bustin 's studio in London's East End, music plays all day: Bach, Mozart, Brahms.
She is usually working on a series of paintings and says, ‘One picture sets you off on a road, and I have to make perhaps six paintings before I come to a fork, onto another road’.
Patient, multi-layering of colour lies at her art's centre.
A picture might start off, for example, carbon black and end up, through multiple transmutations, of a diamond clarity.
Not untypically, one large painting took her five months.
Born in May 1964, Bustin, ‘grew up with the idea that I couldn't be an artist, since, one, I wasn't male, and two, I wasn't mad!’
This reasoning came from early reading of a Ladybird book on Lautrec, van Gogh and Gauguin.
However, this preconception was overcome, and she studied painting at Hertfordshire College of Art and at Portsmouth Polytechnic.
Art college taught her much about an artist's social responsibilities, but disappointingly little about the use of materials in painting, and how to earn a living as an artist.
It was doing specialist decorative finishes commercially, in the late 1980s, that she began to recognise paint's abundant potentialities.
‘I loved doing marbling, but hated sponging staircases!’
A series of painting, in late 1989–90, depict a young woman dressed in orange and white, amid glowing fallen leaves and paradisaical fruits.
Fields of light radiate from the surrounding darkness.
This is art as musical or spiritual sensation, very much in the tradition of the English artist, Cecil Collins.
In 1990 Bustin attended a fresco course near Florence.
‘Fresco is so different to oil painting.
It is built up in very thin washes.
I was taught scumble glazes, tonality and shadows’.
On her return to London she was excited at utilising her discoveries.
She began to find the woman in red, ‘irritating.
She was always waiting around.
I realised I wanted to use objects as symbols, instead of illustrative figures’.
By mid 1990, a radical new fork in the road had been reached.
She came to perceive layered paint as bearing a similarity to skin, like human sensibility which, when torn back, x-rays, as it were, could reveal hidden processes of pain and regeneration.
In new paintings, forms emerging out of intense polar backgrounds suggest internal organs, lips, bruises, vertebrae, seeds, pods and plants.
Here, the traditional split between what she calls ‘spiritual’ and ‘gut’art has, with great formal control, been reconciled.
The layers of paint are built up by the application of a thin wash, staining the primed canvas.
Two or three colours are mixed with linseed oil, which is poured, in sections, onto the horizontal canvas, which is then stood against a wall.
Paint drips, creating coagulated effects and spontaneous textures.
There are choices now to be made, how many layers to add, or whether literally to skin the canvas.
To Bustin, paint is alive, like skin, ‘it can be peeled back, or remain covered.
Edges can be scraped, scored with a palette knife.
There is a primitive desire to want to burst textures’.
Bustin says with determination, ‘I've decided to stop being tasteful’.
Like Francis Bacon, Bustin portrays flayed, seared humanity, yet unlike him, sees it in the context of a redemptive process.
Bustin spent the summer of 1990 in Paris, studying and painstakingly copying 18th century alchemical manuscripts.
Inspired by these researches, she has since worked on two series of small works, in which Rembrandt pastel is layered and fixed on paper, then multi-layered.
She makes use sometimes of ‘residues of dust which leave strange effects.
Why be restricted by tradition?
You can actually adapt materials to your particular way of working’.
These are mysterious pictures, befitting their origin.
PHILIP VANN 
Jane Bustin.
(ABOVE)
Sol et Luna, oil on canvas, 1990.
(ABOVE)
Of Life and Death — series, gouache on wood, Feb 1990.
(ABOVE)
INSIDE ILLUSTRATION
ANIMAL MAGIC
The popular art of illustrating children's books is deftly handled by TRACEY BOYD, whose animals take the reader into a world of magic, mystery and imagination.
ROBIN LOERCH reports.
TRACEY BOYD'S REPUTATION may rest on her magical illustrations of animals given human features, but her work is far from faceless.
Her ability to capture the humour which is too often missing in children's material has made her a firm favourite with children's book publishers alike.
Another quality, which soon becomes infectious on meeting her, is Boyd's childish excitement about her work.
The Circus Finale, taken from 1-2-3 by Nanette Newman and Tracey Boyd.
(ABOVE)
Tracey Boyd's original prints from her books:123 ,ABC and Nursery Rhymes adorn her home.
Each work has a price tag.
‘I've got so many pictures that I thought I'd have a clear out’, she explains, surrounded by the sale items which represent months of hard work.
‘I always try to keep one picture from each book back for myself.
I give it to my husband so that I can't sell it if money gets low’.
I enquired about her pricing system, ‘The more I like a work, the higher the price.
It doesn't have to be fair, does it really?’
Tracey Boyd has been an illustrator since 1980.
Her impressive portfolio ranges from greetings cards to fashion PR.
Since 1985, she has concentrated on children's book illustrations.
Apart from some early designs for greetings cards, the animal theme in Boyd's work didn't come to the fore until Macmillan commissioned her to illustrate a book to accompany Spike Milligan's verse.
Floored Masterpieces with Worse Verse was published in 1985.
The illustrations she produced for the book were based on copies of old master paintings.
But her copies had a witty twist.
She replaced the human faces with those of animals.
An elegant crocodile struck the pose of one of Modigliani's famous elongated models.
Pigs stood for the figures that lounge in the shaded wood of Manet's Dejeuner sur l'Herbe and Whistler's mother was transformed into a black cow.
STICKING WITH ANIMALS
Tracey Boyd has stuck with animals ever since.
‘I never found human faces very interesting’.
She insists, ‘during life drawing classes at art school, I used to love doing the bodies, but the heads were always faceless, always anonymous.
Animals lend themselves to humorous interpretations.
For instance, you can draw nice big nostrils on a llama's face.
Animals can also exemplify human characteristics.
Take for example the image of the sly fox’.
Floored Masterpieces made Boyd's reputation as a gifted young children's book illustrator.
‘About three years ago, before taking on ABC , I had to make a decision to stay in this line of work.
And luckily for me, it's worked out.
I've had books back to back, and, as a result, I don't get a chance to do much else.
But this is what I'm happiest doing’.
Boyd has developed a distinct style.
When asked to talk through her technique, she appears reticent, suggesting that it is a little too simplistic and old-fashioned, perhaps too naive for those readers who have been to art school.
When pressed, she explains, ‘I do very little preliminary work — usually one very rough sketch before I begin with the picture.
I always use Langton watercolour paper, which I wash first so that no spots appear when laying on the colour.
Then I use a basic selection of watercolours, working in the darker background shades first and taking care not to run colours together.
Outlines and details are drawn in with a Rotring pen.
A picture, on average, takes two to three  days to complete’.
Jack be Nimble, taken from Nursery Rhymes by Tracey Boyd.
(LEFT)
Boyd prefers what she calls the ‘old style of illustration’.
The word ‘magical’ crops up time and again as she talks about her work.
‘I like to provide kids with pictures that contain lots of details so that they can find something new in the illustrations each time they look at them.
And I don't use colours that are too obvious or primary.
I prefer to give them depth and richness.’
THE DARK ARK
Tracey's new book,The Dark Ark has the trademark Boyd style and humour.
It also marks a new departure.
This is the first book she has written.
‘It sounds really sinister.
But the only reason that it's called The Dark Ark is because it travels in the shadow of Noah's Ark.
All the animals on the ark have their own ideas.
They think that they are far too rare to travel with the ordinary animals on Noah's ark so they build their own’.
In writing the book Boyd discovered a bizarre range of animals.
‘My chief character is a vulture — a king vulture — the most amazing South American bird, which is bright orange.
I love drawing hideous animals.
They make the best kinds of characters.
Do you remember the wonderful vultures in Disney's Jungle Book ?
I love all of those old Walt Disney films.’
What next?
‘I'll be starting on a new book entitled The Thinking Dog's Book of Doggerell , which is being written by a marvellous guy called Leslie Bricusse.
His verses are very witty, hysterical.
I love working with humorous material.
People are just too serious — especially when it comes to children.
Kids like naughty, dirty, nasty things.
Adults lose sight of that sometimes.’
Although Boyd is working hard to get as many projects as possible into print and to, ‘try to get recognised and get lots of people to buy the books’, she has an ultimate ambition.
‘My dream is to do an animated film.
I would just love that.
I think my characters could really come to life in a film’.
Move over Walt Disney.
Boyd's drive, coupled with her ability to populate children's imaginations with magical animals, will surely, one day, see her on the big screen.
The Balancing Act, 1-2-3 by Nanette Newman and Tracey Boyd.
(ABOVE)
the King and Queen of Hearts, taken from Nursery Rhymes by Tracey Boyd.
(ABOVE)
V in her Vest, taken from ABC by Nanette Newman and Tracey Boyd.
(ABOVE)
There was an Old Woman who Lived in a Shoe, taken from Nursery Rhymes by Tracey Boyd.
(ABOVE)
IN CONVERSATION WITH THE ARTIST
PETER HOWSON
‘Art can make beautiful things out of ugly images.’
PETER HOWSON talks about the ‘dying dinosaurs’ in Glasgow whose faces make his paintings live.
Portrait of Peter Howson.
(ABOVE)
HOW HAVE YOU integrated yourself into the Glaswegian community you paint?
It's very difficult to get into their lives.
They don't actually know I'm an artist, they think I work in a factory or something.
I get to my studio at about 7.30am and the off-licence opens at 8am.
They're already there waiting.
They're desperate for that first drink.
They stand outside, fidgeting and fighting but once they get it they're okay.
Most of them are quite vulnerable and gentle, like dying dinosaurs.
They've been completely forgotten about.
It's like the twilight zone, as if you're travelling back to the depression of the 1930s.
People look different.
The women all have bashed in noses and black eyes and the men have scars.
To many the community around the studio is very frightening.
Most of the people here are quite old and have been really through it.
I'm interested in their battered faces, their anatomy, skin tones, colours.
Some have got bright red faces.
You could actually use purple, alizarin crimson, you see incredibly pallid complexions with red bits.
Do you work alone?
Most people think of artists as having to work totally alone, but I like to have someone there who doesn't really disrupt what I'm doing.
My assistant, Donald, is actually an ex-art student friend of mine so he knows quite a bit about painting.
If he thinks something isn't quite right he tells me.
I take his advice a lot.
Do you work quite quickly?
Yes, but also very carefully.
There's a difference between working quickly and working sloppily.
I work in a controlled way, so mentally it's exhausting.
I was working like a madman right up to the minute of the last show in London, then I collapsed in the studio.
I had to be carted off to hospital, so I didn't manage to complete the work until the new year.
Did you feel that you'd completed a phase?
Over the last ten years I've gone through different phases and characters.
The dossers and down-and-outs of Glasgow between 1985 and 1987, then a different kind of hooligan, then onto a series of a little boy with a yacht and then in 1990–1 I did a huge series of faces and, in the last year, I've been concentrating on thug images with bow necks and caps and dogs.
A lot of your characters appear oafish
They're not nice people in a way, but they have a certain dignity about them.
They might have a bad past but they've got something which saves them.
The small series I've being doing of the guy with the cap on, he doesn't have any goodness about him at all.
No morals, he's therefore the last one of that period that I'm going to do.
They're quite funny in a way.
They're pathetic, a paradox to themselves.
These people do exist and I paint what I see.
They're not figments of my imagination.
Your use of paint varies enormously from the very thin to the highly impastoed.
Yes, the recent big paintings are painted quite thinly.
I tend to work by this rule: for a big painting I paint very thinly and a small one I use thick impasto, although of course the rule can be broken.
Blind Leading the Blind no X is very thinly painted.
There's a huge amount of detail and the technique has got to be perfect otherwise the painting should be an absolute mess.
I build up a painting like that by covering the whole canvas with a kind of stain, then I get a cloth and rub the images out with a rag, block out the areas of light, then I add very thin layers of paint, then I glaze it and then paint into it.
I generally work from dark to light and bring it out from the dark.
I work straight out of my head onto the canvas.
I must be the only artist who does a huge painting and then does the preparatory work afterwards.
I start fiddling about with a brush and then something happens and Donald helps me work it out.
He doesn't ever touch a canvas with paint, but he gives me ideas.
He thought about the wall for instance.
If you can get the composition right at the beginning then you can concentrate on the figures.
Really it's just a blur at first, like an out-of-focus photograph.
In a lot of paintings there is a landscape or seascape in the background.
Is this a symbol of hope?
There's an element of hope but it's hard to find.
What I did with the dossers is put them in very strange settings.
You don't normally find dossers in the countryside.
The work's become a bit more mysterious.
I did a series of men being led over cliffs.
The images I've been doing over the past few years are like great sculptures, the weather has been getting to them and they are crumbling, their faces have cracks in them.
It's important to get the feeling of weight, et the balance of it right, not make it too light, as if it could rise up and float away like a feather.
Which modern masters inspire you most?
I'm influenced by everyone really.
I used to have set ideas but the older I get the more I learn from.
The guy who really got me going about painting was John Bellany.
When I went down and saw his studio I came out so elated.
I just wanted to paint and paint.
The vision of the paintings, the energy of the paint, the imagery, the ideas.
Paint can be exciting but if the subject matter's not there it won't excite me at all.
I imagine his characters coming into a fight with my characters.
I think mine would win, they're much more bulky.
I don't worry about stealing bits from other artists now.
I think that's what was great about the Scottish explosion, we were all taking from each other, we were all in each other 's studios and there was a real community.
A lot of Scottish artists now deny that ever happen.
It did happen.
There still is a focal point up there.
The studios in Gallowgate with Ken Currie, Keith Mackintyre, Martin Caine and myself all on the same floor.
That used to happen way back with Miro, Max Ernst and so on.
I think that is where a lot of artists go wrong, they get too big-headed, lock themselves up and don't invite feedback from other artists.
Peter Howson, Self-Portrait, 1990, oil on canvas, 76x61cms.
Courtesy of Flowers East.
(LEFT)
You talk about being part of a Scottish revival.
Can you also place yourself within a greater tradition?
I see myself in the Northern European tradition.
The artists I greatly admire are within that tradition, like Grunewaldt, Goya and Gericault.
Did you start painting at an early age?
My grandmother gave my a set of oil paints when I was four and she got really angry because they were wee tiny tubes and I squeezed them all out in one go and started painting like Frank Auerbach.
She went crazy.
She said it was a complete waste of paint.
I must admit it was a muddy mess.
I started using oil more and more and by the time I was ten I was using Cubist techniques.
I was pretty precocious.
I was looking at Picasso and Braque, Dali and Surrealism.
I've got a fine old-fashioned outlook on painting.
I still believe the whole basis of art is academic drawing.
People tend to think they can just draw like Picasso without having any basic learning of drawing.
They forget that Picasso was a brilliant draughtsman, composer, colourist.
I think colour is one of the most difficult things to use.
I use a limited palette.
If you use too much colour you can end up with something that looks like a fruit salad.
When I look at a Picasso which is using a lot of colours and I look at something else, for some reason I know that Picasso is using colour well, and the other person isn't.
Picasso understood colour.
He used a lot of black.
I like colours to be mixed, muted; I like dirty colours, browns.
It's part of a tradition.
The Bridge to Nowhere, 1991, oil on canvas, 189x128cms.
Courtesy of Flowers East.
(ABOVE)
What about sketching?
I don't use models so I really have to work it out from memory or imagination.
I do a lot of sketching when I'm out, of real people in the street.
I draw Donald a lot if I can't get a hand or an angle of an arm right.
What about the Saracen Heads for example?
They're real people.
Yes, but they're not drawn from life.
You would recognise them if you saw them in the street, there's no doubt about that, but they're not academic studies, they're caricatured to a point.
Some of them have really distorted faces.
Art can make beautiful things out of ugly images.
Do you exploit them to your own artistic ends?
That's a very difficult question.
Some people would say I make a lot of money out of them but I paint them with sincerity.
I'm genuinely interested in their plight.
I brought these people to the attention of the public.
I could   do the same thing with rich people I suppose, I could paint yuppies.
I don't understand why rich people like buying paintings of poverty.
Maybe it's a guilt thing.
There's definitely something psychological.
I've always wondered why someone like Madonna would want to buy one of the paintings in the last show.
It's called The Bridge to Nowhere and it's about a man in total desolation, totally alone.
Just got rags on.
Can she identify with it?
All I can understand from that is that it must be a universal image.
It's not a Glasgow face, it could be an Indian on a reservation.
I'm glad my work is sold throughout the world.
It means I'm not parochial.
Would you describe yourself as a pessimist?
No, definitely an optimist.
Deep down my wife thinks that I'm a pessimist, bad-tempered all the time — which I am when work isn't going well.
Secretly I've always been interested in the end of the world, the apocalyptic vision of someone like Ludwic Meidner.
When I was 15 I was in a depressed state and I thought, I'll do these last paintings about the end of the world and then I'll end it.
So I go into these depressions every now and then, but I think the general tone of the work is about humanity struggling against all odds.
Whose opinion is the most important to you?
That's a difficult one.
It's difficult because I take advice from everyone, too many people.
Basically I don't listen to anyone properly except for me.
I remember when I say John Bellany for the first time and he said, ‘All that matters at the end of the day is the work’.
I'd always wanted to be famous.
There's always a danger these days that an artist can come into fashion and then go out again.
I'm determined that it's not going to happen to me, but if people were to stop buying my work I would continue painting, so it wouldn't make that much difference.
You've just got to do your best, whether you're a road-sweeper or an artist.
I always do my best.
Game Boys, oil on canvas, 86.5x144cms.
Courtesy of Flowers East.
(ABOVE)
Blind Leading the Blind, 1991, oil on canvas, 244x183cms.
Courtesy of Flowers East.
(LEFT)
Black Squaddie, 1987, oil on canvas, Courtesy of Flowers East.
(ABOVE)
STARTING OUT WITH GRAPHITE PENCILS
the POWER of the PENCIL
The simple graphite pencil has the power to produce the most weighty of subjects.
GARY HODGES confirms the versatility of the medium in his draughting of a baby elephant and its mother.
Gary Hodges at work on one of his complex wildlife drawings.
(LEFT)
I AM WRITING this with the sun beating down on me in  Caracas .
Tomorrow I'm off on a very exciting two-week journey to the central plains of Venezuela, the Llanos.
I'm likely to be visually bombarded by a hugh variety of bird life, reptiles, possibly the odd mammal or two, and a stunning landscape.
And I'm here because I work in pencil.
I was chosen, along with 12 other British artists, by the charity Living Earth and the British Embassy in Venezuela, to visit the country and soak up the rich flora and fauna and then transfer our impressions onto paper and canvas.
Happily, 12 Venezuelan artists are also participating.
The results will form an exhibition to raise funds and awareness for Living Earth's work.
I am digressing, but with the purpose of emphasising the power of the pencil.
It is a sadly neglected medium.
Most artists use graphite, but only as the preliminary means to a further end, for a simple sketch to then cover with paint.
For me, leave out the paint and continue with more pencil!
There are so many varieties of technique, style and tone that you can use with a pencil.
I chose many years ago to explore the avenue of detailed drawings of wildlife and I have largely stuck with the same technique.
Hopefully I have learned from past mistakes and now have honed it in such a way that it has become my profession.
ALL THAT YOU NEED
My materials are few and inexpensive.
I use Rexel Derwent graphic pencils, ranging from 8H to 5; a scalpel knife for sharpening the pencils, trimming the paper and for creating a bevel on the many plastic erasers I use, and Fabriano Five hot-pressed paper.
These are my preferences, but many other professional art materials could be substituted with similar results.
I like to work with a whole range of pencil grades as each one produces a different colour and density, and I believe, creates a more complete drawing.
Pressing lightly with a 2B and firmly with a 2H does not produce the same effect.
The tonal range is extensive from just a few different grades.
There is no way I could draw a living creature with the animal posing in front of me.
Even my smallest works take three to four hours to complete.
An animal would probably move position within three or four seconds.
So I take photographs as reference.
I'm not a fast or very good sketcher, evident by the early stages of the demonstration piece!
Even drawing lightning sketches to then elaborate upon in the studio would not work for me.
My skill is with putting in the detail, so photography is the ideal reference.
The big problem with using photographs is that the drawing can end up looking just like a photo, with little vitality and depth to it.
I think attending an evening class in life drawing helped me overcome this hurdle.
I went for a couple of terms in 1986 and gained a different perspective on drawing which helped me look more deeply at my subject and see light and shade differently.
I had problems with tutors trying to encourage me to diversity my work and experiment with other styles, but I was quite happy with the direction my work was heading so I stubbornly stuck to it.
I'm not trying to encourage anyone else to follow suit, but I would encourage people to be aware of their own particular styles.
ART WITH A MESSAGE
On my return to Britain from Venezuela, my first project will be of a drawing of a tigress and a cub.
This will be made into a special signed print to raise money for the ITV Telethon.
It is going to be sold in the 90 Fast Frame shops throughout the UK and will cost £15.
One of the conservation groups that I wholeheartedly support is the Environmental Investigation Agency (ETA), a small industrious organisation that gets effective results.
One of its major successes was the vital role that it played in achieving a total ivory-ban in 1989.
I believe that, without the pressure documentation that ETA provided, the ban would not be in place.
In March of this year a meeting was held to again decide the fate of the elephant.
Some countries want to reopen trade in ivory and skin.
ETA is passionately campaigning and investigating  to try and maintain the total ban; a ban that has been in place barely enough time for a baby elephant to have been conceived and born.
This is why I decided to draw Love and Protection to try and raise much needed funds for ETA to continue this valuable work.
I have signed and numbered each print and they are available from ETA, London.
All money will go to ETA.
LOVE AND PROTECTION 
1/I do a few preliminary sketches and spend a number of hours finding suitable reference material.
I am now using three photographs that I took in Kenya, plus back-up material for specific areas, from six books.
I decide on a couple of small changes from my original sketches that I feel will improve the design and feel I want.
I move the baby elephant back slightly so it is more hidden by its mother's hind legs, and also lower the baby's head.
Once I am happy with the outline sketch.
I then roughly shade and mark out wrinkles using an H pencil.
(ABOVE)
2/I start putting in more detail.
I begin with this area because, firstly, it is towards the top of the paper and it is always preferable to work from top to bottom to alleviate unwanted smudging.
Secondly, it is the part of the mother elephant that I am most excited about drawing.
Continuing with an H pencil, I define the wrinkles more exactingly.
I then deliberately smudge the area with my fingers and pick out the highlights with a plastic eraser.
This gives me the basic framework on which to elaborate.
(RIGHT)
3/Slowly darkening the area, continuing to smudge and highlight with the eraser again and again, I work the piece until it looks right.
By this time I am starting to use other grades of pencil, from 6H to HB.
I leave the softer grades until the whole drawing is practically finished, to prevent unintentional smudging.
To bring this area of approximately 23x11cms to this stage takes around five hours of actual drawing.
(ABOVE)
4/I continue to work in small areas across the paper, making each one blend into the next.
As always when drawing, I stand back from the piece at regular intervals to get an overall feel as to how the drawing is developing, and to see if it is uniform in shade and texture.
(ABOVE)
NEWS FLASH
Due to pressured campaigning, a total ban on ivory trading has been upheld, with renewed effect from March 10, 1992.
Gary Hodges will be the artist-in-residence at The Nature in Art Museum, Wallsworth Hall, Sandhurst, Gloucester.
5/Many, many hours later I have more or less completed the top two thirds of the drawing and have left the rest bare, in which grass is to be added.
I want the vegetation to create the complete frame for the baby elephant to add to the protective feel of the drawing.
(LEFT)
MY SKILL IS WITH PUTTING IN THE DETAIL AND BUILDING LIFE INTO THE DRAWING SO PHOTOGRAPHY IS THE IDEAL REFERENCE  
6/I draw the grass using 6H-4H pencils and then complete the elephant's legs between the blades of grass.
To finish off, I use softer grades, 2B-4B to strengthen the drawing.
Finally, I put in the hair that protrudes from all over the place on elephants.
(BELOW)
UNDERSTANDING PASTELS
NIGHTLIGHTS in the CITY
‘Under the veil of darkness cities take on a universal quality’, thought American artist DOUG DAWSON, until he brought his pastels to London and discovered that it held certain characteristics he couldn't ignore .
Near the Theatre District, pastel, 51x56cms.
(LEFT)
THE BUSES AND TAXIS I DETERMINED TO AVOID BECAME A CENTRAL PART OF NEARLY EVERY PAINTING.
SOME YEARS AGO I painted a woman sitting next to a table lamp.
The table lamp was on.
It was the only source of light.
I included it in the painting, although I anticipated a lot of problems because of the great difference in values between the model and the light.
To my amazement, however, the painting worked.
From this first experiment, I became fascinated with the problem of including lights in paintings.
I did several other works of people next to lamps.
I painted people holding kerosine lamps.
I expanded my exploration to still lifes with lamps or lanterns in them.
I actively looked for other ways to include lights in painting.
One night, while driving through Denver, I passed a wondrously lit antique shop window.
In the window was a display of old dolls.
Around them were several old electric lamps, a couple with ornate glass shades, and chimneys.
I couldn't have arranged a better still life.
WINDOW DISPLAYS
After the discovery of the antique shop window, I started going out at night and looking for other window displays.
As time went by and my experience sharpened, I back away from the window, taking in more and more of the store fronts, their signs, and external lights.
Eventually, the whole city at night became subject matter for me.
I began to see the city, not so much as a cityscape, but as a still life made up of street lights, buses, cars and shop windows.
All this took place some years ago.
And while I paint other subjects: figure, still life and landscape, I continue to love the theme of the city at night.
Experience has taught me to avoid those parts of a city with modern architecture.
The simple lines of modern architecture break up space and light in a very mechanical way, and not with the variety I seek in my paintings.
There are exceptions to be sure, but my best paintings are usually from older parts of the city.
When I visit a city, I visit the older part of town first, as I have the greatest chance of finding good material there.
My countrymen haven't learned to cherish the old, we are too quick to tear old buildings down.
Consequently, the older part of an American city is often the most run down and neglected.
EVENTUALLY, THE WHOLE CITY AT NIGHT BECAME SUBJECT MATTER FOR ME.
I BEGAN TO SEE THE CITY, NOT SO MUCH AS A CITYSCAPE, BUT AS A STILL LIFE MADE UP OF STREET LIGHTS.
OLDER ARCHITECTURE
This brings me to London, not the thought about run down and neglected buildings, but the one concerning older architecture.
I came to London hoping to find exciting material for night city scenes.
I guessed that London would still have a wealth of old architecture.
I expected to find all the elements of exciting night scenes: glowing street lights, interesting architecture, wet pavements, and a variety of shop windows.
I wasn't disappointed.
When I arrived and asked many people for advice, I was directed to the theatre district, Piccadilly Circus, all the obvious places, as well as some less obvious, whose names I do not know.
I hoped for rain.
Rain does two things for me.
First it multiplies all the spots of light in the scene, because they are reflected off the wet surfaces.
Near The Theatre District is a good example of this.
If the streets hadn't been wet, the scene would have been pretty dark.
Secondly, it causes the lights to be surrounded by a ring of light, which I refer to as their halo.
The phenomenon occurs because the falling rain or snow closest to the light reflects some of it.
If the light is warm, say yellow or yellow orange, the halo will tend to be warmer, orange or red-orange as in the halo around the bus headlights in London Bus .
The reverse is true of cool lights.
A green light, like the go light in the painting, may be surrounded by a blue halo.
PRAYING FOR RAIN
I wasn't disappointed.
It rained during the first few days.
After several days of rain, my wife and I were praying for sun.
We had brought jackets, but weren't prepared for the cold.
Living in Denver, Colorado, a very arid region, we had forgotten how penetrating the cold can be when accompanied by humidity.
Days that were five or ten degrees centigrade in London felt like minus ten degrees in Denver.
Neither of us complained when the weather broke and we had several fine days of sunlight.
Never having been to London before, all my notions came from newsreels and movies like Oliver Twist, Sherlock Holmes and Mary Poppins.
From these impressions, I naively expected and hoped to find the horsedrawn carriages on the streets of London.
Don't misunderstand me, I didn't think the city would be backward, I just assumed that carriages would be as popular with tourists in London as they are, say in New York.
After all, I'd seen pictures of the Queen riding in a carriage, the royal bride and groom rode in a carriage.
Not finding them was my only  disappointment.
I love to paint carriages at night in the rain.
I chose to visit London over other European cities, in part because I thought collectors back home would relate better to a city scene in which all the signs were in English, billboards, signs and marquees are often important elements in a city scene.
Another reason why I chose London is because I know many of my countrymen have visited and have fond memories of their experience.
I had another reason as well, though quite unrelated to painting.
My mother's family came from England, so I felt I had a sense of searching out my identity.
THE PHENOMENON OCCURS BECAUSE THE FALLING RAIN OR SNOW CLOSEST TO THE LIGHT REFLECTS SOME OF IT 
1/My usual method of working is to block in the largest shapes first and then gradually break down into smaller and smaller shapes.
The size of shapes I finally arrive at characterises the finished piece.
If the final shapes are quite large the painting will appear impressionistic.
If they are small it will seem more photographic.
In The Clock Tower I first block in the spider web of interconnecting darks which I visualise as one large dark shape.
(LEFT)
VEILED BY THE NIGHT
An advantage to night city scenes is that darkness cloaks these elements which give a location its regional quality.
Under the veil of darkness, cities take on a universal quality.
The buses and taxis of London are two of its most regional characteristics.
I try to avoid objects which limit a painting in space and time.
For that reason, I came determined not to paint buses and taxis.
Besides, I reasoned they would be trite.
Certainly every artist around London must paint them.
I decided I would explore the rich architecture and the misty light instead.
Well, as you can see, everything  turned out opposite to the way I planned.
The buses and taxis I determined to avoid became a central part of nearly every painting.
The architecture I sought never materialised in any of my compositions.
I will probably never know if my assumption, that buses and taxis are trite, is true or not.
I walked through many galleries in London and didn't see a single one.
I may be that, like the street cars of San Francisco, artists living in London see them so much, they don't see them at all.
For me painting is a never-ending search for that unique point of view.
That means not just searching for subject matter, but constantly reevaluating what I am doing and why.
I came to London with one set of thoughts about universality and triteness.
I set those thoughts aside to peruse the direction my instincts led me to take.
As a consequence, I may rethink some of my assumptions.
In a small way, this is an example of the never-ending task of searching my thoughts and feelings about the world around me.
My hope is, if this is done with integrity, it offers a uniquely personal point of view which distinguishes the artist from the craftsman.
The artist sees while the craftsman is content to repeat what others have seen.
When I am dead my greatest wish is that people will say of my work, no one saw in that way before.
2/In this step I block in other larger shapes.
I block in the large dull, red-violet shape of the taxi and the lighter blue shape of its back window.
I block in the shape of the sky, the building in the background, as well as the shape of the lorry behind the taxi.
I try to get through this stage of painting with only a few sticks of colour.
The idea is to keep my palette simple.
With these larger shapes indicated the composition is fairly well determined.
(ABOVE)
IMPORTANCE OF AESTHETICS
Despite my obvious interest in the city, in recent years my search has taken me away from a preoccupation with subjects to a greater preoccupation with aesthetics.
This doesn't mean I am going to abandon representational art.
I have always believed a greater range of expressions are possible through representations of the real world.
It is just that now my study is directed towards enriching the surface of my paintings through a better understanding of the basic pictorial elements such as shape and edges.
Lately I have been studying the paintings of an abstract expressionist named Diebenkorn.
I became fascinated by the variety of ways.
Diebenkorn manipulated the edges of shapes.
Abstracts are pure studies of aesthetics.
There is no confusion with recognisable form.
A good abstract painting is an experiment I don't have to conduct because someone has done it for me.
I must simply learn what I can from it and apply it to my work.
So this is where I am at the moment.
Playing with the things I've learned from Diebenkorn, and hoping to make it back to London next year.
3/I now start to break these big shapes down into smaller ones.
For example the shape of the window in the back of the taxi is now divided into three shapes; two lighter ones and the shape of the figure in the middle.
I start breaking down the shape of the building into smaller ones as well.
As I do this, I introduce new sticks of colours.
I have intentionally blocked in the shape of the building with a cool colour to control the intensity of the warmer colours I will use later.
I block in the smaller shapes of the windows in the building and the light in the clock tower.
(ABOVE)
4/I continue to divide the shapes up into smaller and smaller shapes.
Some parts of the painting, such as the area around the clock tower are nearly finished at this stage.
I paint in the rest of the window shapes.
At this stage I still haven't introduced the writing on the theatre.
As I start painting the statue I realise I am going to have a problem.
To accurately imitate what I can see will require that I use smaller shapes than those used in other parts of the painting.
This will cause the statue to seem out of place.
The alternative is to simplify the statue and interpret it with larger shapes so the technique seems integrated.
As you can see, in the next step, I choose the large-shape approach.
(ABOVE)
5/In this last stage, I eliminate most of the little spots of board showing through.
This is especially critical in the darkest parts of the painting.
I do this in two ways.
In some places such as the sky I apply more pastel to cover the spots.
In other places such as the street I make short dabbing strokes with my little finger.
This is not the same as rubbing the area.
That would kill the surface.
Rather I make short jabbing strokes like the pecking of a chicken.
I alternate the direction of these strokes, imitating the direction I use to apply the pastel in the first place.
I introduce the letters in the theatre sign but I keep it intentionally vague, I am more concerned with the feeling of light emanating from the theatre sign than with its readability.
(LEFT)
WORKING WITH WATERCOLOUR
TACKLING WEATHERED BUILDINGS
Watercolour ‘is as valuable in recording the urban landscapes of today as it was for the rural watercolourists of the 19th century’, reports RICHARD S TAYLOR, as he sets out to paint a timeworn French townscape.
THE COPPER-COLOUR RUST STAINS FROM RAGGED WINDOW-SHUTTERS THAT DRIP DOWN OCHRE-COLOURED STONE CATCH MY EYE FREQUENTLY.
Place des Vosges, Paris.
(LEFT)
AS AN ARCHITECTURAL artist with a fascination for the urban environment, I frequently stalk the streets and alleyways of towns and cities in search of subjects.
All are considered, the ramshackle disorder of the street market through to those small facets of urban decay that can add life, colour and texture to an otherwise dull setting.
But my personal passion above all others is for texture.
The lichen-crusted walls bedecked with city grime capture my attention time and time again.
The copper-coloured rust stains from ragged window-shutters that drip down ochre coloured stone catch my eye frequently.
These are ideal subjects for recording in watercolour, especially if you can see walls as not bricks and stone, but as coloured surfaces emblazoned with a wealth of tints and colours.
The pleasure can be even more enhanced if you are prepared to forego some of the geometry accuracy of urban structures and allow your watercolour paper to pay a substantial role in the formation of your image.
EQUIPMENT
As my concern is more for recording the natural aspects of the urban environment and the accidental results of decay and neglect, I choose a palette of natural, earthy colours.
Yellow ochre is a colour I often use for both undercoats and overpainting, having a good semi-transparent quality.
Burnt umber, being dug from reddish brown earth in its natural state and roasted, gives a warm, brown quality when used.
Burnt sienna, with its rich, luminous red, makes an ideal colour for adding warmth to natural brick.
To add to these I will often introduce Prussian blue for its strength, sap green and synthetic colours, such as cadmium yellow and vermilion.
I usually choose a medium Not paper.
I find this an expressive paper which will withstand much punishment and is ideal for creating textures in old, weathered stone.
Be prepared, however, to let the paper have some say in your final picture.
SPONTANEITY OF WATERCOLOUR
The spontaneity of watercolour painting is, I believe, most conducive to recording this type of scene, where fleeting effects of moving light can be captured with a few quick washes and blots, and is as valuable in recording the urban landscapes of today as it was for the rural watercolourists of the 19th century.
But, there again, perhaps the urban artist has the advantage in the greater range of subject matter.
1/The attraction of this alleyway in a southern French town is not only the warmth of the stone and the wealth of textures that it offers, but the interplay of light on the time-worn steps, accentuating, if not actually creating a natural perspective.
My starting point as always in recording such scenes, is a simple pen sketch, establishing the basic shapes and structures.
This sketch is concerned only with the framework of the solid objects, no attempt is made to suggest blocks of light and shade as this would inhibit the application of paint to these pre-defined areas, denying the paint its freedom to run, bleed and react with the previously described qualities of the paper.
(LEFT)
FLEETING EFFECTS OF MOVING LIGHT CAN BE CAPTURED WITH A FEW QUICK WASHES AND BLOTS.
2/Having established the sketch, it is time to neutralise the starkness of the white paper by applying a basic, watery undercoat.
Throughout this painting I choose to work within the arch as it forms a natural frame, concentrating the eye on the activity of the light on the steps, allowing an intensity of contrast to be created.
This is a mixture of yellow ochre and burnt umber applied to previously dampened paper.
As the paint bleeds onto the damp paper, I take the opportunity to blot out a central area along the line of the steps onto which the bulk of the light falls.
Then, with the paint still damp on the paper, I apply a small, but watery mixture of burnt umber and Prussian blue to the area where the bulk of the shadows are found and allow this to bleed into the stone undercoat.
This wet-into-wet technique prevents the formation of watermarks or lines at this early stage.
(ABOVE)
3/The next stage is to introduce an element of depth into the painting.
As I previously mentioned, the steps and the interplay of light create a natural perspective, leading the eye in an upwards diagonal.
I now enhance and accentuate this be establishing the light tones of background wall and the luminosity of the foliage created by the back-lighting.
I mix some sap green with Prussian blue and burnt umber still left in the palette and dab it onto the previously dampened, shaded areas of the greenery.
I record the backlight areas where the light breaks through the dense greenery with a thicker-than-usual mixture of cadmium yellow and a touch of sap green.
I now allow the painting a few minutes to dry.
(ABOVE)
4/Now is the time to introduce some real body into the painting.
I change technique.
Having established the undercoat by way of washing and blotting onto damp paper, I now begin to apply very watery paint onto dry paper, slowly building up a series of translucent layers.
This paint will run as far as it is allowed but will not bleed.
My blotting technique comes to the fore here.
When attempting to record textures, I choose to use textures.
I blot out unwanted runs, bleeds and blocks with highly textured kitchen roll.
This complements the Not paper and will not leave a smooth mark, as blotting paper, but will leave the imprint of the rough surface on the paper.
This is ideal for weathered stone and patchy plaster.
Successive washes of burnt umber mixed with Prussian blue are applied to the top of the composition and pulled down, blotting out the light sections and leaving the shadows to create their own shapes.
I then apply a very watery burnt sienna to the parts to maintain some warmth amongst the shadows.
Although particular areas and shapes are beginning to develop, this is still only the middle stage, creating the blocks of shadow from which the specific light and dark areas in the final stage will be found.
(ABOVE)
5/So, with the main areas of dark blocked in, and the main areas of light blotted out, the real business of creating the contrasts formed by the shafts of diagonal cross-lighting begin.
Here, the specific shadows can be observed and recorded.
Again, working with very wet paint onto dry paper, I apply successive washes of burnt umber and Prussian blue, burnt sienna and yellow ochre with a little more care, pulling diagonally downwards from top right to bottom left.
A useful technique with steps, I find, is to apply a thin line of paint under the ridges of the steps and, using a wet brush only, no paint, pull the paint downwards in the line of the shadow, blotting out rogue runs that you do not want shaded.
(LEFT)
6/The penultimate stage is to complete the foreground by painting the stone arch.
I leave this until last so that the lightness of the stone can be assessed in order to maximise the contrast between the shaded steps and their outer-frame.
I say penultimate as there is one final technique that I use.
When, and only when, the paper and the paint have completely dried, I emphasise the highlights by rubbing over them gently with a typewriter eraser, the variety which can be sharpened to a point to increase accuracy.
This removes some of the layers of paint, occasionally rubbing down the surface of the paper, enhancing the brightness of those shafts of light on the stone.
(ABOVE)
ALL ARE CONSIDERED THE RAMSHACKLE DISORDER OF THE STREET MARKET THROUGH TO THOSE SMALL FACETS OF URBAN DECAY THAT CAN ADD LIFE, COLOUR AND TEXTURE TO AN OTHERWISE DULL SETTING
MEET THE ARTIST
RICHARD TAYLOR MSAI was born in Enfield in 1953.
He won the Rexel Award for outstanding drawing in 1983 at the Mall Galleries and has published a selection of books on watercolour painting.
The latest,Towns and Cities in Watercolour , will be published by BT Batsford in July.
He has contributed to many magazines and newspapers and has held a string of exhibitions in England and France.
FOCUS ON EASELS
the ESSENTIAL PROP
No artist is truly well-equipped without an easel.
If you are about to invest, our 20 point plan will guide you to a failsafe purchase .
1
The term easel is derived from the old Dutch word ezel , meaning ass.
The easel is the workhorse of the artist, and perhaps one of the most essential tools for the studio.
One particular form of easel is actually known as a donkey .
The artist's donkey is an elongated stool or bench that the painter sits astride.
2
There are various types of easel, and choice should very much depend on practice.
A studio easel, in contrast to a sketching easel, is, for example, a permanent fixture in a studio once purchased.
A new easel which has recently come onto the market is Daler-Rowney's Town and Country easel.
This combines the best of both worlds, as it is sturdy enough to be used in the studio but can also be folded and used for field work.
3
The traditional, if basic design of an easel survives.
This comprises a frame with three supporting legs.
To its detriment, the traditional easel always holds the canvas at a slight backward tilt and cannot easily paintings above or below a certain size.
4
A variant of the traditional easel came into common use many years ago.
The tapered frame of the original pattern was straightened and made broader so that it became rectangular in design.
The crossplank was then converted into a sliding rest which moved up and down and a central strut was included, to be positioned according to the size of the canvas.
5
The display easel originated in the 19th century and was commonly used to show off a painting.
It was usually a frame tripod made from exotic hardwood instead of basic timber.
It was carved or inlaid, and added elegance and authority to the sale of a painting.
6
A Victoria studio easel consists of an upright rectangular frame on a firm base.
A central shaft connected t a moveable shelf allows canvases across a wide size range to be mounted and also permits variations in the height at which the canvas is carried.
The main advantage of this style of easel is its ability to accommodate large canvases and offer a vertical support to work on.
7
Certain easels are designed to be used with a variety of attachments.
These might include brush boxes or trays.
8
The radial easel is probably the most popular and common type.
It has no frame, but simply an extendable arm along which a base rest and top grip may be slid and locked into the desired position.
The arm pivots on a sturdy squat tripod base and may be secured vertically or in an angled position to suit the preference of the painter.
9
A variation on the theme of the radial easel is the tilting radial easel.
This has an additional pivot, allowing the easel to swing backwards and forwards from a pathway along its length.
10
A new radial easel manufactured by Loriart makes interesting painting.
Instead of wingnuts the easel has nobs which can be easily loosened or tightened and a ratchet handle which keeps the easel stable.
11
Table easels are sometimes miniature versions of studio easels.
They are intended for use on top of a work bench and are often used by the artist when in a sitting position.
12
An alternative to all permanent studio easels are transportable easels.
Sketching easels usually have three folding legs and a pivotal canvas carrier with sliding stops and supports that allow the position and size of the canvas on the easel to be varied.
13
On most sketching easels, the canvas carrier can be tilted horizontally, to hold a drawing board for watercolour painting.
14
Wooden sketching easels are traditional.
They are usually made of beechwood and are reasonably hardy.
It is also the cheapest type of wood used in the manufacture of easels.
Sometimes the wood is pre-oiled, but if you buy one which hasn't been, rub it over a couple of times with a rag soaked in linseed oil and leave it aside to dry.
15
Some canvases are stained as well as oiled.
This helps preserve the wood.
Some easels are made with  mahogany , one of the most stable and durable woods available.
These tend to be lightly constructed due to the cost.
16
Steel or aluminium are metals sometimes used as alternatives to the traditional wooded easel.
Naturally, steel is heavier and liable to rust but, at the same time, it is often more study than wood and locking devices are less likely to slip than those on wooded easels.
17
If an easel is being purchased specifically for sketching out-of-doors, weight is a major contributing factor to the choice.
the average wooden sketching easel weighs between 1.3 and 1.5kg.
Many metal easels  weigh over 2kg.
The lightest easels are the aluminium ones which can weigh in at as little as a kilo.
18
The artist can buy easel kits for self-  assembly .
This can cut the cost.
19
Some table easels can double up as carriers for wet canvases.
Many manufacturers also manufacture waterproof easel carriers.
20
An easel can cost anything from £10 to £2000, but the cost of a good studio easel varies from about £80 to around £200.
Let the Town and Country easel from Daler-Rowney take the strain!
Solid and sturdy, it also folds down compactly to travel well on outdoor painting expeditions.
(ABOVE)
An easel fit for Raphael!
This Italian-made easel from Osborne & Butler is the perfect piece of studio equipment, easy to erect, dismantle and stow away in your art materials alcove.
(LEFT)
THE ART MATERIALS DIRECTORY
OILS in the frame
Overawed by oils?
EMMA PEARCE looks at the old master of mediums and examines the products available for the discerning painter.
OIL PAINT IS suited to either a transparent or opaque palette.
It can be used thinly and is the most popular medium for glazing.
It can equally be used thickly for impasto methods.
A smooth or textured paint film can be produced.
It can be used wet into dry paint or wet into wet, although once it is dry it is longer than for other types of paint, being anything from a day to a week depending on the colour.
A variety of mediums and thinners are available for use with oil paint which facilitate further manipulation of the paint.
Types and uses of various mediums and thinners past present will be discussed in further Art Materials Directories.
OIL PAINT IS THE MOST POPULAR MEDIUM FOR GLAZING.
The binder for oil paint is a vegetable drying oil or a combination of several.
A drying oil forms an insoluble film by oxidisation.
Linseed oil is used in a greater proportion for most colours, although colours such as blues and particularly whites are most made using poppy, safflower of sunflower oil because they are less yellow than linseed.
These former oils are slower driers than linseed.
Slow drying paints should not be used under quicker drying ones.
This is because oil paint shrinks as it dries.
Therefore as the slow drying colour dries and shrinks it will crack any already dry and contracted colour on top of it.
If you use a lost of white in your underpainting you would therefore be well advised to use a white which is bound in linseed oil.
Alternatively, you could use an underpainting white or alkyd white, both of which dry quickly.
Alkyd whites are made by Daler-Rowney, Spectrum and Winsor & Newton who also make an underpainting white.
Over a period of time and experience of using different makes of oil paints, this becomes apparent and useful in your choice and use of paint.
There are several methods of manufacturing the oil which is used.
The two main types used are cold pressed and refined.
Some manufacturers believe the handling properties of the paint are improved by the use of cold pressed oil whilst others believe refined to be superior.
Again, this is information which is useful to you over the long term.
Blockx make an oil paint which is made almost entirely from poppy oil.
Poppy oil colours are short and buttery and slower-drying than linseed colours.
You may prefer their texture or you may need extended periods of wet paint, in which case Blockx colours are very useful.
The use of Colour Index Generic Names, enables us to know which pigments are being used in each paint.
The table shows which companies are publishing the Colour Index Generic Names in their catalogues or on their colour charts.
JP Stephenson does not print the information in the catalogue but the information is available upon request.
Artists' or Students' quality
The artists' or students' quality of the paint is also noted in the table.
This column is noted as ‘not applicable’ for Kremer colour pastes from AP Fitzpatrick; this is because although these colours are pure pigment in oil they are not finely ground.
Types of oil paint
Aside from the traditional oil paint there are several variations according to the binder used when making the paint.
All claim to be compatible with their traditional relations.
Oil/resin paint
Schminke's Mussini from LC Cornelissen is made from a mixture of drying oils and natural resins.
These dry quicker than conventional oils and are creamy to handle.
The resin content also makes them particularly glossy.
Water soluble oil paint
Pelikan's Mastercolour is a small range which uses water to thin the paint with rather than white spirit or turpentine.
This is a boon for anyone who is hypersensitive to the latter solvents.
They may also be useful for travelling as you won't need to take thinners with you.
Unfortunately, Pelikan have decided to discontinue this paint, so it will be disappearing from any shelves you may see it on.
Alkyd paint
Winsor & Newton's Griffin is made form an oil modified alkyd resin.
It is fast-drying, all the colours will dry overnight, so it is particularly suitable if you need to speed up a glazing process for example.
Again, they too are eminently suitable for travelling as you will not have to cope with transporting a wet oil painting home!
They are preferable structurally to acrylic paint for underpainting an oil painting, as an oil film is more compatible with an alkyd one than an acrylic.
Alkyd white is particularly useful in underpainting.
IT IS ONLY MORE ECONOMICAL TO BUY OIL PAINT IN TINS PROVIDED THAT YOU USE IT QUICKLY.
As mentioned at the beginning, oil paints dry by oxidisation.
Tubes are therefore the ideal container for them as air is excluded.
Tins of paint may be more economical; although this may be because they are student quality, and all paint is cheaper when bought in quantity.
However, it is only more economical to buy paint in tins provided that you use it quickly, within weeks.
As you remove paint from the tin, air will replace it and initiate the drying of the remaining paint.
You should not cover the paint with water, as is commonly recommended, because water particles deposited in the paint film will result in it being unstable on the canvas.
As water contains oxygen, it does not in fact prevent the paint from drying anyway!
Whites are often sold in tins and most artists are more likely to use a lot of white.
Tins also have the disadvantage  of allowing you to contaminate the paint with dirty brushes.
Kremer colour pastes from AP Fitzpatrick come in glass pots in the 250ml size, whilst the 1,000ml size is in metal tins.
JP Stephenson's paint comes in glass pots in the 250ml size, whilst the 500ml and 1,000ml sizes are in plastic pots.
Small tubes, 20ml for example, are useful when needing a colour from the most expensive series, whilst large tubes are appropriate if you are using larger quantities of oil paint.
Where manufacturers produce both an artists' and a students' paint, the artists' range is the larger of the two, with the basic colours repeated in both ranges.
If you are well-acquainted with pigments and paints and are equipped with the manufacturer's pigment information, you can pick and choose between artists' and students' ranges to obtain a balance between the colours you want, their permanency, quality, quantity and price.
Most artists' ranges of oil paint are priced in series.
The student ranges tend to be one price for all colours.
The prices in the table are compared by calculating the cost of 38ml of oil paint; using the price of the tube size nearest to 38ml.
Prices are increased annually by companies, usually in January to March.
At the time of going to press only some companies had increased their prices.
Supports for oil paintings include canvas on open frames or boards, wood-based boards, paper-based boards, gesso panels and paper.
Grounds include traditional white lead primer, alkyd primer, acrylic primer, oil emulsion grounds and gesso.
Supports and grounds can be prepared by the artist or bought custom or ready made.
Grounds and supports are used to manipulate the colour, texture and absorbency the artist wishes to use.
Each surface has its own characteristics and advantages.
Acrylic, emulsion and gesso grounds tend to be more absorbent than oil and alkyd grounds.
Some artists prefer the springy sensitivity of an open canvas whilst others prefer the hardness or smoothness of a board.
Cardboards and paper can obviously be useful for prolific artists or those travelling light!
The manufacturers for this months article have been preselected by the magazine.
There are: Atlantis, Bird & Davis, Canvex, Colart UK, LC Cornelissen, Daler-Rowney, AP Fitzpatrick, Frisk, Goldline, Green & Stone, Osborne & Butler, Russell & Chapple, Spectrum, JP Stephenson and Winsor & Newton.
CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT: Canvas boards in a range of sizes from Osborne & Butler.
Daler-Rowney and Canvex; linseed oil and van Eyck painting medium from Rembrandt by Talens; tubes of Titanium white from the Georgian range by Daler-Rowney and Winton by Winsor and; Newton; no14 bristle brush from Osborne & Butler; acrylic primed linen canvas from Osborne & Butler, bottle of Sansodar oil colour from Winsor & Newton; no2 and no6 brushes from Rembrandt by Talens; no6 and no0 brushes by Russell & Chapple; Liquin oil colour, Winsor & Newton; Titanium white alkyd colour, Winsor & Newton; Titanium white colour from Brera, Maimeri; no8 Bristlewhite brushes.
Daler-Rowney; Goldline disposable palette pad, HW Peel.
(LEFT)
TOP LEFT: Tubes of Rembrandt oil paint in large and small sizes from Talens; tubes of Sennelier artist's oil colour from HW Peel.
TOP RIGHT: Winton oil colour.
Artist's oil colour and alkyd paint from Winsor & Newton
BOTTOM RIGHT: Classico, Artisti and Brera ranges of oil colour from Maimeri; tubes of Roberson oil colour from Cornelissen & Son Ltd; Mussini oil paint from Schminke.
BOTTOM LEFT: Spectrum oil colour, selection of Rowney Georgian and Artist's oil colours from Daler-Rowney.
Still life inspired by oil paintings of the Old Masters.
Amongst this Caravaggian feast can be found: linseed oil and medium, tubes of oil colour and trowels from Rembrandt by Talens; bottle of turpentine by Daler-Rowney; tube of Roberson oil paint from Cornelissen & Son Ltd; Georgian oil colour from Daler-Rowney; Sennelier oil paint from HW Peel; Mussini oil colour from Schminke; selection of fine brushes from Osborne & Butler and Russell & Chapple.
(ABOVE)
CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT: Winsor & Newton Gallery set comprising 10 tubes of Winton oil colour 10 tubes of Winton oil colour, medium, palette, board and brushes; Georgian oil painting set from Daler-Rowney containing eight tubes of oil colour, bottles of turpentine and purified linseed oil, selection of brushes; basic set of Griffin alkyd colours from Winsor & Newton; set in 10 large tubes of Winton oil colour from Winsor & Newton.
(ABOVE)
SMALL TUBES, 20ML FOR EXAMPLE, ARE USEFUL WHEN NEEDING A COLOUR FROM THE MOST EXPENSIVE SERIES.
SERIES
FIGURE DRAWING without a model
Last month RON TINER encouraged you to get out and about with your sketchpad.
This month he talks about the methods behind drawing creatively without a model .
If you know where the main constituent parts of the skeleton belong, you will understand the disposition of the body's elements in any pose from any viewpoint, and so be able to construct it convincingly from memory.
(LEFT)
PART TWO
CREATING FULL-BODIED FIGURES
THE HUMAN FIGURE may be considered the ideal subject for the imaginative artist.
It is a subject with which we are thoroughly familiar; we see hundreds of them every day, and of course, we all live inside a human body.
We can draw anything in the world if we know what it looks like, but only when drawing a human being can we truly say we know what it feels like.
A knowledge of the body's structure and proportions is essential, but it is by no means necessary to have a surgeon's intimate familiarity with each individual muscle and internal organ.
Good figure drawing has little in common with an anatomical diagram, but if you don't know the basic machinery, your drawings will be unconvincing.
There is not enough room here to cover the subject adequately, but a number of good anatomy books are available that offer all you need to know.
The normal human skeleton consists of 206 bones, providing a mobile supporting framework for the body and a protective carapace for the vital organs.
Central to the human skeletal system is the spine, a flexible column of 33  vertebrae supporting the skull, pectoral girdle, rib-cage and pelvis.
Although individuals vary widely, the bones of the average female skeleton are smaller and lighter than the male.
The bones are bound to each other by tough, flexible ligaments and are articulated at the joints by muscles.
There are just over 600 voluntary muscles in the human body.
For our purposes, it is only necessary to mention the larger, superficial muscle groups which affect the shape of the body and are responsible for the movement of the limbs.
These are referred to as skeletal muscles, most of which are attached at both ends to bones.
The muscles that give expression to the face are also referred to as skeletal muscles, and they like bone to skin.
A whole complex system of muscles is brought into paly for each movement of the body: bending an arm involves the shortening of the biceps, while the tricep muscles at the back of the arm must relax and lengthen in unison.
Meanwhile, others immobilise joints not needed in the action, while others still adjust to stabilize the body's equilibrium.
GETTING IT ALL IN PROPORTION
The proportions of the human figure have interested artists, philosophers and teachers throughout the past 20 centuries.
During the Renaissance, human anatomy became the subject of detailed investigation, and artists were involved in a search for mathematical relationships between the sizes of various parts of the body.
Complex systems were invented to define what was considered an ‘ideal’ figure.
Since then, scores of such systems have been devised, using disparate parts of the body as units of measurement, including the head, face, foot, forearm, index finger, nose and spinal column.
Because such systems do not take into account the variation in individuals, they are generally only of interest to the classicist.
Ideals also vary, and the view of what constitutes perfect bodily proportions changes from one generation to the next.
When drawing from memory, however, it is useful to have a handy, rule-of-thumb checking device to gauge such proportions as arm-length or head-size.
The usual modern method is to use the vertical length of the head as a unit of measurement.
An average figure is about seven heads high, but anything between six and eight heads is well within the normal range.
When drawing children, you will find that the head takes up a much larger proportion of the height.
A newborn baby's head is about a quarter of the baby's total height, and the length of the legs are little more.
As the child grows, leg length increases in relation to full body height much more than other body parts, so the head becomes proportionally smaller.
The exercises outlined here should be regarded as steps in your learning process.
Knowledge memorized as a list of facts is of little practical use unless backed up by activities that put it to work.
If you know where the main constituent parts of the skeleton belong, you will understand the disposition of the body's elements in any pose from any viewpoint, and so be able to construct it convincingly from memory.
It is a short step from drawing the simplified skeletal figures to drawing a mannequin which may serve as a basis for the fully fleshed-out human being.
We view the torso as a flexible tube or sausage-shape, remembering that it is capable of twists and bends in any direction at the waist: forwards, sideways and backwards.
The first exercise can now be taken further: establishing the figure in a few choice lines.
Once the basic gesture is jotted down, further refinements can be made; the arms and legs can be fleshed out and the sex differences made evident.
The purpose here is to develop your ability to visualise clearly the figure you want to draw.
Begin, as before, with simple standing figures and progress to active running, dancing and sports-playing poses.
(RIGHT)
An average figure is about seven heads high, but anything between six and eight heads is well within the normal range.
When drawing children, your will find that the head takes up a much larger proportion of the height.
A newborn baby's head is about a quarter of the baby's total height, and the length of the legs are little more.
As the child grows, leg length increases in relation to full body height much more than other body parts, so the head becomes proportionally smaller.
(LEFT & RIGHT)
The two drawings represent a simplified human skeleton.
The first show the main bone shapes, the second a matchstick with head, ribcage and pelvis indicated as egg shapes.
Once you are confident of the position and curvature of the spine, and how and where the limbs go, you will know that your work is structurally sound.
Remember that the spine is flexible, and that in a normal upright posture it describes a shallow double-S curve.
the legs account for half the total height of the figure.
Try the static, standing poses first, then draw more active poses in which the spine is bent or twisted and the limbs are flung wide.
(ABOVE)
The next exercise involves simplifying the figure into blocks and cylinders, so that you build up in your mind a conception of the body as a solid object.
If you can understand these simple shapes as three-dimensional cylinders and boxes, the very complex shapes that comprise the human figure can be analysed and understood.
Understanding it, you will be better able to draw it.
In creating figures from the imagination, this grasp of the three-dimensional form is something you will need to call upon constantly as you draw: your practice with these simplified forms will help increase the stock of knowledge you bring to the task.
(ABOVE)
Good drawing is a frame of mind as well as an exercise in line, For good figure drawing from memory, the artist's identification with his or her subject of paramount important.
By this I mean that you must feel that you are dealing with an aspect of yourself as you draw.
As you draw a hand, you should be acutely aware of your own hand: its structure and proportions, the knuckles and the fingertips.
This state of mind will transmit itself into the drawing and so give it life.
Draw a small naked figure, as small as you like, maybe only a couple of centimetres tall.
Your first effort may well look like a rag doll, but this is quite adequate to begin with.
Bear in mind as you draw that this little figure is you — yourself.
Try to experience the pose while you draw it.
Think of your own shoulders, spine, knees and elbows, and try to make this figure physically similar to yourself.
If you are tall and lean, so should your drawn image be; all this will help you to feel more intimately involved with the figure you are drawing.
Don't be too ambitious in the early stages.
Initially, just try drawing your figure standing upright, then show the arms raised or the knees bent.
Next, try depicting the mannequin leaning on a stick or sitting down, remembering as your draw what it's like to do these things yourself.
If the pose you have selected is a tense one, feel the tension of it yourself.
Similarly, if it is relaxed, feel the looseness and calmness of it.
Draw your figure as often as you can, whenever you have a spare moment, making him or her a part of your everyday life.
(LEFT AND BELOW)
THE BOOK, FIGURE DRAWING WITHOUT A MODEL BY RON TINER IS A COURSE OF INSTRUCTION IN DRAWING THE HUMAN FIGURE FROM MEMORY AND IMAGINATION, COPIOUSLY ILLUSTRATED WITH THE AUTHOR'S OWN DRAWINGS IN A WIDE RANGE OF STYLES AND TECHNIQUES.
RON TINER OUTLINES FRESH APPROACHES TO FIGURE DRAWING.
THE BOOK IS PUBLISHED BY DAVID AND CHARLES AND COSTS £13.99.
FOCUS ON WAR ARTISTS
PAINTING FROM THE FRONT
Examining war artists past and present, ANN KODICEK considers the role of their art as a barometer of public opinion .
Ken Howard, RM Boat Section, Fort George, Londonderry, March 1978.
(RIGHT)
KENNETH CLARK SAID at the time of World War Two, ‘The average artist will want to go to the Front not simply out of curiosity or bravado, but because he may there discover some of that emotional stimulus on a grand scale which is inevitably lacking from his everyday life.’
Despite the increasing sophistication of photography, war artists, painters and, occasionally sculptors, have a unique contribution to make and such an appointment is an enviable one for an artist who feels that the contemporary peacetime art scene limits his or her breadth of vision.
The First World War was the first to touch civilians as well as combatants, and, for the first time, the British authorities were made conscious of the need to raise public morale.
This period coincided with various socioeconomic advances which could also be usefully recorded, such as the change from horsepower to mechanisation and from an all-male workforce to a female civilian one.
Female war artists, however, remained and remain a rarity.
During the 1914–18 war, Laura Knight recorded the work of female volunteers; after the 1939–45 war, she made drawings of the Nuremberg trials which are masterpieces of psychological portraiture.
The horrors of Belsen concentration camp, meanwhile, were eloquently summed up in the painting of Doris Zinkeisen.
SETTING UP INSTITUTIONS
Before 1914, war propaganda had not been traditionally a British trait and the authorities leaned to use it following the examples of the French and Germans.
For this purpose, new institutions were created, such as the Ministry for Information and the War Museum, and special administrative officers appointed, like John Buchan and Lord Rothermere in the First World War, Sir Kenneth Clark in the Second.
They were responsible for appointing war artists.
Prominent in artist-ministry public relations was the etcher Muirhead Bone, who was also the first British War Artist, serving as such in both World Wars.
Himself a traditional artist, he recommended a variety of colleagues of widely differing styles, including Epstein and Stanley Spencer.
Continuing this tradition, Kenneth Clark selected artists of individual vision for these rather establishmentarian posts, stressing the importance of their work as art.
Early subjects of war art were often unimaginative, most typically portraits of military dignitaries or war damage to architecture.
In this area, Muirhead Bone earned the reputation of ‘the Piranesi of city scenes’.
Artists responded to the outbreak of two world wars in several ways.
Many, such as the Bloomsbury Group, were pacifists and simply disassociated themselves from hostilities.
Others were pure artists, to whom war and other nonaesthetic factors were quite irrelevant; this applied especially to artists working in the 1930s, such as those associated with nonobjective art and St Ives.
A third group were idealists and enlisted with the Artists' Rifles and other forces, whether or not they were physically suited for fighting.
Feeling that combat was more heroic than art they sacrificed their creativity in this way.
Others, either purposely or accidentally, found the war useful to further their careers.
In certain cases, it defined the unique style for which they later became famous: Henry Moore's reclining underground figures and John Piper's bombed-out buildings are important examples.
ARTISTS AS INEPT SOLDIERS
Some of the most successful war artists were appointed from combatant ranks after proving to be inept soldiers.
Kennington was one of these in World War One, Carel Weight another in World War Two.
The move to war artist did not necessarily prove an easy path, since artists ran the gauntlet of their military  colleagues, who considered them malingerers and sycophants.
They also had to work under demanding physical conditions, especially extremes of temperature, and had to endure cultural privations, with music and books in short supply.
Unlike the forces, they worked and often largely existed, alone.
At worst, some artists were killed: four victims of World War Two were Ravilious, Rex Whistler, Hennell and Richards.
Nevinson was wounded during World War One, and Paul Nash became ill, suffering from asthma.
I spoke to war artist Carel Weight, who was commissioned at the end of WW2 to record architectural damage to the historic cities of Europe.
His memorable images of destroyed Renaissance bridges of Florence, and of Vienna's damaged st Stephen's Cathedral, are well known.
In later years, he was to add a more humorous and personal touch with his series The Recruit's Progress , which comments on the indignities suffered by noncommissioned army ranks.
Other unusual works by Carel Weight were executed at the height of the London blitz, and recorded events which showed how civilians were often more at risk than the forces.
His Messerschmidt Overtaking a Tram was not bought by the War Office, being a bit close to the truth; but his Escape of the Zebra from the Zoo is an endearing, surreal narrative work which foreshadows his later direction as a painter of the ethereal and unexpected.
Painted on four panels, it is owned by Manchester City Art Galleries.
John Keane, Death at the Sheraton, 1991, oil and collage on canvas.
(ABOVE)
CONTEMPORARY WAR ART
Only in 1972 did the Trustees of the Imperial War Museum, alerted by ‘the increasing level of violence in Northern Ireland’ realise that, since 1945, there had been a ‘conspicuous absence of any contemporary art recording the involvement of British and Commonwealth forces in numerous small wars.’
By 1989, there were 28 artists working officially to record various military conflicts.
The first war artist in Ulster was Ken Howard, who was twice commissioned by the Imperial War Museum to record day-to-day life in Northern Ireland: of the forces and the civilians in 1973 and 1978.
He described the resulting compositions as ‘figures with architecture to animate them.’
Perhaps most notable was his  Ulster Crucifixion .
This was a work which evolved almost by accident, when a boy swinging playfully from a lamp post near a wall covered in graffiti, challenged the artist to draw him.
‘It was only later,’ observed Ken Howard, ‘that I realised the symbolism of the crucifixion pose.
If the painting says anything, it is that it is the innocents, the children who suffer.
It is their lives that are being crucified in the Irish situation.’
On a technical level, Howard found his Northern Ireland experience particularly helpful in developing his topographical skills.
He was later flown by army regiments to do further such commissions in the Far East and elsewhere.
CRISIS IN THE FALKLANDS
The demands of the most recent wars: in the Falklands and the Gulf, have inspired subjects deliberately antiheroic, understated, even humdrum.
This is partly because hostilities now arouse political opposition and are be no means fully approved of by all the British people or even all British authorities.
Moreover, the anti-war lobbies are now substantial and enjoy an entirely respectable status.
Added to which, in modern warfare, breaches of security are potentially ever more fatal, so that artists have less rather than more access to the front than in the past.
Because of ever-tightening security arrangements, Linda Kitson of the Falklands, and John Keane of the Gulf, were only permitted to record preparations and the aftermath of their respective wars, rather than fullblooded action.
In recording life on board troopship, which she noted mainly in very quick sketches of which she has special mastery, Linda Kitson noted the macabre elements of military training and equipment against the cushioned setting of a luxury liner; for example, the Rudolf Steiner Hair Salon, which housed the signals squadron.
As her subjects prepared for action, she encountered and noted the physical hardships that prevailed, notably the intense cold.
She identified with the emotions of the young men she accompanied, including the mental agonies suffered by many after the conflict had ended and they had returned home.
INTO THE GULF
John Keane opted to convey through ironic allegory the greater message of the human race, of only through waiting, with the army, in the Saudi Arabian desert, or with the RAF in the bar of the five star Sheraton Hotel in Bahrain; a more telling topic than might be imagined, since alcohol is forbidden in Saudi Arabia.
Like artists of the earlier wars, Keane was frustrated by his  dependence on the forces, their movements, their security and their unalloyed, albeit good-natured, company, which led him to be protected from real military action and from the indigenous civilian population of Iraq.
‘I think it's essential to have some kind of interaction,’ he told me.
No doubt the unaccustomed contact with troops and journalists helped fuel  Keane with a source for the alienation that is the hallmark of his pictures.
However, he says he is glad to have had an experience which afforded him ‘unique access’ to what he calls ‘The Grand Theme: Life and Death’and to have lived through a slice of contemporary history, which is for him an important interest.
He describes his responsibilities as a war artist as having been, ‘only to the truth as I see it.’
He works mainly from photographs and from video film.
The results of his last two years' work can be seen during Spring 1992 in two exhibitions:Gulf at the Imperial War Museum, and Not the Gulf at Waterman's Arts Centre.
Ken Howard, Linda Kitson and Keane, like most war artists, were appointed directly though special recommendations.
As is customary, they were paid a fee which committed them to producing pictures to that value for the Imperial War Museum.
Any remaining works are the property of the artist.
It will be interesting to see, in future exhibitions of work by these and other war artists, the effects of modern warfare on art through the historical context of art since World War One.
This can be studied not only in the Tate Gallery's Modern British collection, but also through the Imperial War Museum's collection of over 1,200 paintings, drawings and sculptures.
Linda Kitson, Mustering to Disembark, 1982, pen and ink.
(LEFT)
Carel Weight, Temple of Malatesta. 1945.
(RIGHT)
REVIEWS
BOOKS
ISLAND CHAPTERS
Prose and Poetry by Anna Adams , paintings by Norman Adams RA .
Published by Littlewood, paperback, £8.95
This book chronicles a period of intermittent family life spent on the Hebridean island of Scarp, mostly during the 1970s.
Scarp: is rugged beauty, its gradual depopulation, its sheep fanks, blackhouses and shielings.
Anna Adams provides written commentary in prose and verse, and Norman contributes nine watercolours.
Unfortunately, the delicacy of these splendid watercolours is not easily communicated in reproduction: the combine structural rigour with a sensuous lapping of colour.
More muted in palette than Adam's recent work, they have yet the same characteristic richness of evocation.
The Adams first visited Scarp in 1963, ‘It was  as though we had disembarked on the flowery slopes of Heaven’.
They returned six years later and purchased a corrugated zinc dwelling, and with their two sons became part-time islanders.
Anna Adams had no illusions about the decline of Scarp, ‘When the artists move in on a way of life, that way of life is picturesquely anachronistic and in decay’, but it seems that a taste for tragedy only augments the awareness of beauty.
This is another world, ‘At Whitsum the northern sky used to smoulder all night as though an arctic city were on fire’.
Anna Adams is a poet and painter of observed detail.
She writes of the ‘dark cities of the burdock’, and the way ‘the scrubbed withdrawing room of the sea was strewn with swags of weed’.
She contemplates the flowering machair and the hillside lazybeds.
For all her speculation, her voice is that of down-to-earth sense.
Typically, her own watercolours are often of what she calls weeds.
It is interesting to see the raw material of event transformed into poetry, though this does make for a certain degree of repetition.
Anna Adams is good on maps, on the quality of silence, and she captures the bleak, lonely poetry of the weather report.
Whilst celebrating the ordinary, she happens upon the marvellous.
Beachcombing for wood she discovers paraffin way and ambergris.
ANDREW LAMBIRTH
POEMS AND DRAWINGS FROM THE FIRST WORLD WAR
By David Bomberg 
Published by Gillian Jason Gallery, £90
In the years just before 1914, David Bomberg was exploring, in semi-cubist, Vorticist works, the potentiality of geometric forms in the new mechanical age.
The War itself, in which he served, brought home to him the ruthless destructiveness of man as weapon or mere machine.
In a beautifully bound and printed limited edition (250 copies) of 11 of his previously unpublished war poems and 15 black and white plates, Bomberg's devastating war experience is laid bare.
His brother was killed in it, as was his critical champion T E Hulme, and his fellow Jewish East End artist and Slade student, the poet/painter, Isaac Rosenberg.
The poems relate the Front's sulphurous claustrophobia and hellish din, in language that is often stark, jerky, sensuous: ‘Guns in action! /Spitting a tawny phlegm/Lightning's jagged tongue stinging the air.’
We hear of trenchermen ‘with liquid acids freezing on the/heart’.
The drawings (c. 1918), showing gunners loading shells and tunnel patriots, are succinct, almost balletic, with the fellow-feeling but not the horror of the poems, though a fine, nervously sketchy drawing,Figures Helping a Wounded Soldier (c. 1916–17), evokes war's ineffable pity.
Copies are available at £90, plus £5 p&p (£13 overseas) from Gillian Jason Gallery, London.
LEARN TO PAINT MIXED MEDIA
By Moira Huntly 
Published June 2, HarperCollins, £6.99
A new book in the Learn to Paint series, Moira Huntly examines combinations of paint and illustrates the basic techniques, followed by some demonstration paintings.
Some of the media covered are: watercolour and wax, watercolour and ink, poster colour resist and ink, charcoal and acrylic, watercolour and gouache, watercolour and pastel, printing ink and other media, Indian ink and acrylic.
ALWYN CRAWSHAW'S OIL PAINTING COURSE
By Alwyn Crawshaw 
HarperCollins, £15.99
Following the success of his Watercolour Painting Course , Alwyn Crawshaw has now produced on oils which offers the reader 29 lessons.
Crawshaw guides the beginner through the basic methods and techniques of oil painting, clearly explaining each process and offering advice and encouragement at every stage.
WATER HOOD FITCH, A CELEBRATION
By Jane Lewis 
HMSO Books, £17.95
The 19th century explorer and illustrator, Walter Hood Fitch is best known for his flamboyant yet accurate drawings which have made a lasting contribution to our knowledge of the plant world and to the art of botanical illustration.
This celebration of the artist's life and work has copious colour prints of his work as well as a lively text.
GENERAL QUERIES…
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS…
QUESTIONS ANSWERED
QUESTION TIME
QUESTION TIME belongs to the readers of AIM and it is up to you to make full use of it.
If you have a problem with colour mixing for instance, why not direct a question to Michael Wilcox?
Tom Robb, a teacher of over 30 years, can lend advice on may technical problems.
If you have query about information mentioned in a particular feature ask the person who wrote.
Send your questions to Question Time, The Artist's and Illustrator's Magazine, London.
DRAWING PINS
As a travelling artist, I frequently come up against the problem of transporting my work.
Watercolours are easy — they dry; but oil paintings need time.
Winsor & Newton used to make double-sided drawing pins, but alas, no longer.
I have fiddled about with bits of cork but nothing is really satisfactory.
Do any of your readers have any bright ideas?
The Countess of Strafford
Winchester
We are looking forward to hearing your suggestions.
When we asked Winsor & Newton why they stopped distributing canvas pins, John Oldfield explained, ‘We no longer handle canvas pins in our range.
We have never manufactured them ourselves.
They were withdrawn due to the fact that there was a lack of demand and a poor quality of supply.
I believe that similar items are available through specialist art suppliers’.
HORSE DRAWINGS
Please could you recommend a book on horse anatomy for the artist, rather than the vet!
Since many of my paintings feature horses these days, I feel I really need this knowledge in just the same way that being familiar with human anatomy is essential to really understanding figure drawing.
Cynthia Lambert
Worlingham, Suffolk
An excellent study of the art of animal anatomy, ‘Anatomy of Animals, Studies in the Forms of Mammals and Birds’, by Ernest E Thompson, should be able to help you.
Illustrated by over 100 drawings, the book contains two chapters on the anatomy of the horse, and considers size and proportion.
Published by Studio Editions.
£7.99, 1991
PASTEL DUST
I recently purchased a book on pastel painting.
In one section it warns that, as some pastels contain such poisons as arsenic, chromium and cadmium, one should avoid, as far as possible, breathing the dust from them.
It advises artists to refrain from smoking or eating while painting, to use face masks and to provide adequate ventilation by means of an extractor fan.
I have been using pastels for at least 30 years and in all that time I have never once seen a warning to this effect in either art books or on the many boxes of pastels that I have purchased.
Do you think that the Americans are being over-cautious about this or are we perhaps being a bit lax?
Ben Robson
Hatfield, Herts
As Gary Robert's series, Is Art Dangerous?
(AIM, Feb/March, '92) highlighted, health labelling of art materials is obligatory in the United States, though not, as yet, in this country.
Most UK manufacturers do not list the ingredients of their products, but this does not necessarily mean they pose a risk with sensible use.
Rembrandt pastels from Frisk carry a health label on their packaging, which assures customers that the pastels contain no cadmium or other heavy metal-based pigments, which may cause problems with prolonged and heavy usage.
Rembrandt pastels are certified by the Art and crafts Materials Institute, which is the main watchdog for safety in the arts in the US.
Derwent pencils and pastels from Rexel are also non-toxic, and the company stresses that the material should not pose a risk, that is, given that you don't eat them!
Jane Foreman, Product Manager at Rexel told us, ‘In the years before 1960, traditional artists’ pigments were often natural minerals, some of which were compounds of heavy metals.
Even after regulations to protect children from these materials, some use in professional art materials was still permitted.
However, none of the pigments is question are used in the manufacture of Rexel Derwent products, pastels included, and because of this it has not been necessary to issue warnings with Derwent products.
All Derwent products carry the CE symbol to indicate that the product conforms with the current EEC Toy Safety Regulations which totally preclude the use of those pigments in their manufacture’.
OIL FLOWING FROM THE BRUSH
My oil paintings often involve a lot of fine lines and small details, but when using fine brushes I find it very difficult to get the oil paint to flow from the brush very smoothly.
Could you suggest a medium which would help the oil paint to flow better?
I was interested last year to see Tim Jonke's article and his method of spraying acrylic paint over oil paint, as I had always been led to believe that acrylic would no take on top of oil paint.
Is this possible because of its very thin application?
Are there any other art materials that can be used on top of oil paint?
John S Bowman
St Albans, Herts
Other than using turps, products to thin and make your oil paint freer-flowing are small quantities of stand oil mixed with turps, or Roberson's glaze medium, obtainable from L Cornelissen & Son, London.
It is not recommended to add more oil to your pigment, as keeping your paint dry and simple will yield better results.
For fine detailed work, you could possibly try using a rigger brush, which has longer hair and therefore stores up more paint.
As to using acrylic directly on top of oil paint, this is generally best avoided, mainly because of the difference in drying times between the two media.
TOM ROBB
MINING ARTISTS
I was interested in the article British Miner Artists by Philip Vann which appeared in AIM last year.
I would like to find out more about these artists, particularly Nicholas Evans.
Are any of his paintings on view anywhere?
Any information you can let me have would be gratefully accepted.
Keith Bannister
Barnsley
Nicholas Evans is part of the Ashington Miner Artist Group, and his work, together with that of other members of the group, is on permanent display at the Woodfern Gallery, Ashington, Northumberland.
For further reading on the subject of the Miner Artists, a book called ‘The Pitman Artists’, available at your local library, provides a fascinating insight into not only the works, but the lifestyles and social background which inspired these paintings.
CAN YOU HELP?
Pictured above is a work of art by one of our readers.
The transparency of this work was sent to us a year or so ago.
Unfortunately the label came detached from the image and now we don't know who painted it!
If you did, or know who did, please contact us at the magazine.