

ISSUE NO. 144
Bishop's David's message on coal crisis
‘Our duties to those in need’
JACK DODD reports
A PLAN to combat the coalfield crisis was proposed in Bishop David's pastoral letter dealing with the national outcry which followed the Government plans to close pits.
The Bishop joined with other church leaders in meeting British Coal executives much earlier this year when many jobs in the Yorkshire coalfield — Britain's biggest were already in question.
His recent message was circulated to the media, resulting in radio interviews, newspaper coverage and comment.
Bishop David has now asked parishes to investigate the local problem, offer practical friendship and support, lobby the legislators — and pray for a just, compassionate solution.
In a Pastoral letter titled ‘Our Duties to Those in Need’, he wrote of ‘the disaster that threatens so many miners in our community.
‘We must no mince words; it is a disaster.
It is so much more than their jobs that are under threat; it is their livelihood.
‘Others more qualified than I am in these matters can comment on the economic sense or otherwise of the  proposed pit closures.
I restrict myself to pointing to the human misery that follows on such events and our human and Christian responsibilities in the face of such hardship.
Shattered
‘I wrote earlier this week to our MPs.
I referred in my letter to the human spiritual depression that is part and parcel of such closures — and indeed of all job losses and business failures.
Lives of individuals and families are deeply damaged; and in the case of the miners, whole communities are in danger of danger of being shattered.
‘Cash handouts help in the short term, and are essential to alleviate hardship.
But cash alone cannot repair the personal or community battering that closures of this magnitude bring about.
There is a loss of self-confidence, a sense of personal failure, great anger and a feeling of being utterly let down.
This is the really dangerous depression in our society and is one we must do all in our power to do away with.
‘It seems to me that there are a number of things we can and should do.
‘We must make every effort to know something of the detail of what is happening.
In a situation of this sort ignorance is often the easy option.
I hop every parish will make arrangements to publicise accurately the facts, especially insofar as they concern the people in our diocese.
‘Secondly — and especially in those parishes most affected by the threatened closures — we must offer practical friendship and support to those likely to be hurt by the closures.
You must obviously decide in your own parish what can best be done, whether for your own or from a neighbouring parish.
‘Moreover, on the basis of the facts and likely consequences as we know  them , we have an obligation  to make appropriate representations to our legislators.
In a democracy this is a duty, not a choice.
I hope that every parish will take on this duty carefully and  conscientiously .
‘It goes without saying that we have an obligation to pray for a just, understanding and — dare I say I — compassionate solution to the situation.
We may pray in particular that communities will survive and flourish and that the anger and depression caused by the announcements will be healed.
‘The publicity which rightly has surrounded this situation may have one good effect; it draws our attention to the awful consequences of unemployment and business failures in our society; and it reminds us of our genuine responsibilities towards the individuals and families damaged by this; we must have care for our brothers and sisters in need.
Our secular work is guided more by a system of economics than by the Gospel.
We need to show in every possible way that far more important than economic considerations are the needs of individual people and communities.
That is a true work of evangelisation we may be quite sure.
‘I wish you all every blessing, with every hope for the future.’
Presentation evening Bishop David pictured with the headmaster of St John Fisher School, Harrogate, Mr Terry Keelan, at a school prize-giving last month.
See Page 5 for a photograph of the prizewinners.
Photography by RICHARD JACKSON
Teams of Our Lady
THE Teams of Our Lady is a lay movement of Christian married couples, who base their family life on the Gospel and see their love sanctified by the sacrament of marriage.
Acknowledging their weaknesses and limitations to live up to the Christian ideals they realised the strength they would obtain from mutual help and formed themselves into Teams.
A Team consists of 5–6 couples and a priest/spiritual counsellor.
They meet monthly in each others homes to share their experiences over a simple shared meal, pray together and deepened their understanding of marriage, family life and their faith.
Throughout the month they endeavour to pray and read the scripture regularly and make time for a ‘sit down’— an occasion to have meaningful conversation — which should be an important part of married life.
For more information contact Tom and Maureen Hoban.
Sale of investments cuts diocese losses
DIOCESAN accounts show that investments have dropped from £4,327,000 at March 31, 1989, to £1,851,000 at March 31st this year.
Savings have been disposed of in order to meet the growing gap between income and expenditure.
The accounts suggest that if this trend continues, ‘the entire investment base of the Diocese will have been used up within the next two years.’
Largely due to educational reorganisation, schools are a major drain on funds.
The school funding debt has risen from £269,000 in 1989 to £1,896,000 this year.
This is largely because of interest changes.
Although, on paper, the Government meets 85% of the cost of Catholic schools, the Diocese must put 100% ‘up-front’, paying interest on the whole cost until such time as the Government pays its share.
Thus the diocesan schools debt has risen by £1,627,000.
Purchase of other property and buildings has cost £935,000.
Loans to parishes have increased by £651,000.
Much of this expenditure has been funded by loans from parishes which have contributed £1,514,000 over the four years, leaving almost £1,700,000 to be funded from diocesan resources — in other words, the disposal of assets.
Figures show an operating deficit of £336,203.
This was reduced by the sale of investment to £284,956.
Figures for 1991 showed an operating deficit of £28,002.
Sale of investments worth £77,217 produced an operating surplus of £49,215.
These figures relate to central funds.
They do not refer to the 130 parishes in the diocese, each of which operates its own finances.
Bishop David has already appealed to us to double the money we give to the Church wherever we can.
On that occasion he said: ‘This is the first time I have done anything like this, but I don't apologise for it.
The pastoral work of the church cannot be done without adequate financial support and I am afraid the support we are getting at the moment is simply not enough for all we are doing.’
Catechism —‘a broader understanding’
SOME of the alleged contents of the long-awaited Universal Catechism were ‘leaked’ to the Press in Rome last month, giving rise to discussion and comment — informed, aggressive, sour, ribald and otherwise.
The English version is not expected to be published until sometime next year.
As one of the team writing of the new catechism, Bishop David was in great demand to comment on the work which began some years ago.
Of a number of radio and TV appearances, perhaps the most informative was on BBC Radio 4's Sunday Programme.
On that programme, our Bishop said the new catechism is not simply about sin.
‘The catechism is about the beliefs, the worship, the prayer and the way of loving of those who wish to follow Christ in the Catholic Church.
‘Part of that refers to the ways in which people fall short in their living, which is what we call sin, so it is not simply about that.
 It is a far broader understanding of how we live as Catholics in today's world.’
Only a fraction of some 450 pages are devoted to sex — though this was the section which attracted most attention in the popular press who really seem to have some quite comical ideas of what the Church is all about.
The Bishop: ‘I think it is a very balanced and very clear statement of how we should be living so far as our sexuality is concerned.’
‘Living Will’ leaves doctors in difficulty
by JOHN T. DUNNE St. Joseph's, Harrogate
PEOPLE in favour of euthanasia will soon ask Parliament to agree a Bill that could open the way to legalised ‘Mercy Killing’.
The Bill is about what are sometimes called ‘Living Wills’ or ‘Advance Directives’.
This means that you drag up a documents giving directions about how you wish to be treated if later on you cannot make your wishes known because you have suffered a serious accident or are very ill.
As patients we have every right to decide what happens to us.
Suppose we honestly believe that some treatment is unlikely to bring us a benefit that makes worthwhile the pain or distress involved, we have every right to refuse it.
Moreover we do not have to inflict such pointless treatment on others.
There is no reason why we should not put our wishes into writing in a ‘Living Will’.
But the Euthanasia Lobby is bring a Bill before the House of Lords which goes much further.
It would give legal force to these Advance Directives.
Hospital Doctors would be obliged to carry out what the Living Will demanded,(or, if they objected, find another Doctor who would).
If doctors fail to do something the Bill lays down, the could be fined or go to prison for six months.
There is nothing wrong in preparing written directions about how we wish to be treated.
There are many dangers in trying to make such a document legally binding on those would have to take care of us.
This is exactly what the ‘Advance Directives Bill’ would do.
To begin with, how can we possibly know what we would really need if stricken by serious illness or accident perhaps many years later?
Imagine a young man of twenty-five laying down strict instructions about his retirement!
‘Terminal’
Then when the times comes there are likely to be serious doubts about how to interpret the terms of a Living Will.
For example, it may speak of ‘Terminal Condition’, but what is ‘Terminal’; six days, six months or even years?
Or we may say we do not want treatment which ‘just keeps us alive without any hope of a cure’.
But how do you decide in advance exactly what comes under this head?
In any case it is not easy to be sure about how an illness will progress or what the outcome of a treatment will be.
A legally-binding Living Will leaves little room for doctors to use their best judgement about how to help us.
In addition to all this the Bill to be introduced into the House of Lords pays no real attention to the rights of conscience of doctors, nurses or anyone else involved in the care of the sick.
It would put them in an impossible position if a legally-binding Living Will demanded what they considered unethical or bad medical practice.
To sum up: there is nothing wrong in putting into writing our instructions about future treatment and such a document should be taken very seriously.
But Living Wills should be regarded only as a general indication of our wishes.
They should not be given legal binding force.
This would be against our own best interests and would be unjust to those looking after us.
There are many reasons to oppose this Bill.
Above all we should resist it because it is really intended to allow legalised Euthanasia to sneak in by the kitchen window having been refused entry at the front door.
AT the moment we need to be aware of what is happening and make others aware too.
When the time comes it will be important to oppose strongly this very dangerous piece of legislation.
‘HERE I AM’ EXPLAINED
I'm a Catholic parent and I have seen a great deal of correspondence and adverse publicity in the local and Catholic press about this new Religious Education programme ‘Here I Am’.
Can somebody tell me about ‘Here I Am’.
Certainly.
‘Here I Am’ is a new Religious Education Programme, specially developed in England and Wales for children in Catholic primary schools.
Where has it come from?
The Church has always seen the need to present its teachings and tradition in ways which are appropriate and relevant to each generation.
In 1982 the Conference of Bishops of England and Wales asked for a new Religious Education programme that would reflect this thinking.
What was involved in this?
There has been widespread consultation throughout the country over the past 10 years involving the bishops, priests, religious education advisers, teachers parents, theologians and scripture scholars.
A list of the principal contributors is contained at the front of each volume of ‘Here I Am’.
Can you assure me that ‘Here I Am ’ is approved of by the Church authorities?
‘Here I Am’ is published with the authority of the Conference of Bishops of England and Wales and it presents the essential teaching of our Catholic faith.
What is the ‘Here I Am’ programme trying to do?
‘Here I Am’ is rooted in the teaching and tradition of the Catholic Church and explicitly draws it inspiration from the four major documents of the Second Vatican Council.
At the heart of it is the Church understanding of Revelation, which has constantly been reiterated in the writings of Pope John Paul II.
How does it do this?
‘Here I Am’ uses as it starting point the life experiences of children, through which God is initially revealed.
Working from these experiences ‘Here I Am’ gradually and sensitively leads the children to a knowledge of Jesus Christ, who is the fullness of God's revelation
Through Scripture, formal teaching, exploration, investigation and other appropriate educational techniques, the children are drawn into an understanding of the Church, its authority, its sacramental life, its liturgy and morality.
I've read that our children will be taught about other faiths.
This worries me…
I don't understand…
One of the things our faith teaches is that God has created each one of us in his own image and likeness.
We want our children to come to a love and respect of all God's people.
The Church herself ‘rejects nothing of those things which are true and holy in other religions.’
(Vatican II: Non Christian Religions: 1965).
Today children are meeting and playing with children of other faiths so it is important for them to have some understanding and knowledge of each other 's traditions.
Is it true that our children will be learning strange and unfamiliar methods of prayer?
‘Here I Am’ introduces to the full breadth of the Christian experience of prayer.
In addition to the traditional and familiar prayers, children are introduced to other common ways of praying, such as meditation, praying the Scriptures, litanies, and repetitive prayers, such as the ‘Jesus’ prayer.
We have children from a wide variety of backgrounds in our Catholic schools today.
Doesn't this make things very difficult for our teachers?
That is one of the reasons that teachers and priests have welcomed ‘Here I Am’.
The themes used express the beliefs of the Church in a language accessible to children and teachers.
The range of topics gives variety to the way they are taught.
The presentation is systematic, related to the age and development of the children and is designed to highlight the seasons of the liturgical year.
How does ‘Here I Am’ fit in with the present changes in education?
In recent years we have seen great efforts being made at all levels to ensure that children learn effectively.
‘Here I Am’ has taken into account the development of the National Curriculum and aims to ensure that the quality of Religious Education is as challenging and demanding as other areas of the children's learning.
No programme, however good, can replace the role the teacher in Religious Education.
That is why ‘Here I Am’ is gradually being introduced with an extensive programme of training for teachers, priests and governors.
OBITUARY
Michael Carroll
THE Bradford Catholic Players were shocked by the sudden death of Michael Carroll, a past President, on October 25th.
Devoted to his wife, Julie, and a family who shared his passion for the Catholic Players, Michael was a well-known figure in the Amateur Theatre in Bradford, appearing in shows and concerts with the Society in a period of over 30 years, rarely missing an event.
Being a member of the Bede Singers, a small group noted for its charitable work, was a great joy to him and his loss to both the Catholic Players and to them is great indeed.
MAY HE REST IN PEACE
Catechists to celebrate
THE Bradford Area Pastoral Council met on October 6th at St Mary's, Bradford.
The meeting was chaired by Monsignor John Moran in the presence of Bishop David Konstant.
The recently-held Day of Recollection for members of the APC and friends had been greatly appreciated and as a result a further Day of Recollection will be held in the spring.
A series of Talks on the Faith is being arranged for Catholics and non-Catholics.
The talks will be held in St Mary's Parish Hall on 16th, 23rd and 30th March, 1993 and 20th and 27th April, 1993.
An afternoon for Catechists from the Bradford area will be held at St Mary's on 21st November to celebrate their Ministry.
It is hoped to form an Association of Parish Catechists for the area.
Other issues covered at the meeting included a report front he Faith in the City Forum and the work of the Catholic Housing Aid Society.
The poor state of the church of the Immaculate Conception in Moscow was evident to members of the Rock Bottom Travel Company whose mission to Russia was reported in the October issue of ‘Catholic Voice’.
Bishop David and the headmaster of St John Fisher High School, Harrogate, Mr Terry Keelan, pictured with prize-winning pupils at a presentation evening at the school on October 21st.
The  school String Orchestra provided the music which featured a duet from John Coats (piano) and Fiona McLoughlin (flute).
Bishop David presented G.C.S.E. and A-level certificates and special prizes.
‘Come as you are’ party in Seacroft
IN SEPTEMBER, a group of 50 people met together for a week of prayer at Our Lady of Good Counsel, Leeds.
The group was made up of Anglicans, Methodists and Catholics and was led by ‘Prayer Guides’— lay people, ordained ministers and religious sisters representative of these denominations.
Because of family commitments, it is difficult to many people to participate in residential retreats.
John Veltri, a Canadian priest, struggling with the idea of a retreat which would reach more people, devised a form of prayer week which would allow people to enjoy the spiritual benefits of a retreat whilst still going about their normal daily lives.
The people taking part commit themselves to half an hour of scripture based prayer each day and a half hour meeting with a ‘Prayer Guide’ each evening when they receive personal guidance.
Sister Mary Leahy, who organised the prayer week at Seacroft, explained the purpose of these personal interviews; ‘Prayer is a relationship with God, so as a prayer guide, I would want to help people to recognise God in their lives — relating person to person — speaking to God and listening to him — coming to God just as they are and not as they think they ought to be.’
Throughout the week the participants came each evening to discuss their experience of praying through scripture with their personal guide.
The ‘one-to-one’ nature of these discussions was one of the most important factors in the success of this spiritual enterprise.
For many people this was a new experience and some, at first, felt a little anxious and apprehensive.
As the week went on these tensions disappeared and there was a wonderful sense of relaxation and peace.
At the final session the whole group met together to pray and reflect on the week.
Everybody had felt some spiritual movement and the comments were very positive:
‘I have a new understanding of scripture and I learnt to read a personal message from it — I don't want to lose that.’
‘I did it my way!
Before, I had always listened to somebody else's view.
I was free to express my own thoughts and feelings — it hurt sometimes.
‘It wasn't just print — living ideas came out of it.’
All agreed that it had been an exciting week, sometimes emotional and demanding but in the end enjoyable and full of the message of joy and peace.
Fr.
Michael O'Reilly, parish priest of the hosting church, Our Lady of Good Counsel, added, ‘I have been doing directed retreats for about fifteen years — it was good to have one in the parish which could be shared with our Christian friends from the other churches in Seacroft.
It was a very moving experience which I'm sure will have been spiritually beneficial to all who participated in it.’
JEAN LA VELLE 
PEW VIEW
Enough is enough
JUST when you may been ready to despair, it seems that this country of ours may have found something of its heart, or perhaps its soul.
I hope it is not too late.
Stop now, I hear you say, politics is rising its head.
An I mixing Religion and Politics?
No, just Life and the Gospels.
This column supports no party: it just has a option for the poor — in heart, spirit, wealth or opportunity.
Once upon a time you had a dream — that you lived in a world of simple market forces where everything or everybody had a price or value.
Everything, every service, object, or person — hospital or job, could be bought and sold in a market place — freely and without check.
Everything could be converted tot he market: people and needs parcelled up on to some sort of national supermarket shelves.
No more bureaucracy, no more faceless state direction.
All political parties could embrace these simple beliefs.
Everything is possible, for everyone, high or low.
Hard work, ambition could achieve anything.
But your dream world of wheeling and dealing become confusing.
Homes became a speculative investment which bubble and burst, leaving thousands without homes or unable to move home.
Schools are businesses, competing for pupils and cash.
Then the dream suddenly changes to nightmare when you hear voices say that they won't be able to look after your health because you're not really worth it: that the treatment you need is not cheap enough so you'll have to do without: that they would love to provide care for you in the community, but the price isn't right.
In your nightmare, you feel that decisions about your life are made somewhere else by someone else — people who know little of you or your job, thus making it easier to decide that you no longer fit into this year's marketing or accounting fashion
Your dream becomes one about cheap, efficient, green and natural fuels.
The market says close the pits.
The pits close, leaving thousands without jobs in pit-head villages that they or their fathers once came to for work.
Without jobs, and probably without hope.
Your dream is becoming an unpleasant, bizarre nightmare.
What next?
You are suddenly awoken by a loud noise.
Is it you, crying in your dream, or the voices of may people?
Is it about pits or jobs or housing or social care?
All you can hear is one word: ‘Enough’.
BENCHMARK
Obituary The Rev. Michael Brendan Conlin
FATHER Michael Conlin, the Parish Priest of SS.
Peter and Paul, Yeadon died in Leeds Infirmary after a long illness on October 24th.
He was fifty years old.
The son of a highly respected medical practitioner in the Sacred Heart parish in Leeds, he was educated by the Benedictines at Fort Augustus before proceeding to Ushaw to prepare for the priesthood.
He was ordained at Leeds Cathedral by Bishop Wheeler on 20th May, 1967 and was then appointed to St Joseph's, Handsworth, Sheffield.
He then served as curate at St Ignatius, Ossett and St Nicholas, Gipton, but by this time he was becoming increasingly involved in additional administrative tasks.
In 1969 he had been made assistant secretary to the Diocesan Schools Commission, becoming principal secretary three years later, he also became a member of the Finance Commission, and then in 1972 Bishop Wheeler appointed him his personal private secretary at Bishop's House.
Father Conlin combined all these many onerous tasks with great efficiency but above all with constant good humour and kindness.
Education
After six years at Bishop's House he went to reside at St Urban's, Leeds and then in 1982 moved to Holy Family, Leeds, taking over as Parish Priest from Canon Patrick Bradley in 1985.
By now he had become Principal Schools Commissioner for the Diocese, a post he continued to hold until August 1986 when he became Parish Priest at Yeadon.
For seventeen years Father Conlin had been closely involved in the educational provision of the Diocese, a far from easy task but one in which he achieved much and at the same time earned the  respect and affection of Clergy, Governors and Teachers.
Despite his many diocesan commitments Father Conlin remained above all a pastoral priest, with an abiding concern for people as individuals, even if this was often hidden by his mischievous sense of humour, it was always recognised by everyone who met him.
In recent months he accepted his increasing illness with an admirable fortitude and resignation.
His funeral took place at SS Peter and Paul, Yeadon where only five months before he had celebrated the silver jubilee of his ordination.
+ May he rest in Peace +
On the move…
Fr., Michael Lynch has been appointed parish priest of St Joseph's, Sherburn-in-Elmet, Fr.
Gerald Casey goes to the parishes of St Patrick and Mount St Mary, Leeds and Fr.
Mark Naughton temporarily to Myddelton Lodge.
SAFETY FIRST!
Our photograph, courtesy of the Huddersfield Daily Examiner, shows pupils from St Joseph's R.C. Junior School receiving advice on road safety from Huddersfield Police accident prevention officer, P.C. Alan Lawrie.
He conducted a four-day pedestrian awareness course which included classroom work, practical experience outside the school and a written test.
THE FUTURE OF CATHOLIC TEACHER SUPPLY
By G. L. TURNBULL, Principal, Trinity & All Saints College
TEACHER education is to be reformed, transferred in orientation and emphasis from the existing teacher training institutions to schools.
Associated funding is to be similarly redirected
As is now well known, the thrust and outline of the proposed reforms were announced by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the then Secretary of State for Education and Science in a speech to the North of England Education Conference in early January and by way of a consultation document at the end of that month.
The reforms are intended to cut deeply into current practice in both undergraduate and post-graduate programmes of initial teacher education, primary and secondary.
They are intended to promote the primacy of schools at the expense of teacher  education institutions.
Whether the proposed scheme will deliver the net benefit claimed in terms of the quality and quantity of teacher supply has been the subject of extensive comment elsewhere and will not be repeated here.
My concern is to address a different and very specific issue.
How will these reforms impact upon denominational education needs, those of the Roman Catholic sector in particular?
These needs range across the full spectrum: from primary and secondary school to sixth form college and colleges of higher education.
The latter serve as a focus for meeting the needs of the Catholic schools sector not just in the sphere of initial teacher education but in the ever-increasing demands for school-based work and school partnership required by the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE) and, more importantly, the continuing need for professional development and updating.
In-Service needs are ever expanding, in response both to the demands of the national Curriculum, Local Management of Schools and the definition of denominational identity.
The Catholic H.E.
Colleges serve as a integrating force for these purposes to the rest of the sector and also express the Roman Catholic Church's commitment to a presence in Higher Education.
The Catholic Church has long insisted on its right of making due provision for the full range of the educational needs of its community and has invested heavily in making such provision.
The same applies, of course, to other denominations and has been recognised in Britain as qualifying for state support.
There is little doubt that, taken to their ultimate conclusion, the full range of proposed reforms would severely wound the remaining teacher education activities of the Catholic Colleges of Higher Education, possibly mortally so.
Most of the Colleges are quite extensively engaged in activities other than teacher education, their viability would be disturbed but it would not be destroyed.
Damage there would be.
A core relationship, indeed their original raison d'étre, between the colleges and the church would be negated.
The colleges have, in overcoming the crises of the 1970s, already significantly repositioned themselves as regards their contribution to the professional life of the Roman Catholic Church.
It includes but extends beyond their contribution to teacher education.
However, to lose that ingredient from the richness of their diversity would be an outcome which none of the colleges would wish to contemplate.
Obligation
The Secretary of State for Education is under a statutory obligation to make adequate provision for the denominational schooling needs of the Roman Catholic community.
Since Catholic schools require Catholic teachers to staff them that obligation extends, by implication, to maintaining adequate teacher training resources.
What would happen if, as a result of the proposed reforms, the Catholic H.E.
Colleges could not longer sustain their initial teacher education?
A due sense of balance is required in the argument at this point.
It would be quite wrong to attempt to suggest that, as currently constituted, the Catholic H.E.
Colleges could match the needs of the Catholic school system either in numbers or range of subjects.
Of the six colleges only two are accredited for both primary and secondary training at undergraduate as well as postgraduate level; primary provision predominates and, because of cuts imposed by the former DES in the past, even their joint secondary provision does not meet the full range of subjects required by the standard secondary school.
Expansion
The attrition of the last two decades has been severe.
Twenty years ago there were sixteen Catholic Colleges of Education, of which six survive as colleges of Higher Education.
Three remain free-standing; the other as part of federations.
Catholic education expanded rapidly after 1945.
The boom was accompanies by the formation of eight new colleges and a rapid growth of student numbers to a peak of 11,000 in 1970.
Thereafter the birthrate shrank sharply, reducing the demand for teachers.
The national provision for teacher training places was slashed, from 140,000 in 1976 to some 40,000 in 1980.
An inevitable consequence was a rapid run down in the stock of Catholic Colleges as registered student numbers plummeted to 3,000 by 1980.
Parallel closures occurred in the Anglican sector which between 1974 and 1989 lost 15 out of twenty-seven colleges.
For the academic session of 1991–92 an aggregate of 3,400 students were enrolled on initial teacher education courses in the six Catholic H.E.
Colleges.
Not all are Catholics and not all will find employment in Catholic schools.
But the operating framework of meeting the needs of Catholic schools has remained firmly in focus.
The Minister's proposed reform of initial teacher education places all of this, and more, in jeopardy.
It will potentially drive a wedge between the Catholic H.E.
Colleges and Catholic schools at a time when both are increasingly aware of the need to co-operate more closely with each other.
Will the denominational bond overcome the competitive drive of the market economy now introduced into teacher education?
Will it matter if it does not?
The answer must surely be ‘Yes’.
Graduates
The college route into teaching has never been exclusive; university-based qualification has been a proper alternative, especially for graduates seeking a career in secondary education.
However the relationship between the Catholic H.E.
Colleges and the population of Catholic schools is a complex one which extends well beyond the supply of newly-qualified staff.
At its best, the relationship is an interactive partnership in which school and college combine from initial interview, through College-based initial training, to school-based teaching practice, joint curriculum development, and joint evaluation and assessment in the formation of a potential Catholic teacher.
School and college come together in a variety of other ways too, most notably through In-Service provision either on a direct one-to-one or collective basis, or through the Church's own national structures.
Attention has recently  focused on supplying to Catholic schools In-Services resource training packs concerned with formulating mission statements, identifying denominational distinctiveness and appropriate forms of appraisal.
The Catholic H.E.
Colleges made a major contribution to that work, an activity, as with In-Service generally, for which they would lack both credibility and resources were their teacher education work to be further reduced, as the proposed reforms threaten.
Morever past closures of Colleges of Education have resulted in serious geographical gaps, most notably in the North-East and the Manchester area.
Other areas were never well provided.
These have served to highlight deficiencies of supply, critical gaps of a general kind, rendered ever more pointed by the potential impact of the intended reforms.
Lead role
More specifically, the Colleges have taken the lead role in the provision of an essential qualification for Roman Catholic teachers, the Catholic Certificate of Religious Education.
On present trends, there will be serious problems in continuing to be able to supply that particular need.
However much more it might be considered that the Catholic H.E.
Colleges should be doing to meet the needs of Roman Catholic schools, notwithstanding the harsh economic regime they share with the rest of higher education, it seems fair to conclude that without them the Roman Catholic educational sector would be very much the poorer.
They form an irreducible minimum.
A VOLUNTEER'S REFLECTIONS
Father John Kelly concludes his report on life and work in Peru.
What will I take home with me from Peru?
The experience of faith as it is lived by another people, another culture; the enjoyment of celebrating fiestas (and that includes the liturgy and the party afterwards) with the people; the experience of living amongst a people who never give up the struggle whatever happens and so challenge my own pettiness; the graciousness of so many of them and the great welcome they gave us.
I am a walker and often enough would just meander through the parish of an afternoon for an hour or so — many of the people would say hello and stop for a word.
I fear, at times, that, surrounded by so much violence, it might become commonplace to me and cease to shock and move as it should.
I hope not.
I wonder how life will be again in a quietish suburban English parish.
Maybe I will have learnt say ‘Yes’ and I mean ‘No’, or, ‘I'll do it tomorrow’when I have no such intention.
It is impolite to say ‘No’ to a Peruvian and they have various social technique of  doing so without actually saying it.
That could cause problems at home.
I'll remember the rogues too, and their incredible ability to tell tall stories when looking for help.
It is said that Peru has some of the best liars in the world — I couldn't know, they are so good I believe them!
But above all I would hope to go home with a faith in some measure renewed by the experience of seeing close at hand how many of the Peruvians live theirs.
A faith worn on the sleeve, to be seen and not hidden; a faith that touches every detail of life; a faith that knows how and what to celebrate; a faith that knows how and what to celebrate; a faith that earthquakes, terrorists, cholera, drought, power cuts, water shortages, poverty and bad housing will never shake.
I am not due home for another year or so and I hope that by then a little more of the Peruvian culture and faith will have rubbed off on me.
And Beamish museum?
No, I don't think I'll be applying to replace the vicar.
But will I been seen as a museum piece by some?
Perhaps — but the years in Peru will hopefully have given the lie to that one.
LOTSI'S DREAM GROWS
READERS of the August issue will know of the dream of Lotsi Jacobyini to establish a community for handicapped people in the village of Atea in Romania.
The efforts of Anthony Thompson and his friends, including contingents of willing helpers provided by the St Bede's Link with Romania, have gone a long way towards enabling Lotsi to achieve his goal and the project has now reached the stage where it will benefit from a greater degree of organisation than has been necessary so far.
This was realised in  March of this year when, at Columba Club in Bradford, the Bradford Atea Project was formed.
This is an association of interested parties, individuals and organisations, who have joined forces to provide fund-raising facilities, logistic support and whatever other assistance is found to be necessary to give effect to the hopes of all the parties concerned that a self-sufficient village for the care of physically and mentally handicapped people should come into being in Atea.
An application has been made to the Charity Commissioners for the Bradford Atea Project to be given registered charity status and the association has set itself a target of raising £20,000 during the next 12 months.
In March it was learned that there is in existence a French organisation which has been working towards the provision of a water supply to the village of Atea and the construction of a better quality road to the village than had previously existed.
Contact was made initially by a representative of the French organisation and the possibilities of co-operation between the two organisations are being explored.
At the same time Lotsi's colleagues in Romania had formed an organisation, known as ‘Pater Nostra’, which has now been recognised by the Romania government as an approved institution.
the significance of this is that the organisation will be subject to supervision by the local equivalent of the Department of Social Security and in return will receive financial help from the Romanian government towards the running costs of the village.
So far buildings have been acquired as the result of the Bradford efforts which are at present undergoing alterations and improvements which will eventually accommodate about 20 handicapped people plus staff.
The French have gone a long way towards providing a road and water supply and members of the ‘Pater Nostra’ organisation are studying in Budapest, Vienna and Germany to obtain qualifications in medicine, physiotherapy, occupational therapy and other skills which will enable them to provide the day-to-day care of the residents in the future.
The immediate aim of the members of the Bradford Atea Project is the provision of finance.
The generosity of people in the area so far gives them good cause to believe that they will succeed again over the next 12 months.
Frank Thompson, the father of Anthony, is masterminding the fund-raising activities to be arranged over the next year and is open to suggestions and, of course, contributions, from any source.
Support for St Gemma's
SR.
Mary Sloan C.P., matron (centre) and Mrs Mary Wright, Appeals Co-ordinator (left), accepted a cheque from Mrs Enid Dowling of the East Leeds Deanery Committee for £6,053.56.
The money was raised from two events held during the summer months to benefit St Gemma's Hospice, The first being a sponsored walk in May at Roundhay Park and the second being a car treasure hunt and barn dance in June at St Theresa's School.
Sr. Mary Sloan expressed her gratitude to the committee for their continued support for the work of the hospice.
Over the years the committee has raised in excess of £17,000 for St. Gemma's.
CENTRE OF ATTENTION
BY PADDY AMBROSE Youth and Community Education Worker
A real hive of activity for all ages!
ST MARY'S Youth and Community Centre, Halifax is unique in that it is the only one of its type owned by the Diocese of Leeds.
Some readers may remember attending the building when it was St Mary's Junior School, indeed many nostalgic, even misty-eyed visits are made to the building by people who remember the school as it was many years ago.
The young people who use the building today are likely to be part of the thriving youth club that operates on four nights of the week.
They are allowed to make a little more noise than earlier occupants!
The centre is also a hive of activity during the day with activities which include a luncheon club, over-60's club, yoga, language classes, table-tennis and the ever-popular tea dance every Friday afternoon.
Alcoholics Anonymous meet at the centre twice a week.
A long history of spiritual development work with young people includes retreats and all-night vigils, and a prayer group meets every Wednesday evening.
Above all, the centre is a meeting place and focus for Catholics from all over Calderdale.
In addition to meeting rooms and lounges, a large function room is used for conferences and is hired for celebrations such as wedding receptions.
There cannot be many Catholics in Halifax who have not been to an event at St. Mary's!
Further information about the centre and its work can be obtained from me at the centre.
A rare sight!— empty seats in a meeting room.
The thriving centre in Clarence Street, Halifax.
A large function — ideal for all uses.
C.H.A.S.
CONCERN FOR OUR NEIGHBOURS
BY PETER MEREDITH
FOLLOWING on from my article in last month's ‘Catholic Voice’, I would like to deal the national situation by outlining the problems as I see them.
THE recent wild fluctuation in interest rates has only added an extra burden to people already having severe housing problems.
What it means for the broader economy is that the current housing crisis is more serious than ever, and there doesn't seem to be an end in sight.
Despite Government initiatives at the end of last year, repossessions continue.
The number of mortgages in arrears also suggest that repossessions are set to continue.
IN the first six months of 1992, 35,750 households lost their homes (which could mean nearly as many repossessions as last year); and, even worse, at the end of June 1992, 305,140 households were in arrears of six months or more, compared to 275,350 at the end of 1991, suggesting a rising trend.
Homelessness continues to be a major problem: in the first six months of 1992, 73,310 households were accepted as homeless by local authorities in England alone.
(At this level this could mean 146,700 households for the full year, contrasted with 145,140 households accepted in 1991).
Squatters
Use of temporary accommodation: At the end of June 1992, there were 62,780 households living in temporary accommodation (these are households that have been accepted as homeless by the local authority, but are not able to be housed in permanent accommodation).
Of these, 11,080 were in hotels and b&bs.
Of course, these are the official statistics — there are no official figures on those sleeping rough, squatting, staying with friends, etc.
The official statistics only include those accepted as homeless by local authority, and they are mainly households with children.
A major problem area is that of young people aged 16–17 with no benefit, and 18–25 on reduced benefits — this increases hardship for young people.
Despite these soaring levels of homelessness, hardly any affordable housing is being built even though the construction industry is calling for jobs.
It has been acknowledged that the current housing situation plays a vital role in the recession.
Bad housing is not an isolated problem, but interconnected with debt, poverty and low incomes.
In the recent Households Below Average Incomes Report (the Government's official record of poverty!), the number of individuals with incomes less than half the average (which is the European definition of poverty) rose again.
The figures are: 1979: 8% (4.4 million people) 1987: 16% (8.7 million) 1989: 19% (10.4 million)
I have concentrated on mortgage arrears and repossessions above, but it's worth remembering that the HBAI report reminds us that the majority of people in the lowest 10% rely on rented accommodation.
Much of this is in appalling condition.
HOW CAN YOU HELP CHAS
a) Prayer/ service: Light in Our Darkness — Using the CHAS candle and services for Advent, remember those who are homeless and badly housed in prayer.
Reflections, prayers and action ideas for the Advent period.
b) Support your local CHAS Branch — By prayer, as a volunteer, by making donations (this could be dome by Deed of Covenant or for those in work by Gift aid) or by donating furniture to the CHAS Bradford Furniture Service.
(Leeds and Huddersfield do no have furniture services).
c) Support CHAS nationally at Christmas — rather than send your family and friends socks or hankies — make a donation to CHAS in their name and we will send you a card, with a ‘Gift token’ which explains what you have done, saying that they are helping the work of CHAS.
Light in Our Darkness and the CHAS tokens are both available from CHAS.
Write for more information on our publications.
Dereliction and decay — another household forcibly abandoned by a family in debt?
OBITUARY
Clare Illingworth
THE Bradford Catholic Players are saddened by the death after a long illness of past President and Life Vice President Clare Illingworth.
Often playing leading roles in productions her loyal and hardworking membership went back to her joining in 1947.
Her knowledge of the stage and music was always at the disposal of younger members.
In a career that started at the age of seven in top hat and tails, she brought her superb soprano voice to both shows and especially concerts, often sharing the platform with nationally known Opera singers.
A passionate lover of the Savoy Operas, she was a founder member of the Bradford Gilbert and Sullivan Society, with who she had a long association.
A founder of the St Clares Ladies Choir which performed over a period of years, she also found time to become a devoted and regular pilgrim to Lourdes, where her lovely voice became well known to those in the Torchlight Processions.
Her love and support of the Little Sisters was a matter of record and her passing will be deeply felt by many people.
‘A matter of human dignity’
BISHOP John Jukes shared a platform with National Union of Mineworkers President Mr Arthur Scargill at the TUC rally in Hyde Park last month.
He was there as chairman of the World of Work Committee of the Bishops' Conference of England and Wales to tell the many thousands who were resent despite pouring rain that human dignity ‘demands that all who can must be able to work to support themselves and their families’.
The Bishop quoted Pope John Paul II in support of the right to work: ‘The obligation to earn one's bread by the sweat of one's brow also presumes the right to do so.
A society in which this right is systematically denied…cannot be justified from an ethical point of view…’
Bishop Jukes, a Franciscan Friar, made it clear that his concern was not to offer technical solutions on energy policy but to promote Catholic teaching about work and workers.
This includes the responsibility of government to regulate market forces in the interests of the whole community.
This teaching is based upon the dignity proper to all individuals by virtue of their having been created by God and redeemed by Jesus Christ.
Many leaders of various churches have voiced dismay at the Government's original proposals for the closure of may coal mines, now under review.
Seasoned observers have no doubt that the vocal response of so many has been instrumental in applying a brake.
The question now seems to be: will Government policy be changed or will implementation of the closure plan merely be delayed or modified?
Meet the ‘A-team’ THE HEADTEACHER of St John Fisher R.C. High School, Dewsbury, Mr Terry Walsh, presents A-level certificates to Thomas Rosser and Danny Diskin who each gained five grade A passes.
Danny, of The Common, Thornhill, is to study physics at Cambridge next year and Thomas, of Cravens Lane, Gomersal, will read the same subject at Oxford.
Their A-level subjects were Maths, Further Maths, Physics, Chemistry and General Studies and both took two special papers.
Photograph courtesy of the Dewsbury Reporter
READER'S VOICE
‘A very painful experience’
PLEASE allow me to reply to Fr.
O'Dowd's recent letter.
I would like to apologise to Fr.
O'Dowd for the hurt caused by my letter of complaint.
However, I would also like to remind him that I wrote in response to a report which I assumed to be factual.
Certain questions follow from this episode.
Firstly, I understand (from a journalist acquaintance) that there was an original report of Fr.
O'Dowd's speech at the Liverpool Pictorial and that this same report appeared in the Daily Telegraph.
How did this happen?
How could that report have been so inaccurate?
Was it some kind of ‘leak’?
How was ‘Quest involved in this?
These are important questions.
In the present climate, when seemingly intelligent and experienced theologians are producing strange and contradictory ideas, we have to exercise some care to ensure against serious distortion of anyone's words or beliefs.
We must try to act justly especially since the situation within the church is often confusing and upsetting.
Secondly, why did Fr O'Dowd not make an official complaint against the Daily Telegraph.
In these times it is important to follow things through.
The reason for this is fairly obvious; when people are confused and insecure (as many Catholics are especially today) it is incumbent on all of us who teach and preach (in whatever capacity) to have a proper respect for the needs and weaknesses of those who may be listening.
In a climate of serious doubt (especially as regards morality) it is surely important to be careful.
In this context Fr.
O'Dowd may wonder whether agreeing to speak to ‘Quest’ was the right decision.
Having said that, I hope Fr.
O'Dowd will accept my sincere best wishes and be assured of my genuine regret at being involved in what, for him, was a very painful episode.
FR.
JOHN ABBERTON St Joseph & St Thomas, Goole  
THAT CAPS IT ALL!— yet another evocative photograph from the Rock Travel Company's visit to Russia: Father Paul Moxon, of St Joseph's, Wetherby (right) dons a typical Russian woolly hat while Vic Wilson, driver on the 6,000-mile journey, sports a police hat.
New church packed for official opening
Report: ROSIE SHAW
MORE than 550 people packed the new church of St Peter & St Paul, Wakefield for its official opening.
They filled the pews, stood at the back and sides and spilled over into a side chapel and the parish function room where the ceremony was relayed by video.
Main celebrant at the Mass of Dedication (above) was David Konstant, Bishop of Leeds.
During the ceremony the main contractors and the architect formally handed over the building to him.
Surrounding the Bishop, along with parish priest Mgr Philip Holroyd and assistant priest Tony Jackson, where more than a dozen clergy.
Some had served the parish in the past, others were from the local Deanery.
For some years the three-cornered parish with its three Mass centres had been looking to provide a parish centre with meeting and function rooms and to locate the priests' house onsite.
After considering updating the old parish church the decision was made to provide for the needs of the 21st century, building a church large enough for both the old St Peter & St Paul church and St George's, Kettlethorpe.
The priests' house at one end of the building is complete with parish office.
The other end holds long-awaited facilities for parish meetings and social functions.
St Joseph's church at Crofton is retained, and elements of the two churches which have been replaced are carried over into the new one.
‘This is our answer to the community around us,’ said Mgr Holroyd.
‘A church for joyful celebration, yet a place of peace and quiet, of tears and comfort.
A church that feels good to be in, where people might say: ‘I can pray in here.’
Tractor for Romania
THE St Bede's Link with Romania, now an associated organisation of the Bradford Atea Project, have provided funds for the purchase of a tractor for use by the ‘Pater Nostra’ group in Atea, Romania.
The ‘Pater Nostra’ organisation, which will care for physically and mentally handicapped people in Atea, expect to find that by owning their own tractor they will not only go a long way to becoming self-sufficient but will be able to hire out the tractor locally to enhance their income.
The St Bede's Link with Romania held a dance at St Bede's Grammar School on 17th October, 1992.
One of the main objects of the occasion being to enable the many supporters of the Link to learn first hand from Mr Jim Coffey and his team how the results of their fund raising efforts have provided much needed aid in Romania.
The Dale Country Show Band provided the music.
OUR CHURCHES No. 37 St Joseph's Bradford
TWO YEARS after arriving at St Mary's, Bradford, Canon John Motler commissioned Edward Simpson to build a school-chapel in Grafton Street, off Manchester Road.
It was opened in May 1868 and dedicated to St Joseph.
In the following years the population in the areas of West Bowling and Horton increased enormously with the growth of the worsted industry and the building of new steam-powered mills, so that in November 1881 Canon Motler established St Joseph's as a new parish and became the first parish priest himself.
He quickly set about building a church and acquired a site on Pakington Street further up Manchester Road and work began in July 1885.
The architect was again Edward Simpson and he built a large stone cruciform church capable of accommodating 800 people.
It was opened by Bishop Cornthwaite on 14th September 1887 in the presence of the Bishops of Liverpool, Northampton and Middlesbrough and after St Mary's, was the largest Catholic church in Bradford.
In the 1920's a new high altar and reredos was erected as a memorial to those parishioners who had died in the First World War.
To mark the Golden Jubilee in 1937 and on the occasion of its Consecration by Bishop Poskitt, 50 years to the day after its opening, three new marble altars dedicated to the Sacred Heart, Our Lady and St Patrick were placed in the church.
Later still in 1964 a fine new porch replaced the old entrance and finally in 1987 to celebrate the centenary of the opening, the whole church was refurbished in accordance with the latest liturgical requirements.
Mgr.
G. Bradley
Welcome to two priests
A WARM welcome to the diocese has been given to two priests.
Fr.
Charles Richardson, who is a priest of the diocese of Plymouth and has been recently working in the Diocese of Cape Town, has been appointed as assistant priest in St Joseph's, Bradford.
Fr.
John Paul Gallagher, who has been appointed as chaplain to the U.S., Menwith Hill base, is with the U.S. Bishopric of the Forces and can be contacted at or via the base.