

Number 133
At last it's here!
‘WELL we've waited long enough, but it's been worth it,’ said one of the nearly 200 primary school teachers who gathered at St Wilfrid's Church in Northwich for a mass of thanksgiving for the new national programme for religious education.
The programme is called Here I Am.
The qualities that the new programme is seeking to offer our children were embodies in the celebration of the mass.
There was a deep sense of prayer, an opportunity for reflection and an enjoyment in discovering more about our Catholic faith.
Teachers from primary schools in the four corners of the diocese shared in the happy and joyful celebration.
Children from St Teresa's, Blacon and St Bede's, Weaverham, led moving dance and mine during the mass.
The music group included a number of children from St Wilfrid's primary school.
Catherine Darby, our primary schools adviser, spoke of the awesome and privileged task of the religious education leading children to meet Jesus.
The very title of the programme.
Here I Am, expresses something of the living relationship between God and ourselves.
Teachers have that special task of sharing God's name with children, of teaching others to be festive, to celebrate their love for one another, and the mystery of God's love for us always.
The occasion concluded with a buffet in a parish hall decorated with examples of children's work from St Clare's primary school, Chester.
A floral presentation was made to Mrs Chris Malone, one of the authors of Here I Am.
As teachers left Northwich, they knew that the weeks and months ahead will be full of opportunities to discover and enjoy the riches of this new programme.
Now that Here I Am has arrived, it will need time, work and prayer to make it part of the life of our schools and our parishes.
Work is currently going on to prepare a book so that parishes can be helped to develop the part they have to play in handing on the faith to our children.
CHILDREN mime as Father Peter Morgan celebrates mass for the new RE programme
Oh!, what a surprise
TINA BRADY, a 91-year-old member of the UCM at St Bernard's Ellesmere Port was honoured in April to receive the Royal Maundy Money from the Queen in Chester Cathedral.
She was chosen ad one of the 66 women and 66 men (66 being the Queen's age), to mark her service to the church and community.
A short time afterwards, Tina and her friend Alice Poyton were mugged while out walking.
They knocked to the ground and their handbags were stolen.
Apart from shock and time in hospital, their injuries were not serious, thankfully.
To console them after their bad experience, the mothers at St Bernard's decided to give them a surprise party to mark Alice's 90th birthday.
Parish priest Father Michael Lester, with his guitar, was great entertainment and (see the picture) the mothers presented Alice with a beautiful birthday bouquet.
Tina Brady is seen sitting facing the camera.
The tragedy of refugees
IN THE FACE of the millions of people who have become displaced from their homes and their countries, and are refugees, the Vatican has published a document last month to ask Western governments to deal effectively with the ‘tragedy of forced exile.’
The document is aimed at stimulating international solidarity, not only with regard to the effects of the refugee crisis, but above all tot he causes of the tragedy.
We now live in a world where human rights are violated with impunity, and this will continue producing refugees of all kinds.
In addition to looking at the causes which make people flee from their countries, the Vatican also asks countries to be sensitive to the plight of the refugees.
‘The first point of reference should not be the interests of the state or of national security, but to the human person.’
The document is called Refugees, A Challenge To Solidarity .
‘Marriage is our business’
HOW CAN we sell The Catholic Marriage Advisory Council?
That was the question which a dozen or so representatives agonised over at Loyola Hall, Rainhill, one Saturday in October.
How can we tell people that, although we're a Catholic organisation, we help non-Catholics too?
Does the name the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council, mislead the public?
But we are proud of the fact that CMAC is Catholic based: it is the largest Christian organisation involved in marriage counselling.
What will persuade folk that confidentiality is assured?
How can we make people understand that, although all the counsellors are volunteers, they are highly trained and highly dedicated?
How can we get the message across that counsellors do not make judgements, do not tell people what to do, do not try to force clients to sustain marriages which are no longer sustainable?
In advertising terms, we are selling a commodity.
That commodity could be described as peace of mind.
How can such a product be effectively marketed in this world of sophisticated publicity?
No-one would argue with the statistics — marriage breakdown has reached epidemic proportion, so the CMAC must make sure that everyone knows of its existence.
Look out for the publicity!
After a day discussing these issues in depth, we are geared for action.
CMAC could be making itself known in your area.
If you were not aware of its existence before, you will be now!
MEANWHILE…with all the problems facing family life and marriage today, a new and exciting venture has opened in North Wales — the Catholic Centre for Healing in Marriage.
It aims to help all married people who want to bring new life and new dimension to their marriage, to come and share in the life of the centre.
If your marriage lacks sparkle, if you would like to know how to improve your relationship, or you have had serious problems but would like to save your marriage, the centre can be of help.
It is set in the comfortable, relaxed and peaceful atmosphere of an attractive building in its own gardens on the edge of Porthmadog.
If you would like to know more, contact the directors, Tony and Betty Dady.
Sower to reap again
THE first ever  catechetical journal in this country,The Sower , has been relaunched.
First issued in 1919 from the archdiocese of Birmingham, it is now published from that same archdiocese by Maryvale Institute and the Department of Religious Education in Birmingham.
The journal in its new form will be invaluable for all parish catechists and for Catholic teachers of RE, in both primary and secondary schools.
Its pages carry practical ideas for teaching the faith effectively, whether to adults or to children, in different parish and school situations.
The first issue focuses on how to teach prayer in both school and parish.
Forthcoming issues include special topics on scripture in education, the new catechism of the Catholic Church, and teaching about saints and the call to holiness.
As well as the special theme, each issue carries two major articles on areas of current concern in the world of RE and catechetics.
The journal carries audio-visual, book and parish programme reviews, keeps catechists and teachers up-to-date with vital research in the area of RE and catechetics and gives useful ideas on teaching the faith from round the world.
More information about The Sower and subscription details can be obtained by writing to: The Editor.
What now?
DISCUSSIONS have been taking place in Birkenhead over the future of St Laurence's parish, and one proposal is that it should be joined to Our Lady's Parish.
With the demolition of so much property at the centre of Birkenhead there has been a significant decline in the number of St Laurence's parishioners.
At the same time, there has been the inevitable steep rise in the cost of maintenance of the parish church and presbytery.
This has meant that questions have had to be asked.
Mgr.
Peter O'Neill, the Vicar General, representing the Bishop has said that while the financial aspects are clearly important, the most important consideration is the pastoral care of the people.
If too much is spent on buildings, not enough can be spent on personnel to care for people.
New knights
TWO NEW Papal Knights were invested last month.
Edward Jones, of Rhyl and Patrick Tyrrell, of Runcorn were awarded the papal honour, Knight of St Gregory in recognition of their long service to the community.
Mr Jones is well known in many parishes of the diocese, as he has been visiting them in helping to organise their planned giving schemes.
At present he is director of planned giving and covenant on the diocesan finance team.
My Tyrrell is well known in the Runcorn area and in Cheshire, being chairman of the Chester County Council.
He is the first Catholic to have held this office in the 103-year history of the county council.
The Order of St Gregory the Great was founded in 1831 by Pope Gregory XVI to honour loyal and well-deserving citizens of the papal state.
Now it is bestowed as a recognition of the great work people do on behalf of the church and society, regardless of their religious belief.
Help them
GROUPS FROM the churches in every parliamentary constituency are preparing for a lobby of MPs, in support of the homeless and poorly housed.
A petition is being organised and will be signed by as many people as possible.
It reads: ‘We urge the government to give housing a higher priority, by making 100,000 affordable homes available each year, using both public and private housing, to meet rural and urban housing need; by improving choice and quality of housing for all tenants; by further measures to tackle homelessness especially among young people; targeting government resources, such as mortgage interest relief, to those in greatest need.
For Yossers
AN ASSOCIATION for all former pupils and staff of St Hugh's School, Birkenhead, has been established for about four years and its main function is an annual reunion mass held on or near the Feast of St Hugh of Lincoln.
The mass is followed by an informal gathering of Yossers, at the Parish centres in Birkenhead.
This year, the mass has been arranged at Holy Cross Church, Hoylake Road, Birkenhead, and afterwards at Our Lady's Parish Centre, Park Road North, Birkenhead.
We need clergy who are former pupils of St Hugh's to assist in a concelebrated mass and to pledge support for the future.
Without their involvement we could not continue with an annual reunion mass.
Donations are welcome to defray expenses.
You are well advised that Our Lady's Parish Centre has a limited capacity — John Caulfield.
Just watch
CHANNEL FOUR has a range of interesting programmes during November and December which might entertain, inform, challenge, annoy and infuriate.
There is a series called Big Battalions.
Shot in Britain, Ethiopia, Israel and Saudi Arabia, it deals with major issues facing the world's religions.
The conflicts are reflected in the personal lives of three families, Christian, Muslim and Jewish with parents and children in different parts of the world, whose destinies become entwined against a backdrop of ecclesiastical ambition.
The events and power struggles which engulf them result in kidnapping, jealousy and romance!
Inevitably, when the TV wants to focus on sex, the Catholic Church comes up front again!
Catholics and Sex, a four-part series presented by two journalists, gives quite a personal view of the Church and sexuality.
Each programme looks at an area of the Church's teaching, through the stories of individual Catholics, while wider issues raised are discussed by Catholic Theologians and commentators.
John is found
IN THE July issue of the Voice, we asked ‘Where are you John?’ as a friend who had left these shores many years ago, living in Australia, wanted to make contact.
She had tried to locate him for over two years, in both America and Canada, where John had been living and working for a number of years.
However, he returned to England five years ago, and was delighted to make contact.
It was the daughter of a friend of his who had emigrated to Australia in 1958.
Subsequently, the daughter visited England and met with John, when many happy memories were shared.
Off to Lourdes
NEXT YEAR is the 80th birthday of the Union of Catholic Mothers, and they plan to celebrate is with a national pilgrimage to Lourdes.
This will take place over the May Day holiday weekend, and there is a choice of travel by air or coach.
Details are already with the foundation presidents.
Keep learning
THERE ARE excellent opportunities for people to keep on learning more about their faith in different parts of the diocese.
Manchester University organise extra-mural courses at the Dominican Centre in Withington, South Manchester, and also at the Wellspring Centre in Stockport.
The current course at the Wellspring, which began in October, is called Life Story and God's Story, which helps us see how the message of the Bible speaks to our lives today.
In fine style
ST JOHN the Baptist Parish, Timperley, finished October off in fine style with a variety concert and dance at Christ Church parish hall, with dancing to the Innisfree Band.
The event raised funds for the parish and also provided an excellent night out for lots of families.
Sporting dinner
FOLLOWING the success of last year's event, Blessed Thomas Holford School at Altrincham have organised another Sportsman's Dinner.
The guest speaker is Jack Charlton, formerly of England and currently manager of Eire, and the guest of honour is Sir Stanley Matthews.
Welcome, Terry
JUST BEFORE he was taken hostage, Terry Waite had promised to come to the laying of the foundation stone of the North East Cheshire Hospice, in Macclesfield.
He apologised profusely for being five years late when he opened the annual fund-raising garden party for the hospice.
Where there's a will
IF YOU haven't made a will, November is the time to do so.
For your family's sake you should make one, and during November you can also help people in the poorest countries of the world.
Will Aid is an appeal by a partnership of top charities, including CAFOD, working among the world's poorest people, and is being sponsored by the TSB Bank.
During the month, thousands of solicitors will be giving their time to make wills through Will Aid.
For a suggested minimum of £35 to Will Aid, they will draw up a simple will — or a pair of similar wills for couples, for £50.
Ring the TSB Will Aid Helpline for details of your local Will Aid Solicitor, or call in at your local TSB, and they will tell you.
When you make a will you are showing, in a practical way, that you care for those closest to you.
By putting your affairs in order and making your wishes clearly known, you avoid the tangles that can so easily happen.
This can save time, worry and unnecessary expense for your family.
You can also decide to help some charities after your death in a way you may not be able to while you are alive.
NEW LIFE: A new branch of the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child has got off to an encouraging start at St Winefride's parish in Neston, where Jim Hallis is the chairman, Margaret Unsworth is the secretary and Debbi Trotman is the treasurer.
A successful street collection in Neston raised £154.73 for the society and they had also had a membership drive with the Heartbeat Campaign on the last weekend of October.
Then they joined with the Merseyside groups in their Liverpool activities.
They has a successful fringe meeting of the pro-Life supporters at the recent Labour Party Conference in Blackpool, with over 800 supporters at the Norbreck Castle Hotel.
The group meet in St Winefride's Church Hall on the last Wednesday of each month, and pictured above are members David Paton, Jim McKay, Alison Davies,(author of From Where I Sit, and leader of the SPUC handicapped division), Colin Hart and Janet Thomas.
MEANWHILE, Huw Morris reports that there was another successful meeting at St Joseph's Parish Centre last month for the SPUC Birkenhead Branch.
‘Yet we still need more people to take an active part in spreading the pro-Life word,’ says Huw.
The experienced Chris Walsh, president of the Merseyside SPUC and vice-president of National SPUC, illustrated a fascinating talk with slides.
The general consensus of the meeting was that we should help people to be aware of the sacredness of human life, and how precious is this gift from God.
Rome at its best
FIFTY-FOUR parishioners from the Shrewsbury Cathedral Parish and diocese have returned from a memorable holiday/pilgrimage to Rome, Assisi and Palazzola.
In Rome, the group stayed at the Venerable English College in Old rome, and at the college's summer retreat, the Villa Palazzola, on the wooded slopes of Lake Albano, directly opposite Castel Gandolfo.
The pilgrimage began with mass in the crypt of St Peter's Basilica in the chapel of St Elizabeth of Hungary.
Mass every day was celebrated by our parish priest, Canon John Roper, in different churches and basilicas.
Norah Jenkins from the cathedral parish, as group leader and guide, was assisted by students from the English College.
For some, it was the second pilgrimage to Rome as a parish group, and many well-loved churches and places were again visited as well as new places of interest.
These included the four major basilicas, the Scavi excavations, the catacombs of St Callixtus and Ostia Antica, the ancient port of Rome.
Two days were spent at leisure in the lovely Umbrian hilltop city of Assisi, where the spirit of St Francis and St Clare is everywhere.
Mass was celebrated in the basilicas of San Francesco and Santa Chiara.
The monasteries of St Benedict and Santa Scholastica at Subiaco were visited, and the famous Benedictine Abbey of Monte Cassino.
The route taken to the abbey was through the Circeo National Park and along the scenic coastal road next to the Tyrrhenian sea.
For many, the highlight of the pilgrimage was attending the Angelus and receiving the blessing of the Holy Father at only his second Sunday audience at Castel Gandolfo since his illness.
As the 54 said: ‘A memorable pilgrimage, and wonderful parish group!’
THE PICTURE on the left shows Canon John Roper celebrating Mass in the Chapel of St Elizabeth of Hungary.
Special trophy for John
DENNIS BLAKE of Hyde writes to The Voice:
‘It is quite some time now since I last wrote to you, but both my wife Joan and I have been busy putting on shows for the Children's Rescue Society, The Family Rainbow Trust, old people's homes and Guide Dogs for the Blind, etc.
‘The main reason that I am contacting you is that I thought you might be interested to know that John (stage name Joan Rawson) was awarded the Eric Rowley Trophy for the artist who has done the most for charity over the last 12 months.
She is quick to point out that this would not have been possible without the help of all the artistes and musicians on the various shows.
‘The trophy was in the shape of a wooded scroll with a quartz clock and a brass plate inscribed with the words, ‘Presented to Joan Rawson by the Stockport & District Concert Secretaries at the 29th Command Show 1992.’
‘We are both very proud and thank God for giving us the strength to help others less fortunate than ourselves.’
Musical boost for Canon
A MUSICAL Evening with Una and Friends was held at Sale Civic Theatre in aid of the Canon John Marmion Church Organ Fund.
Those of Canon John's professional musical friends who took part in the concert came from far and wide and gave their services as a gift to him in gratitude for being the leading light in all the musical ventures for the Third World while he was parish priest of St Joseph's, Sale.
There is never a better gift for a musician to give than to offer their talent and it being received.
On that night, that was certainly the case.
Canon John and the capacity the case.
Canon John and the capacity audience of well-wishers were presented with a wealth of talent and a variety of music.
Financially the concert raised in excess of £2,500 and he received a splendid and sophisticated Korg keyboard.
It is hoped that this instrument will help him in his new parish of Our Lady of Lourdes in Leasowe to enrich further the lives of the people at home with all kinds of music.
But it is hoped that in doing so, it will also help him to continue his untiring work for the Third World and enrich the lives of those poor people, particularly in Africa.
IT'S DIFFERENT:
We are well used to the Vigil Mass on Saturday night now.
However the mass at Our Lady of Lourdes, Leasowe, on Saturday November 14, will also be an occasion for the singing of Byrd's Mass for Four Voices.
Leigh Cantamus will be presenting the music, with the conductor Jacqueline Alderson, and the celebrant of the mass will be Canon John Marmion.
There will be a retiring collection for the CAFOD emergency fund for Africa.
FROM POYNTON TO WALSINGHAM: A break en route(left) for the great shrine of Walsingham for parishioners of St Paul's, Poynton.
There (right) they joined together with other pilgrims in what is becoming more and more a feature of Catholic life once again in England.
— Pictures by PATRICK BLACK
THEY'VE GOT IT TAPED: After the success of their Rock Passion, which was presented in St Peter's Church, Hazel Grove, during Holy Grove, during Holy Week, the cast decided to record the entire show on audio tape.
This has now been done.
They enjoyed doing the shop, and wanted others to have the pleasure of listening to it as they drive in their car, or walk with their walkman.
They have assigned the copyright of the tape to the Handicapped Children's Pilgrimage Trust.
They hope that the sale of the tape will bring in some much needed funds to the trust.
If anyone would like further information about the tape, and even wish to buy a copy, then telephone.
Helping hands
FIVE girls from St Anne's Primary School in Nantwich raised the awareness of the whole school and parish community to the needs of the people of Somalia.
They produced a magazine called Feed Us, which contained contributions from many children in the school.
On the Gamily Fast Day in October, the children gave up snacks and donated the money save to a collection which was brought up at the offertory at a special mass in school.
Members of the parish community joined the school community and Father Jack Warnock, along with many parents.
More than £140 was raised for CAFOD's special appeal.
The five girls are (left to right in the top picture), Catherine Birchnell, Sally Benbow, Elizabeth King, Amy Riley and Kerry Welsh.
PUPILS and staff of St Mary's College, Wallasey, celebrated their Good Shepherd fund-raising successes this year when they presented a cheque to Bishop Gray for nearly £2,100.
Foremost among the fun activities which raised the cash were sponsored stay-awakes and lock-ins by the Year 11 and Year 7 youngsters.
Pictured at the presentation (below) are representatives from the various year groups, First Deputy Ray Harris, Chair of the Governors Tom Moor, Chaplain Father Nicholas Kern and Father John Daly.
The group entertained the Bishop to coffee afterwards and presented him with a memento to mark his 49 years in the priesthood.
We cannot just do nothing
OUR VOICE — by THE EDITOR
ONE OF the amazing aspects of the crisis caused by the decision of the government to close over half the pits, and make more than 30,000 miners redundant, was their apparent surprise at the reaction of the people of the country.
It does not seem possible with the research which their Central Office are regularly doing, and with the continual monitoring of public opinion, that they did not have some idea as to how people would react.
The suddenness of the pits crisis evoked a popular reaction, and the miners' voice is being heard.
However there are thousands and thousands of other people who are suffering silently because of the policies of the present government.
The Churches have a clear responsibility to be a mouthpiece for those who don't have a platform.
The Churches have formed a coalition to speak on behalf of the thousands of homeless people in this country.
There is a mass lobby of Parliament on December 1, to try to bring home to those in power what is happening to the families who are forced to live in bed and breakfasts, and those who literally have nowhere to lay their heads.
People are also being asked to make their voices heard expressing concern over the possible cut to aid to the third world.
CAFOD, on behalf of the church in this country, are asking people to write to their MP to stress that this country should not be cutting aid, but rather seeing how we can increase it.
The Church has to be the voice of the voiceless, but that means far more than the cardinal and bishops making statements.
What counts with MPs is the opinion of those who vote for them.
For every letter they receive, they guess that that speaks for about 100 others who have not written.
Individual letters mean far more than a signature on a petition.
We cannot just do nothing, when it takes so little of our time to make our voice heard.
Every crowd is made up of individuals.
You and I are but two of them, yet every one counts.
Be user friendly
BE user friendly…that's the message to the Churches from a report published last month.
Finding Faith Today is a major report on evangelism, based on research carried out by the Bible Society on behalf of the Church Together in England.
It found that most adults come to faith in God through the help of a friend, a relative or a minister.
Only four per cent find God through big evangelistic rallies.
Often what happens in the context of a church service has only a limited effect as well.
The report also found that the Church can appear unfriendly to outsiders, and needs to teach more about the basics of the Christian faith.
This report is the first published research about how people of all main Churches come to faith.
It is the result of a survey of more than 500 adult Christians to make a ‘public profession of faith’ between March 1900 and March 1991.
It is clear that the vast majority of people find faith gradually, rather than in a sudden conversion.
Evangelical and charismatic church seem to be more successful in bring adults to faith.
A warning note to the churches is that the report finds that only 14 per cent of children are in contact with a church.
Victory over death
BENEDICT Matthew, the son of Elizabeth and Monk, was five when he died in 1980.
His death prompted his father to share their experience.
Their faith — the couple both came into full communion with the Church in later life — helped them see that they had not ‘lost’ Benedict, but ‘handed him over.’
They were very conscious during this requiem mass that they were not to pray for him, but pray to him.
Monk wrote an account of their experience for the Universe, and has been promoted to write a fuller account of the Church's teaching on death, of what happens to the soul before, during and after death.
His book does more than attempt to give comfort to those who have been bereaved.
It offers, in straightforward simple language, the Church's understanding of what Christ's victory over death can mean to each of us.
To belong to the Communion of Saints gives us a sense of deep communion.
The glory of the saints is part of that.
Dying, Christ destroyed our death, Rising, He restored our Life, His glory will indeed come again.
The book is published by the Teresian Press and is available from the Carmelite Book Service.
CHRISTMAS ANGELS
The Association of the Mouth and Foot Artists is unique, wholly owned by the disabled artists themselves.
They not only make an income from their paintings, and the cards from them, but their work gives them the challenge to succeed despite handicap.
It gives fellowship with their colleagues, and also gives them a feeling of being an active and useful member of the everyday world.
The artists have produced their Christmas pack once again, with six cards, six tags and two angels, priced at £3.45 and also their calendar, available at £5.95.
It's time to celebrate
Our songs of joy
By JANE KAY
SONGS of Praise, as seen on TV, is tightly scheduled and carefully edited.
Doing a homemade version is much more fun, as we found out at St Edwards, in Runcorn while celebrating 150 years of parish life.
October already had been action-packed, with a talk by local historian Bert Starkey —‘The main thrust for good in Victorian Runcorn came from Methodism; there were 18 chapels within one square mile,’— and a brilliant display of dancing by the over-forties at the dinner/dance.
The square tango had to be seen to be believed — eat your hearts out, disco dancers!
The feast of St Edward on October 13, saw a parade of priests (see picture top left), all similarly vested, around Bishop Joseph Gray, who presided at the mass.
It was good to see so many familiar faces, some older, some heavier, some lighter (well done, Father Roger Clarke), Father McNamara had interrupted his pilgrimage to the shrines of Blackpool to be with us.
The display of photographs and mementoes produced great interest —‘come and see Father Brendan Hoban when he had hair!’
‘See our school secretary in a Fifties style swimsuit’(brushed nylon for those too young to know).
Bishop Gray quoted from the Jubilee parish magazine (copies still available) and the music was memorable.
Latin motets alongside modern crowd-pullers — which brings us back to hymn-singing, where we began.
The Songs of Praise event gathered in members of all the local churches.
In fact Catholics were outnumbered by their fellow Christians.
Is this a message for the future?
There we were, in a church bedecked with flowers, in arrangements calling to mind every aspect of parish life.
Even an old school desk was transformed into a thing of beauty — as you can see in the picture on the right.
The central window sills at the rear of the church had arrangements linked to signify our unity and involvement with our friends in other Runcorn Churches, through Interchurch, our home-grown unity movement.
It was good to be there.
How lovely are thy courts, O Lord.
Singing together unifies and inspires us; music touches our emotions, and words take on a deeper meaning.
We sampled the delights of hymns old and new, in alphabetical order, only reaching as far as J, for Jesus.
Jesus, as the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, Jesus, who came to give us the good news, news worth singing about.
We should have been on TV after all.
Happy day for OLP
A LARGE congregation gathered for the consecration of the Church of Our Lady of Pity, Harlescott, Shrewsbury.
It was during the 1940s that parishioners at the cathedral held rummage sales, whist drives, sales of work, raffles and soon to raise funds to buy ground in Ditherington, to the north of Shrewsbury, for a church for the parishioners living there.
The church was to be known as St Theresa's (The Little Flower).
After the war the land was bought by others, and houses were built.
But the area known as Harlescott was spreading.
Land was bought in Meadow Farm Drive, where the present church now stands.
The Church of Our Lady of Pity was built in 1961 and Bishop John Murphy laid the foundation stone on May 17 of that year.
There was some disappointment among the parishioners that the dedication was Our Lady of Pity, and not St Theresa, as originally planned.
But there was a devotion to Our Lady under this title in the Middle Ages, and the old church at Battlefield (now closed) has an ancient image of the pieta.
The new church was at first served from the cathedral.
In the registers are the names of Monsignor Lightbound, Canon Ted Harrington, Father Michael Dyson and, of course the late Monsignor Terence Welch, who was administrator of the cathedral for many years.
The first parish priest was Father Kevin Daley, who at first lived at the Cathedral House until a house was bought on Sundorne Avenue.
Later a house became available in Meadow Farm Drive, just opposite the church.
This was obviously much more convenient, and it was here that Father Daley and his housekeeper moved.
In 1983 Father Daley was appointed to another parish, in Stockport, and Father Desmond Friel became his successor.
On October 10, 1986, the silver jubilee of the parish was celebrated.
In 1990, Father David Craig was appointed parish priest, Father Friel moving to St James, Hattersley, near Hyde.
The parish priest of OLP, as the church is affectionately known locally, is also chaplain at the prison in the town.
This arrangement came about when Father Kevin Daley was appointed as first OP, the chaplaincy formerly being manned by the cathedral.
Golden day for the ‘Lady with the Veil’
SISTER Mary Benedict Henry, of the Sisters of Christ, celebrated the golden jubilee of her religious profession on Friday, October 2.
Bishop Gray was the chief celebrant at mass in St Anthony's Church, Woodhouse Park, Wythenshawe, and afterwards there was a reception and presentation in the parish centre.
Sister Benedict entered the congregation of the Sisters of the Nativity on July 29, 1940, and made her profession of vows on September 8, 1942.
After profession, she taught in Maidenhead until 1979.
Sister was then transferred to Wythenshawe, and worked for the last 13 years on the chaplaincy team of Wythenshawe Hospital.
Sister ministered to staff and patients alike and was known everywhere as the Lady with the Veil.
Now she has moved on again — in late October she took up a new appointment in Rotherham.
The Sisters of Christ, a new congregation, were formed in 1976 by the amalgamation of several different congregations.
The Sisters of the Nativity of the Lord was one of them.
Silver smiles A GREAT variety of activities marked the silver jubilee of the Holy Family Primary School in Sale.
At a concelebrated mass, Bishop Gray presided and with Father Brendan McDonald, who opened the school, the present parish priest, Father David Peters, Father David Woodler, Father Paul O'Grady, and a packed congregation, gave thanks for the many  achievements of those 25 years.
There was a gala day in the school grounds, with a brass band, and a whole range of events.
Then followed a social evening for the past pupils and past members of staff — and nostalgia reigned!
A jubilee cake was baked, and the head girl Laura Berry and the head boy, Brian Quinn, presented the Bishop with a memento of the occasion.
They are pictured with the Bishop, headmistress Miss Eileen Tooland and the parish priest, Father Peters.
Toni gets to work ALEC GILROY may have walked out on the Rovers Return, but 16-year-old Toni Canning is more than ready to take over from Britain's favourite landlord.
Toni was one of 95 pupils from All Saints Catholic High School, Dukinfield, who has been gaining valuable work experience.
While Toni mixed with the stars at Granada Studios other pupils tried a range of jobs — from grafting as garage mechanics to calming patients as dental assistants.
The two-week work experience forms an important part of All Saints' careers programme, which spans three years.
The careers co-ordinator, Mrs M. Goodman has thanked local businesses and industry for their support and co-operation.
‘The programme enables pupils to gain practical experience of the world of work,’ she said ‘and we hope that they return to school more confident and mature and better equipped to make informed decisions about their future.’
Stars of the school THREE star pupils at Harrytown High School, Romiley, Stockport, have gained a total of 28 A grades in their GCSE subjects.
Helen McMurdo (above left), obtained 10 A grades, and Anna Fitzsimmons (above right) and Damien Sutton nine A grades each.
All three pupils are now following A-level course work at Aquinas College, Stockport and hope eventually to go on to university.
Ged Roper, Harrytown's headteacher, says: ‘This year saw some of our best results ever.
Sixty-one per cent of all our pupils gained five or more GCSE's at grade C or better, and 65 per cent of all grades awarded were grade C or above.
‘Seventy five per cent of our pupils have gone on to further education, mainly at Aquinas College, and we are delighted with their successes and commitment.’
GCSE certificates will be presented at the school on Thursday November 12, by the special guest speaker, Dr Mary Connor of York University.
Harrytown also has its Open Evening on November 2, and all parents are welcome.
Young ‘need to know’
TONY LLOYD, local MP and Labour party Shadow spokesman on trade and industry, opened a careers convention at Loreto Sixth Form College, Moss Side, Manchester, during October.
Over two days, some 3,000 students from High schools in Manchester, including St Thomas Aquinas and St Vincent de Paul, as well as Loreto's own students, visited the college and took part in the carefully structured careers information process.
More than 35 firms, including Marks and Spencer, banks and industrial companies had prepared interesting displays and provided careers information experts to give students well-founded advice.
The local community also took part: people on the Joblink register were invited to use the expertise on hand in their own search for employment.
Loreto principal Sister Patricia Goodstadt said: ‘We hope we can show the positive side of life in Hulme and Moss Side.
But young people everywhere need to be educated to the opportunities available.’
Taste of Cheshire life
PUPILS at All Hallows High School, Macclesfield, played host to a group of 14–16-year old Spanish students on the first leg of a new Spanish/English Language exchange.
The 26 students and three teachers, from Xirivella near Valencia, in eastern Spain, stayed with families in Macclesfield, Congleton, Wilmslow and Poynton for ten days.
During their visit they went on excursions to Styal Mill, Chester and Liverpool.
This new exchange venture has proved a tremendous success, not only improving linguistic skills and cultural awareness, but also in forming friendships which will last way beyond the second leg of the exchange, due to take place in March.
Meanwhile, there has been national success for the school.
All Hallows cross-country teams entered the national cross country championships at Marple Hall School last month, when more than 40 schools were represented from as far afield as Newcastle and Coventry.
The overall result was that All Hallows were third, behind Marple Hall, whose local knowledge brought them in first and Queen Elizabeth GS, Wakefield.
Youth all fired up!
By CLARE O'BRIEN and CATH BEECH
THE young people of St Thomas More deanery are all out to celebrate their first ever youth day on Sunday, November 22, The Feast of Christ the King and National Youth Sunday.
This year's theme, Tongues of Fire, explores areas of evangelisation and questions our ideas about the society we live in.
How do these ideas fit into what God wanted for us, and what are the ways in which we can help to fulfil God's plan?
The host parish is St Edward's, Runcorn.
The day will start at 12 noon, will include mass at 6.30pm and will finish after the pop quiz/disco at 9.30pm.
During the day there will be various workshops.
These will be drama-based, the creative type and discussion groups.
After follow-up work on numerous social issues by the individual parish groups in Warrington, Runcorn and Frodsham we trust that the ideas of growing into the society God wants will be put in action in our community.
In the planning of the day we've tried not to miss any of our young people out.
There will be two age groupings, 10–13 and 14–18, both working around the same theme, but coming together for the mass and social.
The cost of the day will be £1, and light refreshments will be on sale.
As a lead-up to national Youth Sunday, parish youth groups have already enjoyed two deanery events.
In September, over 60 young people from across the deanery took part in a ten-pin bowling evening in Warrington.
Lourdes trip
And at the end of October, a sports evening held at Newman High School in Latchford, introduced rounders, non-stop cricket and football, followed by hot-dogs, prepared by Father John Feeney.
Future events planned for St Thomas More Youth include a carolling-a-long at Christmas and a weekend retreat in the spring.
A Youth to Lourdes' group has started planning their pilgrimage for next July.
For more information of these, and future events, contact your parish priest who will put you in touch with your parish youth team member.
Don't leave us out in the cold
HAVE you heard the voice of Shropshire's Youth?
Having asked about Shropshire's youth and their existence within the diocese, my friend Clare and I were invited to take on the role of Shropshire's Youth Representatives.
My name is Rebecca Burns, I have just started my A-levels courses in the sixth form at the Blessed Robert Johnson Catholic College, in Wellington, Telford.
I have become involved in the Youth of Shropshire, the Shropshire Youth Brass Band and college activities.
Through the college I attend and enjoy Emmaus evenings at Dehon House and youth days within the northern part of or diocese.
Perhaps we could we could have more activities in Shropshire?
After many conversations, it is my feeling that we need better communication between the youth of Shropshire and the youth of the rest of the diocese.
Shropshire Youth has been left out for too many years to fend for itself.
We need more action, not only from ourselves, but also from people to support us in our aims.
Together with the right kind of support we could have fun together and achieve so much for ourselves and our diocese.
REBECCA BURNS Let's communicate
CLARE HUMPHRIES Listen to us
Let our voice be heard
MY NAME is Clare Humphries and I am 17 and currently at the Blessed Robert Johnson Catholic College in Wellington.
I am studying A level music, theology and chemistry.
I have been extremely interested in the youth of Shropshire for many years and I try to express this by such activities as being a confirmation catechist, working with young adults with physical and mental disabilities and also attending a week's work experience at Dehon House.
Since being appointed as Shropshire Youth rep, I have become increasingly aware of the lack of ‘voice’ that the youth of Shropshire seem to have, and therefore my job is to represent the youth of Shropshire so that at last we can be heard.
LET'S HEAR FROM YOU
CALLING all young people…
If you have any news items, information of coming events or photographs that you would like to be considered for publication in The Voice, please send them to: Paul Rowlands, by the beginning of each month.
Alternatively, material can be handed in at the Emmaus Evenings held at Dehon House on the first Friday of each month.
Young people are doing a lot in our diocese, so let's hear from you.
In the meantime,