

INTRODUCTION
The Structure of Government in the United Kingdom
The traditional classification of governmental functions into the legislative, executive and judicial does not adequately describe the complexities of government in the modern nation-state.
In practical terms, whether one has realistic access to the power to initiate a legislative proposal may be as important as whether, once a proposal is initiated, one has a say in whether it is adopted or not.
The ‘executive’ power today is important in part because it carries with it such wide powers of initiation of legislation.
It is also complex in other ways; its literal meaning — the power to carry out laws, decisions, etc. — describes its scope much too narrowly.
The ‘Executive’ formulates policies, procures the passing of the necessary laws, puts the policies into effect and even, on occasion, determines the mode, if any, in which disputes arising out of them are to be determined.
Even the apparently simple ‘judicial’ power is complicated by the entry on to the scene of ‘administrative tribunals’and officials exercising ‘quasi-judicial’powers.
This traditional classification nevertheless remains a convenient way of approaching the task of describing the United Kingdom constitution.
It is convenient to think of Parliament as the legislature, even though Parliament does much more than legislate, and though legislative power also resides elsewhere.
The Crown remains the supreme executive authority, although not the sole one.
The courts of law are undoubtedly the chief repository of the judicial power notwithstanding that they no longer exercise a monopoly in this respect.
To view the constitution of the United Kingdom as concerning only Parliament, the Crown and the courts is, however, to take altogether too narrow a view and to focus too closely upon the centre.
The population does not, unfortunately, all live within a mile of Whitehall; nor does it consist exclusively of Englishmen.
Such considerations pose problems for the structure of government in the United Kingdom.
The simplest and most readily comprehensible model of government hardly exists.
If one can imagine a purely unitary state with a single, simple, supreme authority at the centre formulating all policy and implementing it personally, one gets near.
In fact, especially in a complex modern society, nothing like this is possible.
Governments today undertake responsibility for the discharge of a vast and complex range of functions — from the organisation and administration of the armed services to the provision of education for persons of all ages.
For this a vast army of personnel is needed, working at different levels of generality — some dealing, at the ‘sharp end’, with the actual, detailed discharge of functions ‘on the ground’, others, at progressively higher levels, discharging coordinating or supervisory functions, which may involve an element of policy-making or, higher still, primarily concerned with overall general policy.
Other dimensions necessarily enter into the problem of organising government today.
Much of policy-implementation today requires positive action by government officials — it is no longer a case of making rules and leaving the citizen to get on with observing them, subject only to policing.
Buildings have to be inspected, benefits paid out.
Much of this work has to be done ‘on the spot’, i.e. where the building or the beneficiary is.
Needs may, furthermore, vary with locality.
Public transport needs in a rural area will be different from those in an urban area — housing in one town may be markedly deficient by comparison with another.
If, in view of the scale and complexity of governmental functions, the task is to be effectively discharged, the whole must, in some way, be rationalised and coordinated.
There is no particular method of structuring government which is logically compelling; it is merely a matter of some methods being more efficient than others.
The constitution of the United Kingdom seeks to accommodate these various forces in a variety of ways.
The main and most obvious response is departmentalisation — the grouping of a diverse range of functions which nevertheless have something in common into a single central government department.
A second technique is deconcentration — although functions may be departmentalised in a single central government department, it may nevertheless be desirable for administration to be dispersed from the geographical centre and into the regions and localities where it takes actual effect  ‘on the ground’.
A third technique is devolution — the separation, except for the ultimate and overriding authority of Parliament, of functions from central government entirely and their vesting in a subordinate authority.
Departmentalisation
As has already been indicated, the modern vogue is for leviathan departments, headed by a Secretary of State and comprising a number of Ministries.
Each of these Ministries will, in turn, have separate branches each charged with the administration of a particular facet of the Ministry's affairs.
Thus, there may be within the Department of Health and Social Security, a Ministry of Social Security, containing a Pensions Branch.
There is nothing constitutionally mandatory about any such particular structure but, both in existing legislation and particularly so far as internal civil service organisation is concerned, such a structure is assumed and there are heavy administrative costs involved in change.
Deconcentration
Notwithstanding that a particular central government department has total responsibility for the discharge of  particular functions — from formulation of general overall policy to implementation in the form of decisions in particular cases ‘on the ground’— it may nevertheless be desirable to distribute actual administration at different levels on a geographical basis.
A particular government department may, therefore, comprise not merely a central ‘office’ but also regional and even local offices, as the efficient transaction of the business of the department dictates.
Regional Health Authorities within a Ministry of Health may facilitate the most effective and responsive administration of health services; local job centres, as limbs of a Ministry of Employment, or local social security offices, as the point of access for claimants to the benefits provided, are examples of the deconcentration of central government services.
Not even the most centralised system of government, such as that instituted in France, by Napoleon, can entirely avoid deconcentration if it is to do its job in  a tolerably successful manner.
Devolution
The Napoleonic model in France, even though it survived virtually unaltered for over a century and a half, eventually had to yield to  demands for a wider measure of regional self-government, and over the past years schemes of regional devolution have been instituted.
Such regional devolution is well known and topical in the United Kingdom at the present day.
If we take as the distinguishing feature of devolution, as compared with deconcentration, the fact that it involves the removal of direct control by any of the organs of central government over the administration of the devolved powers, then two quite distinct types of devolution require recognition.
The first and best known of these, which may conveniently be referred to as ‘horizontal’ devolution, involves the setting up of a machinery of government exercising jurisdiction over a particular geographical area and having powers, within that area of a semi-autonomous nature.
This is not to say that the range of powers thus exercised need be comprehensive.
Far from it, powers only in relation to such matters as can be most conveniently and efficiently administered within such an area will be transferred.
But once transferred, there will be no direct responsibility for their exercise to a higher governmental authority.
The second type of devolution is ‘vertical’ devolution.
Here, powers are devolved not by reference to a particular geographical area, but by reference to a particular function or service, such as transport or telecommunications.
The point is best illustrated by reference to specific examples under the existing United Kingdom constitution.
Since nationalisation under the Coal Industry Nationalisation Act 1964, the exploitation of all coal reserves within the United Kingdom has been brought under public control.
It thus involves, in this broad sense, the discharge of governmental functions.
The role of central government in the actual exploitation of coal reserves is, however, passive.
The active part is played by a public corporation, the National Coal Board, which carries on the vast bulk of the exploitation itself whilst licensing a minute amount of private enterprise by others.
There is no constitutional objection to a publicly owned enterprise being run by a central government department, in much the same way that the Prison Service is presently run by the Home Office.
It is merely that the choice is made to run it as a self-contained entity and the appropriate structure thus created for it.
There is, inevitably to the extent that central government funding is involved, ultimate central government responsibility for such enterprises, but this is a matter of organisational preference rather than of constitutional dictate.
Such central government responsibility as exists may be sought to be discharged in a variety of ways.
In relation to nationalised industries, it is commonplace to vest in a particular Minister of the Crown a power to issue general directives as to the running of the industry in question but this is again nothing more than a matter of organisational preference; not, of course a preference which is a matter of caprice but which is based on notions of the best procedures to attain the objective in view.
The regimes under which nationalised industries function are by no means the only examples of vertical devolution under the United Kingdom constitution at present.
Arts and Sports Councils established under Acts of Parliament and funded by block grant offer a further instance.
Yet another example is the BBC, established under Royal Charter and financed by licence fees.
It is tempting to point, as a common feature of enterprises such as these, to the fact that they are ‘single-function’ entities (in contrast to central government and agencies of horizontal devolution which may be thought of as multi-function).
This is, however, a difference of degree rather than of kind.
It would, for example, be perfectly feasible, as a matter of constitutional engineering, to bring all the nationalised industries under the umbrella of a single authority whilst at the same time so restricting the range of matters and extending the area of an agency of horizontal devolution that the two became almost indistinguishable.
Horizontal devolution
Even if there is nothing legally obligatory about a particular scheme of vertical or horizontal devolution, there is, nevertheless, a measure of political compulsion, particularly so far as horizontal devolution is concerned.
One form of horizontal devolution has been a feature of the constitution of the United Kingdom for centuries.
In Scotland, the burghs, and in England, justices of the peace, have long exercised a local jurisdiction.
Although, today, justices of the peace are thought of primarily as being judicial bodies, they nevertheless retain certain administrative functions (the best known of which is the issuing of liquor licences) which, however, are a pale shadow of their former role.
The place which they once occupied on the constitutional stages has now been occupied by the organs of local government.
Little has changed so radically and so frequently in the United Kingdom constitution during the past two decades as the structure of local government.
It is clear, however, what principles require to be applied in settling the structure of local government.
The problems all arise in connection with implementing and, particularly, reconciling these principles.
In its Report of 1973, the Royal Commission on the Constitution (the Kilbrandon Commission) detected three vices in the then-existing constitutional structure of the United Kingdom which it was called upon to review.
Central government was felt to be too remote from the people; they lacked a sufficient sense of participation in its affairs and were beset by a sense of unresolved grievance.
Whilst an extension of the deconcentration of central government might have gone some way towards abating these feelings, it was not considered by the majority to be a sufficient remedy.
Rather, the Commission looked in the direction of devolution of power of some sort (though the members of it were divided as to what sort).
Whilst there has been some confusion as to exactly what ‘remoteness’ consists of (it seems to have been equated to distance from London whereas it would seem to be psychological remoteness in the sense of inaccessibility of decision-makers which really matters), the lesson nevertheless seems clear.
If a system of government is, in the long term to continue to enjoy the broad acquiescence on which, in a democratic society, it stands, it must be sufficiently responsive to the voices of the governed and this is most effectively ensured by the constitution's providing for the regulation of social affairs at the lowest and most immediate level possible.
Other considerations, however, enter into the calculation.
An excess of confusion and costs would attend a system which provided for the affairs of the street to be regulated by its inhabitants, and likewise those of the hamlet, parish, market town, county and region.
A compromise is therefore necessary.
In a series of reports as a result of inquiries in the different parts of the United Kingdom in the late 1960s and 1970s, local government was extensively reorganised.
The most striking thing about these changes, however, is that although the problems which confronted the inquiries were broadly similar, the solutions which came to be offered differed in marked respects.
The most significant feature of the Welsh reforms, for example, was the creation of five new ‘megacounties’ as the top tier authorities in the rural areas  away from Glamorgan.
However, the most striking feature of the reforms resulting from the Maud Report, so far as England was concerned, was the institution of ‘metropolitan counties’ in the most heavily urbanised areas of that country.
The most influential policy norm in the Maud proposals was that local government services should be so organised that they were made available on the most economic basis possible, having regard to economies of scale.
It may well be that the costs of change were underestimated or, indeed, left out of account altogether.
The reforms have not, anyway, been universally successful and are now under attack.
Another principle has been brought to bear.
Local and regional governments are, potentially, heavy spenders of public funds and complete freedom for them to institute and carry out their own expenditure programmes has come to be regarded in some quarters as subversive of a sufficiently refined power of control over public expenditure overall by central government.
Central government has recently, therefore, sought to limit local authority expenditure and has further embarked upon the abolition of the metropolitan counties, created chiefly in order to secure the economies of scale for the services they provide, on the grounds that they are uneconomic in providing those services.
Whilst controversy may continue to rage over the most desirable structure for local government and as to the measure of control which central government should exercise over it, the case for having some such structure as the present as a part of the make-up of the constitution remains an imperative both of history and of modern democratic ideals.
It is an important source of the acquiescence upon which the constitution stands.
Local government is by far the most important, if indeed it is not the only, example of horizontal devolution in the United Kingdom today.
True regional devolution no longer exists.
For over half a century, Northern Ireland enjoyed true regional devolution.
The Government of Ireland Act 1920 had set up a regional parliament and government.
Direct central government control was abjured — the Royal Assent to Bills was accorded on behalf of the monarch by the Governor of Northern Ireland (only once in over 50 years was its granting delayed; it was otherwise a formality) and a ‘convention’ of non-interference in Northern Ireland affairs grew up.
That experiment was, however, brought to an end in 1972, although a brief attempt to restore devolved powers lasted from December 1973 to May 1974.
There still exists today a  Northern Ireland Assembly, but its main function is as a scrutiny body for Westminster legislation applying to Northern Ireland and it lacks executive powers.
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all enjoy a species of regional government but it savours more of deconcentration than of devolution.
Each has, as its head, a Secretary of State who heads his own Office, but who is a member of the Cabinet and answerable to Parliament for the discharge of his duties and exercise of his powers.
Such legislative powers as the three Offices enjoy are delegated by Parliament and subject to its scrutiny, though they differ in form and function.
This retention of direct control by central government over the affairs of the three regions refutes any claim that powers are truly devolved.
The extent to which true devolution of powers to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland is necessary or desirable is controversial and differs in each case.
When local demand was put to the test of a referendum in Scotland and Wales under the Scotland and Wales Acts of 1978, a majority of those voting in Scotland favoured the scheme under consideration although this majority fell short of the ‘threshold’ of 40 per cent necessary for acceptance.
In Wales, however, apathy came first, the status quo second and devolution a bad third, favoured by no more than 12 per cent of the electorate.
The position in Northern Ireland is more complex.
The Northern Ireland Act 1982 provides for the existing Assembly (which lacks both legislative and executive powers) to make proposals for the transfers to the Assembly of legislative and executive powers but such proposals must  be such as to be ‘likely to command widespread acceptance throughout the community’ and although attempts are currently under way to evolve such proposals, they have not so far met with success.
Northern Ireland's problem is different from that of either Scotland or Wales in that there exists in Northern Ireland a substantial minority which fears oppression by the majority and if any scheme is to be adopted it must meet these fears.
Different majorities could no doubt be found for a diversity of schemes for Northern Ireland, unlike the case in either Scotland or Wales, but this is not the problem there.
If a scheme for Northern Ireland is to have a real chance of success, it must not only enjoy the support of a majority — it must enjoy also the acquiescence of most of the rest, a vivid illustration of the need for an adequate social foundation for any constitutional structure which is to enjoy even a modicum of success.
The legislation which currently paves the way for ‘rolling  devolution’ in Northern Ireland (Northern Ireland Act 1982, ss.1 and 2) requires that before any scheme for an extension of powers be implemented, it must be ‘likely to command widespread acceptance throughout the community’.
In the final analysis, it is the two Houses of the Westminster Parliament which must judge whether or not this criterion is met.
This is as it should be under the constitution of the United Kingdom.
Whether in the case of deconcentration (where parliamentary control is immediate) or in that of devolution (where it is mediate) Parliament remains the central institution of the constitution of the United Kingdom and it is to this that we now turn.
Parliament
Introduction
A representative assembly is a near universal feature of modern western democracies.
The USA has its Congress, Ireland its Oireachtas and the United Kingdom its Parliament.
These bodies have various functions; none is exclusively concerned with what is commonly regarded as being their primary function, i.e. the making of laws.
Certainly, the Parliament of the United Kingdom has a number of other functions and one of these, the exercise of control over the Executive, is of fundamental importance to the constitution of the United Kingdom.
What is Parliament?
Almost all Bills (i.e. proposals for legislative action) in Parliament are eventually ‘enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled’.
These words of enactment are a recognition that the Parliament of the United Kingdom today is a tripartite body, consisting of Queen, Lords and Commons.
Notwithstanding that the development of notions of democracy and the extension of the franchise have rendered the Queen's participation formal and that of the Lords subservient to that of the Commons, Parliament still consists of more than the House of Commons.
If one goes far enough back in United Kingdom constitutional history, one comes to a time when neither Lords nor Commons existed as such and when indeed, it was often by no means certain where the Crown should reside.
Early on, however, the forerunner of the modern House of Lords emerged from the Council around the monarch and it is now over seven centuries since commoners of  England (albeit of no more lowly status than the county squirearchy) were admitted to the Parliament of England.
The Welsh were admitted in 1535, two and a half centuries after their formal subjugation and accession as a quasi-colony in 1284.
Scotland, meantime, had her own monarchs and her own parliament which, notwithstanding accession to the English throne by a king of Scotland in 1603, continued to regulate the affairs of the Scottish kingdom according to its own laws and customs.
The English are sometimes accustomed to think, indeed, they are often taught to believe, that their Parliament began with Simon de Montfort.
So, indeed, it did.
But that Parliament has not met since 1706 and is extremely unlikely ever to meet again.
In 1706, Articles of Agreement were concluded in a ‘treaty’ between the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England, providing for ‘the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland’to be ‘for ever…united into one Kingdom’(Art.1) and for this new kingdom, ‘the United Kingdom of Great Britain', to be ‘represented by one and the same Parliament to be stiled The Parliament of Great Britain' (Art.III).
These Articles, confirmed by Acts of the Scottish and English Parliament (Union with England Act 1706; Union with Scotland Act 1706), were to ‘be held and observed in all time coming as a Fundamental and Essential Condition’ of union.
This ‘new’ Parliament did not last very long.
The very urbane and civilised citizenry of Regency Dublin had succeeded in securing the ‘restoration’ of a parliament for Ireland in 1782, now usually referred to as ‘Grattan's Parliament’.
Had it been allowed to thrive, the whole sad subsequent history of Ireland might well have been different but, alas, it was not.
Agitated by the fear that the rebellious Irish, with their own parliament, might have allowed Ireland to be used as a back door into Britain by the acquisitive Napoleon, the government in London embarked upon a course of pressure which culminated in the felo de se of Grattan's Parliament in the union legislation of 1800.
By the Act of Union Ireland) 1800, passed by the new Dublin Parliament, and the Union with Ireland Act 1800, passed by the Westminster Parliament of Great Britain, a new union of kingdoms was effected, this time, the kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland; and, again, Parliament was reconstituted and ‘styled ‘The Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland’(later, in 1923, to be restyled the ‘United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland''’; see above, p.34).
It is, and no doubt will remain, a moot point whether, in these  events, the old parliaments were abolished and replaced by novel creations, or whether a pre-existing parliament was merely renamed.
In the case of Irish union the pre-existing parliaments are nowhere expressly abolished; on the other hand, it is nowhere stated, or implied of necessity, in any of the union legislation, that one of the pre-existing parliaments was continued under a new style and, indeed, if this view were to be adopted, one is left with the question as to which of the two pre-existing parliaments it is which has survived.
It may be reasonably speculated that English ethnocentricity, then as now, would assume that, first the Scots and later the Irish, were let into Westminster, but the legislation gives no warrant for this assumption.
If this had happened, and if one could state confidently that the Parliament of England had survived these events, albeit in an altered state, whereas the parliaments first, of Scotland, and later, of Ireland, had disappeared from the scene, then there would be some warrant for assuming that the law, customs, conventions and powers of the Parliament of England had survived, whereas those of the others had not.
There is, however, no firm basis for such confidence and, as will be seen to be significant in relation to notions of parliamentary sovereignty, it is by no means universally accepted that it is only the characteristics of the Parliament of England which survived these constitutional upheavals.
Parliament, then, is ‘the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland’.
It consists, as have British parliaments for several centuries, of monarch, Lords and Commons.
Beneath this veneer, however, much has changed.
The role of the Queen is vastly different from that assumed for the monarch under the Tudors; the hereditary element in the House of Lords has plummeted in importance in the deliberations of the House over the last two and a half decades; and the House of Commons has become, although in relatively recent times, with the extension of the franchise, a popular assembly.
The above.discussion rather assumes that the Parliament is a permanent, enduring feature of our constitution.
In an abstract sense only, it is.
In concrete, legal, constitutional terms it is not.
What we have is not one, ongoing Parliament, but rather a series of parliaments, each now limited in its life to five years (Parliament Act 1911, s.7).
In actual practice, except when its life was extended in the World Wars, that limit has never been reached in modern times.
The Parliament Act provides merely that the life of  Parliament will end by effluxion of time, five years to the day after its first meeting, only if it has not previously been dissolved by the monarch and, these days, it invariably is.
Once dissolved, there is no Parliament until the next one meets; it is yet another endearingly eccentric feature of the constitution of this cradle of democracy that its law provides that, at least once in every five years, it shall undergo at least a short spell of autocracy.
These-spells of autocracy were once frequently longer and of indefinite duration, sometimes, indeed, extending over decades.
The reluctance of monarchs to summon Parliaments (except when necessary, for reasons of self-interest, to do so) was an important feature of the constitutional struggle of the seventeenth century and an important element in their downfall.
That these tensions could arise at all was due to the fact that historically, Parliaments were originally called as a matter of discretion by the monarch.
They could equally well by dismissed as a matter of whim.
Their function was to advise the monarch and if he chose to dispense with their advice, so be it.
The legal power to summon and dissolve parliaments, then, was and remains a ‘prerogative’ power of the monarch, i.e. a power accorded to the monarch in virtue of his regality, by the common law.
What has changed is that a convention has developed as to how and when this power is exercised and the modern position is thus that the monarch has, except in the most unusual circumstances and even then only doubtfully so, no discretion as to when Parliament shall be called and disbanded.
Normally, Parliament will be dissolved by the monarch as and when advice to do so is conveyed to that effect by the Prime Minister; and invariably, the issuing by the monarch of a proclamation dissolving Parliament is accompanied by the issuing of another proclamation summoning the next one.
Parliament is thus best seen as a cyclical phenomenon — it is born, lives, dies and is then reborn….
The Composition of Parliament
(1) The Monarch
The monarch is, as has been said, one of the three constituent parts of Parliament, although her role today is largely formal and ceremonial.
The monarch is, furthermore, more than merely a part of Parliament under the constitution of the United Kingdom.
She is the formal head of the Executive and it is, nominally, in her courts that her justice is administered.
The rules relating to succession to the Crown thus provide for the identification not merely of a part of Parliament but for that of the head of state in all respects.
A tribe may acquire its leader by election, or by battle, or according to customary or other rules providing for devolution of the title by heredity or in other ways.
At various times in the history of the nations which now comprise the United Kingdom, various of these methods of selection have prevailed.
It was, however, one of the legacies of the constitutional struggle of the seventeenth century that the rules of succession to the Crown were put on a firm, statutory basis and the statutory rules prescribed have since functioned uncontroversially subject only to one or two possible minor exceptions.
The revolutionary assembly which met at Westminster in January and February 1688 attempted, in the Bills of Rights, to legislate for the succession to the Crown after the end of the joint reign of William and Mary.
In this attempt, however, Parliament failed to foresee all the possible contingencies and it was obliged to return to the matter in 1700 when it established, in the Act of Settlement, the basis upon which the Crown has since devolved.
In one of the longest and most turgid sentences on the statute book, Parliament provided, effectively as it turned out, that the Crown should pass to Sophia, Electress of Hanover ‘and the Heirs of Her Body being Protestants’.
There has been the occasional quickening of the establishment pulse from time to time when one in line to succeed to the Crown has seemed to develop too intense an interest in a Roman Catholic but despite that, the anticipated line of succession has been perfectly followed subject to only one scandalous disruption when Edward VIII preferred to marry a divorcee to retaining the monarchy.
He executed a declaration of abdication of the throne for himself and his descendants and this declaration was duly rendered effective, so far as it went, by His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act 1936 which amended the Act of Settlement accordingly.
The 1936 Act was certainly effective so far as the United Kingdom was concerned.
The King was, however, also King of his Dominions and it had been provided by the Statute of Westminster 1931, s.4, that Parliament should not legislate for the Dominions (defined as Australia, Canada, the Irish Free State, Newfoundland, New Zealand and the Union of South Africa) except at the request of and with the consent of the Dominion concerned.
Canada, with which Newfoundland had by this time merged, duly requested and consented; Australia, New Zealand and South Africa merely ‘assented’.
The Irish Free State, maintaining its constitutional stance that the Westminster Parliament had no jurisdiction anyway, ignored events (see above, pp.5–6).
The words used in the Act of Settlement, ‘and the heirs of her body’ were well known to the common law and had a definite meaning.
This was the formula whereby the law made provision for the descent of landed estates within a line.
It implied, first, primogeniture amongst males, i.e. inheritance by the eldest son, if there was one.
Failing this, it implied inheritance by daughters as coparceners, i.e. all equally.
On the first occasion of failure of a male heir, in 1837, Victoria, as the sole daughter of rank (a niece of William IV), inherited the Crown.
On the second occasion, in 1952, there were two daughters, Elizabeth and Margaret Rose.
It was, however, the advice of the law officers of the day, and it has been assumed to be correct (inter alia by Parliament in the Royal Titles Act 1953), that upon failure of male heirs, primogeniture should apply as well to females.
If this advice were incorrect, then Margaret Rose would be entitled to the Crown as coparcener and, in strict law, the vice in Elizabeth's title could not have been removed by the Royal Titles Bill which would,ex hypothesi , have lacked the Royal Assent.
In fact, the advice was almost certainly correct and, in any case, there is little room for doubt that if Elizabeth's  inheritance was revolutionary, it enjoyed  immediate acquiescence and has manifestly been effective.
One other possible implication of the magic formula is that the Crown is alienable by the monarch, within the limits permitted by the common law rules of limitation.
Such alienation would, it seems, be inconsistent with the intendment of the Act of Settlement.
Regency
It is only in recent historical times that statutory provision has been made to cover the event of the infancy or incapacity of the monarch.
The position was first regularised by the Regency Act 1937 and further Acts dealing with the matter were passed in 1943 and 1953, after the accession of Elizabeth II.
These Acts make provision for two types of surrogacy, the first by a regent, the second by counsellors of state.
The powers of the former are more comprehensive than of those of the latter.
The regency provisions would come into effect in any of three events.
Were an heir under 18 years of age to accede, or the monarch to become mentally or physically incapacitated from acting, or were otherwise not available ‘for some definite cause’, it would fall to a panel of high officers of state to declare a regency, in which event the person next in line would assume power until a further declaration signified the end of the regency.
A regent assumes almost full powers.
There are a very few reservations such as assenting to an alteration of the succession to the throne.
It is for the monarch to appoint counsellors of state whenever she wishes, delegating whatever powers she wishes.
Such counsellors are identified as close members of the Royal Family.
Amongst the few powers which may not be so delegated is the power to dissolve Parliament.
Declaration of a republic
In a number of instances, the Crown's formal legal title over the dominions has been terminated.
Where republican status has been unilaterally declared (as in the case of the Republic of Ireland) it has been accepted.
In the case of Ireland, the Crown's title had, in any event, ended some 12 years previously, according to Irish constitutional law.
There would seem to be little doubt that Parliament could, by  passing an Act (which would, of course, necessitate the Royal Assent) establish a republic.
Legally, it would seem that nothing less would do, so far as the United Kingdom is concerned.
Declaration of a republic, by the monarch or by Ministers, could have no legal effect upon legislation recognising the monarchy and would be revolutionary thus depending for its constitutionality upon acquiescence and effectiveness.
(2) The composition of the House of Lords
The short answer to the question ‘who may sit in the House of Lords?’ is the same as to the question ‘who may sit in the House of Commons?’, and it is ‘anyone whom the House admits as a member’.
We do not elect Members of Parliament; we merely elect nominees.
In the same way, the conferment of a peerage confers merely an inchoate right to a seat in the House of Lords.
It is for the House itself, in the final analysis, to determine whether one can take one's place, and, if issue were joined (as is occasionally the case where succession to an hereditary peerage is contested or doubtful) the House would decide on the basis of a report received from its Committee of Privileges.
In such cases, however, the Committee will have the benefit of the opinions of holders of high judicial office and those opinions will be based upon law.
This is the relevance of rules; for the courts to embrace such an issue would be for them to breach the long-standing settlement with regard to the boundaries of parliamentary privilege (see below, pp.113–19) and they would not do it.
Two classes of peer may sit, peers spiritual and peers temporal.
The latter class is much the more numerous.
Peers spiritual
Until the fourteenth century, all clergy were summoned to Parliament.
Since then, only bishops have been summoned.
By the law of Parliament, bishops had a right to sit.
This was suspended during the Long Parliament in the middle of the seventeenth century but was restored by the Clergy Act 1661.
In the nineteenth century, the number of bishoprics increased considerably and a limit was imposed upon the number entitled to sit,(e.g., by the Bishoprics Act 1878).
The present position is that 26 bishops may sit.
These consist of the two Archbishops (of York and Canterbury), the three senior bishops (of London, Durham and Winchester) plus 21 others.
These 21 consist of those most senior according to date of appointment.
A newly appointed bishop joins the end of the queue and works his way up by attrition until he reaches the favoured band.
Peers temporal
The precise number of peers temporal is unknown but is most probably well in excess of a thousand, most of whom, however, never sit.
They comprise two classes:(a) hereditary peers, historically the only class; and 6) life peers, today the most important class for practical purposes.
(a)Hereditary peers The present House of Lords is the product of the union legislation of 1800 and the House which it replaced was created by the union legislation of 1706.
Prior to that, its House of Lords was a part of the Parliament of England as of Scotland.
Prior to union, each kingdom had its own peerage.
With union, new peerages came into being.
There are five peerages in the United Kingdom — those of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom.
With the first union, the peerages of England and Scotland were superseded by that of Great Britain.
With the second union, the peerages of Ireland and Great Britain were largely superseded by that of the United Kingdom.
All peers of England have retained entitlement to sit in the appropriate House of Lords throughout.
All peers of Great Britain have retained entitlement to sit since the peerage was instituted in 1707 as have peers of the United Kingdom since 1801.
New creations of peers of Scotland were prohibited by the Acts of Union with Scotland.
Those Acts provided not for full representation of the peerage of Scotland in the new House, but for the election by peers of Scotland (who were not also peers of the United Kingdom of Great Britain) of 16 of their number to sit.
With no new peerages being created, numbers dwindled and election was abolished by the Peerage Act 1963 and all remaining Scottish peers allowed to sit.
The Irish Acts of Union did not prohibit the creation of new peers of Ireland but imposed a limit of 100 at any given time.
This 100 (or such lesser number as existed at any time) were to elect 28 of their number to sit in the new House.
In the event, few new Irish peerages  have been created since 1800, and no election has been held since 1922 when the Irish Free State came into being.
The 28 then elected continued to sit for life but the last of them, the Earl of Kilmorey, died in 1961.
In 1967 the Earl of Antrim and a number of other surviving Irish peers sought to set in motion the machinery for a fresh election of 28 of their number, and petitioned the House to this end.
The House, however, decided (in The Earl of Antrim's Petition [(1967]1 AC 961) that for procedural and substantive reasons this was not possible.
Procedurally, the machinery could no longer be operated since no provision had been made, in 1922, for functions relating to the organising of elections and previously discharged by the Lord Chancellor and Clerk of the Crown in Ireland, to be transferred to new officials, and those offices had been abolished.
Substantively, the election was of peers to sit ‘on the part of Ireland’ and ‘Ireland’contemplated by the union legislation had ceased to exist.
Peers of Ireland, therefore, have no seats; as we shall see, they are equated to commoners for parliamentary purposes.
(b)Life peers The first life peers were the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (the Law Lords), appointed in gradually increasing numbers since the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876, in order to strengthen the professional element in the highest court of appeal.
The monarch did not and does not need statutory authority to appoint life peers — a peerage can be conferred on any terms thought fit.
The first attempt to strengthen the House of Lords, prior to 1876, was the conferment of a life peerage upon Baron Parke,(‘Baron’ here signifying merely a judgeship in the Court of Exchequer) who thus became Lord Wensleydale.
Whilst the peerage was validly conferred, however, the House of Lords itself decided that such a peer had no right to sit, and the object of the exercise was thus frustrated.
The problem was overcome by the passing of the 1876 Act.
Whilst the admission of the Law Lords made available to the House one particular type of needed expertise, it effected no significant general improvement.
The Law Lords were and are few in number; they tend to sit, otherwise than in the Judicial Committee, rarely.
Since 1909 the House of Lords has been under attack, and whilst one objection which has been taken has been to the undemocratic nature of the House, that is not the whole story.
There are two distinct objections to the hereditary principle — one is that hereditary peers are not elected; the other is that blue blood is no guarantee of any particular merit, competence or expertise  such as one would wish for in a Parliamentarian.
It can be argued that for a second chamber, whose main functions are the consideration of less controversial Bills and the revision of other Bills from the other place without, however, power finally to frustrate the will of the democratically-elected chamber,(as is now the case with the House of Lords, see below, pp.98–9) the fact that it is undemocratic matters little, provided that it is competent to do the job expected of it.
In 1958, the Life Peerages Act was enacted.
It makes possible the conferment of life peerages with a right to sit.
So far, nearly 350 have been created and, since 1964, very few hereditary peerages have been conferred.
Since few hereditary peers take their seats anyway, the result has been to tilt the balance in the House gradually from heredity to merit.
The appointment of peers temporal
Nowadays, one thinks that if one is a peer, one is summoned to Parliament.
Historically, prior to the fifteenth century, it was the other way round.
The receipt of a writ of summons to Parliament meant that one was a peer.
Since then however, the invariable mode of appointment has been the conferment of a peerage by letters patent.
The patent operates in much the same way as a title deed to property, except that the ‘property’ cannot be alienated.
It states the peerage conferred (whether it be a barony, a viscountcy, etc.) and prescribes the mode in which it is to descend to heirs.
Much the most common prescription is for the title to descend to ‘the male heirs of the body’, in which case, it passes to the eldest or only son if there is one, failing which it becomes extinguished.
Exceptionally, however, a peerage could be conferred or devolve upon a daughter or other heir.
Where the patent terms resulted in the inheritance of the title by two daughters as coparceners, the House of Lords would treat the peerage in abeyance until inheritance by a sole heir.
Until 1958, females, even though they were peeresses in their own right, were not admitted.
The Sex  Disqualification (Removal) Act 1919, designed to facilitate the admission of women to the House of Commons but worded in such a way as to be apt to give them access also to the House of Lords was seized upon by Viscountess Rhondda as having this effect but the Committee of Privileges refused to endorse her claim and the House rejected it.
It was not until the Life Peerages Act 1958 that it became possible for a woman to be created  a life peer and sit and not until the Peerage Act 1963 that hereditary peeresses in their own right were allowed to join them.
Peers are nowadays almost entirely appointed on the advice of the Prime Minister although the monarch does retain the right to confer personally and occasionally exercises it in the case of eminently deserving elder statesmen and suchlike.
One was, for example, offered to Sir Winston Churchill but he preferred to remain a commoner.
It is the fact that peerages are conferred on a Prime-Ministerial advice which lends reality to the threat of governments to swamp a reluctant House of Lords with their own supporters in order to avoid obstruction.
The weapon has been sparingly used.
It was first employed on the occasion of the Great Reform Bill in 1832 and when it was wheeled out again, in 1909, Edward VII required an electoral mandate for its use.
Since, under the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, the House can block legislation for only one session, it is practically obsolescent.
Unless a matter were extraordinarily urgent, the only occasion for its use would be in relation to the passage of a Bill to extend the life of Parliament and even here, the abolition of the House of Lords might be a preferred course.
Most peers are disqualified from sitting in the House of Commons (see below, pp.76–80) and it was thus at one time the case that a promising political career could be cut short by the involuntary inheritance of a title.
A long campaign to avoid this consequence was waged by Anthony Wedgewood-Benn, as he was then known, when he inherited the Stansgate title.
He executed a deed of disclaimer and fought a by-election as a peer in order to test its validity but the House of Lords refused to recognise it.
Eventually, a statutory right to disclaim was created by the Peerage Act 1963 and Tony Benn, as he later became, was enabled to pursue his political career.
One who inherits a title whilst a Member of the House of Commons or a candidate for a seat in it can remain or become a Member for only one month before disclaiming.
Otherwise, a period of one year from inheritance (or age 21 where the title was inherited before that age) is allowed for disclaimer.
Celebrated disclaimants have included the Earl of Home, when he became Prime Minister, and Lord Hailsham, when he thought he might.
Although most of them rarely attend, hereditary peers could still, if they so wished, dominate the proceedings of the House of Lords, and it occasionally happens, when a matter of vital and controversial national concern, such as the abolition of hanging, galvanises them, that many more than usual attend.
This practice is  now discouraged, although not precluded, by standing order.
Peers are asked if they wish to be granted ‘leave of absence’ and, if they do not reply in the negative, are expected not to attend without giving 30 days' notice of intention to do so.
Whether this entitles the House to exclude a peer on leave of absence has not been tested.
Attendance is slightly encouraged by the payment not of a salary but of an allowance for attendance.
The amount is not large but, then, nor are retirement pensions and in some cases, no doubt, the supplement is welcome.
Reform of the House of Lords
One favoured reform of the House is its abolition.
The main plank in the abolitionist's platform is that there should be no place in a modern democratic state for a second chamber composed in large part on the principle of heredity and in lesser part on that of nomination.
It is extremely unlikely that if the House of Lords did not exist it would be invented in its present form.
The case that is usually made out for retention is that the House of Lords nevertheless discharges a valuable constitutional function especially in the processing of uncontroversial Bills and the revision of Bills passed, perhaps with undue haste and lack of consideration, by the House of Commons.
This case is, as is readily appreciated, a case merely for the existence of some sort of second chamber, and not for the House of Lords as at present composed.
It is, in other words, not a case against reform.
There have several times been movements for reform in the course of this century.
The Parliament Act 1911 still recites that ‘it is intended to substitute for the House of Lords as it at present exists a Second Chamber constituted on a popular instead of hereditary basis’ and explains the Act itself as a temporary measure pending such a substitution.
It has, however, never happened.
The occasion of the most recent serious attempt was in 1968 when a Bill designed to further limit the power of the Lords received a second reading in the House of Commons but it foundered.
There seems, from past votes on the matter, to be an overwhelming majority not only in the Commons, but even in the Lords itself, for reform of some sort.
The problem seems to be that there is no majority in favour of any particular scheme.
In part, at least , this is due to the fact that there is a substantial lobby amongst Labour Members of Parliament for whom abolition is the only acceptable reform.
These have, at times, made strange bedfellows with the minority who oppose reform because no reform, and certainly not abolition, is acceptable.
Although the heredity principle still has its proponents in some quarters, few would admit that it could any longer be defended.
It may be that some hereditary peers are well worth a place, but it is also true that some who are not hereditary peers are equally deserving and it is hard to argue that they should not be considered on their merits on the same basis, with life peerages being conferred on those most suitable.
Even however, if the hereditary element were thus removed, there would remain controversy about the basis of selection for the rest.
Nomination on the basis of so-conceived merit is objected to as non-democratic; election on the basis of popular franchise is objected to as duplicating the House of Commons and as giving to the House of Lords a much more convincing title to oppose the Commons.
If ever it were possible to agree upon a scheme of regional government, then there might be a basis for regional representation, but attempts at this have so far failed.
So the largely hereditary, geriatric, nominated, meritocratic House of Lords continues on its useful path.
There is some merit in nomination.
It enables a voice to be given to interest groups which ought to be heard and, possibly, even exercise influence but which otherwise would lack a sufficient say in the affairs of the nation.
Such arguments underlie the composition of second chambers elsewhere, for example, in the Republic of Ireland.
(3) The composition of the House of Commons
It is the convention today that when the Queen issues a proclamation dissolving Parliament (on the advice of her Prime Minister) she also issues a proclamation summoning a new one.
None of this affects the tenure of office of Ministers of the Crown; they remain ‘the government’ although they will, of course, resign if the country rejects them.
The dissolution of Parliament does, however, bring an end to.
membership of Parliament; the summoning of a new one, in consequence, gives rise to the need to identify those who will be entitled to sit in it.
In the case of the House of Lords, no difficulty arises.
Its personnel are already identified by reason of their peerages which are held, subject to disclaimer, at least for life), and all that remains is to summon them.
There are, however, at this stage no specific  individuals entitled to claim seats in the House of Commons, not even the Ministers of the Crown who continue in office.
It is the function of elections to identify claimants to seats in the House of Commons.
In the case of a ‘general election’, i.e. an election for all seats contemporaneously, the process is triggered by the issuing of the proclamation of summons.
This prompts an official of state, the Clerk in Chancery, to issue writs to the returning officer in each constituency, and it then becomes ‘the returning officer's general duty…to do all such acts and things as may be necessary for effectually conducting the election in the manner provided’(Representation of the People Act 1983, s.23(2)1.
This, of course, assumes that there are returning officers in existence to whom the Clerk can send the writ.
This, and most of what follows, is regulated by the Representation of the People Acts, the most important by far of which is the 1983 Act,(‘the 1983 Act’ hereafter).
Section 24 of the 1983 Act enables the Clerk to identify the person to whom he must send the writ.
In some cases, the returning officer is such ex officio , as being, e.g., the sheriff of a county compromising a single constituency, or the mayor of a London borough which comprises a single constituency.
In other cases, where it is not possible to identify a returning officer ex officio , a returning officer is specifically identified by order.
Formal defects in appointment or procedures will not invalidate a result (1983 Act, s.23(2), 24(2)).
The rules which must be followed in arranging and conducting the election are set out in the first schedule to the 1983 Act as amended.
This schedule sets out the timetable, providing for the giving of notice of the election, the procedures for nomination of candidates and the conduct of a poll where, as is almost invariably the case, the election is contested.
Until recently, it was customary for a Speaker to be returned unopposed, but this practice has now been abandoned in a number of instances.
In the case of a by-election, the issue of a writ by the Speaker is warranted by the House of Commons on a motion to that effect.
It used to be the custom that the issue of the writ should be moved by chief whip of the party in the House of Commons a member of which had held the seat prior to its vacation, but this practice was occasionally the subject of abuse by the moving party being reluctant, by reason of its unpopularity in the country and consequent fear of being humiliated in a poll, Constituents in one instance were left unrepresented for over nine months.
This abuse is  now curtailed by the Recess Elections Act 1975.
The voting method in parliamentary elections is the simple primary, or ‘first past the post’ system.
Under a two-party system of government, much the same result would be yielded within a one member constituency by any voting system.
Even under a two-party system, however, the overall, national result in a general election can be distorted, in the sense that a party with a small overall majority of primary votes can secure an overwhelming majority of seats.
In fact, the United Kingdom has never had, in the course of this century, a simple two-party system and it is many years since the party eventually forming government secured a majority of primary votes cast, let alone the votes of a majority of electors.
Where there are more than two parties which command a substantial vote in the country, the simple primary voting system produces even more distorted results, even within a single constituency.
It is not uncommon in the United Kingdom today for a seat to be won by a candidate who secures less than 40 per cent of the vote, and for a government to be formed by a party securing less than 40 per cent of votes cast overall.
The position can be even further distorted by votes for a particular party being concentrated in a particular region or locality, as opposed to being evenly spread over the country as a whole.
Such ‘distortions’ are the reason for persistent advocacy, particularly from parties suffering these electoral evils, of a change in the voting system.
The favoured candidate is a system of proportional representation under which the numbers of candidates of a party ultimately returned would be much more proportionate to the number of votes cast for that party overall.
The most common varieties of this system (commonly used in other member states of the European Community and in some elections in Northern Ireland) are the single transferable vote system (under which primary votes of the least successful candidates are progressively redistributed to the more successful) and the list-system, under the simplest variety of which votes are cast not for particular candidates, but for parties, the ‘list’ of whose candidates will benefit proportionately to the party's overall vote.
If the ‘list-system’ is to produce a proportionate result, it is necessary to have multi-member constituencies.
Likewise, the single transferable vote system normally operates, and is usually thought of as operating, in multi-member constituencies.
It is, however, possible to operate a single transferable vote system  within a single-member constituency; this is normally described as the ‘alternative voting’ system.
It does not go so far to ensure proportionality as other variants, but would involve the least departure from the existing system, would retain single-member constituencies which many regard as being a valuable feature of the present system, and would be much the simplest to understand in operation.
Under it, the only change from the existing primary voting system would be that instead of placing one ‘X’ against the name of a favoured candidate, the voter would put ‘1’against his first choice, ‘2’against his second choice, etc.
Change is unlikely simply because it could only be effected by a majority in the House of Commons.
It is extremely improbable where, as is normally the case, that majority is constituted by a single party which,ex hypothesi , has been successful under the existing voting system and therefore lacks any great incentive to change it.
It is likely to come about only as a consequence of a general election yielding a majority for no single party thus putting a minority party favouring change in a strong position to secure it as a price for joining or supporting another minority party in government.
Resistance to change is not normally articulated in frank terms of party advantage.
Rather it is usual to claim objective virtues for the existing system which would be lost by a change from it.
Chief amongst these ‘virtues’ is ‘strong’government.
‘Strong’ government is only possible, it seems, where it is conducted by a single party resting on a sufficiently large majority in the House of Commons.
Such a majority is likely, under the simple primary voting system, even on a substantial minority of primary votes.
It is extremely unlikely under the ‘list-system’ or under varieties of the ‘single transferable voting’system other than the ‘alternative voting’system.
Even under the latter, it is less likely than under the simple primary voting system.
The corollary of ‘strong government’ being good is that ‘weak government’is bad and ‘weak government’in this context means coalition or minority government, both much more likely given a departure from the existing simple primary voting system.
The ‘weakness’ appears to consist in two factors.
The first of these is that defeated and therefore less able to take unpopular albeit necessary measures.
The second is that coalition or minority government involves taking account of the views of others and even, perhaps, having to compromise.
These ‘vices and ‘virtues’ seem all to be relative.
There are, no doubt, some circumstances where firm action is urgently necessary and where vacillation or debate would be fatal.
Equally, however, there may be some circumstances where ‘strong’ government amounts to nothing more than the power to force upon the country crass, stupid and mistaken policies lacking even the virtue of endorsement by a majority of, presumably, misguided electors.
The alternative voting system at least possesses the virtue of requiring that if such policies are to be persisted in, the doctrine in which they are grounded must have been at least minimally acceptable to, if not the first choice of, a majority of voters.
For the present, and perhaps for far into the future, the simple primary voting system rules.
Once the polls close, it is the returning officer's duty to supervise the count, declare the result and, ultimately, make the required return of the result to the writ.
The next steps are for the successful candidates to take.
They are all equal.
Neither the rawest young winner nor the Prime Minister is yet a Member of the House.
The proclamation will have summoned the Parliament to meet on a specified day and it is up to the victors to turn up on that day at the time prescribed.
They assemble initially in their own chamber from where they are eventually summoned by the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod to attend at the Bar of the House of Lords where a Commission for the Opening of Parliament is read, usually by the Lord Chancellor, on behalf of the monarch.
The Commons then return to their own chamber where, at a meeting chaired by the House of Commons Clerk, they elect a Speaker.
In the time of the Stuarts, this was a high-risk occupation and even today, the Member elected pretends reluctance and protests at having to take the chair.
The next day, the Speaker leads the Commons back to the Bar of the House of Lords where his election is duly confirmed by the Lord Chancellor on behalf of the monarch and the Speaker then claims from the monarch all the ancient privileges of the House of Commons.
Such is the force of tradition that when the newly instituted Parliament of Northern Ireland met for the first time in 1921, its first act was to claim these ‘undoubted and ancient privileges’.
The Queen's Speech, which is usually delivered by the Queen in person but which consists of a text prepared by the government setting out the government's proposed programme for the session, follows, and the Commons return to their chamber.
They are, however, still not Members of Parliament in the full sense.
Each would-be Member has to comply with the requirements of the Parliamentary Oaths Act 1866, as amended, prove his right to membership to the satisfaction of the Speaker and be admitted to the House by the Speaker.
It is extremely unlikely that there will be any difficulty — at a general election the returns to the writs will have identified the winners and, nowadays, the oath is unlikely to present any problems, although it has in the past.
Poor Charles Bradlaugh, returned time after time by the electors of Northampton was first found by the courts (on the application of an informer for a penalty) to be disentitled to affirm (since, having no religion, he had no religious objection to taking the oath)(in Clarke v Bradlaugh (1881) 7 QBD 38, reversed but not on this point in Bradlaugh v Clarke (1883) 8 App Cas 354).
Then, when he sought to take the oath, the House itself refused and excluded him on the dubious ground that, being an atheist, he could not swear.
Bradlaugh's efforts to enrol the courts on his side on this occasion foundered on the rock of parliamentary privilege (see below, pp.113–19)(Bradlaugh v Gossett (1884) 12 QBD 271).
In one respect, Bradlaugh's suit against Gossett, the Serjeant at Arms, for excluding him by order of the House, is still important.
It emphasises that in the final analysis it is not what the electors, or judges, or a returning officer may say, but what the House itself says, which determines whether a successful candidate may take a seat.
When, on the only occasion in British parliamentary history, a Communist Party member was returned (Willie Gallacher, at the Motherwell by-election of 1944) and he asserted his right to take his seat in the House without sponsorship (as is the House's custom) the House refused him admission and he was obliged to seek the support of two independent members next day.
A latter-day Bradlaugh would at least avoid his predecessor's problems with the oath.
The Oaths Act 1888 made the right to affirm available to all.
All this assumes that constituencies have been determined; that the persons voting have become qualified to do so; and that candidates for election are qualified to sit if elected.
These matters will now be considered.
Determination of constituencies
The boundaries of constituencies fall to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the House of Commons (Redistribution of  Seats) Acts 1949 and 1958, as amended.
The objectives sought to be achieved by this legislation are not simple.
Clearly, one aim is to ensure the election of a Parliament the House of Commons of which is of an efficient size, and the Members of which are elected in such a way that the vote of one elector is worth the same as another, neither more nor less.
It is currently considered that a House consisting of some 650 members is appropriate; the figure has been between 600 and 650 for many decades although there is nothing magic about this particular size.
It is desirable that the ‘payroll’ vote, i.e. the number of members of the government party holding office and therefore behoven to support the government, should not form too large a proportion of the House, but otherwise, there is no obvious reason for preferring 400 to 800.
A second consideration is administrative efficiency.
The voting population is not spread conveniently evenly throughout the jurisdiction; nor is it conveniently organised in neatly organised batches of identical size for other purposes.
It is, however, grouped for other purposes such as local government and it may well be administratively convenient that a town or city, already thus organised, should form one or more parliamentary constituencies, even though some disparities in size as between different constituencies result.
At the same time, a constituency should form a homogenous whole and, ideally, it should not be so large in area that its affairs cannot properly be overseen by its Members.
This results in a tendency for rural constituencies to have smaller electorates than urban constituencies.
Similarly, it is considered that the distinctiveness of the smaller constituent parts of the United Kingdom should be recognised and that they should have a guaranteed membership.
There are therefore a minimum or fixed number of seats for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
At present, there must be at least 71 seats for Scotland, 35 for Wales and between 16 and 18 (presently 17) for Northern Ireland (House of Commons (Redistribution of Seats) Acts 1948, 1958 and 1979).
The number of seats for Great Britain England, Scotland and Wales), which must not be substantially more or less than 613, is presently 627.
The actual fixing or, to be accurate, ‘refixing’ of constituency boundaries is ultimately up to the House of Commons.
It does so by approving an order presented by the Home Secretary.
The order which he presents is the product of the work of four boundary commissions, one for each of the countries of the United Kingdom.
The Speaker is nominally chairman of each of them but the actual work of chairing is undertaken by deputy chairmen, who are superior court judges.
The chief function of boundary commissions is to secure even representation amongst the constituencies within their jurisdiction, each of which will have a notional ‘quota’ consisting of the total number of electors divided by the number of constituencies.
The commissions are to strive to ensure that no constituency varies from this quota by more or less than a quarter of it.
By reason of their rates of population decline vis-à-vis England and their fixed minimum number of seats, the Scottish and Welsh quotas are smaller than that of England.
Shifts in population can soon make a nonsense of the best efforts of the boundary commissions and it is not at all unusual for the largest constituency to be over three times the size of the smallest.
This trend may be aggravated if, as is commonly the case, the proposals of a boundary commission are perceived to be likely, if implemented by order, substantially to advantage one party or another.
In one such instance, when the party prospectively disadvantaged happened to be in government, the Home Secretary took the extraordinary step of introducing the order and advising his party colleagues in the House to reject it, which they duly did, the stated reasons being the desirability of awaiting the outcome of a local government review then pending.
Electors
Vindication of the right to vote has a long and proud history.
It was, however, a rather different type of ‘vote’ which Holt, CJ offered to protect in Ashby v White in 1706 (1703) 2 Ld Raym 938.
At that time, the vote was, in a very real sense, valuable as property — a dozen votes could win a seat.
A series of extensions, starting with the Great Reform Act in 1832 through a series of extensions in Victorian times, the extension of the franchise to women after the First World War and then to all persons, first over 21, later over 18, have changed the picture and the nature of Parliament radically.
In general, a person is qualified to vote in a parliamentary election in a constituency if he fulfils conditions as to residence, citizenship, registration and capacity.
(a)Residence The 1983 Act requires residence on the ‘qualifying date’.
This is 15 September in Northern Ireland and 10 October  elsewhere in the United Kingdom, in respect of any election polling for which takes place during the year commencing 16 February following.
Thus, for a poll in November 1985, the relevant qualifying dates would be in September and October 1984.
In Northern Ireland, in order to prevent hordes crossing the border in order to reside on the qualifying date, three month's prior residence in the constituency is required (1983 Act, s.1(2)).
Otherwise, residence in a constituency on the day suffices.
The prospect of a rabid Irish nationalist invasion of Northern Ireland from the Republic in order to swamp the poll is unreal in more than one sense and it is very doubtful if the three months' residence requirement is necessary.
What is required is ‘residence’ and mere presence clearly will not suffice.
Oxford students succeeded, in Fox v Stirk [1970]3 All ER 7, in establishing that they could be resident in their university constituency and thus entitled to qualify to vote notwithstanding that they were also resident in their home constituencies and could qualify to vote there alternatively but this was on the basis that they had a ‘residence’ in Oxford where they spent a substantial part of the year.
Whether even this would suffice is now doubtful (see 1983 Act, s.5(1)).
What seems abundantly clear is that even if there were not the three months' residence requirement in the case of Northern Ireland, it would still be necessary, in order to qualify to vote, for a person to have there a ‘residence’ in which he spent a substantial part of the year.
And provided that he did have a ‘residence’(or ‘abode’, the concept used in other contexts) there, in which he spent a substantial part of the year, it would not be necessary for him to be physically present there for the whole three-month period prior to the qualifying date.
As it is, the three months' requirement in Northern Ireland results in the disentitlement to vote of persons who would undoubtedly be able to vote in Great Britain, for example any person previously resident only in Great Britain who abandons his old residence and takes up a new one in Northern Ireland within three months of the qualifying date.
(b)Citizenship The right to vote is not restricted, as one might expect, to citizens of the United Kingdom and colonies.
Commonwealth citizens and citizens of the Republic of Ireland (retaining their former rights as citizens of the United Kingdom) may vote provided that they satisfy the other conditions.
(c)Registration Section 8 of the 1983 Act thrusts upon various local authorities the duty to appoint a ‘registration officer’ whose  task it is to prepare and publish each year a register of electors in his area (ibid , s.9).
Registers should be published at the latest by 15 February in each year for use in all polls taking place after that date, although if for any reason they are not so published, the most recent register may be used (ibid , s.13(31).
Registration is vital; one may not vote unless one is registered (ibid , s.1(3)) even though one is entitled to be registered.
Contrariwise, one may be able to vote provided that one is in fact registered even though one was not entitled to be registered — the register, when published, is conclusive (ibid , s.49) once notice of an election has been given, although it may be amended on specified grounds prior to that date (ibid , s.11).
(d)Capacity Certain persons may not vote even though otherwise qualified in terms of residence and nationality.
These are:
(i) Persons under 18 years of age.
The Representation of the People Act 1969 extended the franchise to persons aged 18 or more on polling day.
Persons under 18 but who will attain the age during the current year are entitled to be registered in anticipation of attaining that age.
They must, nevertheless, be of age on the date of the poll.
(ii) Peers with the exception of peers of Ireland.
As has been stated above (pp.61–2) the last of the Irish representative peers died in 1961 and the Peerage Act 1963 conferred upon all surviving Irish peers the right to vote in parliamentary elections.
All other peers may now take a seat in the House of Lords and may not participate in the election of Members of the House of Commons.
(iii) Until 1967, when the distinction between felony and misdemeanour was abolished, persons convicted of treason or felony stood to be disqualified.
The disappearance of felony confined this disqualification to traitors.
It was, however, provided by the Representation of the People Act 1969, s.4, that persons serving a sentence of imprisonment after conviction of a crime were disqualified and s.3 of the 1983 Act reiterates this disqualification.
(iv) Certain electoral practices, some of them with a long and disreputable history, are forbidden.
The more serious of these, such as personation (1983 Act, s.60) and bribery (ibid , s.118) are ‘corrupt practices’.
Others such as hiring a fleet of taxis to take supporters to vote (1983 Act, s.101, 102) are ‘illegal practices’.
Persons found guilty of a corrupt or an illegal practice on prosecution therefore, or by an election court (contesting the validity of the ‘election’ of a  candidate) may be disqualified.
If so, the disqualification may be for a period of five years, universally in the case of a corrupt practice or within the particular constituency in which the offence took place in the case of an illegal practice.
(v) Mental patients may not be registered as being resident in a particular constituency solely by reason of being in a mental hospital within that constituency.
A voluntary mental patient may, if able to do so without assistance needed by reason of mental illness, made a declaration stating where he would otherwise be residing, or has resided, and be registered there.
A person detained involuntarily may not make such a declaration (1983 Act, s.7).
there appears, however, to be nothing to prevent any mental patient registering in a constituency in which he is actually resident.
There is no express disqualification from voting in the case of mental patients other than the general reference to ‘any legal incapacity to vote’ in s.1(l) (b)(i) of the 1983 Act but it is generally considered that any person who, at the moment of voting, lacked capacity to understand what he was immediately about to do, whether by reason of mental illness or drunkenness, etc., could be denied the right to vote by the presiding officer at the poll.
This may well be so, but a presiding officer who, without good cause, interferes or attempts to interfere with a voter when recording his vote commits an offence (1983 Act, s.63 and 66(3Xa)) and he would need, therefore, to be sure of his ground.
The above provisions are those which apply in the normal case.
There are special provisions with regard to the registration and voting of service voters, certain persons abroad and others on whose behalf postal or proxy voting is regarded as being appropriate (see 1983 Act, s.6, 12, 14–17, 19–22).
Whether other persons resident abroad, perhaps on government service, should retain the right to vote is currently a matter of controversy.
Candidates
The position of candidates needs to be considered in two respects,(a) qualification and disqualification;(b) conduct of the election campaign.
(a)Qualification and disqualification A candidate can be barred from standing for election by a returning officer only on certain  limited grounds.
He is entitled to reject a nomination only if the nomination paper does not conform to requirements (1983 Act, sch.1, paras.12,15) or if a candidate is disqualified by reason of having been ordered to be detained or imprisoned for more than one year in the British Islands or the Republic of Ireland in respect of an offence or offences of which he has been found guilty (Representation of the People Act 1981, s.1).
Whilst he may stand, however, it does not follow, even if successful, that he will be allowed to take his seat in the House.
The High Court or an election court (constituted and functioning in accordance with Parts III and IV of the 1983 Act) may, on the presentation of an election petition by an interested party (a voter, a ‘defeated’ candidate), declare a seat vacant, or provide for the return of another candidate in prescribed circumstances, where there has been irregularity in the conduct of the election campaign or where the ‘successful’candidate is not qualified.
He may be not qualified for a number of reasons, including that in the above paragraph, save that if a returning officer has decided that the nomination is valid, that decision may not be questioned (1983 Act, sch.1, para.12(5),(6)).
The number of grounds of disqualification, which are strangely obscure in a surprising number of respects, are:
(i) Aliens — this ground of disqualification, which one would expect, attaches apparently by the Status of Aliens Act 1914.
It does not debar citizens of the Republic of Ireland or of the Commonwealth from membership and election of these is not unknown.
(ii) Infants — when the age of majority was reduced from 21 to 18 years for most purposes, qualification for sitting in the House of Commons was expressly excluded from its ambit (Family Law Reform Act 1969, s.1(4). s.2, para.2).
Infants were originally barred by the Parliamentary Elections Act 1695 but some nevertheless sat without challenge in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
(iii) Persons under a mental incapacity — section 137 of the Mental Health Act 1959 now lays down a procedure whereby a seat can be vacated for this reason.
Where a court, or another authority or person makes an order for detention of a Member as being of unsound mind, or where a doctor recommends such detention, or where a Member is so detained, that court, authority, person, doctor or the head of the hospital, etc. where the Member is detained, must notify the Speaker.
The Speaker is then to obtain a medical report, and a further medical report after six months.
If, then, the Member is still of unsound mind, his seat is automatically vacated.
Mental incapacity otherwise, it will be obvious, is no disqualification.
(iv) Peers and peeresses in their own right, except peers of Ireland — the latter were, before 1963, qualified to sit for constituencies in Great Britain but not in Northern Ireland.
The Peerage Act 1963 now enables them to sit for all.
That Act, as has been stated (above, p.64) allows disclaimer within limits and provides that a Member or candidate shall not be disqualified by reason of inheriting a peerage during the period allowed for disclaimer.
(v) Clergy — this is a veritable mare's nest.
The House of Commons (Clergy Disqualification) Act 1801 provides that ‘no person having been ordained to the office of priest or deacon, or being a minister of the Church of Scotland, is or shall be capable of being elected to serve in Parliament as a Member of the House of Commons’ whilst s.9 of the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 states that ‘No person in holy orders in the Church of Rome shall be capable of being elected to serve in Parliament as a Member of the House of Commons’.
These provisions clearly cover ministers of the Church of Scotland and Roman Catholic priests expressly.
The 1801 provision was originally designed also to embrace ordained clergymen of the united established Church of England and Ireland.
This church was, however, disunited in 1869 and the Irish Church disestablished in 1871.
No one doubted that the disqualification remained in force so far as clergymen of the Church of England were concerned but the position of clergymen of the Irish Church remained in doubt until the election of one of them, the Rev. MacManaway, in 1950.
His right to sit was first referred to a select committee of the House of Commons which reported, somewhat unhelpfully, that there were arguments for and against his right to sit, and recommended clarifying legislation which, however, has not been forthcoming.
The matter was then referred to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council for advice and they eventually reported (in Re MacManaway [1951]AC 161) that he was disqualified.
The key to disqualification lay in ‘episcopal ordination’ and, MacManaway having been admitted by the laying on of hands of a bishop, he could not sit.
Since then, the House of Commons has considered the matter on two subsequent occasions, on the latter resolving to leave things  alone.
There may be pragmatic merit in this, but the position continues to abound in anomaly.
It is not clear why any of the clergy should be disqualified (as opposed to restrained by their own professional ethics) at all, except that in the case of the Church of England some sort of case can then be made out by reason of the right of bishops to sit in the House of Lords.
Here, there is further anomaly, for it has been possible in the past for Anglican clergymen to circumvent the disqualification by virtue of the Clerical Disabilities Act 1870, whilst others cannot.
When the House of Commons considered the matter in 1953, its views were affected by the fact that they were unaware of any evidence of pressure for change from the churches themselves.
It can, however, no longer be assumed that that is so, and in any case it is not clear that if a clergyman wishes to stand and electors wish him to represent them the mere fact that the churches do not like the idea has anything to do with matter.
For the time being, and probably for the foreseeable future, the rather vague criterion remains that of ‘episcopal ordination’, vague because that procedure is not peculiar to the Anglican Church.
To attempt to confine the disqualification to ‘true’ episcopal ordination takes the argument back at least to the Reformation and perhaps to St. Peter.
Clergy in the Church of Wales at least are spared this; their disqualification, if any, was removed by the Welsh Church Act 1914.
(vi) Bankrupts — an undischarged bankrupt cannot stand for Parliament.
Where a court adjudges a Member bankrupt, it must notify the Speaker and, after six months, when the House takes note of the order, he may become disqualified and remain so after his discharge, the length of the disqualification depending upon whether the court certifies that he was not at fault (in which case the period is one year), failing which the period is five years.
A quaint, old provision peculiar to Ireland, enabling a Member to resign, go bankrupt, and stand in the ensuing by-election has, sadly, disappeared (see Hollinshead v Hazelton [1916]1 AC 428, 452–3).
(vii) Persons guilty of a corrupt practice are disqualified from standing in any constituency for five years; persons guilty of an illegal practice may not stand for five years in the constituency in which the offence was committed (see above, pp.75–6).
(viii) Persons disqualified under the House of Commons (Disqualification) Act 1975.
This Act embraces a vast number of persons holding public office of a specified sort; it is amended regularly as new offices are created and persons appointed to them.
It limits the number of holders of ministerial office who may sit and vote in the House of Commons to 95 and debars, amongst others, civil servants, judges, members of the police and armed forces from sitting.
Amongst the offices listed are the stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds and that of bailiff of the Manor of Northstead the existence of which is nominal only but ‘appointment'’ of a Member of Parliament to which is the traditional manner of resigning a seat.
The House does, of course, have charge of its own affairs and can expel a Member, without prejudice to his right to stand in the ensuing by-election, whenever it so wishes.
The power was last exercised over 30 years ago in the case of Garry Allighan who, having launched the scurrilous accusation that some Members were disclosing confidential business for reward, was discovered to be the sole offender in this respect.
(b)The election campaign It is not necessary for a candidate to have substantial support in order to stand; all that he needs is the signature of 10 qualified electors.
Nor is it necessary for him to be serious, at least about Parliament, provided that he is reasonably well-to-do.
For many decades, a deposit of £150 was required and even the £500 now suggested will not necessarily deter the strip club owner or pop star who is otherwise lacking in publicity and for whom the outlay of such a sum may well be worthwhile.
On the other hand, for a poor candidate or, more important, a party lacking the hundreds of thousands of pounds now needed, the prospect can be deterrent.
Each candidate must have an agent (who may, however, be himself) and must notify the returning officer of his name and address (1983 Act, s.67).
The agent must have an office; he is the channel of official communications about the election.
Most importantly, he is responsible for the business side of the election and for the oversight and eventual declaration of expenses.
There are strict limits on the expenditure which can be incurred by or on behalf of a candidate and a successful candidate who is discovered to have exceeded the limits may find himself unseated.
Section 75 of the 1983 Act prohibits expenditure ‘with a view to promoting or procuring the election of a candidate at an election’ on items such as meetings, circulars or other promotional activities by any person other than the candidate or his agent.
The broadcasting authorities, which have in the past been accused of falling foul of the ancestors of this provision by reason of granting undue exposure to one particularly well-known candidate (see Grieve v Douglas-Home [1965]SLT 186), are now exempt (1983 Act, s.75(1)1, but the press otherwise, even such a reputable journal as The Times , remains bound (see R v Tronoh Mines and The Times publishing Co [1952]1 All ER 697).
Much of the obscurity surrounding this provision has been removed by the House of Lords in DPP v Luft [1976]1 A11 ER 569, concerning the prosecution of members of an ‘anti-fascist’ committee for incurring expenditure on the publication and distribution of literature attacking National Front candidates.
The section expressly prohibits ‘disparaging another candidate’ and the House of Lords held that this phrase was wide enough to cover this activity.
In any case, demoting the prospects of one candidate enhanced the prospects of all others and, hence, promoted their chances.
It had been thought at one time that the restriction did not apply to an attack on members of a party as a whole, or where the motive was simply the provision of information and not the demoting of a candidate, but Luft adopts an extensive interpretation of the scope of the provision.
Functions of Parliament
Describing the functions of Parliament is a matter of listing the things it does.
The next chapter, ‘Parliamentary procedure’ is concerned with how it does them.
Parliament discharges two great functions — functions which are absolutely central and vital to the British constitution.
In addition, it discharges a host of minor, even trivial, functions, the cessation of which would have little impact on public life.
Major functions
Parliament's two major functions are:(1) the making or approval of legislation and (2) the control of the Executive, especially in relation to financial matters.
(1) The legislative function
Parliament's legislative function is five-fold:
a)
the enactment of Bills;
b)
the approval or disapproval of important United Kingdom delegated legislation;
c)
the scrutiny of European legislation;
d)
the regulation by each House of its own activities by the making and revision of standing orders; and
e)
the regulation of the Church of England.
(a)The enactment of Bills Subject only to slight doubts with regard to the union legislation (see below, pp.126–30) Parliament may legislate on anything.
In order to enact a Bill on any matter, all that is necessary is that Commissioners, acting on Her Majesty's behalf, grant the Royal Assent to the Bill after it has been passed by  the House of Commons and the House of Lords.
In exceptional cases, under the ‘Parliament Act’ procedure (considered below, pp.98–9), it may not even be necessary for the House of Lords to pass the Bill.
How each House chooses to ‘pass’ a Bill is a matter for its own internal procedures.
These procedures form the subject of the next chapter.
So far so good.
Legislative proposals do not, however, materialise in the chamber out of thin air and they are not, furthermore, all of the same character.
In this latter regard, a distinction must be drawn between, on the one hand, Bills of general application — Public Bills, and Bills applying only to a particular area or person — Private Bills.
The most important of these latter are Bills concerning, e.g., a particular local authority or public corporation; or, more interestingly, Bills providing for the divorce of a particular couple (now extremely rare, but formerly the only mechanism for dissolution of marriage) or enabling a couple whose marriage would otherwise be prohibited by reason of being within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affinity, to marry.
A Bill may be ‘hybrid’, i.e. whilst the Bill as a whole is of general application, it contains particular provisions applying to particular persons specifically.
Thus, a Bill which sought to bring shipbuilding and repairing under public control but which did so, so far as repairing is concerned, by naming the particular firms affected, would be a ‘hybrid’ Bill.
Nowadays, much the greater part of the legislative programme of the two Houses is taken up by Public Bills.
Private Bills, indeed, will often be passed as a purely formal matter and will occupy hardly any time of the Houses at all.
Of the time of the House devoted to Public Bills, much the greater part in turn is devoted to Government Bills, i.e. Bills promoted by the government of the day, as opposed to those promoted by private Members.
By definition, the government of the day controls a majority of the House of Commons which regulates its own procedures.
It would be possible for the government of the day utterly to monopolise the time of the House fur its own legislation.
It does not do so; standing orders recognise this position of dominance and provide for the devotion of most of the time of the House of government business, including Bills.
Governments do not exercise the same sway over the House of Lords; notwithstanding that the House of Lords is sensitive of its constitutional vulnerability and hence wary of obstructing  governments, it can be more troublesome for a government to negotiate the passage of a Bill through the House of Lords than through the House of Commons.
A Private Bill proposal almost invariably emanates from the person or organisation in whose interest it is that it should be promoted.
A proposal for a Private Member's Bill may emanate from the Member himself, or may have been urged upon him by another Member or Members, or by an outside pressure or interest group.
Anomalously, proposals for Private Member's bills are emanating increasingly from governments; a government wishes to see a particular measure enacted but either wishes not to devote government time to it, or wishes to avoid too close an association with its controversial subject-matter, or both.
So far as Government Bills are concerned, it is no exaggeration to say that the substantial task of legislating will have been largely discharged before the Bill is even read a first time in the House in which it is introduced (Bills may normally be introduced in either House, thence proceeding to the other).
The government of the day would not be promoting the Bill, and it would not have been allocated time in its legislative programme, unless the government had considered the matter in considerable detail and decided more or less exactly upon the Bill it desired.
The immediate source of the Bill will almost invariably be a government department.
It will have instructed the Parliamentary Draftsman on the preparation of the Bill; he will have drafted it (though probably not without returning to the department on a number of occasions for clarification of instructions or to point out to the department any legal or constitutional difficulties encountered in implementing the instructions).
Once drafted, it will be put forward by the department to the Cabinet which, nowadays, usually has a Legislation Committee to consider draft bills and settle their priority in the programme.
Whilst the department will be the immediate source of a proposal for a Bill, it will not necessarily be the mediate source.
Most proposals are, in actual fact, generated internally within departments.
A particular proposal may, however, emanate from an individual initiator (a campaign, propaganda, letters to a department, books, conference proposals, etc.).
It may be taken up directly by a department; or by a party prior to going into government; or by a pressure group, whether an ad hoc group, a single interest group or other.
Proposals may be initiated by  pressure groups and filtered thence to a department, or to a party programme prior to its acceding to power.
Some proposals are generated by parties themselves and implemented when the opportunity arises.
Whilst it would be an exaggeration to say that the part played by remains true that it is only in an exceptional case that a Government Bill fails to pass into law in substantially the form in which it entered Parliament.
Exceptionally, if a government underestimates the strength of opposition amongst its own backbenchers, or fails to anticipate the extent of opposition in the other House, it may be necessary to modify a bill or even have an amendment forced upon it.
It is, however, extremely rare for a Bill to be rejected, or for its main proposals to be overturned by amendment, except by lapsing upon the dissolution of a Parliament.
A government suffering such a reverse on the floor of the House of Commons would feel compelled to seek a dissolution.
One baulked by the House of Lords would have to accept that, but would almost certainly determine to exact a price at the next opportunity.
Much of this evil can be and is anticipated and avoided.
Informal consultation of interests affected, at the preparatory and drafting stages, is likely to take much of the impetus out of opposition.
Intelligent management of the government party and careful preparation of the way in House of Lords can guarantee a relatively smooth passage for a Bill which might otherwise have encountered difficulties.
Its functioning as a forum for this sort of transaction is one of the most important roles of Parliament.
(b)United Kingdom delegated legislation In terms of quantity, the most prolific source of legislation in the United Kingdom today is not enactment by Parliament.
Acts of Parliament generally deal with the most important matters.
Nevertheless, the bulk of legislation in the United Kingdom today is not parliamentary but delegated, i.e. made by a agency to which Parliament has, in a prior Act, delegated legislative power.
Powers of delegated legislation inhere in a very wide range of agencies, such as local authorities, public corporations, universities, their vice-chancellors and deans.
Far and away the most important powers, however, are those delegated to Ministers of the Crown.
It is rare, today, for a substantial Act of Parliament to be comprehensive of the matters it deals with.
Much more common is for the Act to set out the main framework of the legislation, dealing itself with the  more important and general matters, but leaving much to be done later by others, particularly the Minister in charge of the sponsoring department.
To some extent, this will be done simply because it is felt that it is more efficient, or at least administratively convenient, to handle matters in this way — the matters delegated may be ephemeral, needing constant change; or technical, requiring expertise.
To some extent, however, Parliament goes off ‘half-cocked’— a Bill is conceived of as being urgent and is introduced before all its complexities have been thoroughly worked through.
It is anticipated that once Parliament has approved the general thrust of legislation, the rest can be left to the department to implement piecemeal as is appropriate and convenient.
For long before 1946, it had been customary for Parliament to preserve an oversight of such central government delegated legislation by requiring that such legislation be laid before it in some form or another.
There were and are a variety of ways in which this might be done.
Today, the two most important of these are laying an instrument subject to affirmative and negative resolution procedure.
The Statutory Instruments Act 1946 sought to regularise these procedures and to ensure that the House had an opportunity of scrutinising such legislation.
Affirmative resolution procedure requires the Houses to act.
It means that the instrument in question requires positively to be approved if it is to become or, more usually, remain in force as law.
Where an instrument is laid subject to affirmative resolution procedure, the Government sponsoring it must find time in the Houses for a vote on it and it must secure an affirmative vote.
This procedure is normally reserved for the more important examples of delegated legislation, particularly those with financial implications (in which case, the affirmation of the House of Commons will be sought).
Where, as is usually the case, an instrument is laid subject to negative resolution, the position is that it will obtain or, more commonly, retain the force of law unless, within the stipulated time, the House rejects it.
Thus, whereas in the case of affirmative resolution procedure, the instrument fails unless a vote is taken and succeeds, in the case of negative resolution procedure, it will thrive unless a vote is taken to reject it, and succeeds.
Accordingly, it will be extremely rare for a government to press the matter to a vote and it will be left to Members opposing the instrument to move its rejection.
Such a motion is exempted business, so that the House in  question cannot be denied the opportunity to pass upon the matter simply by government manipulation of time, but in relation to the vast majority of instruments, opposition is pointless and rarely mounted.
(c)European legislation Unlike United Kingdom delegated legislation, European legislation, the most typical example of which is regulations made by the Council of Ministers or (informally) the Commission of the European Community, enjoys the force of law within the United Kingdom without any parliamentary endorsement other than the general authorisation conferred by the European Communities Act 1972 (see pp.136–7 below).
Once the European law is made, therefore, Parliament's function is confined to reacting to a fait accompli , perhaps by chastising a Minister for acquiescing in its making, perhaps by pressing him to seek change.
Such a ‘stable door’ approach would obviously be limited and unsatisfactory.
Both Houses have, therefore, established committees to examine proposals for legislation by the European authorities with a view to securing a parliamentary input via a Minister before the instrument is settled in its final form.
(d)Standing orders Beyond the requirement that the Houses shall ‘pass’ Bills before they receive the Royal Assent, the common law has little to say about the Houses of Parliament.
It recognises (a recognition reflected in such celebrated instances as the Bill of Rights 1689 and the Case of the Sheriff of Middlesex (1840) 11 A & E 273) that each House is itself the final authority as to the propriety of any particular method of carrying out its functions, and beyond the reach of judicial control in so doing.
Presumably, if the House of Commons chose to determine upon the fate of a Bill by drawing lots or tossing a coin, it would be within its competence so to do.
In fact, both Houses regulate their proceedings on a more rational basis, by Standing Orders.
Standing Orders govern a wide range of activities from the daily programme of each House to the structure, membership and procedure of a host of committees with various functions.
Whilst each House is the sole author of its own Standing Orders, proposals may emanate from any source although initiatives are commonly taken by the Clerk and a common source of proposals is the reports of select committees specially constituted to consider a particular matter.
(e)Measures of the Church of England Prior to 1919, Parliament legislated for the established Church, the Church of England.
Oddly, although the Church of England is the established 
Church in the State, it is not established in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland, although in each of these there is an Anglican or Episcopalian Church which is part of the same Communion as the Church of England.
‘Establishment’ today means very little outside the sphere of the purely formal and ceremonial and the devotion of the time of Parliament to the tedious and time-consuming task of regulating the affairs of the Church of England has long been recognised as anachronistic.
Since the passing of the Church of England Assembly (Powers) Act 1919, Parliament's role in relation to the legislation of the Church has been largely formal.
The substantial legislator is the Church Assembly, a tripartite body consisting of the Houses of Bishops, Clergy and Laity.
It passes ‘Measures’.
It has a Legislative Committee, one of the chief functions of which is to negotiate parliamentary endorsement for such measures.
For this purpose, Parliament has established an Ecclesiastical Committee, consisting of 15 peers selected by the Lord Chancellor and 15 MPs selected by the Speaker.
It is this latter Committee's task to lay before Parliament for its approval, after consultation with the Legislative Committee of the Assembly, such Measures as commend themselves.
Measures which meet with the favourable resolve of both Houses are presented for the Royal Assent and thus become law.
It is rare for such measures to provoke much debate.
It is even rarer for Parliament to resolve against a measure.
In substance, the Church of England is now self-regulating and Parliament's role in connection with its legislation little more than a throwback to the days when the established Church had a more substantial role to play in the affairs of the State.
(2) Control of the Executive
Parliament, particularly the House of Commons, plays a part in controlling the Executive in two ways.
It does so directly in connection with the fundamental constitutional requirement that, if it is to retain office, the Executive must retain the confidence of the House.
It does so indirectly as probably the most important forum of opinion and vehicle of publicity in relation to the Executive's other chief constitutional responsibility — to the electorate.
It is extremely rare for the Executive to lose the confidence of the House of Commons.
That it is so rare is due, in very large part, to  the efficiency of the processes whereby the House, particularly the government party, lets it be known what it will and will not tolerate.
If the House gave no such indication until it actual threw a Bill out, or voted down the government on some other major issue, governments would fall with much greater regularity.
There are, however, a number of formal and, more importantly, informal channels of communication to government about the mood of the House.
Formal channels include debates, not only in relation to Bills but in relation to any other matter which the House chooses to consider, and questions, oral and written.
More recently, departmental committees have come to play a more important role in this regard, seeking by the examination of Ministers and senior members of the Civil Service, amongst others, to elicit information, previously much less accessible, as a basis for more intelligent criticism and control.
If anything, informal channels of communication are even more important.
The House of Commons, particularly, but also the House of Lords, is often thought of as a club and the exchange of views and striking of bargains which goes on outside the chamber can be and frequently is of much greater significance than the public posturing which goes on within it.
It is, indeed, one of the most telling arguments against the broadcasting of the proceedings of Parliament that by shedding the spotlight on only one facet of the functions of Parliament it misrepresents its role in a quite grotesque fashion.
It is, nevertheless, this public face which looms largest in relation to the second way in which Parliament plays a role in controlling the Executive.
It is rare, today, for the House of Commons to bring a government down, but there is no escape from the quinquennial test of a general election, and in an election the constant exposure of the weakness of a government in the course of debates and questions in Parliament can be a powerful influence as, indeed, can the converse — government spokesmen consistently and persistently surviving the attacks of a hostile House.
Its parliamentary performance, narrowly viewed, is perhaps a small element in determining the fate of the government party (and opposition) in an election.
It is, however, largely through its parliamentary performance, and particularly through the Lobby, that the images of government and opposition are mediated to the electorate via the Press and few today would question the influence of the Press in determining the fortunes of government.
Minor functions
Each of the Houses discharges a range of minor functions which do not bear directly upon either of the above two major functions.
A few examples only are offered here.
It remains, under our constitution, the right of every citizen to petition Parliament for the redress of grievances and one function of Parliament, therefore, is to receive such petitions.
As a formal procedure, this is today rare and serves mainly to attract publicity to the cause in question.
Each of the Houses discharges a quasi  judicial function in relation to the regulation of its own affairs.
Each House has a Committee of Privileges to which prima facie of breach of privilege or contempt of
Parliament are referred.
The Committees behave much as a court would do in entertaining a charge and, in due course, make a report to the House in question, recommending a course of action if necessary.
In considering such reports and recommendations, the Houses are free to decide as they wish and it is not unknown for them to divide along party lines where there are party political implications involved.
The Houses of Parliament are also the final arbiters of the tenure of office of judges of the Supreme Court.
Judges of the superior courts hold office until death or retirement (see below, pp.200–1)— their salaries are charged directly upon Consolidated Fund and are therefore not subject to parliamentary vote.
They can only be removed for misbehaviour upon an address by both Houses of Parliament.
Although it has recently become fashionable to subject judges to (usually ill-informed) public criticism, even in Parliament, and although it is no longer unknown for demands for the removal of judges to be voiced in the House of Commons (as when Sir John Donaldson incurred opprobrium as President of the National Industrial Relations Court for applying the law which Parliament itself had passed) Parliament has still, in modern times, to remove a judge in this manner.
The occasion is unlikely to arise; if the resignation of a superior court judge becomes necessary, it is much more likely to come about as a result of ill-health diagnosed in an old-established London club.
Quite apart from such specific minor functions, there are no practical restraints upon either House of Parliament seeking to busy itself with any task whatever that it cares to assume.
Either House may set up a committee of inquiry into any matter it wishes, as the House of Commons chose to do on the occasion of the Aberfan disaster of 1966.
A committee of partisans is not, however, necessarily the best forum for an objective inquiry into a matter which may have political overtones and an alternative and preferable procedure for this purpose was established by the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921.
Public finance
By long-standing convention, fortified by the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 (see pp.98–9 below), financial affairs are the peculiar province of the House of Commons.
The House's functions in relation to public finance are not distinct from the above two major functions.
Public finance is, however, an area in which the two functions — legislation and control of the Executive — meet.
The manner in which and the level at which revenue is to be raised is very much a matter of governmental policy as is the regulation of public expenditure generally.
One of the great issues in the revolutionary struggle of the seventeenth century (and in a sense it had gone on ever since and, indeed, even before Magna Carta in 1215), culminating in the Bill of Rights 1689, was as to the liability of the subject to be taxed by the Crown without his consent as expressed by his representatives in Parliament and it was an issue resolved against the Crown and in favour of the subject.
R remains one of the foundations of the constitution today that the Crown requires annual parliamentary sanction for the raising of revenue, particularly tax revenue.
Although a government which enjoys the confidence of a comfortable majority of Members of the House of Commons is very unlikely to encounter any difficulty in securing such sanction, the necessity for it remains the ultimate weapon in the hands of the House.
The House cannot ‘sack’ a Prime Minister; it cannot dismiss a government — only the Queen can do that, and such a step would be highly controversial and provocative of a serious constitutional crisis.
The House can, however, deny to an unpopular government the wherewithal to govern and render the retention of office and further denial of a dissolution an empty and purposeless gesture.
The importance and complexity of financial matters have caused special procedures to be evolved to deal with them.
These are considered in the next chapter.
Parliamentary Procedure
Legislation
Primary legislation
The same, basic, common law requirement attends all enactments.
Any Bill must (subject, now, to the Parliament Act procedure (below, pp.98–9)) be passed by both Houses and receive the Royal Assent.
The manner in which, however, the Houses approach the task of passing a Bill varies according to the nature of the Bill.
It is necessary, therefore, to treat of Private and Public Bills separately.
(a)Private Bills Anyone may initiate legislation in Parliament by means of a Private Bill.
The Standing Orders of the Houses are such, however, that no mere eccentric has much chance of disturbing the parliamentary calm for even a few seconds.
One prepares one's Bill and then presents it as a petition to Parliament.
It is not, however, brought immediately before either House by laying on the table, but is deposited in the Private Bill Office of the House of Commons.
After 27 November each year, all Private Bills go before the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills (servants appointed by the House).
Usually, parliamentary agents specialising in Private Bills will have been employed.
These agents (or otherwise a promoter) must appear before the Examiners and satisfy them that the Standing Order requirements about giving notice to objectors (i.e. persons wishing to oppose the Bill by reason of its allegedly deleterious effect on their interests) have been observed.
The Examiners then report to the House.
If the report is favourable, the Bill will be read a first time.
This means no more than that a statement to that effect will be included in the order paper.
In due course (usually about the end of January) such Bills will come up for a second reading, i.e. they will appear  again on the order paper for consideration during private business, the first item on the Houses' agenda after prayers, usually 2.35 to 2.40 or 2.45 p.m.
The title of the Bill is read out.
If no one objects, it goes through without more ado.
If any Member wishes to object, he simply stands up and says ‘object’.
If he objects, progress is blocked for a week.
This can go on indefinitely, but if he wishes, the chairman may direct a debate at 7 p.m. on some evening.
If, as a result, the Bill is defeated, it lapses.
If passed, it goes to a Private Bill Committee.
If opposed, the opposition will have made its points by depositing petitions of opposition in the Private Bill Office before January 30.
Opposed Bills go before a committee of four members.
The proceedings are very like those of a court; there will be arguments and evidence for and against the Bill and, eventually, a judgment in the form of a recommendation.
A further parallel with judicial proceedings is that opposition may be dropped and the matter settled on the basis of some concession or undertaking granted by the promoters or their agents.
The Bill thus becomes unopposed and proceeds as if it had been unopposed throughout.
Unopposed Private Bills do not need to be subjected to the  quasi-judicial type of proceeding apt in the case of opposed bills.
They are, instead, handled by a different committee of the House whose main function is to secure the public interest by ensuring that the facts are as alleged and that all the appropriate procedures for promotion of the Bill, such as giving notice for objectors, as required by Standing Orders, have been gone through.
After this committee, the Bill returns to the House to be read a third time, after which it is transmitted to the other House and, if successful there, submitted for the Royal Assent.
(b)Hybrid Bills Where a Public Bill (dealt with below) contains provisions which savour of a Private Bill in that they refer specifically to a particular person or locality, the House may, if it so wishes, before second reading refer the Bill to the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills.
If the Standing Orders for Private Bills are applicable, they must be complied with unless the Standing Orders Committee of the House grants a dispensation.
Compliance with the Standing Orders Committee for Private Bills may mean that objections to the Bill are forthcoming.
If so, the House will appoint a select committee to handle such objections in the same way as the Private Bill Committee would.
This takes place after the normal second reading.
This committee will eventually report and the Bill will then proceed in the normal way, via the committee, report and third-reading stages.
In the case of the Shipbuilding Engineering and Repairing Bill in 1976, it was not appreciated until the Bill was well under way that it was, by reason of naming the firms to be affected in a schedule, a hybrid Bill and its passage had to be deferred in order that the above procedures could be gone through.
(c)Government Bills Before a Bill enters the House, a government will have put its proposals in legislative form, it will have consulted various interest groups affected and it will have taken into account the strength of feeling amongst its supporters in Parliament and in the country at large.
Before the formally dramatic part of the legislative process even begins, almost all the terms of almost all Bills are settled.
Occasionally, a Bill will be abandoned as was the Judges' Remuneration Bill 1953, which proposed tax-free salaries for judges.
Occasionally, but rarely indeed, a Bill will be rejected, as in the case of the University Education (Ireland) Bill 1873, as a result of which Gladstone resigned.
More commonly, though still infrequently, the House of Lords will reject a Government Bill as it did in the case of the Parliament Bill 1947.
Minor amendment is frequent; major amendment not uncommon.
But the vast majority of Bills will pass into law substantially unchanged from the form in which they finally leave the draftsman's office (if they pass into law at all).
Many Bills never even reach the floor of the House simply because, even though they are Government Bills, time cannot be found.
A Bill may be introduced in either House, except for Money Bills.
Important or controversial Bills, as well as Money Bills, will normally be introduced in the House of Commons.
Whether time is found depends upon the Leader of the House who, of course, must answer to the Cabinet.
The first thing a Minister in charge of a department sponsoring a Bill has to do is negotiate time from the Leader of the House for his Bill.
To some extent, this will be predetermined.
The Government will have mapped out its legislative programme for the session in the Queen's Speech at the opening of the session and will give first priority to the commitments there undertaken and to any important urgent Bill (as has happened in recent decades in the cases of Rhodesia and Northern Ireland).
In addition, the Cabinet in approving a proposal may give a higher or lower degree of priority to it.
A Bill may well be approved, if time is available, in which case whether it ever completes its course depends entirely on whether there happens to  be sufficient time.
If a bill does not complete its parliamentary course in a session, it lapses.
It sometimes happens, where the end of a session is imminent, that a government will seek to bargain with the opposition to avoid the demise of Bills, which would otherwise lapse, so as to avoid a total waste of the parliamentary time devoted to them.
The results of such horse-trading are not always satisfactory.
Nor is this necessary.
There is no compelling reason why a Bill should lapse at the end of a parliamentary session.
Rather than go through the entire process again in a later session, it would make more sense to take it up at the point where it was left off in the previous session, if desired.
Since the session normally ends in July, a Bill which is not on its way by May or June may stand little chance of passing into law.
(It has to go through all stages in both Houses and receive the Royal Assent.)
The first thing a Minister has to do, then, is negotiate for time with the Leader of the House.
This means fixing dates for a first reading and all the subsequent stages in the House.
(d)Stages through which Bill passes 
(i)First reading A Bill may today technically be introduced in either of two ways:
Either : On a motion — this is now very rare.
A Member simply gives notice and eventually moves that the Bill be read a first time.
Or : Under Standing Order 35 (written notice).
Under this Standing Order, a Bill is taken to be read a first time if certain formalities are gone through.
A notice must appear on the daily order paper under the heading ‘at the commencement of public business’.
The Speaker calls upon the Minister in charge who merely stands up and nods.
A clerk reads the short title of the Bill and the Minister names the second reading date.
That is it.
In fact, for Government Bills, only the latter is ever used.
Once a Bill is read a first time, it can be printed and is usually available the next day.
It is now public knowledge.
It is before the House and out of the government's hands except via the House.
This means that it can now only be altered by amendment by leave of the House.
Since it is now public, members of the public and Members of Parliament can form their own views and prepare to assault the Bill in its undesirable aspects during subsequent stages.
The next stage is second reading.
(ii)Second reading In his discussions with the Leader of the House relating to the Bill, the Minister will have arranged for certain times (usually a day or two, but perhaps up to eight days) to  have been set aside for the second reading debate.
When the time comes, the Minister stands up and moves ‘that the Bill be now read a second time’.
This heralds a debate on the general policy and nature of the Bill.
The House is really concerned to decide whether it should have a Bill of this type on this matter.
The Minister goes straight into his, the main speech, in favour of the Bill.
He will have been briefed by his department and this speech is the best indication of the policy of the Bill, though, since it is a partisan indication, it is not entirely reliable.
A measure actually intended to achieve the unpopular objective of raising revenue so as to remedy a funding deficit may, for example, be linked to and presented as instituting a new and desirable benefit.
The leading opposition spokesman will follow; the debate will then be at large and, at the end, the Minister or another government spokesman will sum up.
If it is the Minister, he speaks again by leave of the House as no Member can address the House twice on the same motion without leave.
Because it is the convention that second reading is concerned only with general principle of the bill, textual amendments are not allowed to be proposed at this stage.
In opposing a Bill, however, the opposition (occasionally it may be a dissident member of the government party) will move an amendment not to the text of the Bill, but to the motion that the Bill be read a second time (the motion before the House).
The usual one is an amendment to the effect ‘that the Bill be read a second time upon this day six months’ hence' when, historically, the session would have ended and the Bill thus have lapsed.
At the end of debate, the motion is put.
The Speaker will normally rule that the Government has won (‘ayes’ if on the original motion, ‘noes’if on the amendment) but if a division is called for the House will proceed to an actual vote.
The effect of reading a Bill a second time is to curb further debate on the general principle for the time being and cause the Bill to go straight to the next stage, which is the committee stage.
(iii)Committee stage The purpose of the committee stage is to enable the House to consider the Bill in detail and propose specific amendments to particular clauses of the Bill.
There are three types of committee:
(1) Standing committees — these normally have about 30 members drawn from parties represented in the House.
If no other provision is made, ordinary Government Bills (and other Public Bills) will be referred automatically to a standing committee.
(2) Committees of the whole House, which are as the name  suggest.
(3) Select committees — committees constituted ad hoc for a special purpose, an unusual step in the case of Public Bills.
A Bill will go to the latter two types of committee only if it is so moved by a Member immediately after second reading and so decided by the House.
It is not uncommon for Bills of great public importance to go to a committee of the whole House.
The committee considers the amendments and votes on each clause one by one.
Committees are governed by almost the same procedures as the whole House.
The government will usually oppose an amendment; occasionally it will agree to one.
Sometimes, the Minister will take the point of a desired amendment, but not like the proposed amendment itself and thus undertake instead to arrange for amendment himself at a later stage.
The committee stage ends with a motion by the chairman (drawn from a panel of committee chairmen), ‘that I do report the Bill (as amended/without amendment) to the House’.
This is always agreed to and the Bill is then reported back to the House.
The formal work of the House is often seen at its best in committee.
Standing committees, especially, tend to conduct their business away from the glare of publicity and the debate tends to be efficient, rational and frequently unpartisan.
Reports of the proceedings of standing committees are published and are a richer source of information than most debates in the House itself where set-piece propaganda speeches are the order of the day.
(iv)Report stage This is normally a dull stage.
In the case where a Bill has been before a committee of the whole House, it is a purely formal stage.
The chairman vacates the chair and a Speaker or Deputy Speaker takes it and receives a purely nominal report.
Where the Bill has been before a standing committee, so that Members not on the committee have had no previous opportunity to speak on the minutiae of the Bill, there is now an opportunity for them to make their points.
New clauses will be debated and the government will introduce amendments which it has undertaken to introduce.
This being merely a matter of report, there is no motion.
The Bill then proceeds to third reading.
(v)Third reading This is similar to the second reading, except that details have now been settled in committee and on report and the House is concerned again with the question of the whole Bill as now amended.
Since most Bills will already have been settled upon by this time — all the battles will have been lost and won — there is  normally less gist about the debate and it may be purely formal.
Exceptionally, if a Bill is extremely controversial, the opposition may fight it tooth and nail even at this stage.
There being, normally, little substance to the third-reading debate, the practice is now developing of merging the report and third-reading stages and treating them, in effect, as one.
Once the Bill receives its third reading, the House has passed it and, for the time being at least, finished with it.
Provided that the other House now passes the Bill in the same form, it will have finished with it for good.
Not so, however, where either:(I) the other House rejects it; or (2) the other House amends it.
(vi)Rejection by the other House It is rare for one House to reject outright a Bill passed by the other, more common for it to pass the Bill with amendments.
It is extremely rare for the House of Lords to reject outright a Bill passed by the Commons, slightly less rare for the Commons to reject outright a Bill passed by the Lords — odd or controversial Bills are occasionally passed by the House of Lords, sometimes, one suspects, in the confident expectation that they will be rejected by the Commons.
Where the House of Commons rejects a Bill passed by the House of Lords, the Bill fails.
It may, of course, be reintroduced into the House of Lord; and passed again in a later session, but it cannot be enacted until the House of Commons passes it.
Until 1911, the same was true of a Bill passed by the House of Commons and rejected by the House of Lords.
One of the most significant constitutional developments of the nineteenth century, however, had been the emergence of the primacy of the House of Commons and, whereas it was tolerable that the Commons should reject a Lords Bill, it was becoming felt that for the Lords to reject a Commons Bill was inconsistent with the newly established democratic basis of the British political system.
The House of Lords was, until the latter half of the twentieth century, almost entirely an hereditary body.
The Commons, on the other hand, had, since the Reform Act of 1832, become progressively more representative of the people as a whole and was answerable to them at election.
When the House of Lords rejected the Budget proposals of the Liberal government in 1909, the response of that government was to set about the emasculation of the House of Lords.
It has consistently been assumed that Parliament can abolish the House of Lords, though in order to do so, a Bill to this effect would have to be passed.
This would, in 1909, have required a compliant  House of Lords.
That in turn would have necessitated the appointment of enough peers of the Liberal persuasion to acquiesce in abolition.
Peers can be appointed by the monarch on the advice of Ministers.
That had been threatened in 1832 in order to secure the passing of the Reform Bill.
It was threatened again (though Edward VIII made it plain that he would only comply if the Liberal government demonstrated that it had a popular mandate for abolition) in 1909.
The Liberal government never actually got round to reform.
It did, however, push through a temporary measure (in which the impending reform of the Lords is recited) curbing the powers of the House of Lords — the Parliament Act 1911.
When, in a similar situation in 1947, the House of Lords threatened to block the steel nationalisation programme of the Labour administration, to the maximum extent permitted by the 1911 Act, that government responded by curbing its powers still further, by forcing through the Parliament Act 1949.
The main thrust of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 is to restrict the blocking power of the House of Lords of a Public Bill passed by the Commons.
The Lords can still reject a Commons Bill and, if it does so, it fails.
If, however, the Commons passes the Bill in the next session, and the Lords again fail to pass it, it can proceed to the Royal Assent, and thus become law, without the concurrence of the House of Lords.
The main change effected by the 1949 Act was to reduce the resulting delaying power of the Lords from two sessions to one.
Only one type of Public Bill is exempted from this procedure and that is a Bill to extend the life of Parliament beyond five years.
Rather oddly, in the context of a crisis in which the abolition of the House of Lords was under consideration, it seems to have been assumed that this reservation would present a realistic safeguard against a majority party in the House of Commons seeking to keep its government in power indefinitely rather than face the country.
There is, however, no express withholding of the Parliament Act procedure from a Bill to abolish the House of Lords entirely.
Presumably, therefore, a House of Commons bent on pressing a Bill to extend the life of Parliament could do so by first abolishing the House of Lords under the Parliament Act procedure and then passing the Bill and presenting it for the Royal Assent.
Under other constitutional systems, one can detect a vague principle that a parliament cannot do indirectly that which it cannot do directly, but  there is little authority for such a doctrine here.
For Money Bills (dealt with below, pp.104–5), the Parliament Act adopts an even more stringent procedure.
It was out of the 1909 Budget proposals that the crisis originally arose and it was already, at that time, well established that financial affairs were the peculiar province of the House of Commons.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that in relation to a ‘Money Bill’, the Lords should have been rendered even more impotent.
A ‘Money Bill’ for this purpose is any Commons Bill which the Speaker certifies to be such, and the Parliament Acts make it abundantly clear that his certification is final and conclusive and beyond challenge in any other forum.
The powers of the Lords, in relation to any Commons Bill which he so certifies, are restricted to delaying its ultimate passage for only one month.
Paradoxically, the Parliament Act procedure (designed to operate only pending the reform of the Lords) has been the salvation of the House of Lords.
Had the House of Lords retained the power to block the Commons utterly, and particularly had it not been possible for the Labour administration of 1945–51 force through its nationalisation policies by using the Parliament Act procedure to amend the 1911 Act, it is likely that the House of Lords would have been abolished.
Since then, however, the creating of life peers has lent it a meritocratic rather than an aristocratic character and governments need no longer fear the exercise of its blocking power to the same extent.
Whilst there is still some pressure for further reform, it is generally recognised that the Lords do perform a useful function and the abolition lobby no longer enjoys the political significance it once did.
In practice, it has been extremely rare for the Lords to use even such powers as remain to it to reject Commons Bills.
What is much more common is for the Lords to pass such Bills but with amendments.
(vii)Lords amendments The critical examination and, if necessary, revision of Commons Bills is now the chief legislative function of the House of Lords.
In discharging this function, it is by no means in constant opposition to the House of Commons.
Indeed, it is probably true to say that the House of Commons relies upon the House of Lords to do this job, up to a point.
There are enormous pressures on the time of the Administration and Commons and it is not always possible to give to Bills the leisured consideration desirable for good drafting and effective debate.
It is, indeed, quite a  common  occurrence for a government to have second thoughts about a Bill during or after its progress through the Commons and to use its supporters in the House of Lords to make the changes in a Bill then seen to be desirable.
The House of Lords is tending in the direction of becoming a standing revision committee of the Commons.
As such, it has effected significant changes in some of the Bills sent up to it by the Commons.
It was, for example, the House of Lords which insisted upon the institution of conciliation machinery in the Race Relations Act 1965, which experience elsewhere strongly suggested was the key to success but which the Commons had, strangely, omitted.
Obviously, where amendments to a Bill are passed at the behest of or with the connivance of the government, few problems will arise.
An amended Bill cannot, of course, proceed straightaway to Royal Assent for it has not been passed, in its new form, by both Houses.
It will have to be agreed, in its new form, by the Commons before it can proceed further.
If the House of Commons is not inclined to accept the Lords amendments, something has to give if the Bill is not to fail.
In fact, in this situation, negotiations take place and, usually, a compromise will be arrived at and an agreed Bill passed.
If not, of course, it fails; a determined government can ultimately get its way under the Parliament Act procedure, should it so wish.
(viii)Methods of curtailing debate The general notion underlying parliamentary debate is that the other side should be allowed to have its say.
This is not merely a matter of tiresome tolerance according to some airy-fairy principle of political philosophy.
A majority in either House has the ultimate power to dominate proceedings.
It could appropriate 100 per cent of the time to its own business and utterly stifle debate by the opposition.
If it did so, however, it would have to pay a heavy and incalculable price.
Opposition would certainly find other means of expressing itself.
Those means would be extra-parliamentary; they would be unlikely to be confined to constitutional and lawful action and it would not be difficult to mount persuasive moral arguments for such activities.
It is, therefore, enlightened self-interest rather than altruism to allow free debate.
The Standing Orders of the House, particularly those of the House of Commons, do ensure that a substantial amount of time is made available for non-governmental business.
Each sitting day, private Members (including all opposition Members) have opportunities at question time and during the half-hour debate on the adjournment  at the end of business, to make their points.
A certain number of days are set aside throughout the session for non-governmental business.
Private Members' business occupies 20 Fridays, and the topics to be debated during 29 supply days are selected by others than the Government.
In addition, opposition has its say, in the normal way, on any government motion and a government will normally accommodate a censure motion by the opposition allocating a day to its debate.
Standing Orders further allow the Speaker to accede to a request for a debate on any matter of urgent topical importance and although a debate is rarely allowed, Members are not unskilled in framing such requests in a manner which makes the point.
Just as, however, it is necessary for the sustenance of parliamentary democracy for the majority to allow the minority to be heard, so also it is necessary, at the end of the day, for the government to be allowed to govern.
It is just as much an abuse of the process of the House for opposition to seek to talk out or filibuster, as it is for government to stifle opposition.
Modern methods of curtailing debate are largely a response to attempts by Irish Nationalists, seeking home rule in Victorian times, to abuse the rights of the opposition to oppose.
Time is finite and business has to be done; abuse consists of seeking merely to occupy the time of the House to no other end than that business shall not be done.
Standing Orders of the House thus provide that any Member (although it will usually be a Member of the government) may at any time in any debate move ‘that the question now be put’.
If such a motion is passed with at least 100 ‘ayes’, debate ends and the motion under debate is put.
This is sometimes anticipated.
Where a government is very keen to press on with its programme, and where it can foresee that it would otherwise be frustrated by pressure of time, it can move that a timetable be adopted for a particular measure and, if the House so resolves, the Business Committee of the House will arrange a programme for a particular Bill, setting aside a specific number of days for each stage.
At the expiration of the time thus set aside, debate ends.
If there is a motion, it is put.
It not, the House (or Committee) proceeds to the next stage.
Instituted in order to prevent abuse by ‘filibusters’, this ‘guillotine’ procedure has itself been abused by governments so as to curtail genuine and purposeful opposition.
One government, anxious to steam-roller its programme through, scheduled five such Bills in a single motion, for no better reason than that they were likely to be vigorously opposed.
Another common and less controversial method of restricting debate is more frequently resorted to.
It will often happen that a number of amendments, differing in form but not in substance, will be proposed to a single clause of a Bill.
Where this is so, it may be possible to encapsulate the points in a single debate on a single amendment.
Standing orders allow the Speaker (or, in committee, the chairman) to propose the selection of specific amendments and the rejection of others for debate, to this end.
A final method of curtailing debate arises under Standing Order No. 22 which authorises the Speaker or a chairman to stop a Member who seeks to waste the time of the House by tediously repeating himself.
(e)Private Members' Bills By long-standing tradition, Friday is Private Members' day.
Governments acquiesce in the House  allotting the 20 Fridays mentioned above for Private Members' motions (10 days) and Bills (10 days).
In addition, parts of two Mondays and two Wednesdays in the session may be made available.
This is all the time there is for Private Members' Bills unless, as occasionally happens, the government takes them over and allots some of its own time to them.
There is therefore opportunity for only a trickle of legislation from this source and, for reasons stated below, even less than that flows.
Private Members can initiate Bills in two ways: as a result of success in the ballot; or under the ‘10 minute’ rule.
(i)Ballot At the start of each session, all Members wishing to promote legislation (or, more realistically, wishing to avail themselves of the opportunity of securing publicity for a cause) may enter their names on a ballot.
The Speaker and members of the government do not participate.
Even so, over 500 Members remain qualified to do so.
Since the time available is so limited, very few will get the chance even to introduce a Bill, let alone see it passed into law.
If the Member who tops the ballot happens to choose to promote a Bill dealing with a controversial and time-consuming topic, he alone may consume almost all the available time and leave no other Bill with a chance.
As a result of all this, Members know that any effort which goes into the preparation of a draft Bill prior to the ballot is likely to be wasted.
In consequence, many Members who put their names down will have only ill-formed ideas about what they want and it frequently happens that Bills presented are  ill-prepared or misconceived.
Bills are read a first time in the same way as in the case of Government Bills, two weeks after the ballot is taken, and there is consequently little time for any consultation or drafting which has not already taken place.
A private Member cannot command the services of the Parliamentary Draftsman, though it is not unknown for him to render advice and assistance.
The subsequent stages are again the same as in the case of Government Bills except that there is a special standing committee for Private Members' Bills.
Nowadays, with increasing pressure on parliamentary time not even the periods indicated above are in reality wholly available for genuine Private Members' business.
The government of the day will often let it be known to one of its aspiring party members that it would greatly welcome his ballot victory to promote a particular piece of legislation which it, the Government, does not wish to devote its own time to, either because of its controversial nature or simply because it has better things to do.
(ii)The ‘10 minute’ rule This is a development of the method of introducing a Bill by motion now rarely used in the case of Government Bills and it is extremely rare for legislation to result from its use for Private Members' Bill purposes.
Notice has to be given of the motion to introduce the Bill.
When the time arrives, the proposer has 10 minutes to speak in favour of his Bill and an opposer may speak for 10 minutes against it.
The motion is then put.
If carried, which is rare, the member has leave to present his Bill which is then read a first time in the usual way.
Any future progress must take place after the end of the normal day's business, if nobody objects.
Somebody usually will.
In truth, it is rather misleading to think of the ‘10 minute’ rule procedure as being a part of the legislative process at all.
Rather, it is a vehicle which allows a Member to draw attention to a cause which he wishes to promote.
(f)Money Bills The expression ‘Money Bill’ has two meanings.
It is used in a narrow sense in the context of the Parliament Act procedure as requiring certification by the Speaker with the consequence that the delaying power of the House of Lords is restricted to one month.
Otherwise, it means any Bill imposing a charge on public funds and the House of Lords may have a substantial interest in its overall contents.
Where the principle object of a Bill was money, it was formerly the practice for it to be  made the subject of a debate in the Commons upon a resolution before the Bill was read a first time.
This procedure is no longer adopted.
Nowadays, every provision imposing a charge on public funds (and most Bills do) is printed in the Bill in italics and is the subject of a resolution after second reading, in committee.
The resolution appears on the order paper.
It can only be proceeded with with the government's consent, and before going into committee the appropriate Minister has to tell the House that the proposed spending has the government's approval.
Because of the need for government endorsement of any spending proposals, the scope for amendment of a money resolution is very restricted.
It is usually a matter of saying yea or nay.
Since its spending provisions are very often at the heart of a Bill, the debate on a resolution might tend to repeat a second reading debate on the principle of the Bill.
This does not happen too much and in any case there is a 45-minute limit on debate, after which the motion will be put.
The committee is usually of the whole House.
Delegated legislation
The vast bulk of delegated legislation is made with no reference to Parliament beyond the original delegation of power to make it by Parliament.
The by-laws of local authorities or of public corporations, for example, acquire the force of law without further reference to Parliament.
In terms, however, of the generality of their relevance and the importance of their subject-matter, statutory instruments loom largest in importance, and amongst statutory instruments, those made by Ministers of the Crown in pursuance of powers delegated to them by Act of Parliament are the most important of all.
The commonest label attached to such instruments is ‘regulations’ but there is nothing magical in names.
As a matter of practice, but no more, the term ‘order in council’ is reserved for the more solemn of instruments, but no technical significance attaches to the use of this term.
It is likely that if an ‘order in council’ is to be confirmed as law, it will require an affirmative resolution of the Houses to bring about this result (see above, pp.86–7) but such a procedure is not mandatory.
What is mandatory is nothing more or less than what Parliament requires as a precondition of according to such instruments the force of law.
As to what Parliament so prescribes, one must look to the Act delegating the power to legislate in order to  discover what conditions it is necessary to fulfil in order for the instrument in question to acquire validity.
Above all, one must look to the requirements of Parliament as stipulated in the Statutory Instruments Act 1946.
The notion underlying the Statutory Instruments Act, as with all Acts prescribing some form of consideration by Parliament, is obvious.
In order to make sparing use of parliamentary time, the role of Parliament is restricted to being offered the opportunity to say ‘yea’ or ‘nay’to ‘proposals’emanating from a delegate.
In law, and in practice, it is misleading to speak of ‘proposals’ emanating from a delegate.
Exceptionally, the person to whom the power to legislate has been delegated may have authority merely to ‘propose’.
More commonly, he will have been given power to make laws, subject only to the controlling authority of one or both Houses of Parliament to unmake them, or to withhold the endorsement necessary for them to continue to enjoy the force of law.
The Statutory Instruments Act 1946 only applies, not unsurprisingly, to statutory instruments.
For present purposes what matters is that legislation made in pursuance of powers delegated to Ministers of the Crown is a form of ‘statutory instrument’.
It is the main function of the Statutory Instruments Act to ensure that where an instrument is made by a Minister of the Crown in pursuance of powers delegated to him by Parliament, Parliament shall have a reasonable opportunity to scrutinise his efforts with a view to deciding whether or not to endorse them.
As to whether, and if so how, Parliament cares to avail itself of this opportunity, the Act is silent.
That is up to Parliament.
Parliament has chosen to discharge this function by placing primary responsibility upon a scrutiny committee formed especially for the purpose.
Had no such provision been made, and had it merely been left to the initiative of backbenchers to keep an eye on instruments tabled, it is highly probable that many instruments would become or remain law with never a critical eye being cast over them.
It is technically perfectly lawful for a Minister of the Crown to be empowered to make statutory instruments in such a way that they are never subjected to parliamentary scrutiny — indeed, there is no requirement of promulgation or publication for an instrument to become legally binding and an instrument made by the Minister and cached in his bottom drawer could be as binding as the Theft Act (although in this situation ignorance might, rarely in our law, offer a defence by reason of s.3(2) of the Statutory Instruments Act 
1946).
It is, however, contemplated, and is the case, that most instruments must be laid before the House for a period of 40 days, offering adequate opportunity for scrutiny.
The Scrutiny Committee (the Joint Select Committee on Statutory Instruments), latest in a line of successors to a House of Commons select committee first appointed in 1944, is a committee of 14 (7 MPs and 7 peers), any 2 of whom constitute a quorum.
Its job is to look at all instruments laid before the Houses with a view to drawing the attention of the Houses to such instruments as are specified in its terms of reference.
These are:
(a)
those that impose a charge on individuals or public funds;
(b)
those from which judicial review appears to be withheld;
(c)
those with unauthorised retrospective effect;
(d)
those whose publication or laying before Parliament has been unduly delayed;
(e)
those necessarily coming into effect before being laid (e.g., where publicity would nullify their effect) if due notice of the fact and the reasons for it has not been given to the Speaker,;
(f)
those where an unusual, unexpected or improper use of powers appears to have been made;
(g)
those where the  draftsmanship appears to be defective;
(h)
those meriting attention in any other way, otherwise than by reason of policy only.
It is rare for an instrument to prove objectionable to the Houses on any of these grounds and the vast majority of those to which the committee draws attention are innocent of serious blemish.
The ground most commonly used is ground (a), above, and the charge imposed in these cases is almost invariably proper.
The most powerful potential weapon in Parliament's hands remains its control over clauses enabling regulations to be made in the first place.
Governments nowadays rarely seek to secure parliamentary endorsement for Acts containing very wide or uncontrollable powers and this fact, together with the surveillance exercised by the scrutiny committee render this one of the most efficiently discharged of Parliament's functions.
European legislation
Some European legislation, e.g. directives, requires further  legislative or administrative action by the authorities of member states for it to become effective.
Where this is so, Parliament's legislative role is as above described in relation to Acts and United Kingdom delegated legislation.
Other European legislation, however, e.g. regulations of the Council of Ministers, guided by the Commission, is directly effective without further action by Parliament.
In such cases, Parliament obviously has no legislative role once the law has been made.
It is customary, however, for the Commission to publish drafts of legislation before submission to the Council of Ministers, and Parliament does, therefore, have the opportunity to comment on these drafts before they pass into law.
To this end, a Select Committee on European Legislation, charged with examining such drafts, has been established.
The Committee draws attention to any draft which it considers to raise a matter of political or legal importance.
Controlling the Executive
Much of the entire activity of Parliament is directed towards controlling or, possibly more accurately, embarrassing the Executive.
This process takes place just as much in the context of legislating as in connection with other procedures which appear to lend themselves more obviously to this end.
Questions
Questions may be written or oral, i.e. asked at ‘question time’.
 Ostensibly , both oral and written questions seek information.
This remains very largely the case so far as written questions are concerned.
Of late, however, oral questions (popularised by the broadcasting of proceedings and, some would say, radically affected in character by that), have tended to take the form of a mini-debate, with statements and arguments merely palely disguised by some such prefix as ‘Is the Minister aware that…’.
‘Questions’, whether oral or written must relate to a matter for which a Minister is responsible and the clerks, administering the rules and practice of the Houses to that effect, will refuse to accept questions which go beyond these bounds.
This power of control has not, however, inhibited the developments in the character of oral questions above described.
It is not, it seems, a rule of the House that a question actually be a question and not mere polemic disguised as a question.
Written questions receive written answers published in the Reports of Parliamentary Debates.
They offer a more useful source of information.
There is no effectively enforceable constitutional obligation on a Minister to answer a question.
Oral questions, particularly, tend to be greeted by evasion.
Where a question, written or oral, imposes an undue demand upon the resources of a department, an answer is sometimes refused.
Debate on the adjournment
Except in unusual circumstance, each day's business ends with a half-hour debate on the motion that ‘the House do now adjourn’.
Matters may be raised at large.
It is common for a Member who has asked a question on an important matter but who is dissatisfied with the answer that he has received to give notice that he wishes to raise the matter again on the adjournment and to do so.
The debate on the adjournment is free from the inhibiting limitations which attach to the asking of a question.
A Member has no need to disguise his statement and will be allowed greater latitude in making it.
Debates on other matters
A great deal of the normal daily business of Parliament is devoted to debates on official business other than legislation.
Government time will be used to submit to the House for debate, official reports, White Papers setting out government proposals and government statements on matters of topical public importance.
There is hardly an occasion on which the government proposes when the opposition does not have an opportunity to oppose.
Censure motions
The opposition may put down a motion of censure on the Government at any time.
If it does so, a day will be set aside for debate.
It is, however, a power which must be used sparingly for the government can decline to debate such a motion where the power is being used to abuse the process of the House.
Committees
For over 120 years, the House of Commons has had a Public Accounts Committee which has established a reputation as an impartial watchdog over government spending.
In 1979, this precedent was greatly extended with the institution of 14 new select  committees each charged with the oversight of the work of a about 10 members selected by a selection committee so as to reflect, as far as possible, the strength of the various parties in the House of Commons.
These new committees displaced two well-established committees, those on Expenditure and the Nationalised Industries, but stand alongside others such as the Scrutiny Committee (see pp.106–7).
These new committees have greatly strengthened the House so far as controlling the Executive is concerned.
They have established a practice of relatively non-partisan inquiry into  departmental affairs, chiefly by examination of Ministers, leading Civil Servants and others.
Government is literally called upon to answer for its conduct of the nation's affairs.
Informal controls
For all these improvements in the formal mechanisms whereby the House seeks to keep government in check, any full account of procedures relating to this function would be incomplete without reference, again, to the importance of the Houses as forums of informal debates, discussions and plain horse-trading.
It is probably true to say that it is in this way, rather than in any other, that governments learn exactly where the limits of tolerance lie.
Financial procedures
By convention dating from the revolutionary struggle of the seventeenth century, control over national financial affairs is the prerogative of the House of Commons.
It is, by and large a convention honoured in observance although the notorious breach of it, in 1909, provoked one of the most serious constitutional crises in modern times.
This convention finds statutory confirmation in the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 which deprive the House of Lords of any legal power over financial or ‘Money’ Bills beyond that of delaying their passage for one month and no longer.
The regulation of financial affairs involves in part legislative action, in part executive action.
The role of the House is therefore partly in the enactment of legislation and partly the control of the Executive in its discharge of these extremely important functions.
There are two aspects to financial matters, the raising of revenue and the authorisation of spending (or the granting of supply).
These two aspects are obviously interrelated.
In so far as a government wants to have money to spend, it must be raised.
The traditional approach is the obvious one — as much must be raised as it is intended to spend, no more and no less.
Such ‘balanced’ budgeting is, however, insufficiently sophisticated for modern notions of regulating the economy by managing demand or, more recently still, maintaining close control over the public sector borrowing requirement and otherwise controlling spending.
It remains an important part of the equation to anticipate the government's spending needs for a period ahead, customarily a year.
The financial year runs from April 1, and by that time, departments must have arrived at an estimate of their needs.
Some items of expenditure are fixed by statute and there is no room for debate about how much is to be spent.
Otherwise, departmental estimates have to be discussed with and agreed by the Treasury, with any surviving disagreements falling to be resolved by the Cabinet.
This entire process must be completed and estimates published by Budget day (i.e. usually in late March) at the latest.
It is for Parliament to warrant the expenditure estimated to be needed, i.e. to grant supply.
Traditionally, supply debates were the occasion for a grand attack by opposition parties upon government policy in general and not merely upon the arithmetic of the estimates.
Standing orders now set aside three days in any session for debate on the estimates specifically (with another six on the Scottish estimates in the Scottish Grand Committee).
A further 19 days are set aside for debate on matters selected by the opposition.
All items approved (and the Government usually gets its way on everything) must eventually find their way into an Appropriation Act, by which Parliament authorises expenditure and which its watchdog, the Comptroller and Auditor General, uses as his guide in determining whether or not a particular item of expenditure is warranted.
It will not necessarily be fatal if the estimates fail to anticipate precisely the needs for the year ahead.
It is now a common practice for the Government to introduce supplementary estimates to make provision for unforeseen events and, on occasion, to correct errors.
The Appropriation Act is normally passed about the beginning of August.
Between the start of the financial year, on 1 April, and the passing of the Appropriation Act, interim spending on account is  authorised by one or more Consolidated Fund Acts.
Until recently, a special House of Commons committee, first the Estimates Committee, then the Expenditure Committee, policed expenditure.
This function is now discharged by departmental select committees.
So far as the raising of revenue is concerned, the entire process is confidential to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and his advisers until Budget day, which is normally in the latter part of March.
The Chancellor's Budget speech comprises a review of the past year's finances, a statement of needs for the forthcoming year and, finally, proposals as to how the necessary funds should be raised by taxation or otherwise.
Legally and formally, the authority for the raising of most revenue is annual only and the authority needs to be renewed each year.
A government needs to retain the confidence of the House from year to year in order to be sure of this authorisation.
After the Budget speech, the House goes into committee.
The Budget proposals will be endorsed by resolution and the renewed authorisation for the raising of revenue will be contained in the eventual Finance Act.
Pending its enactment, revenue will still need to be raised, and interim power to raise it is provided by the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968.
The first Provisional Collection of Taxes Act was passed in 1913.
Prior to that, it had been assumed on all sides that the passing of Budget resolutions conferred sufficient interim authority, but in 1913, in Bowles v Bank of England [1913]1 Ch 57, the courts decided that this was not the case and the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1913 resulted.
The Act confers upon Budget resolutions the force of law for the period of four months after they are passed.
Other procedures Each of the Houses has charge of its own privileges and has a Committee of Privileges to consider alleged breaches of privilege and make recommendations.
This is considered in the next chapter.
Parliamentary Privilege
Being a Member of Parliament during the constitutional struggle of the seventeenth century could be a hazardous occupation.
More than one lost his head as a consequence of making what were alleged to be seditious or treacherous statements in the House of Commons.
This phenomenon was not new; in Haxey's Case (1387) and Strode's Case (1512) the privilege to say what one liked in Parliament with impunity had been denied but then conceded by the Crown.
It was denied again in Sir John Eliot's Case (1629) 3 St Tr 294, a decision which, however, the Houses never accepted and which, after objections in 1641 and 1667, they eventually rejected in 1668 when the House of Lords reversed the decision of 1629 and held that there could be no proceedings in respect of words said in Parliament.
(Eliot and others had also assaulted the Speaker; on the propriety of a prosecution in this respect, the House reserved its opinion.)
These centuries of controversy culminated in Art.
9 of the Bill of Rights in 1689:
…freedom of speech, and debates on proceedings in Parliament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament.
Today, when the victim of an allegedly defamatory statement challenges its maker to report it outside the House, he is acknowledging that it is privileged and therefore unactionable in the courts and daring the Member to abandon the protection of parliamentary privilege.
Whilst the Bill of Rights thus resolved the basic position for the future, it nevertheless left several questions unanswered and we must now turn to these:
(a)
What determines the scope and character of parliamentary privilege (an essential preliminary to (b) below?
Who may determine whether a pretended privilege exists?
(b)
Within these limits, of what does parliamentary privilege consist?
Is it restricted in its scope to words spoken?
What is a ‘contempt’ of Parliament or the House?
(c)
What procedures attend an allegation of breach of privilege?
What part, if any, do the courts play?
What consequences attend a breach of privilege/contempt?
The scope and determination of Parliamentary privilege
This first set of questions is interrelated and confused by the fact that both the courts and Parliament have, at times, claimed exclusive jurisdiction to determine whether a particular privilege exists, and the criteria which they have applied in making this determination have differed.
Broadly speaking, the courts have taken the view that the bounds of parliamentary privilege are fixed by the common law which they have the right to declare.
Parliament or, more specifically, the House of Commons, has been jealous to maintain exclusive control over its own affairs, as determined by the House itself, and has thus been reluctant to concede to the courts the jurisdiction claimed by them above.
The problem bids fair to rank as one of the unsolved mysteries of the British constitution of longest standing.
It surfaced at the start of the eighteenth century in Paty's Case (1704) 2 Ld Raym 1105, where the fact that the officers of the House failed to make a sufficient particular return to the writ of Habeas Corpus was taken by Holt CJ (dissenting, but prestigious) to justify intervention by the courts.
The most celebrated battle in the ongoing war, however, concerned Hansard.
Hansard, the House of Commons' printers, had published, by order of the House, a prison inspector's report which contained statements defamatory of Stockdale who, not surprisingly, sued.
This provoked the passing of a resolution by the House to the effect that the report was privileged.
In the ensuing litigation (Stockdale v Hansard (1839) 9 A & E 1) the court took the view:
(a)
that it was not bound by the resolution of the House to the effect that the matter was privileged, for it affected the rights of subjects outside the House;
(b)
whilst, if a privilege existed, it was up to the House to decide whether there had been a breach, the existence of the privilege in the first place was for the common law to decide and it was for the courts, and not the House, to declare the common law.
Stockdale thus succeeded, but the matter did not end there.
The damages being unpaid, he sought to levy execution upon Hansard and to put the sheriff's men in to distrain goods to the value of the judgment.
The House retaliated by ordering the Serjeant at Arms to arrest the sheriff for contempt of the House and this was done.
The sheriff then sought Habeas Corpus against the Serjeant at Arms to show cause for the detention.
The House, learning from past mistakes, ordered the Serjeant to make a general return to the writ, i.e. state simply that the detention was in respect of a contempt of the House and a breach of its privileges, without specifying details.
This the court now held to be a valid return, although a general one, and, since it did not disclose on its face any irregularity or wrongful cause, it precluded the intervention of the courts.
Provided, therefore, that the House is careful to avoid mention of any determination of whether or not a particular privilege exists, and to confine itself to statements which are consistent with it's merely having decided that a breach has occurred, it can make its will prevail (Case of the Sheriff of Middlesex (1840) 11 A & E 273).
The matter has not fallen for consideration since, and the Hansard litigation remains the source for the existing modus vivendi as between the courts and Parliament.
It is, however, by no means beyond the bounds of possibility that the issue could arise again.
A House of Commons, faced with a crisis, could easily seek to make a more extended use of its power than has been the case during the era of self-restraint.
It might, for example, seek to imprison for contempt either a working-class ‘hero’ organising lawful opposition outside the House to legislative proposals under consideration in it; or an employer determined to extract his pound of flesh under legislation considered to be oppressive and proposed to be repealed as soon as possible.
One cannot be certain, in such circumstances, that a court of law would meekly accept a general return to a writ in the face of clear knowledge that the House was, in effect, seeking to usurp the role of Parliament itself.
The character of parliamentary privilege
On the second set of questions i.e. those as to the character of  parliamentary privilege, we can again be clear about a central core of doctrine but doubtful about some marginal cases.
In terms of both history and function, the chief feature of parliamentary privilege is freedom of speech.
Parliament is the place where the representatives of the people debate matters of state great and small and the interest in ensuring that they are free to speak without fear or favour is regarded as outweighing all others.
So, words which, if spoken outside the House, would be libellous, seditious or, presumably, treacherous, blasphemous or obscene, may nevertheless be uttered, without fear of action or prosecution, in the course of parliamentary proceedings.
This is not to say that they may be uttered with absolute impunity for the House itself, in regulating its own procedures, may treat as objectionable whatever it chooses.
It presently regards certain expressions as ‘unparliamentary’ and a Member who persists in the use of such expressions stands ultimately to be punished by the House for doing so.
This category, however, overlaps with that of defamation, etc., only by accident.
The essence of an ‘unparliamentary expression, is that it is offensive, or hostile to, the honour or dignity of fellow Members.
That it assaults the reputation of one outside the House is an incidental and irrelevant consideration.
Whether privilege may be claimed in respect of actions rather than words is very doubtful.
As is stated above, the House of Lords, in reviewing Sir John Eliot's Case in 1668, was unwilling to decide whether privilege excused an assault on the Speaker; and in Bradlaugh v Gossett (1884) 12 QB D 271, Stephen, J was able to say:
I know of no authority for the proposition that an ordinary crime committed in the House of Commons would be withdrawn from the ordinary course of criminal justice.
Parliament, he said, had been careful to avoid even the appearance of countenancing such a doctrine.
It has also, it may be added, never repudiated such a notion.
Incidents giving rise to the question are, in their nature, rare.
Nevertheless, they do occur and occasional assaults and other criminal acts are committed.
Physical demonstrations and protests, designed to secure much more widespread media coverage for a cause than is ever available for a cogent argument, are an increasingly frequent means of political communication and the House of Commons has not been exempt.
If a Member on one side of the House sought to simulate anger by  crossing the floor, punching an opponent on the nose and destroying his paper, would it be a breach of privilege for a court of law to proceed against him?
Despite what had been said above,R v Graham-Campbell, ex p.
Herbert (p.41 above) suggests that it would, for in that case, the court cited parliamentary privilege as one justification for not ordering a prosecution of members of the Kitchen Committee of the House of Commons for selling intoxicating liquor without a licence.
A second matter of doubt surrounds the meanings of ‘Parliament’ and ‘proceedings’therein to which and which only the privilege attaches.
Members of Parliament, after all, engage in a wide range of activities, from private affairs having nothing to do with Parliament, to participating in debates inside the Chamber.
If the Graham-Campbell case (above) is a reliable indication, then privilege is not restricted to proceedings in this latter, strictest, sense.
There is statutory warrant for extending privilege so as to embrace reports, papers, etc., published by order of a House (Parliamentary Papers Act 1840).
Even without statutory warrant, it would make sense for privilege to attach to whatever a Member does as an incident of discharging his functions as a Member in relation to the proceedings of the House itself (as opposed to in his external role as a political figure, or in relation to constituents, members of the public and non-parliamentary bodies).
It seems to be established, and rightly so, that the criterion is not geographical — privilege does not attach to letters sent by constituents to a member, even though they are posted to him in the post office in the Lobby of the House of Commons (Rivlin v Bilainkin [1953]1 QB 485).
Whether, however, privilege does extend to everything that a Member does as a Member is doubtful.
One would expect that if, in pursuing a matter of concern to him as a Member of Parliament, a Member wrote a defamatory letter to the Minister in charge of the department concerned, privilege would attach.
When, in this situation, the person defamed sought to issue a writ, and the Member concerned asked the House of Commons to treat the matter as a breach of privilege, the Committee of Privileges recommended that it do so but the House, by a small majority, rejected this recommendation.
The Member in question was a member of the opposition and the voting substantially followed party lines.
One is therefore somewhat at a loss whether to regard the Committee or the House as voicing the correct view and the matter remains  somewhat uncertain.
(See HC Debs v 591, c. 208; HC Paper No. 305 of 1956–7;Re The Parliamentary Privilege Act 1770 [1958]AC 331.)
Notwithstanding the doubts surrounding the scope of the privilege which attaches to ‘parliamentary proceedings’, certain other privileges are well established, although somewhat antiquated, and unlikely to figure significantly in the future.
Members still enjoy freedom from arrest for a period extending from 40 days before the commencement of a session to 40 days after it.
This privilege probably also covers summary offences but there is no recent instance of its exercise.
Its abolition was recommended as long ago as 1967 but nothing has been done — one suspects a feeling that it might come in useful one day.
Of much greater practical significance, and by no means obsolete, is the power to punish for contempt.
The scope of ‘contempt’ is uncertain.
It seems to consist of an affront to the dignity of the House or a Member of it.
It is not unknown for the editor of a newspaper to be brought to the Bar of the House for uttering a scandalous allegation against the House or a Member of it and the fact that the allegation is true will not necessarily help him.
It would equally be an offence to seek to bribe a Member in order to persuade him to support or oppose a particular measure, although the boundaries here are hard to define.
Many Members are ‘sponsored’ or retained as ‘parliamentary consultants’by various interest groups; the practice is well established and apparently unobjectionable in itself.
A threat to withdraw sponsorship if the Member in question fails to comply with the sponsor's wishes may well, however, be a breach of privilege.
It could also well be the case that to allege that sponsorship and consultancy are permitted because they offer a lucrative source of additional income would be a contempt.
In recent years, it has become common for local political party caucuses to threaten to withdraw endorsement as candidates from Members who voice views unacceptable to them and there seems to be no reason in principle why this should not be treated by the House as a contempt the essence of which, in this respect, is to deny to a Member the freedom to exercise his power as a Member in the manner dictated by his own personal judgment.
Breach of Privilege Procedures
It is for Members themselves to raise matters of privilege.
Although, if it wishes, the House may proceed in a different way, the normal  procedure is for a Member wishing to raise a matter of privilege to ask the Speaker for a preliminary ruling.
Most allegations of breach of privilege or contempt end there, but if it appears to the Speaker that there has been a prima facie breach of privilege, the matter will be referred to the Committee of Privileges, the function of which is to receive evidence, determine whether, in its view, a breach or contempt has occurred and, if so, report to this effect to the House with any recommendations thought fit.
The House will in due course consider the report.
It will not necessarily do so in a judicial manner; a matter with party political implications may well result in voting following party lines.
This is by no means invariably the case, however.
If it finds that a breach or contempt has occurred, the House must decide what punishment, if any, to impose.
Its powers presently embrace imprisonment, reprimand and admonition.
An offender from outside the House may be summoned to the Bar of the House to receive punishment.
It may be that the guilty party is a Member in which case expulsion (as in the Garry Allighan case above, p.80) may be the punishment.
Much the most common punishments are reprimand and admonition.
It is now proposed that the rarely exercised power of the House to imprison be abolished and for a power for the Commons to impose a fine (as can the House of Lords) to be substituted.
In all but a few minor respects, the privileges of the two Houses are the same.
The House of Lords is less central to the nation's affairs, less likely to be controversial in its activities and more courteous in the conduct of its proceedings.
Matters of privilege are raised more rarely there than in the Commons.
The Supremacy of Parliament
Parliament is clearly a very important institution.
More than this; few dissent from the proposition that it is legislatively supreme, that is to say, that it is competent to make or unmake any law whatever, and that no other body can impede its will so to do.
It is not an inherent characteristic of a legislature that it is ‘sovereign’, as the above quality is commonly described.
Indeed, ‘sovereignty’ in this sense, is rare, as a quality of one of the institutions of a constitution as opposed to the constitution itself.
Why it should be so in the case of the United Kingdom constitution is, again, a matter of history — and perhaps it again behoves us to bear in mind that the constitution is a process, rather than a settled state of things.
It is extremely doubtful if Tudor monarchs would have conceded sovereignty to Parliament, at all events in any real and substantial sense.
It was, however, as we have seen, one of the great issues of the seventeenth century whether the Crown or Parliament was to hold the dominant sway under the English constitution, and it was in this context that Parliaments of England declared themselves to be ‘sovereign’.
Parliament duly emerged, at the end of the seventeenth century, ‘sovereign’ in this sense, but it is doubtful if, in doing so, the claim was being formulated in its full, modern sense.
Coke had, after all, in Dr Bonham's Case in 1610 (8 Co Rep 114) ventured the view that the common law would control and adjudge void an Act of Parliament which offended against common right or reason.
The Union legislation, furthermore, remained to be enacted.
It nevertheless remains the view today that the Parliament of the United Kingdom can make and unmake any law whatever and cannot be controlled in seeking to do so.
The notion that there is nothing more to the idea of parliamentary sovereignty than that Parliament is more powerful than the Crown has a strange ring to today's ears.
This modern view has come about not as a result of any  further substantial constitutional developments — perhaps strangely, or perhaps significantly, the issue has never been seriously tested — rather, it has come to enjoy widespread, although not universal acquiescence largely because Dicey (following Stephen and an equivocating Blackstone) posited it as a central feature of the English constitution and because it has a deceptively simple logical appeal.
Before we turn to the examination of the extent to which it is true to say of Parliament that it is supreme, it would be as well to make clear what we mean by the statement in the first place.
It is sometimes said of Parliament that, say, it can make it a crime for a Frenchman to smoke on the streets of Paris, or that it cannotturn a man into a woman.
It is, however, equally true that Parliament cannot stop Frenchmen smoking on the streets of Paris (or, for that matter, Englishmen smoking on the streets of London) and that it can make it a crime for a man not to turn into a woman.
Parliament changes nothing in the physical world by passing laws.
If, as its Members will, it seeks to bring about such change, it must rely upon other agencies if it is to shift the location of so much as a single molecule.
A government department will have to issue a directive; or the police mount a prosecution.
Some laws which one might imagine on wilder flights of fancy might well be refused this cooperation.
They might be, predictably, so unpopular that Parliament would not pass them in the first place.
It is, therefore, worth pointing out, before we come to the consideration of legal sovereignty specifically, that even if Parliament could pass certain laws, it is improbable, in greater or lesser degree, that it would do so.
There are, at any given time, laws which Parliament will render it profoundly unpopular throughout the electorate or even, more particularly, its own party.
Powerful pressure group may dissuade it.
Governments will be reluctant to pass laws which offend against international arrangements such as those contained in UNO, GATT, the IMF.
Time itself is finite — a government will not devote it to passing less desirable and more controversial laws when it has better things to do with its time.
Even if the government backs legislation (and even more so when it does not and the Houses find themselves confronted by a Private Member's Bill) no Bill will ever be passed which offends against the deeply held beliefs of Members, unless amended to accommodate them.
This is so particularly in the case of the House of Lords where  the whipping system is less effective and where the cross-bench element is more important.
It is even possible to imagine a Bill so offensive in its content that the Royal Assent would be refused, though hardly that such a Bill would be passed by both Houses.
Equally, there are, at any given time, laws which, if passed, could not be rendered effective, e.g. because they affected matters outside the jurisdiction of United Kingdom administrative or enforcement agencies.
Parliament may make it a crime for a Frenchman to smoke on the streets of Paris but he may puff away on the Montparnasse with impunity (until, that is, he arrives at Dover).
One can similarly predict that there are some laws which, if passed, the citizenry would not observe or even the police enforce.
The practical limits on what can be achieved by laws have been illustrated repeatedly in recent years in the United Kingdom in connection with trade union legislation.
It is not inconceivable that a government would wish to render all strikes criminal.
Would Parliament cooperate?
Could such laws be enforced?
None of all this touches the legal supremacy of Parliament.
It argues merely that whilst Parliament could pass such laws, it would be unlikely or unpurposeful for it to do so.
It illustrates that the main bulwark thrown up by the United Kingdom constitution against oppressive laws is not that Parliament is rendered unable to pass them, but that democratic procedures, principled administration and measure of common sense are accommodated within it.
Is it, nevertheless, true that there are no limits upon the power of Parliament to pass laws, and no controls upon it when it does so?
It would not, after ill, be an extraordinary proposition if there were some such limits or controls.
The constitution of the USA limits the legislative competence of the States and Congress.
Cases abound under Commonwealth common law systems of courts striking down as ultra vires a constitution, Acts of a legislature.
Even within the United Kingdom, an Act of Parliament (the Northern Ireland Parliament, set up under the Government of Ireland Act 1920 which withheld certain powers from it) has been held to be limited in respect of the range of authority which it conferred (Belfast Corporation v O.D. Cars Ltd [1960]AC 490).
These and many other such instances, however, are mainly cases where, although the constitution forbade the enactment of the law in question by that legislature or process, it provided for it to be enacted in some other way, e.g. by constitutional amendment.
Many constitutional  lawyers have thought that the respect in which the problem differs under the constitution of the United Kingdom is that if a power of legislation be denied to Parliament in a particular respect, then an intolerable hiatus would exist in the legislative power — there would be some laws that nobody could enact.
This might well be the case but does not by itself establish a logical necessity for legislative omnicompetence for Parliament.
It becomes necessary to interpose some further principle — that it must somewhere, under a constitution, be possible to legislate on everything, at least in theory.
Not only is there no evidence, apart from its assertion as above, that there is such a principle; there are in fact constitutions which flout it with, apparently, no immediate ill effects.
It is true that an inability to legislate upon certain matters might render a constitution prone to crisis but on others it would be far from necessarily fatal and at least one judge, in a common law country, has recently acceded to the proposition that he might be prepared to disavow the power of the otherwise unlimited New Zealand Parliament to enact law providing, for example, for human torture.
If, then, it is the case that the Parliament of the United Kingdom is legislatively omnicompetent, it is not so by reason of logical necessity but by reason of authority and we must next examine sources of such authority.
Sources of authority
The proposition that there are no laws which Parliament may not make is one which has been uttered frequently.
Most modern text-writers state it with some slight, hesitant reservation (and this is thought to be the correct view).
They subscribe to it not for reasons of caprice, but because eminent judicial authority has reiterated the notion over the years.
The commonest (although still rare) type of statement is that if it appears that a Bill has passed both Houses and received the Royal Assent, no court of justice can inquire into the mode in which it was introduced into Parliament, nor into what was done previous to its introduction, nor what passed in Parliament during its progress in its various stages through Parliament (see, e.g.,Lee v Bude & Torrington Junction Railway Co (1871) LR 6 CP 577;Edinburgh & Dalkeith Railway Co v Wauchope (1842) 8 C1 & F 710).
This type of ‘authority’ merits two comments:
(a)
We need to remind ourselves of the nature of judicial  authority in the context of fundamental questions of constitutional law, as discussed above (pp.33–41).
Constitutions are infected with dynamism; they will develop, willy-nilly, and if the necessity for development becomes obvious to courts, as to other law-creating agencies of the constitution, and the steps which they take in consequence come to enjoy widespread acquiescence, it is pointlessly academic in the worst sense to argue that such steps are, in some technical sense, wrong.
In the final analysis, one cannot prescribe for the whole of constitutional development — to some extent, one can do no more than describe and speculate.
Should the judges take it into their heads to question this ‘authority’(as occasionally they have) then much of it is not too difficult to discount, as being obiter dicta , or as relating only to a rather narrow, specific point,(e.g. the effect of a fraud on the Private Bills Committee of the House of Commons) and leaving untouched the broader general question.
(b)
It suggests that the courts are entitled to be satisfied that certain minimal procedural requirements have been fulfilled but that, thereafter, and provided that they are fulfilled, no objection can be taken to the validity of the Act on grounds of its substantial content.
Each of these matters requires more detailed consideration.
Procedural requirements
In British Railways Board v Pickin [1974]AC 765, the plaintiff had sought to challenge the validity of a provision of a private Act of Parliament on the ground that its promoter had fraudulently withheld certain information from the relevant House of Commons committee, thus securing its passage.
It is an illustration of the relative fragility of our current notions of parliamentary sovereignty that the Court of Appeal felt able to accede, to a limited extent, to this notion.
The House of Lords, however, took a different view.
Any investigation, such as a court would be obliged, in this type of case, to undertake, into the propriety of the internal procedures gone through in the course of passing a Bill would conflict with the modus vivendi in which Parliament and the courts had tacitly acquiesced since the celebrated Hansard litigation of the 1840s.
The courts ought, therefore, simply to decline jurisdiction in such matters.
This approach more than adequately disposes of the particular point at issue in the Pickin case but does not, as is hardly surprising, answer a number of questions which were not asked:
(a) Was the provision in question valid?
The House of Lords did not decide either that it was, or that it was not.
They simply, and it seems correctly, decided that it was none of their business.
Whose business, then, is it?
Either House of Parliament is perfectly capable of resolving that any of its previous decisions is to be regarded as a nullity.
If the House of Commons had done so in relation to the allegedly offending provision under review in Pickin's case, would the provision nevertheless have remained valid?
(b) If, as the House of Lords assumes, the matter is one of parliamentary privilege, what approach should be adopted if, as could well happen, the privilege bar was raised?
Questions of privilege are themselves justiciable and have, on occasion, been referred by the Crown at the instance of the House in question to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council; what approach would be proper in such a circumstance?
There is, after all, no such thing as a privilege of Parliament in the strict sense.
Each House has its privileges (though many are identical) and whilst the modus vivendi above referred to may inveigh against interference by the ordinary courts into the affairs of the House of Commons, it is not at all clear that it precludes comment by the Judicial Committee of the House of Lords on the affairs of the House of Lords.
The historical basis for this stance, Art.
9 of the Bill of Rights 1688, prohibits simply the impeachment or questioning of parliamentary proceedings in ‘any court or place out of Parliament’.
(c) To what does the House of Lords' self-denying ordinance apply?
It clearly applies to instruments which purport, in some way, to be Acts of Parliament.
It cannot,ex hypothesi , apply only to proper genuine Acts of Parliament since that would beg the very question under review.
Equally, the consequences of applying it to any old scrap of paper which any party cared to describe as an ‘Act of Parliament’ solely for purpose of denying jurisdiction would be absurd.
No action could ever be maintained, no criminal convicted.
Dicta referred to above suggest that a court is entitled, indeed, obliged to be satisfied that there has been enactment by the monarch with the advice and consent of Lords and Commons (except in the case of the Parliament Act procedure dealt with above, pp.98–9).
There would seem to be no problem about proving enactment — the Royal Assent is today granted by Commissioners and there would seem to be no privilege bar to their giving evidence as to the grant.
There is apparently no technical difficulty here since the practice appears to be to deposit the Bill as assented to in the  House of Lords library, with a copy going to the Public Records Office.
This can be taken further.
It is not, so far as the author is aware, a breach of privilege of the House to assure oneself that a Clerk of the Parliaments, stating that a Bill has been consented to by Lords and Commons, actually is a Clerk of the Parliaments duly authorised so to state.
It seems to be one thing (and a wrong thing by the Bill of Rights), to impeach or question proceedings in Parliament; it seems to be quite another to ask a House to confirm whatever it is necessary to confirm in order to ascertain what the House has resolved.
To do otherwise might, indeed, be to court a breach of privilege.
Thus far it can be argued that, if and in so far as the objection to the validity of a pretended Act of Parliament is purely procedural, there is no objection to any court (and not merely the House of Lords) making such minimal inquiries as are consistent with Parliamentary privilege in order to ensure that the instrument in question was consented to by the two Houses and did receive the Royal Assent.
The process has to stop at any duly authorised statement, e.g. by the Clerk of the Parliaments, or perhaps the Speaker of the House of Commons, etc., as to what was the will of the House.
Further evidence, calculated to show that in so expressing its will, the House was duped, mistaken or careless, would run the risk of falling foul of privilege and would therefore have to be eschewed.
Substantive limitations
Although the issue did not arise in Pickin's case nor in other authorities cited above, it was there assumed that the only possible barriers to validity were the procedural ones there considered.
Elsewhere, however, as has been stated, it is not uncommon for a court to declare invalid a purported act of a legislature on the ground that the legislature in question had no power to pass such an act at all.
Very occasionally, such a challenge is mounted in the United Kingdom with results far from the conclusiveness one would expect on a matter of such a fundamental constitutional character.
A good example is afforded by a rather convoluted claim arising out of the proposal to sever and disestablish the Irish Church in Bills of 1869 and 1871.
In this connection, one opposing clergyman sought the intervention of the courts via an order of mandamus addressed to the Lord Chamberlain that he should present to Her Majesty a  petition to the effect that the granting of the Royal Assent to the latter Bill would be contrary to the Act of Settlement 1700 and to Her Majesty's coronation oath, both of which, he argued, forbade Her from thus imperilling the maintenance of Protestantism.
Mandamus , in any case discretionary, he was told, would not issue to no purpose; and it was to no purpose to suggest that there were any such grounds on which the enactment of parliamentary legislation could be resisted (Ex p.
Canon Selwyn (1872) 36 JP 54).
It is not easy to understand why Canon Selwyn did not suggest, in his petition, another ground on which objection to the granting of the Royal Assent might have been based.
The Irish Union legislation (see pp.19–21 above) had provided that the churches should be united and established for ever and the new Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland established apparently on that basis.
Were a similar case to arise today, it is almost certain that a strenuous argument would be mounted on the basis of Commonwealth precedents concerning the limited powers of central legislatures established by a ‘superior’ Act of the imperial Parliament which withheld certain matters from their purview.
That is, indeed, the line which has been taken in cases concerning the Scottish Union legislation (e.g. McCormick v Lord Advocate ,[1953]SC 396;Gibson v Lord Advocate ,(1975) SLT 134) which, however, have failed thus far because none of the acts complained of as allegedly infringing the terms of union (e.g. the conferment upon Her Majesty by the Royal Titles Act 1953 of the title of ‘Queen Elizabeth the Second’, when there had never been an Elizabeth the First of Scotland) has in fact infringed those terms.
The striking thing about cases such as these is not that they failed — that is only to be expected — but rather that they contain suggestions that a proper claim might meet with success, although difficulty might attend mounting it.
It is, for example, provided in the Scottish Acts of Union that the Scottish Church and the Court of Session in Scotland shall be maintained.
R is not beyond the realms of contemplation the Parliament should seek, infused by a reforming zeal, to rationalise the court structure of the United Kingdom, incidentally abolishing the Court of Session.
Suppose that such a ‘Bill’ received the ‘Royal Assent’having passed both Houses, and that a disgruntled Scottish Unionist now seeks from the Court of Session a declarator that it is still in business.
Or suppose, before the Bill is presented for the Royal Assent, that he seeks a declarator that it would be contrary to the terms of Union for the monarch to  assent to it, so that it presently, undoubtedly, still exists.
There would certainly be some, including many of considerable eminence, who would not find it easy to assent unquestioningly to the proposition that it was constitutional for Parliament to ignore the terms of union at will.
Even more is this the case with regard to the severance of the union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Irish Acts of Union establish the union between Great Britain and Ireland ‘for ever’.
Can the Parliament established by this very legislation sever that union?
If we are to persist in the assertion of absolute sovereignty for whatever body happens to sit from time to time at Westminster, the answer must be affirmative.
But, as one eminent Scottish judge pointed out in MacCormick v Lord Advocate (above), why should it be assumed that successive reconstituted Parliaments at Westminster have inherited the attribute of ‘sovereignty’ peculiar (and, as is above suggested, perhaps with a limited meaning even then) to the English Parliament.
Acts of the old Scottish Parliament were apparently (although this has been questioned) subject to the doctrine of desuetude and that Parliament was thus not sovereign at least to the extent that its Acts could lose force otherwise than by repeal by it.
Grattan's Parliament in Ireland, furthermore, can never have been sovereign or, if it was, then the Parliament of Great Britain itself ceased to be sovereign when it established it.
Logically, one cannot have that both ways.
It is, however, one thing to argue that in their inception, the Parliaments of Great Britain and of the United Kingdom were not necessarily sovereign.
It is another to argue that they have remained non-sovereign, and bound by the terms of union, to this day.
We must again remember to search for the constitution amongst the realities, and not confine ourselves to pretty normative structures.
If, since union, sovereignty has been successfully asserted in practice by the United Kingdom Parliament, and if that assertion has come to be accepted as the basis of the existing constitutional edifice, that is what must, at all events pending the next shift, govern.
Over the years since union, there have been innumerable instances of Parliament enacting measures which conflict with the terms of union.
Terms of trade have long since been abandoned; provisions relating to Scottish professors have long been ignored and, as we have seen, the united established Irish Church has been severed and disestablished in Ireland.
Perhaps most significantly of  all, the Irish Free State, now the Republic of Ireland, has come into being as an independent sovereign state distinct from the rest of the United Kingdom.
It is amusing but totally unhelpful of understanding to regard all these events as legally ineffective for want of constitutional vires .
It does not, however, follow from the fact that some departures from the terms of union have occurred that Parliament is free to ignore all the terms of union unilaterally and by ordinary process.
Most of the above changes were relatively uncontroversial or at least were free from international controversy.
Although, for example, the severance and disestablishment of the Irish Church was opposed by some clerics (and the terms of union invoked in support in parliamentary debates) it was favoured in both Ireland and Great Britain.
It would fully accord with the general principles of contract and treaty law if a mechanism existed for the parties to union to vary the terms of union from time to time by agreement.
If it were possible to reconvene the superseded parliaments which originally agreed the terms of union, no doubt such variation could be effected.
Failing this, however, the only mechanism for effecting variation by agreement would have to involve some other type of representation of national identity.
One obvious possibility here is to regard the union Parliament as representative of all parties and thus as empowered to vary the terms of union — nothing more than a rationalisation of its sovereignty.
Nevertheless, this was not the simple procedure by which the most significant departure from union was effected.
In the general election of 1918, Sinn Fein, the Irish independence party, swept the board in Ireland, except for a handful of Unionist seats in the North.
Sinn Fein did not take up their seats but instead formed a ‘Provisional Government’ of the Irish Free State.
A period of disorder and insurrection followed and finally, in December 1921, representatives of the Provisional Government of Michael Collins met with representatives of the British Government and concluded a ‘treaty’ agreeing upon the establishment of the Irish Free State with provision for Northern Ireland to opt out as, predictably, it would and did.
Only then did Parliament proceed to the enactment of the legislation which, in the eyes of British (although not Irish) constitutional law, established the Irish Free State (the Irish Free State (Agreement) Act, incorporating the December agreement into United Kingdom law, the Irish Free State (Constitution) Act and the  Irish Free State (Consequential Provisions) Act, all 1922), and preserved the union in relation to Northern Ireland.
There remains strong sentiment in Northern Ireland for the retention of union, as in Scotland for the preservation of the Scottish Church and Court of Session.
Should it be desired to alter this state of affairs, there would be many who would assert that the change could not be made without the consent of the part of the United Kingdom affected, however it were to be expressed.
In relation to Northern Ireland, successive British Governments and Parliaments have repeatedly affirmed the union, stipulating the consent first of the Parliament of Northern Ireland (Ireland Act 1949, s.1(2), now repealed), now of the people of Northern Ireland expressed in a referendum (Northern Ireland Act 1973, s.1).
Such provisions do not render the severance of the union politically impossible; indeed, as a matter of politics, as opposed to law, it cannot be maintained against the will of either party that it be dissolved.
It is, however, not necessary to argue that the severance of the union is illegal or unconstitutional in any technical sense.
The fact of union, coupled with its repeated reaffirmation, has resulted in a position where only a blind man could assume that the power of the Westminster Parliament to sever it was so well established in general acquiescence that none would deny the propriety of its exercise.
External restraints on sovereignty
It is the prevailing view of the sovereignty of Parliament, above discussed, that if Parliament wished to cast off a part of the British Dominions and abjure jurisdiction over it, it could do so.
It therefore seems odd to find it argued, as one frequently does, that past attempts to do exactly this in relation to various parts of the British Dominions have been, ‘technically’, ineffective.
By the start of the First World War, many of the older members of what is now the British Commonwealth of Nations were well on the way to de facto independence of the United Kingdom.
Canada had been granted her federal constitution in 1867 (British North America Act 1867), Australia hers in 1901 (Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900), and South Africa hers in 1909 (Union of South Africa Act 1909).
By a different route, New Zealand and Newfoundland were similarly placed and, as we have seen, in 1922 the Irish Free State became added to this list.
A series of ‘Imperial Conferences’ in the 1920s drew attention to the problem of  reconciling this emerging statehood with the continuing legal authority of the imperial power, the United Kingdom, and its imperial Parliament.
One hundred and fifty years previously, a similar problem had been ‘resolved’ by the Declaration of Independence of the 13 colonies and the creation of the United States of America, finally recognised by the United Kingdom in 1783.
This time, things proceeded in a more civilised manner and the arrangements concluded at the imperial conferences were enshrined in the Statute of Westminster 1931, s.4 of which provided, amongst many other things, that for the future, no Act of the imperial Parliament should extend to any of the six Dominions listed above unless it expressly stated that the Dominions in question had requested and consented to the
Eminent authorities both in the United Kingdom and in the Commonwealth have expressed different views as to the impact of this provision upon traditional notions of the sovereignty of the imperial Parliament.
Adhering to the traditional view whilst at the same time acknowledging its limitations, Lord Sankey LC said, in British Coal Corporation v The King [1935]AC 500:
…it is doubtless true that the power of the imperial Parliament to pass on its own initiative any legislation that it thought fit extending to Canada remains unimpaired.
Indeed, the imperial Parliament could, as a matter of abstract law, repeal or disregard section 4 of the Statute.
But that is theory and has no relation to realities.
Dixon J (one of the most powerful judges to have graced the Australian bench), however, regarded s.4 bluntly as ‘a restriction upon British parliamentary supremacy of the law’,(‘The Law and the Constitution’,(1935) 51 LQR 611), and there is much to be said for preferring his view.
It is, first of all, the only view according to the internal constitutional laws of the Dominions affected, and there is something to be said for avoiding conflicts of constitutional laws.
More important, however, it accords with the universally acknowledged realities (as, indeed, Lord Sankey indicates) and here it is important to bear in mind the significance of the ‘realities’ for the purpose of constitutional laws.
It is maintained here that the constitution is nothing more nor less than the outgrowth of the ‘realities’ and not, as Lord Sankey and many others of us tend to  assume, something distinct from them and which can therefore be contrasted to them.
The ‘realities’ in the instant case consist of the universal acknowledgment by all affected (United Kingdom and Dominions alike) of the growth to adulthood and independence of the formerly subject Dominions.
Any version of the resulting constitution which assumes the contrary is no more entitled to respect than the argument that the United Kingdom has lacked constitutional government since King James II threw the Great Seal into the Thames.
This is not to say that there is no place for the principle of legality in constitutional matters.
Lord Sankey's attitude indicates that a court of law in the United Kingdom would need weighty evidence before becoming willing to abandon the principle of legality according to the pre-existing constitutional norms, and so it should, so long as uncertainty as to the ‘realities’ prevails.
That was the substance of the approach of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the celebrated Rhodesian case of Madzimbamuto v Lardner-Bruke [1969]I AC 645, and it was the correct approach even before vindication by subsequent events.
It is, however, suggested that where a new basis for constitutionality has come to enjoy universal acknowledgment or sufficiently widespread acquiescence, the judge's obligation to uphold the law points in the direction of endorsing charge rather than blindly ignoring it.
Whether developments in Europe since the Second World War have wrought the sort of constitutional change brought about by the emergence of the Dominions after the First World War, raises exactly this question and we turn to it in the next chapter.
The United Kingdom Constitution and European Institutions
Since the end of the Second World War, the development of two quite distinct European organisations has had a significant impact upon the constitutional law of the United Kingdom.
The first of these organisations is the European Community, the second is the Council of Europe under whose aegis the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has been established and flourished.
They have little in common beyond having a membership consisting of some of the states of Europe (different in each case) and will be considered separately.
The European Community
The European Community originated in three distinct organisations, the European Coal and Steel Community, the European Atomic Energy Community and the European Economic Community each governed under its own statute.
Although British statesmen had played a prominent part in bringing these organisations into being, the United Kingdom did not become a founder member and later approaches to join were either ineffective or rebuffed.
When the United Kingdom did eventually join, therefore, she joined a well-established existing organisation, the original six members of which had developed an understanding and evolved an attitude towards the Community which the United Kingdom has not come easily to share.
The Community consists of four chief institutions.
It has its own Parliament, members of which have, since 1979, been directly elected by member states (by proportional representation in all cases other than that of Great Britain); the European Court of Justice; the Council of Ministers (consisting of a representative of the government of each member state); and the Commission (the  members of which are full-time administrators)
The Parliament is by no means the European counterpart of Westminster.
It has no substantial legislative powers and is as much a debating chamber as anything.
Its powers, however, do include a measure of budgetary control and the Commission is responsible to it and can, in the final analysis, be dismissed by it, so that in political terms it enjoys a potential influence of considerable substance which, however, it has not yet fully developed.
The preponderance of power within the European Community presently resides with the Council of Ministers and the Commission.
Together, these two bodies constitute the bulk of legislative and executive authority within the Community.
Whilst the Commission is responsible to the Parliament, the Council is not.
It is, in effect, answerable to no-one although its members must, of course, answer to their own national governments.
Since the most important acts of the Community require the concurrence of the Council, and since the prevailing understanding is that in relation to any matter which any member state considers to affect its own vital national interests, unanimity must prevail, the Community appears as at most a confederation with restricted, albeit important, powers.
In terms of practical day-to-day administration, which is substantial and significant, the Commission is effectively in charge, but its activities are, in the end, prescribed by the Council.
The Community makes laws which are intended to be binding upon and within member states.
‘Regulations’ are directly applicable within each member state without more ado; ‘directives’require member states to attain specified ends but leave the means of attainment to the individual member state.
‘Decisions, are binding but specific to the named parties concerned whilst ‘recommendations’, as the name suggests, do not create binding obligations.
The Council formally makes the more important regulations and directives; otherwise legislation is in substance a function of the Commission.
There is, here, an obvious possibility of conflict between laws passed by the Community as applicable within the territory of a member state and the laws of that member state itself.
By the time the United Kingdom's application for membership was accepted, it was already the settled doctrine of European law, as enunciated by the European Court, that in the event of conflict between Community law and the domestic law of a member state, the former was to prevail (see, e.g.,Costa v ENEL [1964]Eur CR 585;Internationale Handelsgesellschaft etc. [1972]CMLR 255.
In other words, it was the settled view of European law, at that stage in its development, that upon accession, a member state abandoned sovereign control over its affairs to the extent that they fell within the purview of the Treaty of Rome, as interpreted by the European Court of Justice.
It was upon that stage that the United Kingdom entered; and the view of European law in this regard has in no wise been modified to accommodate traditional United Kingdom notions of sovereignty.
These notions are not inconsistent with attaching significance to the provisions of international treaties to which the United Kingdom is a party and seeking to give them effect where possible.
There is thus a rule of construction that if a provision in an Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom is ambiguous, it should be given that interpretation which is consistent with international obligations rather than one which conflicts (Inland Revenue Commissioners v Collco Dealings Ltd [1962]AC 11; similarly, there is some authority for seeking to protect fundamental constitutional statutes from unintentional repeals (see, e.g., per Lord Wilberforce in The Earl of Antrim's Petition [1967]1 AC 691) If, however, such devices do not evade the problem, then traditional notions of the sovereignty of the United Kingdom Parliament require that any provision in any later statute which is inconsistent with any earlier provision repeals the latter to the extent of any inconsistency, whether declared or intended to have this effect or not (Vauxhall Estates Ltd v Liverpool Corporation [1932]1 KB 733;Ellen Street Estates Ltd v Minister of Health [1934]1 KB 590).
The problem thus faced by those seeking to provide for the United Kingdom's accession to the European Community was to reconcile such accession with the idea of sovereignty.
It was a problem which was aggravated by the need to meet the political argument that accession would involve an abandonment of sovereignty.
A number of possibilities were canvassed.
That settled upon by the Government, and as set out in the 1967 White Paper,Legislative and Constitutional Implications of United Kingdom Membership (Cmnd 33021), was to meet the problem by the adoption by Parliament of a self-denying ordinance.
Accession should take such a form that although the United Kingdom did not forfeit the sovereignty of its Parliament, and could thus theoretically always assert it, it should, for the future, refrain from doing so.
Accession to the Treaty of Rome was thus, in 1971, effected by the conclusion by the government, in the exercise of prerogative powers  and without reference to Parliament, of a Treaty of Accession to the Treaty of Rome followed later (as was necessary in order to give this accession effect within the United Kingdom) by the enactment by Parliament of the  European Communities Act 1972.
The 1972 Act first of all gives legal effect to all existing and future Community law and renders it enforceable in the United Kingdom by United Kingdom agencies, including courts,(s.2(1)).
The same section further provides that ‘…any enactment passed or to be passed…shall be construed and have effect subject to the foregoing…’ and since the doctrine of supremacy of Community law is arguably a part of Community law this provision appears to have the effect, so long as it remains law, of establishing the primacy of Community law,(s.2 (4)).
A further section provides for the reference for decision according to Community law and, if necessary, to the European Court of any question,inter alia , as to the validity, meaning or effect of any Community instrument (s.3(1)).
This legislation is now bolstered by an increasing number of dicta uttered in the course of judicial decisions to the effect that Community law now enjoys primacy within the United Kingdom (see, e.g.,Macarthys Ltd v Smith [1981]1 All ER 111).
No Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom has, in the intervening 13 years, come into conflict with Community law; meanwhile the European Court continues confidently to assert the primacy of Community law.
The position nevertheless remains that the possibility exists of parliamentary legislation inconsistent with the 1972 Act being preferred by an English court under the doctrine of implied repeal and, even if this possibility were removed, there would always remain the possibility of an express repeal, for notwithstanding this impressive accumulation of law and practice there is no shortage of political figures who insist that the sovereignty of the Parliament of the United Kingdom stands unimpaired, and plenty who are pledged to use that power to extract the United Kingdom from the coils of Europe in which they see it as enmeshed.
Were this to happen, there can be little doubt what the position of the European authorities would be.
They would not regard a mere Act of the United Kingdom Parliament, in contravention of European law, as capable of releasing the United Kingdom from its treaty obligations.
That, however, is not a posture which, as yet, commands unalloyed respect within the United Kingdom.
The time may well arrive — indeed, that process is now under way— when  the notion of the supremacy of the institutions of the Community and the primacy of Community law have become so firmly established that they are widely acknowledged to be a feature of the United Kingdom's constitutional landscape.
Then, and only then, will it be safe to assert that Parliament is no longer sovereign; and until then United Kingdom courts will be right to follow the well-marked paths, even if this does result in conflict between the constitutional laws of the United Kingdom and Europe.
the Council of Europe and the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
The Council of Europe, an international organisation of European states, of much the same character as the United Nations Organisation, is in no way a part of the constitution of the United Kingdom.
There is instituted under it, however, a regime which, if not a part of the constitution of the United Kingdom, at least discharges there a function which, in most other democratic states, is a constitutional function.
Most modern, written, constitutions seek not merely to set up and define the main organs of the state and to distribute public power amongst them, but also to state a range of constitutional guarantees for the subject, frequently limiting the power of organs of the state to this extent.
Thus, the first 18 amendments to the Constitution of the United States of America, passed immediately upon its adoption, constitute the ‘Bill of Rights’ and contain, for example, guarantees of freedom of speech and due process of law which neither Congress nor even the president can override.
Any attempt to do so would be, to that extent, void and, if necessary, would be declared to be void by the Supreme Court.
There is no parallel to this under the constitution of the United Kingdom.
The position of the subject here is quite simply that he is free to do anything that is not prohibited by law but that, by reason of the doctrine of the sovereignty of Parliament, anything can be prohibited or required.
Parliament can discriminate on grounds of sex or religion; or provide for the taking of life with impunity; or detain without trial; or prohibit marriage.
Indeed, it has actually done all these things and more — yet there is no internal, legal mechanism to resist such measures.
There is, of course, the Bill of Rights 1689 but it is just as much subject to repeal, and has in fact been impliedly repealed more than once, as any other Act of  Parliament, and in any case has the effect rather of strengthening the hand of Parliament, than of protecting the ordinary citizen against its excesses.
This is not to say that it is nonsensical, in the context of the constitution of the United Kingdom, to speak of ‘civil rights’ or ‘civil liberties’.
Statements such as‘this is a free country’ are assertions of a strong commitment to liberal principles of political philosophy which politicians will hesitate to flout.
Nevertheless, there are no legal guarantees of ‘liberty’ or ‘freedom’.
There is no legally guaranteed freedom of speech, no legal right to a fair trial which Parliament could not remove at a stroke.
There is no legal right to protect or demonstrate — merely a right for the present to say what one likes provided that it is lawful whether by way of‘protest’ or otherwise; or a right to pass to and fro along the highway in a reasonable manner and for a proper purpose, whether carrying a banner or not.
In a very real and substantial sense, this deficiency in the United Kingdom constitution is remedied by the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Convention was concluded, under the auspices of the Council, in 1950.
Merely as a treaty setting out a range of human rights which the states parties undertake, in international law, to observe, there is nothing new about the Convention.
Several precedents, particularly those established in the forum of the United Nations Organisation, had pointed the way.
The imperfection of international law obligations, however, even where (as only seldom happens) the International Court of Justice at the Hague has compulsory jurisdiction, has severely limited the effectiveness of such schemes.
The regime established under the European Convention is able to be and in fact is of a totally different order of effectiveness — this for two reasons:
(1)
There is a much greater homogeneity and community of interest and value systems about the Western European states which are parties to the convention than is the case with the world community generally; it is possible to prescribe with much greater precision and consistency the standards sought to be attained and, once attained, their observance is rendered much more likely, even without special enforcement procedures, by the social and economic interdependence and intercourse with prevails in Western  European society as compared with the larger world community.
(2)
There are, in any case, special enforcement procedures attending the European Convention.
The existence and nature of these special enforcement procedures is such that it is now possible to speak of European human rights law as being a part of the law of the United Kingdom.
In international law the individual normally lacks the right to initiate any proceedings on his own behalf for the vindication of any ‘rights’ apparently vested in him.
He must hope (he can do no more) that his home state will espouse his claim and pursue it on his behalf.
Most important of all, he can have no rights at all against his home state — such matters are ‘domestic’ and normally entirely outside the purview of international law, a singularly important limitation in the area of human rights where the master criminal is the victim's own government.
The European Convention differs in that it establishes effective enforcement machinery of which the aggrieved individual can avail himself, even where the alleged offender is his own home state.
Article 19 of the Convention sets up a ‘European Commission of Human Rights’ and a ‘European Court of Human Rights’.
The commission is a preliminary vetting and investigatory body which, in addition to entertaining references from states parties themselves (Art.24), ‘may receive petitions…from any person, non-governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming to be the victim of a violation by one of the High Contracting Parties…’
(Art.25).
On receiving a petition it is the function of the Commission to ascertain the facts and seek to bring about a friendly settlement of the matter on the basis of respect for the human rights set out in the Convention (Art.28).
If a friendly settlement is not reached, the Commission must form its own opinion on the matter and report it to the Committee of Ministers making such proposals as it thinks fit (Art.31).
The Commission may further, if it wishes, take the matter before the Court for determination (Art.48).
If a breach of the Convention has occurred, either the Committee of Ministers or the Court, as the case may be, may prescribe the remedial measures to be taken by the offending state (Arts.32 and 50).
States parties may accede separately tot he convention and to the jurisdiction of the Commission and the Court, and they may do so not permanently but for a specific term on the expiry of which the accession will end.
The United Kingdom was an original party to  the Convention but did not accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Commission and Court until 1965 and then only for a three-year term which, however, has so far been regularly renewed although not without some hesitancy prompted by the embarrassment and ignominy of being condemned by the Court on a number of occasions.
It is essential, therefore, when one states that European human rights law is a part of the law of the United Kingdom, to note the sense in which that is the case.
It is not so in the same way in which the Bill of Rights is a part of the law of the United States of America — no Act of Parliament becomes void because it transgresses the provisions of the European Convention; no United Kingdom court will or even can issue an injunction to re; train a government official from acting in contravention of its terms.
Citizens of the United Kingdom do, however, have an individual right of access to the European enforcement agencies whether Her Majesty's government likes it or not, so long that is, and only so long as that government continues to accede to the Convention and the jurisdiction of the machinery which it establishes.
The scope of the Convention
The primary aim of the Convention is not to set up machinery for the chastisement of states which infringe human rights.
As has been indicated, such machinery is established, but it is intended to be used only as a last resort.
The primary thrust of the Convention is to ensure that human rights are respected in the domestic laws of states parties or, to the extent that they are not and that breaches occur, that such breaches should be remedied by the state in question.
Article 1 of the Convention states the first of these aims.
Article 13 provides that:
Everyone whose rights…are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.
Article 26 posits the exhaustion of domestic remedies as a precondition of putting the European machinery into motion.
It was the United Kingdom's view that United Kingdom law was already fully in conformity prior to accession to the Convention and the Convention was accordingly signed and later compulsory  jurisdiction accepted by an act of the prerogative without reference to Parliament.
This assumption, however, has proved to be unwarranted in a number of respects.
Over the past two decades, the Commission and Court have been asked by aggrieved individuals to rule upon matters such as the rights of prisoners to communicate with the outside world and police interrogation methods.
Whether the inhibition of news publishing by threat of contempt proceedings constitutes a denial of freedom of speech and whether the use a corporal punishment in schools can constitute a breach of Art.3 (prohibiting torture, etc.) are amongst a host of other matters, such as the legality of the ‘closed shop’, which have fallen for consideration.
In one sense, the standards exacted by the Convention are not exceptionally demanding.
That governments must govern is recognised throughout the Convention and its protocols (which have extended the scope of the Convention into areas such as education and property rights).
Article 15, in particular allows a state party to the Convention to take measures derogating from some of its obligations under the Convention ‘In time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation’ to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, whilst many of the individual articles establishing particular rights allow to a state a measure of liberty of action in order to secure the public interest.
Article 9, for example, after declaring the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, goes on to state that:
Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedom of others.
One's religious beliefs, therefore, may be manifested but not, it would seem, by human sacrifice.
Whilst it would be easy to exaggerate the importance of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, its significance is more likely to be underestimated rather than overestimated.
As awareness of its potential grows, increasing numbers of individuals and organisations are learning how to operate the levers, aided by the Convention's own legal aid scheme.
The success of the Convention cannot be accurately  measured by the number of applications made to it (the vast majority of which, for technical reasons, fail).
An accurate account would have to have regard to all those instances where a remedy has been accorded by a state party simply to forestall a successful application and to those cases, also, where breach had been avoided in the first place by reason of adjustment of procedures so as to ensure compliance with the Convention.
There remains room for development.
In the case of many other states parties, the Convention has become incorporated into the domestic law, thus discharging a primary rather than a secondary function (i.e. coming into operation only in the event of a failure of domestic remedies).
The incorporation of the Convention into the domestic law of the United Kingdom has been a matter of debate for some years now and is probably not far off.
If and when that event occurs, the United Kingdom will at last have a distinct and workable law of civil liberties as opposed to its present vulnerability to the whims of Parliament and government from time to time.
The Crown
The Crown
The Crown in Constitutional Terms
In common parlance ‘the Crown’ probably signifies the monarch if, indeed, it does not refer to a rather elaborate piece of headgear on show in the Tower of London.
For the purpose of constitutional law, it has a more technical meaning signifying more or less what in popular language is referred to as ‘the government’, which term embraces, rather vaguely, the Prime Minister, Cabinet, central government departments and all that goes with it.
‘The Crown’, in the popular sense of the monarch, remains the formal head of the government.
All that has changed over the centuries is that the monarch used to be the substantial head of the government and it is, indeed, still the case that, legally, much central government executive authority continues to reside in the monarch.
Substantially, however, by convention, the actual power is today exercised, in all but a few relatively minor exceptional cases, by Ministers of the Crown, by the Prime Ministers of the Crown particularly, and especially by a select group of senior Ministers of the Crown meeting in Cabinet.
Not only are the institutions of Cabinet and Prime Minister virtually unknown to the law; they are relatively recent historical phenomena even as creatures of convention.
Our present structure of central government is far and away the most important feature of the constitution not to emerge from the revolutionary settlement of 1688–1701.
There was a similar body in existence, the Privy Council, consisting of the chief officials of state together with other influential persons, which, indeed, still exists today as the formal body which technically discharges much of the official business of the Crown, such as assenting to prerogative legislation, explained below.
Even before the revolution, however, and particularly under Tudor rule, the Privy Council had been largely ignored as too large  and public a body, and the practice had grown up of the monarch preferring, instead, to seek advice from a smaller number of individuals whom he regarded as trustworthy and committed to his cause.
Such a practice eventually attracted the suspicion and hostility of Parliament; it opened up the possibility of the monarch exercising a substantial ‘pay-roll’ influence over Parliament itself.
More important, it was subversive of the control and influence over events which Parliament sought to exercise that the monarch exercising a substantial ‘pay-roll’ influence over Parliament itself.
confidential advisers.
It was, therefore, for a short time a part of the constitutional scheme that emerged from the revolution of the seventeenth century that ‘Cabinets’ were prohibited.
The Act of Settlement 1700, as originally enacted, actually provided that matters therefore discussed in the Privy Council must be dealt with there and not elsewhere and all resolutions of the Privy Council must be signed by all members present.
In addition, Parliament embarked upon a series of attempts to eradicate the practice of the monarch having ‘placemen’ in Parliament by disqualifying for membership of Parliament all who held an office of profit under the Crown.
The attempt, in the Act of Settlement, to treat the embryonic Cabinet as an illegal organisation was never implemented and the relevant provision was, in fact, repealed in 1707.
It remained, however, a secret society and the object of parliamentary distrust at least until it was established on its modern footing over a century later.
The disqualification of persons holding particular offices of profit under the Crown from membership of Parliament remains, as stated in Chapter 5 above,(see pp.79–80).
It is, however, a measure of the extent to which ideas have changed that the most important and influential officers of all, Ministers of the Crown, are permitted, indeed almost required, to have seats in Parliament.
It remains the case that for much of our constitutional history the Cabinet and its forerunners were never greatly liked by Parliament which was at times bitterly hostile to it and tried to stamp it out.
It also remains the case  that the Cabinet, as an institution, does not rest on parliamentary authority but rather on practice developed over the centuries.
It is true that the existence of the Cabinet is now acknowledged in parliamentary legislation — the Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967, for example, creates a privilege for Cabinet papers in connection with proceedings before the ‘ombudsman’— but this no more puts the Cabinet on a statutory, legal, basis than  does the dogs Act create dogs.
Important consequences attend the fact that the composition, powers and procedures of the Cabinet are not fixed by law.
A Cabinet is not a logically necessary part of a system of government at all.
Theoretically, there is no reason why policy initiatives and executive action should not be the responsibility of individual departments.
It may be highly convenient, given the all-pervasive nature of government for activities to be coordinated but even this does not require collective action and there are, indeed, many schemes of government in operation today which lack a feature such as a Cabinet.
To the extent, for example, that it exists in local government in the United Kingdom (and to that extent, it is better described in terms of ‘caucus’ rather than ‘cabinet’) it is a very recent historical phenomenon indeed.
To understand why, if it is not logically necessary, our modern Cabinet developed, we must again turn to history.
The historical fact is that the settlement of 1688–1701 failed to settle everything; it failed to provide for all contingencies.
Whilst it rendered the monarch formally subordinate to Parliament in the sense that it became acknowledged that, at the end of the day, the will of Parliament was to prevail, it failed to provide adequately and efficiently for the discharge of executive government.
Rather, it created a vacuum which became particularly obvious with the frequent and prolonged absences abroad of William III, George I and George II.
Notwithstanding their absences, the day-today business of government had to be carried on and it was left to Ministers of the Crown to do this, noting their resolutions and decisions for later transmission to the monarch.
The first Prime Ministers were messenger boys, but with potentially great influence.
The one who made most of this influence was Walpole, Prime Minister for 21 years and an effective wheeler-dealer who tended to go beyond mere cogency of argument in persuading the House of Commons to be compliant to his will.
Monarchs, nevertheless, remained formally at the centre — the Cabinet was still the King's Cabinet and the Prime Minister first and foremost only if the monarch declined to attend.
Only with the development of factions and the growth of the party system did it come about that monarchs found themselves confronted, in Cabinet, by Ministers presenting a united front on matters on which they had previously deliberated in the absence of the monarch.
These developments were greatly facilitated and consolidated by  the personal characteristics of a series of kings.
George III went mad, George IV was a reprobate of singularly little governmental gravitas and William IV was a nonentity.
They were confronted, by contrast, by Prime Ministers of the calibre of Pitt the Younger and by the time Victoria ascended the throne executive power had effectively shifted away from the throne and into the Cabinet room.
But for parallel development in relation to the parliamentary franchise, the position thus brought about might have resembled too closely that which prevailed under the Stuarts, save only that the pretended despot would have been a Prime Minister, able to influence the composition of Parliament to an excessive degree, rather than a monarch claiming Divine Right.
The Reform Act 1832 had, however, widened the franchise to such an extent that it was no longer feasible to ensure Parliament's compliance by filling the Commons with placemen.
Parliament became assertive and in 1841, the Commons refused the then Prime Minister, Lord Melbourne, supply.
By a single vote, the Commons withheld confidence from the government, Lord Melbourne sought and obtained a dissolution of Parliament, and the necessity for a Cabinet to secure the confidence and support of Parliament and thus be  responsible to it was established.
The last cornerstone of the United Kingdom's constitution was in place.
Since then, Cabinets have met without the monarch.
Victoria was not one to yield up the authority of the Crown too readily and continued throughout her reign to assert it on occasion, such as objecting to the appointment of the nominee of a Prime Minister to a Ministry where she found him personally objectionable.
Since then, however, monarchs have confined themselves almost exclusively to expressing views and preferences of which a Prime Minister might care to take note.