

EDOUARD
Oxford — Algeria — France 1949–1958
‘Tell him I shall be there at once.‘‘At once , milady?’‘Almost at once .I'm in London at the moment.
In the bath actually.
But in a minute I shall just jump in the car, and then I'll be in Oxford before you can blink.’
‘Yes, milady.’
‘He is there , I suppose?’
‘Yes, milady.
He has Schools next week.’
This was said meaningfully; there was a sigh at the other end of the line.
‘How perfectly horrible.
In that case I shall certainly hurry.’
The receiver was replaced.
Mr Bullins, porter at Magdalen College for forty years, and senior porter for the last ten, put on his bowler hat and the bland expression he always assumed on such occasions, and walked to staircase III in New Buildings, overlooking the Deer Park, where E. A. J. de Chavigny had some of the most desirable rooms in college.
Below him was H. J. E. Dudley, Lord Sayle; above him were the rooms of his closest friend, the Honourable C. V. T. Glendinning.
The gentlemen's titles did not appear on the hand-painted signs at the foot of the staircase; in certain other Oxford colleges such practices were countenanced; not, Mr Bullins thought proudly, in Magdalen, which, in his opinion, was not only the most beautiful college in Oxford but also the only one of any consequence.
He puffed his way up to the first floor and, finding the outer door open, knocked on the inner one.
He entered to find Edouard de Chavigny stretched out in an armchair, wearing cricket flannels, with a copy of John Maynard Keynes's Treatise on Money open on his lap.
He did not appear to be reading it.
Mr Bullins regarded him with approval.
It was well known in college that, barring some  accident, Mr de Chavigny would take a First in his PPE Finals.
This was good; what was even better — and the more remarkable, given that the gentleman was French — was that he would do so in the proper manner: with little apparent effort on his part, with a negligent modesty, as befitted an English gentleman.
In Mr Bullins's opinion, the war had had a regrettable effect upon Oxford, and even upon Magdalen.
A number of undergraduates were men in their mid-twenties who had served in the war and whose university education had therefore been deferred.
These young men, taciturn, hard-working, serious, did not conduct themselves in what Mr Bullins considered the correct manner.
Edouard de Chavigny did: he was a fine athlete, with a blue for cricket, and had taken so well to rowing that, even though a late starter, he had narrowly missed selection for the Oxford eight.
He spoke successfully at Union debates; he had acted with the Oxford University Dramatic Society; he knew how to enjoy himself.
He gave parties at which a great deal of champagne was consumed; he attended other parties; he entertained young women to luncheon-parties in his rooms — women whose fashionable faces Mr Bullins recognised from society magazines such as the Tatler , which formed his own favourite bedtime reading.
He dressed superbly, while looking as if clothes were unimportant to him.
He was extremely good-looking, and extremely charming, generous to his scout, and to Mr Bullins on numerous occasions.
In short, Mr Bullins admired him, and — this was more rare — liked him.
He would go far, this young man, Mr Bullins considered, and he looked forward to reading of his progress once he left Oxford.
He cleared his throat as the young man looked up.
‘Lady Isobel Herbert, Mr de Chavigny,’ he announced.
‘She has just telephoned.
She says that she is in the bath now, sir, but that she will be with you shortly.’
He conveyed the message at ten-thirty in the morning.
Lady Isobel's idea of time was elastic.
She arrived at Magdalen in her Derby Bentley at three-fifteen.
Edouard, who had had plenty of time to speculate, was still surprised by her arrival.
He could think of no reason to account for it.
Over the past few years, since she had broken off her engagement to Jean-Paul, he had seen her on various occasions — at balls in  London, or at country-house weekends once at Christian Glendinning's parents' house, but they had spoken only briefly.
That was all.
She had never visited him in Oxford before; he had not been alone with her for years — not since the war, not since London.
He assumed the visit must be one of Isobel's whims, and there had been many of those.
A brief flirtation with the Communist Party — done mainly to shock, he supposed.
A narrowly avoided divorce scandal involving a prominent Member of Parliament.
At least two further broken engagements that he could remember: one to a Battle of Britain flying ace, the other to an Italian count internationally celebrated as a racing driver.
Isobel seemed to like danger at second hand, he thought, and wondered again why she should come.
She walked into his rooms without knocking, wearing an emerald-green silk dress, no hat, and the Conway pearls.
The sun caught her dazzling hair, and as Edouard sprang to his feet she smiled at him.
‘Tell me, darling Edouard,’ she said, ‘have you learned to make cocktails yet?’
And then he knew why she had come.
She drank two dry Martinis, and said she wasn't hungry and didn't want to eat.
Then she lit a cigarette and curled up on the window-seat.
Edouard waited.
‘Shall you get your First?
I hear you're going to.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Hugo said you would.
I ran into him the other day.’
‘How is he?’
‘All right.’
She paused.
‘No — probably not very all right.
Unhappy, I think.
A bit lost.
Feeling he hasn't done things he ought to have done — hasn't fulfilled his promise.
I don't know.
Jagged.
The way lots of people are.
I saw his cousin Christian in the quad, as I came in.
Wearing a pink silk shirt and a yellow tie.
He hasn't changed.’
She smiled.
‘Is he still your best friend?’
‘My closest friend, yes.’
‘I'm glad.
I like him.’
She hesitated.
‘He's madly queer, of course.‘
‘Even so.’
Isobel flicked ash out of the window carelessly, and frowned.
‘How's Jean?
Still fighting?’
‘He's still in the Army.
A desk job, mainly.
He might be posted to Indo-China, I suppose.
It's on the cards.
He spends most of his leaves in Algeria — at our vineyards, you know.
He likes it there.’
‘Who minds the shop when he's away?’
Edouard shrugged.
‘I shall.
When I go down from Oxford.’
‘Do you want to do that?’
‘I do, yes.
Jean hasn't much time — and I think I might do it quite well.’
He hesitated.
‘Everything's stood still, you see, since my father died.
There's a lot of room for development.
Expansion.’
‘I miss Jean sometimes.’
She stood up restlessly.
‘He made me smile.
He could be so predictable.
I'm afraid I behaved rather badly.’
She paused.
‘Of course, I miss the emerald too.
You know I was disproportionately fond of that emerald?’
The green eyes met his, and the lips widened into a smile.
Edouard hesitated.
‘It's an unlucky stone.
I didn't want to say that — when you chose it.
But it is supposed to be…unlucky.’
‘Is it?’
She was looking at him very intently.
‘Well, that would explain an awful lot of things.’
She turned, and looked at the door across the room.
‘Is your bedroom in there?’
‘Yes.
it is.’
‘Oh, good.’
She crossed in front of him, and went into the bedroom.
There was a silence, then she called to him.
He walked slowly over to the door, and stood looking down at her.
The emerald dress was in a heap on the floor, and Isobel's slender pale boyish body was stretched out naked on his narrow college bed.
Her hair flared across the pillow; there was a triangle of red gold between her narrow thighs; the Conway pearls lay between her small white breasts.
‘Darling Edouard.
You don't mind, do you?
You see, I wanted to do this ages ago…
’ She paused, and her wide greenish cat's eyes glittered up at him.
‘I'm going to be married, Edouard, did I tell you?
The racing driver one, after all.
Next week, I think, after some Grand Prix thing he's racing in.
If he isn't killed first, of course.
And so I knew I must  do this now.
I couldn't bear to be married if I hadn't…‘
Edouard crossed to the bed, sat down beside her, and took her slender hand in his.
‘You don't have to worry about anything.’
She smiled.
‘I have one of those beastly Dutch cap things.
I put it on before I left London.
They tell me you'd never know it was there….’
He bent his head and gently kissed her lips, then he drew back, and touched her cheek with his finger.
‘You're crying.’
‘Only a little bit.
I'll stop in a moment.
It's probably all that waiting.
Tell me, darling Edouard — you did know, didn't you?’
He looked at her steadily.
‘I suppose I did.
Yes.’
‘Oh, I'm so glad .
That makes it much simpler.
Dear Edouard, would you mind if I just watched — while you undressed?’
Edouard smiled.
He took off his clothes, and Isobel curled up on the bed watching him, like a little cat.
Then she drew him on to the covers and pushed him gently back.
‘Darling Edouard.
Don't kiss me.
Not yet.
You don't need to do anything.
I'm quite ready.
I'm wet.
I was quite wet when I was drinking the first Martini.
You have the most wonderful — the most beautiful…
I've ever seen.
And I just want to do —this ….’
With great grace she straddled his body, and paused for a moment, upright above him, her body as pale and slender as a wand.
Then she touched his full penis with one slender hand, and guided its head between her legs.
He felt the moistness, felt the narrow aperture, then slowly, her eyes never leaving his, she lowered herself down as if she were impaling herself on his flesh.
‘Darling Edouard.
I shall come almost at once, if you move just the tiniest bit.
Oh, yes…‘
He moved, and she did.
Then she kissed him.
They made love all afternoon, and sometimes she was creamy and calm and slow as a cat being stroked, and sometimes the cat arched her back and revealed claws.
Edouard came into her body with a feeling of shuddering release and the afternoon seemed to pass in a dream he had had, or she had had long before.
As dusk fell, he kissed her damp thighs, and then her mouth, and Isobel held his head and looked into his eyes.
Her own glittered like emeralds, but without tears this time.
‘Darling Edouard,’ she said.
‘I love you in a very special way and I knew you would understand.
I did do the right thing, didn't I?’
‘Most certainly.’
He smiled.
‘Do you like me?
I've always liked you.’
‘Yes, I do.’
He kissed her gently.
‘I've always liked you very much.’
‘I thought so.
I'm glad.
I'd much rather be liked than loved.
On the whole.
And now I must go home.’
She sprang up from the bed with that quick restless grace which had always delighted him, and pulled on her green dress.
‘I shall send you a piece of my wedding cake.’
Her lips curved mischievously.
‘It will be encrusted with that terrible white icing pastry-cooks are always so proud of, and far too sweet.
But I love those little box things with the lacy paper that they pack it in.
So I'll send it.
You can eat it before your Finals, and wedding cake is terribly lucky — everyone says — so then you'll be certain to get your First, and…‘
‘Isobel…‘
‘If I stay one more minute, I shall cry again,’ she said.
‘And that would be in very poor taste.
Goodbye, darling Edouard.
And take care of yourself.’
The following week he sent a telegram:Thank you for the cake, Edouard .
Three months later, after his First was announced with the other Oxford and Cambridge examination results in The Times , he received a telegram at the house at St-Cloud.
It read:I see you ate it, Isobel .
He did not hear from her again for another eight years.
When Edouard left Oxford, and returned to France to begin work on the administration of the de Chavigny companies and estates, he was appalled by what he found.
During his years at Oxford, he had spent part of his vacations in France, but those relatively short periods had given him no idea of the chaos that had prevailed since his father's death.
With Jean-Paul's casual agreement —‘Of course, go ahead, little brother.
You'll find it's a terrible bore’— he began a  systematic investigation of the de Chavigny empire: the jewellery company, its workshops and showrooms in Europe and America; the estates and vineyards in the Loire and in Algeria; the stockholdings; the capital assets; the property the Baron had retained in France and abroad.
Everywhere he found the same thing: elderly employees, attempting to run things as they thought the old baron would have wanted, out of touch with new ideas, fearful of taking any decision on their own, and consequently stalling, allowing problems to build up.
No new blood had come into the affairs of de Chavigny for years: everywhere Edouard found stagnation and apathy.
It was as if a great machine had been left running so long that no one had noticed, or cared, that it was running down.
After the execution of Xavier de Chavigny, the German High Command had taken over the house and gardens at St-Cloud and used the beautiful late-seventeenth-century mansion to quarter troops.
This Edouard knew: what he could not understand was that in the years since the end of the war Jean-Paul had made no attempt to restore the house.
He had carved out a small apartment for himself in one of the wings, kept on the remnants of an elderly staff of servants, and left the rest of the place as it was.
Knowing what he would find when he went there, and knowing that it would pain him, Edouard delayed the moment when he would make a formal inspection of the house.
He went, finally, on a beautiful September day in 1949, some three months after he came down from Oxford.
From the distance, as he drove towards it, the great house appeared unchanged.
The sun struck the steep blue slates of the roof, and the glass of the tall ranked windows of the main facade.
The elderly servants greeted him nervously; silently, Edouard went on a tour of the house.
There was little furniture, for most of that was stored in Switzerland, and the few pieces that remained had been damaged beyond repair.
The walls were bare of the famous Brussels tapestries; his footsteps echoed on uncarpeted floors.
Edouard stared around him in mounting disbelief and anger.
The panelling was scarred with initials and obscenities; greenish damp from blocked gutterings seeped through walls hung with silk that was torn and ripped.
On the great curving staircase that was one of the  most celebrated features of the house, half the bannisters had been ripped out, and used for firewood.
In the ballroom, the Venetian mirrors which lined the walls had been smashed; doors hung on broken hinges; the place stank of mice and damp.
The servants had done their best: they had tried to clean the house for his arrival, but their efforts only heightened the destruction Edouard found.
Slowly he went upstairs: his father's bedroom, his dressing-room, his bathroom where the mahogany panelling had been axed, and the old fittings of brass and copper had been wrenched from their sockets and looted.
His mother's bedroom, once hung with hand-painted eighteenth century Chinese wall-paper, now ripped and defaced and stained with urine.
The library, where the bookcases had been smashed.
Room after room, twenty bedrooms in all, and then the attics, where the roof had leaked, and where ceilings had caved in.
Edouard went back down the stairs; he stood in the huge marble-floored foyer, and closed his eyes.
He saw the house as it had once been, in his childhood — still, ordered, each thing in it the finest and most beautiful example of its kind.
He thought of the dinners, for eighteen, twenty, thirty people; he thought of the dances, and the whisper of music from the ballroom; of the quiet afternoons he had sometimes spent in his father's study.
He opened his eyes again; the old butler looked at him anxiously.
‘We tried, Monsieur Edouard…
’ The old man gave a helpless gesture.
‘You see.
We have washed all the floors.’
Edouard wanted to weep with anger and frustration, but he hid his feelings out of consideration for the old man.
The next day, he returned to the house with Louise.
His mother, who had taken one look at the place when she first returned to France, had been firm.
She was beyond coping with it; she had no intention of living there; she had moved, instead, to an early eighteenth-century townhouse in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, a quarter of Paris still preferred by the pre-Napoleonic French aristocracy.
She returned to St-Cloud with obvious reluctance.
Paris was more convenient in any case; the memories of St Cloud were too painful…
When Edouard pressed her, she shrugged irritably.
‘Edouard.
The place is too far gone.
It belongs to the past.
I think Jean-Paul should sell it…‘
She left, half an hour after she arrived, in her stately dark blue Bentley.
Edouard stood for a while, alone in the gardens.
He watched her car depart; he stood on the terrace, and looked across towards the city, then back towards the house.
The gardens were over-grown and neglected, the gravel paths a wilderness of weeds, the formal hedges unclipped for years.
A few late roses struggled through the encroaching tangles of nettles and bindweed.
Edouard stood looking around him, his mouth set, his hands clenched.
His mother was not interested; Jean-Paul was not concerned: very well, then, he would do what had to be done, and he would do it alone.
It was the same in the Loire, at the Chateau de Chavigny, where the famous mirrored salon, built for the seventh baron de Chavigny, had been used as a shooting-gallery.
It was the same in the vineyards there: production of wine had almost ceased during the war years; acres had been decimated by disease; attempts at post-war wine production had been sporadic and ill-organised.
Edouard tasted some of these thin sour wines with disgust, and gave orders that the entire cellar stock be jettisoned forthwith.
‘But, Monsieur de Chavigny, what shall we do with it?’
The elderly régisseurlooked around the vast cellars in despair.
‘It's of no consequence.
Pour it down the drains if necessary.
I will not have such wine sold under the de Chavigny label.’
He paused, feeling a momentary pity for the old man.
‘Would you drink this?’
The régisseur hesitated, then smiled a slow gap-toothed smile.
‘No, Monsieur de Chavigny.
I should prefer not to.’
‘I also.’
Edouard pressed his arm, not unkindly.
‘Scrap it.
We shall begin again.’
This grand tour of Edouard's took over six months.
At the end of that time, working ceaselessly, he had been through every file in every office.
He had seen every room in every house, and had personally interviewed every one of the old baron's servants, and all of his senior employees.
He had been to his father's lawyers, to his father's banking partners and advisors; to his stockbrokers at the Bourse; to his accountants.
He had visited Switzerland, London, Rome and New York.
In that time, he had despaired.
It had seemed to him, about halfway through his investigation, that in the past five years Jean-Paul had done one thing, and one thing only.
He had, with Edouard's assistance, erected a memorial to their father in the chapel at the Chateau de Chavigny where he and his ancestors were buried.
But the true memorial to his father, the empire Xavier de Chavigny had so painstakingly and brilliantly built up during his lifetime — that he had simply allowed to decay.
By the end of the six months, Edouard's old resolve grew fiercer: he would restore that empire to its former glory, and then he would develop it, increase it, expand it.
It could be done: gradually, in the second half of the six months, he grew in confidence.
He began to see ways, to make plans.
Thanks to his father's pre-war prudence, a fortune was there; it simply had to be deployed.
And it should be deployed: it would be his tribute to his father; his memorial to the reticent man he had scarcely known but deeply loved, and who had died so courageously.
His and Jean-Paul's tribute.
He did not doubt for an instant that once he explained things to his brother, once he made him see what assets were available and how they could be used, Jean-Paul would rise from his lethargy and be as engaged, as excited, and as determined, as Edouard.
Armed with papers, his head filled with lists of stockholdings, production figures, statistics of pre- and post-war profits and losses, with preliminary architectural plans for the restoration, first, of the three houses in France, and ideas for those property holdings abroad, Edouard arranged to meet his brother for a week-long series of discussions.
Jean-Paul at first resisted; eventually, when Edouard pressed him, and after changing their proposed schedule three times, he agreed to a week in the autumn of 1950, when he would be on leave.
In Algeria, at the Maison Alletti, the large, low-built house which the old baron had had built in the late 1920s, which formed the base for his Algerian vineyards and timber plantations, and which was built among gardens on the slope of a hill, overlooking the city and the breathtaking bay of Algiers.
Edouard demurred, but Jean-Paul was adamant.
It was there or nowhere.
He spent all his leaves there now; he liked Algeria.
Besides, Edouard should see for himself the vineyards and plantations there: they were doing well, Jean-Paul said  proudly.
He had taken a personal interest in them; there, he said, a little pettishly, Edouard would find room for no complaints.
Edouard had never been to north Africa; he was unprepared for the beauty of Algiers itself, and the magnificence of the surrounding country, with its rugged sunburned hills, its narrow winding roads which would suddenly open up on views of a vivid blue Mediterranean sea.
At once, it fascinated him: a country and a city that were so French, and so Arab, in which two cultures very different from one another seemed to him at first to blend triumphantly.
He could sit on a terrace in the French quarter, sipping wine, and feel he was in France.
The wide formal boulevards of Algiers, the plane-trees with their trunks painted white, the tall graceful white-painted houses with their balconies and shutters, the shade of the square reserved for Europeans: all these reminded him of the France he had loved so much as a child; the towns of the South — Arles or Nîmes or Avignon, some of the small towns of the Loire.
Here was a city relatively unscarred by war, with signs of growing prosperity.
He could drink good wine; eat French food superlatively cooked, and apparently available in abundance; be waited upon as he had been waited upon in the old days before the war, by a succession of polite, quiet, efficient, well-trained servants, all of whom were Arab, all of whom spoke perfect French.
But there was also another Algiers, of which he caught, in the first couple of days, heady glimpses.
There was the Algiers of the Arabs themselves: the old Kasbah, the Arab quarter of the city, was built on a hill.
A fascinating warren of steep narrow alleyways, of Hat-roofed tenement housing, it was visible from the French quarter, visible almost throughout the city: that teeming place, filled with barefoot children, with women shrouded from head to foot in black, who clasped their head-dresses across their faces and between their teeth, and never raised their eyes.
In that zone of the city which lay between the French quarter and the Kasbah, Edouard caught glimpses of the Arabic world.
The scents of north African cooking, of couscous, of saffron and cumin and turmeric j street-markets, where they sold powdered dyes and spices, sticks of sandalwood for  burning, little piles of henna powder and ground indigo.
He smelt the scents eagerly gazed, fascinated, at the henna-stained feet and palms of the women and children, listened to the cries of the muezzin and the harsh guttural shouts in a language he could not understand — and he saw, he thought, why Jean-Paul was so drawn to Algeria.
He announced his intention of visiting the Kasbah.
Jean-Paul yawned.
If he wanted.
It could be arranged.
He must take a servant with him, naturally — they knew how to get rid of the beggars.
And, besides, it was not entirely safe to go alone.
‘Go if you must.’
He shrugged.
‘But watch your wallet.
And stay well clear of the women.’
So, for the first few days of his visit, Edouard explored the city alone, except for the servant.
In the evenings Jean-Paul made an effort to entertain him, and held a number of elaborate dinner parties.
They ate outdoors, under a vine pergola on a wide terrace overlooking the sea.
The classic French dishes were cooked to perfection by the Arab cook and served gracefully by Arab boys in white uniforms, the eldest of whom seemed about fifteen years old.
All the guests were French.
The majority owned vineyards.
Several, like Jean-Paul, had military experience or backgrounds.
Their wives were chic, exquisitely dressed — far better than the majority of women in post-war Paris.
Their jewels sparkled, and their talk palled.
Edouard found them stiflingly boring, and curiously closed.
The women could discuss with animation the latest novel to take Paris by storm, the politics of the Comédie Française, the reputations of actors, writers, musicians, politicians, painters.
They regarded them from afar, with a delicate patronage.
The consensus was clear: France was finished; Europe was finished; they were better off here.
Edouard listened to them and disliked what he heard.
He had been naive, he saw that now.
He returned to the Arab quarter, and saw the poverty, no longer as picturesque, but as a by-product of French colonial prosperity.
It made him angry; Jean-Paul's smugness, and that of his friends, made him angrier still.
He said nothing; it would be useless to discuss the politics of the country with Jean-Paul.
Instead, when a week had passed, during which tune he and Jean-Paul had made one cursory visit to the Baron's vineyards and had  inspected perhaps one-eighth of that vast acreage, Edouard decided to return to the purpose of his visit.
He bearded Jean-Paul when his brother finally got up at about eleven in the morning.
‘Jean-Paul — please.
Could we not look at these company figures?
Discuss my plans?’
Jean-Paul sighed, and stretched back in his wicker arm-chair.
‘Oh, very well, little brother.
But I'll think better over a pastis .
So, for the next two hours, they sat on the terrace, and Edouard talked.
He produced  sheaves of paper; he rounded-off figures to make his calculations simpler; he kept them all in francs, because Jean-Paul became hopelessly muddled by rates of exchange.
Jean-Paul drank three pastis , and smoked kif .
‘You're sure you wouldn't like some?’
He passed Edouard a silver box in which cigarettes of kifmixed with tobacco were ready-rolled.
‘No, thank you.’
‘It's very relaxing.’
‘Jean-Paul…‘
‘Oh, all right, all right .
I follow you so far, I think.
Go on.’
Edouard continued his dissertation over lunch.
He could see that the pastis, the wine and the kif had taken effect.
Jean-Paul's eyes were pinkish and glazed; his colour had risen; his immaculate white clothes already looked crumpled.
Edouard knew he was wasting his time, but he couldn't stop.
This was so important; he had done so much work; he had to make Jean-Paul understand.
After lunch they took coffee, thick Arabic coffee.
Jean-Paul lay back on the silken divans and closed his eyes.
‘Jean-Paul.’
Edouard's voice was hoarse with desperation.
‘Surely — can't you see? –or our father's sake.
He built all this up.
Oh, it was big before he started, but he made it great.
There are so many possibilities.
We could build on what he did, Jean-Paul.
It was his life's work.
We can't just let it disintegrate into the dust .’
Jean-Paul opened his eyes, and Edouard looked up.
While he had been talking an Arabic serving-woman had silently entered the room.
She stood now, head bowed, just inside the door.
‘Time for my siesta.’
Jean-Paul heaved himself to his feet.
They looked at each other, Jean-Paul focusing his eyes with difficulty, and Edouard saw the coarsening in his brother which he had been trying to ignore for days.
He was overweight, thickening around the waist; his face was perpetually flushed; he was still handsome, but his features were heavy now; the once strong jaw-line was jowled.
Edouard looked at him, and felt a sickening dismay.
‘I have to rest in the afternoons.’
Jean-Paul's voice was defiant.
‘It's the climate here.
It's so damn hot.
I'll be able to think more clearly this evening.
When it's cooler…‘
He glanced across the room to the silent figure of the Arab woman, who still stood waiting, head bowed.
He grinned at Edouard, winked.
‘A sleep and a fuck.’
He spoke in English, presumably so the woman would not understand, and Edouard suddenly felt furiously angry.
‘Then I'll be all right.
We'll talk again.
This evening.
Really.
I'm grateful to you, Edouard.
I can see how much work you've done…‘
They did talk again that evening.
Edouard forced his brother.
He pushed him into an upright chair.
‘No pastis .
No wine.
No kif .’
He slammed a pile of papers down on the table.
‘You listen, Jean-Paul, and you listen properly.
I've sweated over all this for six months, and I'm not going to see that work wasted.
So you listen, damn it, or I'll get the next plane out, and leave you to cope with the whole bloody lot.’
‘All right.
All right.’
Jean-Paul lifted his hands amiably.
‘There's no need to get so hot under the collar.
You were always hot-tempered, impatient.
I'm just slower than you, that's all.
Now, explain again, and explain slowly.’
Edouard explained.
At the end of his impassioned arguments, Jean-Paul stood up.
‘All right.
Fine.
OK.’
‘What do you mean, ‘all right’, ‘OK’?’
‘I mean, do it.’
Jean-Paul put his hand on his shoulder.
‘I can't — you must know that.
I wouldn't know where to begin.
You do it.
All the things you said.
I trust your judgement.
I'm sure you're right.
You were always the clever one.
Just let me know what I have to sign — make as much of it as  possible over to yourself, and get on with it.
All right, little brother?
Now can I have that pastis ?’
Edouard looked at his brother.
At the eyes which slid away from his own in embarrassment.
His mouth tightened, and he stood up.
‘Very well.
I'll do as you say.
And by all means ring for your pastis .’
And so it was, in 1950, that Edouard effectively became the baron de Chavigny.
Jean-Paul signed over power of attorney to his brother in all the financial affairs of his companies, and Edouard, baron in all but name, returned to Paris and began work.
Initially both brothers found they were delighted with the arrangement.
Edouard defined his work to himself in two stages: first, he would restore; then he would build and expand.
All the furniture, silver, paintings, and the private jewellery collection stored in Switzerland by his father were returned to France.
The huge house at Deauville, with its gardens and private beach, was sold to one of the newly oil-rich Americans just beginning to invest in European property.
It had, in any case, rarely been used.
Edouard used the capital to buy a smaller house near the Normandy coast, telling himself that — one day — his children, or Jean-Paul's, might like to stay there.
The rest of the capital was used to defray the very great costs of restoring the house at St-Cloud and the Chateau de Chavigny in the Loire.
When the structural work on the houses was completed, the furniture, tapestries, paintings, carpets and hangings were restored and replaced.
This, and the restoration of the celebrated gardens of both houses, took two years.
Even Louise de Chavigny, whom he took to St-Cloud for a triumphant tour when the work was finished, was impressed.
‘It's quite lovely, Edouard.
As lovely as it ever was.
And you've made some additions…
’ Her eyes flicked over the Louis XIV furniture of the formal salon.
‘You have my eye.
You've chosen well.’
‘You can return here now, Maman.
Your rooms are ready for you.
Just as they were.
Only the curtains aren't yet complete; the identical silk could not be found.
But they're  being rewoven now, in England.
They'll be ready very soon.
The same design, the same dye even.
I've had them copied exactly…‘
‘No, Edouard.
I shall stay in Paris.
I'm used to it now.’
She gave a little gesture, out towards the windows, to the formal parterre which had taken twenty men as many months to relay and replant.
‘Too many memories, Edouard.
I told you.’
Edouard moved into the house at St-Cloud alone.
With his father's employees he was generous but firm.
The elderly among the servants were asked to retrain the new staff to their old exacting standards; they were then retired, with pensions of a size that made Edouard's Parisian friends complain.
Word gets around, they said; for God's sake stop — or they'll all be demanding de Chavigny-style settlements.
Edouard shrugged.
‘They stayed with my father right through the war.
They deserve that and more.’
The vineyards in the Loire were ploughed up, and replanted using vine stock free from disease.
A new régisseur , trained on the estates of Baron  Phillipe de Rothschild, was brought in.
Edouard toyed with the idea of having the de Chavigny wine-labels redesigned, and each vintage ornamented by a leading artist, as Rothschild had done.
But he abandoned the plan: to learn from Baron Phillippe'sexpertise was sensible; to copy him too flagrantly was not.
It was what was in the bottle that finally counted.
Within five years, wine production had doubled pre-war levels, and the quality was consistently improving.
The first year that they obtained a vintage of acceptable quality, he sent a dozen cases to his old régisseur to lay down, and invited him for a tasting.
He watched the old man as he carefully sniffed the wine, sipped it, rolled it around his palate.
He waited.
‘It's not perfect…
’ The old man frowned.
‘Is any wine perfect?’
‘Four years from now, yes, by then…’ the old man's face broke into a grin.
‘I could drink this, Monsieur de Chavigny.
Oh, yes.
Without difficulty.’
Edouard embraced him.
‘Et voilà.
Je suis content .’
With the central part of his father's empire, Edouard proceeded cautiously.
De Chavigny still had an unrivalled reputation  for the quality of stones used in its jewellery designs, and for the perfection and artistry with which they were cut and set.
He had inherited four major outlets: in New York, Paris, London and Rome, all of which had come through the war intact, all of which were in prime locations, and all of which had suffered from neglect.
Proceeding much as he had done with his houses, Edouard first refurbished them.
He brought in a new interior designer, Ghislaine Belmont-Laon; her work on these showrooms made her name.
Cleverly, Mme Belmont-Laon retained the formality of the nineteenth-century rooms, with their mahogany showcases and cabinets, and yet, by her use of colour and light, contrived to give them a modern elegance.
She introduced soft blues, and a colour that came to be known as de Chavigny grey: the rooms, understated and severe, were the perfect backdrop for the jewellery and the silver.
At the sumptuous party held to celebrate the re-opening of the showrooms in the rue du Faubourg St Honoré, Edouard looked around him with pride, but he knew his work had scarcely begun.
He had provided one essential, a glittering showcase for the de Chavigny merchandise.
He was eager to expand, to diversify into other luxury products as his rivals Cartier and Asprey were already doing very successfully.
The world had changed: de Chavigny could no longer cater just to the needs of those who had arrived; it had to make provision for those on the way up.
Leather goods, desk accessories, smoking accessories, tableware, the little playthings of the conspicuously affluent — Edouard knew that these, adorned with the de Chavigny name and crest, could be marketed for high prices and to a much wider market than that which could afford the most superlative jewellery in the world.
Edouard began to commission feasibility studies for new de Chavigny showrooms, in Geneva, Milan, Rio de Janeiro and — in the longer term — for Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles.
But he knew that for his expansion plans to work he needed two things: further capital investment, and a designer of genius.
The investment, he knew, would be no problem.
His French and Swiss bankers had already indicated their eagerness to participate in any expansion of the company.
His chief financial adviser, Simon Scher, a young Englishman who, after Cambridge, had trained at the Harvard Business School, was urging him to go public.
‘If we floated shares in de Chavigny on the open market tomorrow,’ he told Edouard, ‘you would be over-subscribed four times over.
The money is there; the confidence is there; it's the fifties now — the recovery has started.’
But Edouard had no intention of going public; he wanted de Chavigny to remain a private company, as it had always been, with the reins of power firmly in one pair of hands: his hands.
And he thought he could do without the high-interest assistance of French or Swiss bankers.
John McAllister, his American grandfather, had sold out his interest in his family steel and railway holdings shortly before the Wall Street Crash; he had died towards the end of the war, a few months after his wife.
His fortune, conservatively estimated in excess of a hundred million dollars, had come intact to his beloved daughter, Louise.
It was handled by a prominent Wall Street firm, with the utmost caution, the bulk of it invested in government bonds, gilt-edged securities, and land from Oregon to Texas.
Louise took no interest in her fortune.
Her investments provided her with an annual income of well over a million dollars, in addition to the trusts and investments left to her directly by her husband.
Provided she could buy anything she wanted, when she wanted — and it never occurred to her to do otherwise — Louise was happy.
Edouard had already begun his campaign to persuade his mother to divert some of her capital holdings into an expansion programme for de Chavigny, but he knew he had to proceed slowly.
Louise had gone so far as to allow him access to her papers and portfolio: he and Simon Scher were working on them now.
But he knew it would be useless to press his mother too hard for any major decision.
She baulked at commitments, over money as well as over men.
Edouard knew that the more rational his arguments were, the more likely she was to resist them.
She had an iron whim.
But if he could not persuade her when the time came to move, Jean-Paul could.
Anything her beloved elder son asked of her, Louise gave.
It caused Edouard to feel better sometimes, but he accepted facts.
After all, it made little difference: he would persuade Jean-Paul, Jean-Paul would persuade  Louise; the route was more circuitous, that was all.
In his business dealings Edouard had discovered he had a talent for the circuitous approach; he was beginning to derive great pleasure from deploying it.
But the designer of genius — ah, now that was more difficult.
The last great designer de Chavigny had employed, Vlaçek, a Hungarian Jew trained in Russia in the Fabergé workrooms, had been discovered by Edouard's father, and brought to de Chavigny to design the collection which launched his first American showrooms in 1912.
Vlaçek had been a prize, and he had been loyal: all attempts to woo him away from de Chavigny — and there had been many — had failed.
He had remained with the company until his eyesight began to fail in the early 1930s; he had died during the war.
Like all great jewellery companies, de Chavigny had a huge and jealously guarded archive of designs, dating back, in this case, to the mid-nineteenth century.
Those designs could be, and were, constantly reused, either in their original form or adapted to accord with changing fashion and taste.
They were the company's lifeline.
But the last great de Chavigny collections had been designed by Vlaçek in the late 1920s.
Edouard longed for a new collection, for revolutionary designs that would set competitors like Cartier by the ears; designs that would reflect the post-war world and which would use to the full the latest technology.
Truly great jewellery designers are as rare as any other great artists.
Edouard knew what he was looking for, a Picasso, a Matisse, whose medium was not paint but rare stones and precious metals; the genius who would be the linchpin of his whole enterprise.
Wherever he was-in America; in the Middle East, one side or the other of a newly divided Europe,— and whether he was still unknown or already being trained by one of de Chavigny's rivals, Edouard intended to find him.
He had a hand-picked team whose sole function was to do just that.
They infiltrated the workshops of his rivals; they viewed all the new designs of every major jewellery company in the world; they attended the graduating shows of every major training college; they consulted, circumspectly, with discerning collectors such as Florence Gould.
They would find the man, sooner or later.
Then Edouard would go to him.
And make him an offer he couldn't refuse.
For four years, Edouard lived for his work.
He found it addictive, stimulating, endlessly absorbing, and he allowed nothing-certainly no personal involvements — to distract him.
He played equally hard, and with the same restless energy, quickly discovering that the two worlds — his days of board meetings and company manoeuvres, his evenings and weekends of parties — overlapped, and fed one another.
He was in constant demand.
Parisian hostesses fought for his presence at their dinner-parties, opera galas and charity balls.
He attended private views, and with the help of his Oxford friend, Christian Glendinning, cousin to his former tutor Hugo, he began to buy paintings, and to add to his father's unrivalled collection of twentieth-century European art.
Christian, who came of a long line of English country gentlemen whose only aesthetic investment was in bloodstock, was a maverick, and the despair of his family when Edouard first met him.
He was outrageously affected, flamboyantly homosexual, and extremely clever.
When his father realised that Christian had no intention of returning to the family estate in Oxfordshire, and breeding prime Herefordshire cattle for the rest of his life, he gave him a small capital sum and washed his hands of him.
Christian used it to open a small gallery as soon as he left Oxford.
He put on the first English show of American Abstract Expressionists, and the British critics sniffed.
He sold two Rothkos and one superb Jackson Pollock to his friend Edouard de Chavigny, and after that he never looked back.
By 1954 he had one of the most successful modern art galleries in Cork Street, London, a branch in Paris, and another planned for Madison Avenue.
Edouard de Chavigny, his most loyal and discerning client, had the basis for a collection that one day would be rivalled only by Paul Mellon and the New York Museum of Modern Art.
To Christian's distress and incomprehension, Edouard bought horses as well as paintings.
He reinvested in his father's stud in Ireland, and brought in Jack Dwyer, the best trainer in the country, poaching him from the stables of his mother's old friend, Hugh Westminster, without a qualm.
Christian accompanied him once to Ireland to watch a new filly run, took one look through the field-glasses, announced he was already dying of boredom, and departed to look at paintings.
He returned to England on Edouard's new plane with fifteen excellent Jack Yeats oils; Edouard returned secure in the knowledge that he had a winner for the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, the prime race in the French racing calendar and the one he had set his heart on winning.
But then, as Christian acidly remarked, his friend Edouard was a man of many parts — not just one, which he had suspected when he had first met Edouard in London.
Edouard de Chavigny passed from opera box to grouse moor with equal elegance and aplomb.
In the autumn he fished and shot in Scotland; in the winter he skied in Gstaad or St Moritz, where he invested heavily in hotels.
In the summer he might be a guest at a Mediterranean villa or at his house on the Costa Smeralda.
He might be staying at Southampton, Long Island, with an American newspaper tycoon, or visiting distant American cousins at Newport.
Wherever he was there would be a woman, but never the same woman for very long.
The gossip columnists of Europe and the East Coast fought to keep up with him.
Who was his latest mistress?
Which of the many candidates would he finally marry?
The Italian diva, whose operatic performances he faithfully attended from La Scala to the Met — for four months?
The English marchioness, widowed during the war, who was the most beautiful of the legendary Cavendish sisters?
The daughter of Old Money from Massachusetts, or the daughter of New Money from Texas?
Would he marry Clara Delluc, the least celebrated of his mistresses, and the one to whom he always returned after forays elsewhere?
It would be a Frenchwoman, naturally, said the hopeful mothers of ancient lineage and impeccable Catholic upbringing, when they discussed the matter in their Paris drawing-rooms.
And not a Frenchwoman like Clara Delluc, either, but one of his own class, and a virgin.
A man like Edouard de Chavigny liked to play the field, so much was understood, but when it came to choosing a wife, well, then the qualifications required were somewhat different.
Meanwhile, there was the question of his presents , to which much time and many column inches were devoted.
Edouard de Chavigny was a Frenchman; he understood that women, when abandoned, liked some small remembrance to soften the blow and to remind them of tender memories.
Edouard  de Chavigny always gave jewels.
That alone was not remarkable; it was the choice of jewels that attracted attention — that, and the manner of their delivery.
The jewels were carefully, some said mockingly, chosen to reflect the woman.
Emeralds if their eyes were green.
Exquisitely matched sapphires if their eyes were blue.
If their complexion was their most celebrated feature, then perhaps a long necklace of perfect pearls.
Gold bracelets, each as thick as a child's wrist, if their hair was blonde; amber, ebony, ivory, white gold, amethysts…
The gifts were beautiful, almost priceless, and, of course, from de Chavigny.
They were delivered to the woman concerned by Edouard de Chavigny's English manservant, without any accompanying message.
None was needed; the jewels signified dismissal, announced the relationship was at an end.
This was accepted, this was known, it was a rule from which Edouard never relented, never deviated.
One other thing was also known.
He never gave diamonds.
The columnists delighted in that.
It gave them the pin for endless stories; it gave them a myth.
He would give diamonds when he loved, they said.
It was simple; poetic.
He was saving the diamonds until then; with that gesture the world would know that Edouard de Chavigny, now one of the five most eligible bachelors in Europe, had finally chosen the woman he wanted as his wife.
It was a story that Edouard was often questioned about, by women as well as by journalists.
It was one on which he always refused to comment, as he did on all questions about his personal life.
Nothing could persuade him to confirm or deny.
He would smile, and change the subject.
It took four years for Edouard to discover the one aspect of his life the columnists had never suspected: he was lonely.
He returned to the house in St-Cloud late one night in 1954, hollow with exhaustion.
He had returned that day from an exhausting round of deals and meetings in New York.
The rubies rumoured to have belonged once to Marie-Antoinette had been dispatched to the diva , who always wore scarlet.
His senior secretary had been instructed to cancel his engagements for that evening to give him a few hours' peace before a six-month period in which his diary was entirely filled.
It was summer, and he walked around the beautiful gardens alone, admiring the beds of shrub-roses which had been laid out here as they had been in Josephine Bonaparte's gardens at Malmaison.
The scholarship, the skill, the work and the love which had gone into this section of his gardens struck him forcibly.
He smelt the scent of the roses, and realised it was the first time he had walked here, the first time he had looked at them, in four years.
He longed then, suddenly, and with a passion that had been suppressed so long that it took him by surprise, for someone to share all this with.
Someone to talk to.
Someone to love.
Not his mother, with whom his relations remained cool and formal.
Not his brother, who had now left the Army and spent most of the year in Algiers.
None of his friends.
Certainly none of his women.
Someone else.
Someone he trusted, he thought, returning to his study, and sitting up alone late into the night — and he trusted so few people.
Someone who was with him for himself, not because he was a man of influence and power and wealth.
Someone with whom he could be free.
He let himself think, as he had not done for many years, of Célestine, of their year together in London, and as he had known it would, the memory made him deeply unhappy.
He finally went to bed, cursing himself for his own sentimentality, certain the feeling was due to tiredness and jet-lag, no more.
It would have disappeared in the morning.
Next day he fulfilled all his engagements as usual.
The feeling was still there.
as if he had everything, and nothing.
Months passed; the feeling did not go away.
Then, that autumn, and quite by chance, something happened which was to alter his life.
On a visit to the Chateau de Chavigny to inspect that year's vintage, he caught sight of a small boy, playing in the gardens of one of the estate cottages.
Edouard was on horseback; he stopped to look at the child, who was about eight or nine years old, and exceptionally beautiful.
The child looked back at him.
Then a girl, too young to be his mother, rushed out of the cottage, clasped the child by the hand, and pulled him, protestingly, indoors.
Edouard made enquiries; the servants were embarrassed.
He persisted, and discovered that the little boy was called Grégoire.
His mother was now the wife of one of the estate  carpenters, and the boy was Jean-Paul's son, fathered after a drinking bout, during his first visit to the Loire after the war.
Jean-Paul confirmed the story negligently.
Yes, it was true, he accepted paternity.
He had seen the boy once or twice since, and he seemed a nice enough lad — a little backward perhaps, but his mother was ashamed of him, and refused to send him to school, perhaps fearing the other children would tease him.
Jean-Paul shrugged.
He would be all right.
When he grew up there would always be work for him on the estate.
This meeting took place in Paris, where Jean-Paul was visiting Louise briefly before returning to Algeria.
Edouard sat and watched his brother as he spoke, his own face growing hard and still.
Jean-Paul was sprawled in a chair; his complexion was flushed; he was drinking brandy, though it was the middle of the day.
He seemed irritated at Edouard's questions but, apart from that, sublimely unconcerned.
‘You feel no responsibility to him, then?’
Edouard leaned forward.
‘Responsibility?
Edouard, if a man had to be responsible for every little by-blow, where would it end?
The boy is perfectly happy.
I imagine he's in good health.
I fail to see why I should concern myself with him any further.’
‘I see.
And his mother-have you made any provision for her?’
‘Good God, no.’
Jean-Paul stood up angrily.
‘She's married now, isn't she?
I give her husband employment.
These people are peasants, Edouard, and proud of it; they accept these things.
Their way isn't our way-and, besides, give her money and people would talk.
Half the pregnant women on the estate would be swearing I fathered their children.
Mind your own business for once, can't you, Edouard?
Really, it's not your affair.’
Edouard looked at him, red in the face with indignation, reaching for the brandy-bottle, glancing towards his brother uneasily, as if he feared more self-justification would be needed.
In that moment the last of Edouard's illusions about his brother fell away.
He stopped making excuses for him; he let his loyalty and his trust slip aside, and he saw Jean-Paul clear.
Perhaps Jean-Paul read the disgust and the anger in his face; Edouard thought that he did, for he started, in a stubborn voice, on a whole new series of excuses.
He was still in  mid-speech when Edouard turned, and walked out of the room.
Edouard went back to the Loire.
He went back to the small house in which Grégoire lived, and attempted to interview his mother.
The attempt was not a success.
The woman refused to sit in his presence; she kept looking over her shoulder as if she feared her husband would come in.
Edouard saw that she had bruises on her wrists, and that one side of her face, which she tried to turn away from him, was swollen.
He looked around the cottage with a sense of despair.
It was poorly and sparsely furnished; a brave effort had been made to keep it tidy and clean.
The woman had four other children by her marriage; they crept into the room, peeped at Edouard, and crept away.
‘I manage,’ the woman kept saying, in response to his questions.
‘I manage.
I get by.’
‘But five children…
’ He hesitated.
The cottage was without heat, except from a stove; there was no running water.
‘My sister helps me.’
Her face grew set.
‘I told you.
We manage.‘
Finally, Edouard left her.
He returned to the chateau, furious with himself that he could have allowed people to live in this way.
He called in his estate manager, rebuked him, and angrily ordered that there should be a complete overhaul of the property of every de Chavigny tenant.
The houses should be repaired and modernised; proper plumbing should be installed, and more adequate heating.
The manager listened to this; he frowned.
‘It will be expensive.
The question arose, immediately after the war.
I discussed it with the Baron then.
He said —‘
‘I don't give a damn what he said,’ Edouard roared, unable to contain his anger.
‘I want this done, do you understand?
And I want it done now.’
Later that day, when he left the gardens to walk by the river, alone, a small figure appeared from the bushes beside the path.
It attached itself to him, and Edouard, looking down, recognised the young girl he had seen with Grégoire, pulling him back into the cottage.
He stopped.
The girl looked up at him.
She had a square intense face, and very dark hair.
The mother's sister, Edouard thought, and was correct.
Her name was Madeleine.
‘I heard this morning.
I was listening.’
She looked up at him, clearly terrified to be speaking to him, and yet determined to go on.
‘She won't tell you — my sister.
She's too frightened.
He drinks.
He beats her up.
He hates Grégoire.
He resents him — he always has.
He's not a bad man, but he has a violent temper.
He always blames Grégoire.
He takes his belt to him — I try to hide him sometimes, but he always finds him in the end.
I wish — I wish someone would do something…‘
The words had all tumbled out, one upon another.
Now she stopped, biting her lip.
Edouard, moved by her words, lifted his hand gently to touch her arm and, to his horror, she flinched as if she expected him to hit her.
‘Please.’
Edouard looked at her in consternation.
‘I mean you no harm.
I'm not angry.
I'm glad you came after me.
I wanted to help; that's why I came to see your sister.
Here.’
He held out his hand to her.
‘Come back to the house with me.
Then we can sit down, and you can explain properly.’
Madeleine was reluctant, but finally agreed.
She shrank from entering the chateau, and had to be cajoled inside.
Once there, she sat nervously on the edge of a Louis XIV chair, her bare legs drawn together, her hands in her lap.
Edouard ordered her a citron pressé , and then quietly listened as — slowly at first, then with gathering confidence — she told him the whole story.
It was predictable enough, and Edouard's face grew taut as he listened.
When she had finished, he suggested gently that perhaps he might meet Grégoire.
Her face lifted.
She flushed, and pressed her hands together.
‘You would do that?’
She paused.
‘But not here.
It would frighten him.
I'll bring him — to the stables.
May I do that?
He won't be so shy there.
He loves horses…‘
Edouard smiled, and agreed.
Madeleine stood up.
She looked about the room, and then back at him.
‘So many things,’ she said in a puzzled voice as she left.
‘What do you do with them?’
‘I look at them, I suppose.’
Edouard shrugged.
He was aware that-half the time-he hardly saw them.
Madeleine frowned.
‘They must make a lot of dusting.‘
She left then, and Edouard, amused by her words, which had touched some chord in him, looked at the room with new eyes.
Things, indeed; priceless things — which gathered dust  just as cheap ones did.
The room suddenly seemed to him both overcrowded and empty.
The next day, he went to the stables as arranged, and the meeting with Grégoire took place.
Madeleine left them alone after a while, and at first Grégoire was shy and hardly spoke.
Edouard took him on a tour of the stables; he showed him the tack-room; he introduced him to the horses, and gave the little boy lumps of sugar to give them.
Gradually Grégoire seemed to relax: he explained that he was allowed to help the stableboys sometimes; he would have liked to ride, too, but of course he was not allowed to do that.
‘You are allowed now.
Here.’
Edouard lifted the little boy up into the saddle of one of the older horses.
He was very light, and his bones felt as delicate as a bird's.
He looked down at Edouard from the horse's back, and Edouard looked up at him.
The boy's mother was from the Landes region, and Grégoire took after her rather than after Jean-Paul: he was very thin, very tanned, with a narrow solemn face, and thick black hair.
He looked down and, for the first time, smiled.
Edouard felt something snap inside him.
In that instant it was as if some dam erected long ago around his heart had been breached.
He took Grégoire riding.
He cancelled his appointments for a week, and stayed in the Loire, spending each day with the boy.
At the end of that week, Grégoire was allowed to canter.
He executed the run well, without mishap; Edouard's heart was in his mouth as he watched him.
When the boy drew his horse in triumphantly beside him, he felt more pride, more sense of achievement than he had felt in four years of high-powered business dealings.
He talked to Grégoire.
He talked to the boy's mother.
He talked to Madeleine.
With their glad acceptance, it was agreed: Grégoire should return to Paris with Edouard and live at St-Cloud.
Edouard would arrange for his education; he would take care of the boy personally.
Madeleine would accompany Grégoire to Paris for a while, to help him adjust, and then — when she felt ready, when Grégoire felt ready — Edouard would help her find training and work.
He outlined these plans stiffly, fearing a proud rejection.
When he finished, Grégoire's mother fell to her knees, all control gone.
She kissed his hand, and wept; Edouard, helping her back to her  feet, felt rebuked by that gratitude.
He had been blind to need, he thought, ashamed.
He would never be so blind again.
Edouard was worried that it might be difficult for Grégoire to adjust to St-Cloud, and that he might be homesick.
But his worries proved groundless.
The little boy loved the place.
He was made a great pet of by Edouard's manservant, George, and by his cook.
If other servants resented him, these two carefully shielded him.
Edouard set aside a part of each day to be with him.
That winter, he took him skiing.
In the spring he took him to the house in Normandy.
He spent hours on the beach with Grégoire, quite alone, just swimming and talking and playing.
It was after that holiday, when they returned to Paris, that Madeleine said, one day: ‘You don't need me any more.
Grégoire doesn't need me.
I have never known him so happy.’
She was then eighteen; serious, intense, and very single-minded.
She loved children, she said.
She would like to be a children's nurse.
Yes, she would like to train to do that.
Edouard made enquiries, and finally arranged that she should get the place of her choice, Norland College in England, which had trained generations of nannies.
‘You're sure?
You're certain, Madeleine?
You don't have to leave; there is always a home for you here.’
‘I'm certain.
I want to learn.
I want to work.’
She stopped abruptly.
‘I wish to thank you, and I don't know how.
You have changed my life.’
‘Ah, but you changed mine,’ Edouard said.
After Madeleine left, Edouard spent more and more time with the little boy -every free moment.
Grégoire called him ‘uncle’, at his request, which caused great gossip in Paris, but Edouard did not care.
He felt like the boy's father; he loved and cared for Grégoire as if he were his son.
And at the back of his mind, knowing that Jean-Paul had never married and seemed unlikely to, knowing that he himself had met no woman he wished to make his wife, he thought: Grégoire could be my heir.
Everything I have done could be for him.
He will carry on from me, perhaps, as I have carried on from my father.
He consulted his lawyers, and altered his will.
Then, slowly at first, he began to prepare the little boy for this possible destiny.
He never spoke of his inheritance, but he tried, gently, to introduce Grégoire to some aspects of his business  empire.
As his father had shown him jewels, so he showed them to Grégoire.
He took him to all the different workshops de Chavigny maintained in different parts of Paris: he let him watch these highly skilled men at work, the specialists in metalwork, the specialists in inlay work and enamels, the gem-cutters, the gem-setters, the team of men who made the mechanisms for clocks and watches.
These, Grégoire especially loved.
He had, Edouard saw, a technical mind, and loved to see how working parts fitted together.
He would sit for hours, quite silent, watching the assembling of minute coils and springs; he seemed to find the exactitude satisfying.
He loved cars, Edouard quickly discovered that, and — since Edouard loved them, too — this became a shared pleasure.
But whereas Edouard loved cars for their design, and their beauty, and collected them on that basis, Grégoire loved them for the engines under their gleaming bonnets.
Some of their happiest hours together were spent driving, or looking at cars, or simply in the huge garages at St-Cloud, where Grégoire would contentedly remove wheels, and then replace them, and Edouard would contentedly watch him.
His mechanics gave Grégoire lessons, and the little boy learned very quickly.
After a few months he could strip down the simpler engines, service and reassemble them.
When he had finished such a task, he would lift his face, streaked with oil and grease, beaming with a dreamy contentment.
‘I can do it,’ he would say to Edouard.
‘Look.
Everything in the right place.’
Edouard smiled at him gently.
At such time his own life seemed to him equally simple; the components were there — they had been assembled.
The weeks passed, very happily.
They went to the Loire, and toured the vineyards together.
They returned to the house in Normandy and one weekend, just for the excitement of it, camped outside, making a fire on the beach, cooking their own supper, and burning it.
Neither of them minded the burned taste in the least; they sat side by side on the sand, the tall dark man and the small dark boy, at peace together.
‘I'd like to stay here for ever, just like this,’ Grégoire said.
‘So should I,’ Edouard answered.
Later, in sleeping-bags, with Grégoire quiet and breathing  peacefully, Edouard lay on his back, and looked up at the stars.
It was the first time in his life that he had slept out of doors; as a boy, he and Jean-Paul had often pleaded to do this, and it had always been forbidden.
Now, breathing the cool night air, listening to the soft suck of the sea against the sand, Edouard experienced great happiness.
He glanced towards Grégoire, knowing that happiness sprang from him; he had brought Edouard love; he had also given back to him a sense of purpose.
The next day they went riding, the boy in riding clothes made for him by Edouard's English tailors, a miniature copy of Edouard's own.
As they were returning, Grégoire grew quiet and thoughtful.
‘What are you thinking about, Grégoire?’
‘Of you.
And of me.’
The child hesitated.
‘I call you ‘Uncle’, but I wish sometimes…‘
‘Wish what?
Tell me.’
‘I wish I could call you ‘Papa’.’
Grégoire raised his dark eyes to Edouard's face.
‘Just when we are alone.
I understand that.‘
Edouard drew in his horse.
He dismounted, and lifted Grégoire down beside him.
He put his arms around him.
‘I wish you were my son,’ he said very gently.
‘I wish it very much.
And I feel as if you were.
That's the most important thing, don't you think, Grégoire?
Names don't really matter.
Not between us.’
‘Je vous aime.’
Grégoire slipped one small hand around Edouard's neck, and planted a loud kiss on his brow.
‘Et je t'aime aussi, tu sais .’
‘Beaucoup?’
‘Bien sûr.
Beaucoup.’
It was the first time they had ever spoken of the affection they felt.
It made Edouard alive with happiness.
When they returned to Paris, however, he discovered that his relationship with Grégoire, so simple to him, was less simple to others.
His mother summoned him; she made it clear that she wished to see him alone.
She gave him tea; she chatted of this and that.
Edouard waited.
He had been aware from the first that Louise disapproved of Grégoire, and disapproved of this informal adoption.
She had previously limited her expression of that disapproval  to hints, and to glancing remarks; now, clearly, she had decided the time had come to be more open.
She was cautious, though, and Edouard, watching her, realised that his relationship with his mother was changing yet again-that it had, perhaps, been altering over a period of time.
Louise had still not agreed to divert any of her capital into the de Chavigny companies, and Edouard, biding his time, had not pressed her.
But she no longer treated him with the old irritable dismissiveness; she knew of Edouard's reputation as a businessman, and obviously had heard his abilities praised, for she now regarded him warily, as if trying to decide whether, after all, she might have been wrong, and her younger son might be of use to her.
There was a certain speculation in her glance now when she looked at him; she listened when he advised her on her investment portfolio, and — increasingly — she took his advice.
She spoke of some of those investments now, in particular some of her land investments in Texas, which her American advisers were counselling her to sell.
What she said was of interest to Edouard, but he could see that it was by way of a preamble.
His mother wanted his help; she also, he felt more and more certain, wanted to attack him on the question of Grégoire.
In the past she would have done so at once; not now.
Now she was cautious, and Edouard — to his surprise — realised she was weighing the risk of offending him.
‘Dearest Edouard,’ she said at last, finally coming to the point.
‘I did just want to raise the question of that boy…‘
‘Grégoire?’
‘Yes.
Grégoire.’
Her mouth tightened a little.
‘People do talk, you know, Edouard.
They say such wicked and wounding things…‘
‘It's of no concern to me.
Let them say what they like.’
‘Of course.
Of course.’
Louise attempted to sound soothing.
‘I realise you're in a very difficult position.
Really, it is Jean-Paul's responsibility.
And you will step in, Edouard…‘
‘Someone had to.’
‘I fail to see why.
And to take things this far…
’ Louise gave a small toss of her head.
‘Having the boy live with you.
Treating him as if he were your own son, your legitimate son.
It's unfair to him, Edouard, to take him out of his station in  that way.
He'll never be totally accepted, you know that.
And he won't be able to return home.
He'll fit in nowhere-he'll be neither fish nor fowl…‘
Edouard turned away.
He was angered, and for a moment was tempted to reply that Louise herself had managed to fit in to French society, despite her origins and her antecedents, but he curbed himself.
‘He fits in with me,’ he answered stubbornly.
‘At the moment that is all that concerns me.’
‘But Edouard, how can he?’
Louise was now quivering with indignation.
‘Obviously, you're fond of him, but surely you can see?
His accent , Edouard.
You'll never eliminate it altogether, you know.
And he looks so surly, so shifty — he won't meet my eyes…‘
‘That's because you make him shy and self-conscious, that's all.’
Edouard sighed.
‘Look, why don't you make an effort?
Let me bring him here.
Try to talk to him.
You'll see then — when he relaxes, he's delightful.
Maman, he's your grandchild , surely you can overcome your prejudices for once…‘
There was a small silence.
Louise looked at him, a long speculative glance.
He could see her deciding whether to agree or disagree, he could see her weigh the advantages and the possible disadvantages.
The moment when he knew his mother finally acknowledged that she needed him, was then, when she lowered her eyes, and gave a small resigned sigh of agreement.
Edouard looked at her bitterly.
When, as a child, he had been desperate for her love, and had offered his own, she had always turned away from him.
Now, because she needed something from him, she was prepared to give in.
Not that she wanted his love even now; she did not-just his advice, just his financial acumen.
Well, it was a bargain of sorts, he thought coldly.
‘Very well, Edouard.
Bring him here for tea next week.
I'll try, for your sake.’
So she signalled her capitulation, recognised the alteration in the balance of power between them.
Edouard, watching her, wondered if she had any idea that it was too late.
Grégoire did not want to visit Louise.
He opposed the expedition to the Faubourg Saint-Germain with an obstinacy and a truculence that surprised Edouard.
‘She doesn't like me,’ he said, in a small flat voice.’
I know she doesn't.
I don't want to go.’
Nothing Edouard said could overcome this opposition.
When the day came, Grégoire was carefully prepared: he was given a new haircut; George himself supervised his washing procedure, which was inclined to be haphazard.
The boy was arrayed in a neat grey flannel suit, with a tie, a white shirt, and beautifully polished shoes.
In the back of the car taking them in to Paris, he sat with his hands clasped on his bare knees, and a tight closed expression on his face.
Edouard tried very hard to persuade him to talk, and to relax; Grégoire would not say one word.
When they arrived at Louise's house, Grégoire raised a small pinched face to Edouard's, and Edouard took his hand and pressed it.
‘Half an hour, Grégoire.
That's all.
There's nothing to be afraid of.’
Grégoire marched into the house like a small marionette.
In the drawing-room he took a great deal of persuading to sit down, and then, when Louise finally joined them, drifting in in her rose-silk dress, Grégoire seemed so overcome that he forgot to rise.
He remembered, but too late, and then stumbled to his feet too quickly, almost knocking over the tiny wine-table which stood by his side.
‘Grégoire-how lovely that you could come.
Do sit down again…‘
Louise straightened the table a little too ostentatiously.
Grégoire crimsoned, and slowly sat down.
‘Now, Grégoire.
I'm so longing to hear.
You must tell me everythingyou've been doing.
Do you like it at St-Cloud?
How are your lessons coming along?
Do you work hard at them?
Edouard always did — but then darling Edouard was such a clever little boy…‘
So she began, and so she went on.
Edouard sat to one side, helplessly, while Louise bombarded Grégoire with questions, and Grégoire stammered increasingly brief replies.
The tea was brought in by two of Louise's house-maids.
Grégoire sat on the extreme edge of his chair.
Louise poured tea from a silver pot, into cups of Sèvres porcelain.
‘Edouard, if you'd pass that to Grégoire — on the little table there — yes, that's right.
And then — I thought — perhaps one  of these?’
She indicated a silver dish on which were cucumber sandwiches one inch square.
‘Or those?’
Another dish, with exquisitely decorated little biscuits.
A third, with elegant little mouthfuls of patisserie .
‘An English tea.
Edouard always adored that, when we stayed in London.
And little boys are always so hungry , aren't they?
Now, Grégoire which would you like?
I chose them specially for you…‘
‘None, thank you, Madame…
’ Grégoire raised his small face; his lips were set.
‘None?’
Louise's eyes rounded.
‘You're sure?
Well, of course, perhaps you're not used…
Edouard, won't you have one of these?’
Edouard took one of the tiny sandwiches, and sat down again grimly.
Grégoire was now hemmed in by the tiny precarious wine table.
Balanced upon it were a Sèvres plate, a Sèvres cup and saucer.
Grégoire was sitting with his legs tucked firmly back, his elbows pressed against his sides.
‘So, tell me Grégoire,’ Louise went on brightly, after a pause.
‘If you don't like Latin, and you don't like arithmetic, what do you like?
There must be something, I suppose?’
‘Grégoire is very clever with his hands,’ Edouard put in quickly.
‘He can take a clock and put it back together again.
And a car engine too — François has been helping him, hasn't he, Grégoire?’
‘Sometimes.’
Grégoire looked sullenly down at the floor.
‘I don't need him now.
I can do it on my own.’
He raised his eyes to Louise's face.
‘I worked on a Porsche last week, all on my own.
And one day Uncle Edouard said he might let me work on the Aston Martin.
It's my favourite car.‘
This was the longest speech he had made.
Edouard could see the pleading expression come into his eyes, and the desperation for approval.
Perhaps Louise saw it too, for she gave a little laugh.
‘Grégoire, how charming!
But that wasn't quite what I meant.
I'm sure Edouard doesn't need another mechanic…
Oh!
You've finished your tea — how quickly you drink!
Here, let me pour you another cup…‘
This was so overtly rude that Edouard was about to intervene; but before he could speak, Grégoire rose to his feet.
He lifted the Sèvres cup and saucer from the table in front of him, and advanced towards Louise, who was sitting there smiling at him, silver teapot poised.
When he was perhaps one foot away from her, Grégoire dropped the cup.
It fell to the floor, and instantly smashed.
Louise gave an exclamation of displeasure, and Edouard rose to his feet, Grégoire remained absolutely still, looking down at the smashed cup.
Had it been deliberate Edouard hesitated, unsure; it had happened so quickly that it was difficult to know.
Grégoire raised his eyes from the floor to Louise's face: ‘I'm sorry,’ he said, in a flat voice.
‘It's broken.
That was clumsy of me.’
The defiance in his tone was masked, but it was there.
Louise heard it, and flushed.
Edouard heard it too, and it was then that he became almost certain that the dropping of the cup had been no accident.
The episode was passed over shortly afterwards Edouard and Grégoire left.
In the car, returning home, Grégoire was very quiet.
As they reached St-Cloud, he turned to Edouard with a sudden anxiousness in his face.
‘I don't think I'll be asked to go there again.
Not after breaking that cup, do you think?’
The hope that this might indeed be the case was transparent in his face — so transparent that Edouard suppressed a smile.
‘I'm sure my mother will not mind — it was only a cup.
But perhaps we might not go there again — for a while anyway.’
He paused.
‘Grégoire — did you mean to do it?
Tell me truthfully now.’
A small frown appeared on Grégoire's face.
Edouard saw a brief struggle take place.
‘She doesn't like me,’ Grégoire said at last, in a small stubborn voice.
‘I told you she didn't.
I told you I didn't want to go there.’
It was no answer, and it was a complete answer; Edouard, recognising something of Jean-Paul in the implacability of the reply, hearing in it, too, –hat note of bland stubbornness with which some of his workmen in the Loire would resist argument and change with an age-old peasant resilience, sighed and decided it might be wiser to leave the subject there.
The episode was better forgotten, he thought; he would not risk exposing Grégoire to Louise's unkindness again.
Days  passed; weeks passed.
Once Grégoire was certain that he was reprieved from all further visits to the Faubourg Saint-Germain, his nature became open and sunny once again.
In the spring of that year, 1955, not long after this meeting, the tutor Edouard had hired for Grégoire left to take up an appointment elsewhere.
Edouard, searching around for a replacement, hit on the idea of Hugo Glendinning.
He had seen Hugo from time to time in the intervening years; he knew from Hugo's cousin Christian that his former tutor had fallen on hard times.
A prestigious teaching post at Winchester had been terminated abruptly some years before, and Hugo had failed to hold another since.
The regime of the major public schools did not suit him, Christian explained.
He was too individualist, too eccentric.
Christian was sure he would be delighted to go to France and work for Edouard.
Private tutors in England were less in demand these days, Christian said with a smile; times were changing.
Edouard was a little uncertain about the decision.
He would have preferred Grégoire to go to school and mix with other children.
But the little boy, having missed so many years of schooling, was backward in his lessons, and Edouard feared that he would be teased.
He would wait another couple of years, he told himself, until Grégoire had had a chance to catch up, and was more confident.
He thought of Hugo, who had revolutionised his own thinking, who had made him challenge and question for the first time.
He thought of Hugo's ability to excite interest, to stimulate thought.
He reminded himself of Hugo's dedication, his wisdom, his kindness and his wit.
He heard Hugo's voice, saying lines of poetry to him that remained with him still: he came to a decision, and wrote to him.
It was his first major mistake.
Hugo had never suffered fools gladly — Edouard, not a fool, and possessed of a quick and nimble mind had forgotten that side of his nature, which he, in any case, had rarely seen.
Also, time had passed, and Hugo had changed.
A youthful tendency to impatience had, over the years, modulated into a marked irascibility.
Hugo looked at his contemporaries, less clever than himself, and saw them outstrip him.
He blamed political bias, but when he had stood as a Labour candidate in the 1945 elections in which the socialists swept to post-war  victory, Hugo had not won his seat.
He was in his fifties, unmarried, and out of touch with post-war educational methods.
He had never taught boys who were less than well-grounded in traditional academic subjects.
He and Grégoire met, and it was almost instant dislike.
Grégoire's ability to take a clock to pieces and put it together again, to strip down a car engine, to harness a horse and ride it well, to know and to cherish the names and characteristics of plants and of animals — all these abilities meant nothing to Hugo at all.
At first, Hugo tried to be patient.
He understood that the boy had had little formal education until Edouard took him under his wing.
He could now read and write in French, and had learned a little English from Edouard, but that was the extent of his achievements.
Enthusiastically, curbing the dislike he felt, Hugo embarked on a plan that would give Grégoire a solid foundation in all the subjects he considered of importance.
These did not include anything remotely mechanical; certainly not the workings of the internal combustion engine.
Education, to Hugo, was literature, history and languages first, everything else a very poor second.
Their tutorials did not go well.
Grégoire could be stubborn.
It did not take Hugo long to decide that the boy was wilful: he could learn, he just did not want to.
He was lazy; he refused to concentrate.
To his own horror, Hugo, the lifelong Socialist, found himself blaming the boy's peasant stock.
Hating himself for that snobbery, he drove the boy harder, refusing to admit to himself that he was failing.
He knew he had failed at so many things, but never as a teacher, never as that.
Now here was a boy who listened stolidly while Hugo read to him some of the greatest literature in the world; who yawned over Villon; who stared out of the window longingly while Hugo read Maupassant or Flaubert.
Hugo would not, could not, lower his standards; the boy would not, could not, raise his.
They reached an impasse very soon — but neither told Edouard, Hugo out of pride, Grégoire because he could not bear to disappoint him.
Late in the summer of 1955, when the weather was very hot, Edouard left for America on business.
He had decided to investigate for himself the question of his mother's land investments  in Texas, the holdings her Wall Street advisers seemed so anxious she should sell — so anxious that Edouard was a little suspicious.
He would be away two weeks: when he returned, he told Grégoire, they would go away on holiday, to the sea perhaps, as they had the year before.
Grégoire missed Edouard; his concentration did not improve.
The schoolroom at St-Cloud was stiflingly hot day after day; Hugo's temper did not improve, either.
Once, to his own dismay, he almost hit the child out of frustration, and only just curbed himself in time.
Furious, he decided to abandon Latin, for the moment, and concentrate on French.
If the boy would not listen to poetry, then he should be forced at least to understand some grammar.
He set Grégoire pages of text to learn, sequence after sequence of rules.
Then he tested him on them.
One afternoon, about a week after Edouard's departure, he noticed the boy was quieter than usual, and slightly flushed.
He asked him sarcastically if he felt all right.
Grégoire looked down.
‘I have a headache,’ he said eventually.
‘I also have a headache.’
Hugo slapped his textbook down on his desk.
‘I would have less of a headache if you concentrated.
Now.
The conjugations of these irregular verbs.
We will go over them again.
Perhaps if you remember them you will forget your maladies.’
The boy bent his head over the book with a docility unlike him.
The next day it was the same.
He volunteered nothing.
He sat in sullen silence.
He refused to eat his lunch.
At two they returned to the schoolroom.
‘You are sulking, Grégoire.
Would you like to tell me why?’
The boy raised his flushed face.
‘I don't feel very well.’
‘You would feel better if you worked.
Laziness is enough to make anyone feel ill.’
‘Truly.
My head aches.
I should like to lie down.’
The little boy lowered his head on his arms, and Hugo gave a sigh of exasperation.
He got up, crossed to the boy, and felt his forehead.
He did feel a little hot, but the schoolroom was stifling, so it was hardly surprising.
‘Grégoire, these devices may have worked with your previous tutor; they will not work with me.’
Hugo returned to  his desk.
‘If I told you lessons were over for the day and you could go swimming, no doubt a miraculous recovery would take place.
I have no intention of doing that.
Now, sit up, please, and make an attempt to concentrate.
Open your grammar at page fourteen.’
Slowly the boy did as he was told.
By half-past three, when their lessons were normally over, Hugo felt he was getting into his stride.
The boy was quiet; he appeared to be listening; certainly he wasn't staring out of the window for once.
Hugo glanced at his watch, and decided to press on for another half-hour.
At five minutes to four, Grégoire went into convulsions.
It happened very suddenly, and without warning.
Suddenly Hugo heard a harsh sibilant inhalation of breath.
He looked up in alarm.
The boy's head had arched back; his eyes had rolled up; one arm and one leg jerked, then his whole body.
He fell off his chair, and on to the floor.
Hugo had no idea what to do: frantically he rang for the servants.
He fetched water and splashed it over the twitching boy.
He loosened his collar, attempted to put a ruler between his teeth, and failed.
Just after four, the convulsion stopped.
An ambulance was called.
Grégoire had a second convulsion on the way to hospital.
The top paediatrician in Paris was summoned from his home in the suburbs.
He informed a white-faced Hugo that the boy almost certainly had meningitis.
They would perform a lumbar puncture to make sure.
And after that…
‘Then what?
Then what?’
Hugo was distraught.
‘Then you pray, monsieur.
I will do the best I can, naturally.
If he had been admitted sooner, I should have been more optimistic.
That is all I can say.’
Hugo first telephoned the de Chavigny offices and told them to contact Edouard immediately; then, for the first time in many years, he prayed.
Edouard was contacted in the middle of a meeting at six-fifteen Eastern Standard Time.
He left immediately for the airport, and chartered a jet.
Grégoire died the next day, in the early morning, two hours before Edouard reached the hospital.
He took the boy's small, still limp body in his arms, and wept with a passion of which his business associates would not have believed him capable.
Three months later Hugo was drowned in a boating accident; there were rumours of suicide, which were hushed up.
He left Edouard his library, and when Edouard heard this he angrily sent the whole collection to auction.
Grégoire was buried in the de Chavigny chapel, to the fury of Louise and the indifference of Jean-Paul, and Edouard tried to begin to rebuild his life.
It was from that time, his friends judged, that he became a changed man.
They had always respected Edouard de Chavigny.
Now they began to fear him.
In the early 'fifties, Edouard had commissioned Emil Lassalle, pupil of Le Corbusier, and the leading Modernist architect in France, to design the new administrative headquarters for the de Chavigny parent company in Paris.
By late 1955, the tall black glass tower Lassalle designed was completed; it was the first building of its kind in Paris, the subject of much controversy and subsequent imitation, to become a landmark in the commercial sector.
In the winter of that year, Edouard arrived there punctually at nine, as he always did.
As always, he was driven from St-Cloud in his black Rolls Royce Phantom; as always, when his driver held back the door, and he climbed out, he looked up at Lassalle's building, that tall dark tower, and then passed inside.
He was not looking forward to the events which he knew lay ahead of him that morning, but he dismissed all such thoughts from his mind: pleasant and unpleasant, most tasks were equal to him now: he viewed them with the same cold dispassion — so many tasks in each day, so many days in each week, so many weeks in each year.
He stepped into his private elevator, and pressed the button for the eighteenth floor.
In his office on the twelfth floor of the same building, Gérard Gravellier, head of the archive department of de Chavigny, was standing at the window.
He had watched the Rolls Royce pull up as he did most mornings.
He had watched the tall, black-suited figure pass quickly inside.
Once Edouard was out of sight, he turned away from the window thoughtfully, brushing a few flecks of dandruff absent-mindedly from the shoulders of his suit.
The suit had been tailored for him in London, at a cost of some one hundred and fifty guineas — not by Edouard de Chavigny's own tailors, Gieves of Savile Row, but by another man who could do a cheaper, and passable, imitation.
Gravellier felt nervous, so nervous he'd been unable to eat any breakfast.
But now he tried to calm himself: there was no reason for nerves, he told himself.
He knew the reason for this meeting.
It was to discuss the new storage and filing systems to be used for the archive of de Chavigny designs, which had been replanned from scratch at Edouard de Chavigny's insistence, and which would become fully operational that week, when the archive was finally moved to its new headquarters.
The new system involved some staffing reductions — voluntary redundancies; it was probably them that Edouard de Chavigny wanted to discuss, or some details of the system.
Edouard de Chavigny's eye for detail was well known; no aspect, however small, connected with the running of his companies escaped his notice.
The remembrance of that brought the nervousness back.
Gérard Gravellier was beginning to sweat.
When the buzzer went on his new chrome and ash desk, he jumped.
Calm down , he said to himself.
He began to recite a litany of his own successes to himself as he passed down the quiet, thickly carpeted corridors to the executive lift that went up to the eighteenth floor: a new apartment in the smart suburb of Beauséjour; a smaller apartment in Montparnasse, with a most accommodating young mistress; two cars, one the largest and latest registration Citroën Familiale; a generous expense account, which was not queried too closely — he hoped was not queried too closely.
He had a degree in fine arts from the Sorbonne; he had further training from the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, and the Beaux Arts in Paris; he knew more about the history of jewellery design in general, and of the de Chavigny company in particular , than anyone else except the man he was going to see now.
He sighed and mopped his brow.
He was indispensable.
He hoped.
It was his first visit to Edouard de Chavigny's offices in the penthouse suite on the eighteenth floor.
When he stepped out of the high-speed lift, his eyes widened.
The break with tradition was complete.
The outer reception area was vast; an ocean of pale beige and white; glass and chrome.
Three huge natural leather couches surrounded a Le Corbusier table; two extremely beautiful receptionists sat at Le Corbusier desks.
They both wore plain silk blouses, pearls and Hermès scarves knotted loosely around their throats.
Gravellier looked at them sideways.
Both highly desirable, the one on the left especially; both looked as if they wouldn't get on their backs for anything less than Edouard de Chavigny himself; both had the kind of accent that made his toes curl, and made him wish he'd opted for the more costly tailor.
Bon genre — it was a type he detested.
‘You'll have to wait just a little while, Monsieur Gravellier,’ one had said.
No apology; no explanation; no offer of coffee; nothing.
He sat there sweating for forty-five minutes.
Then the inner office, even more discreetly sumptuous, and two more smooth bitches, secretaries this time, both looking as if they had starch in their well-bred pants.
Jesus!
Then the inner sanctum; precisely one hour after he'd first been called; he was sure it was deliberate.
He went in through the plain mahogany door, and stopped.
The office was very large, and startlingly austere.
He had expected antiques, flowers, the portraits of past barons de Chavigny which had always hung in the old Baron's offices.
There was none.
The walls were hung with abstracts.
His jaw dropped slightly as he took them in: one Picasso, from his Cubist period; two superb Braques; an early Kandinsky; a Mondrian; one of Rothko's red series; a vast and tormented Jackson Pollock.
On the black bookcase behind the desk three exquisite bronzes: one Brancusi; one Henry Moore; one Giacometti.
He swallowed.
It was a long walk to the chair in front of the desk.
He made it hesitantly.
Edouard de Chavigny looked up.
Gravellier looked at him curiously.
He was thirty now, he knew, but he looked slightly older.
Tall, well over six foot, with wide shoulders, and the same magnetic good looks as his father.
Tanned skin, strong features; that extraordinary combination of very black hair and dark blue eyes.
Gravellier felt as if the eyes looked straight into his head and out the other side again.
He glanced enviously at the suit: plain black, with a waistcoat, four buttons at the cuff, whereas his only had three.
He swore silently to himself.
The difference between a two-hundred-guinea suit and a five-hundred-guinea one was only too obvious at close hand.
A white shirt; a black knitted silk tie.
Jesus, the man looked as if he was in mourning.
‘Do sit down.’
Gravellier sat.
The huge black desk was flanked by a complicated system of telephones and intercoms; on the top of it was one platinum de Chavigny pen and one plain white folder.
Nothing else — and this man knew what was happening in Rome, Tokyo or Johannesburg about two months before the men on the spot found out about it.
How did he do it?
He eased his collar away from his neck.
There was silence.
He knew those silences; they were famous.
They were designed to unnerve you, to make you start jabbering indiscreetly.
He swallowed, and started jabbering.
‘I am filled with admiration for the new headquarters, Monsieur de Chavigny.
I just wanted to say that.
It will make a great difference to our — er — corporate image, I feel sure.
To have the privilege of working in such modern, such advanced, offices.
Already I hear that —‘
‘I did not call you here to discuss the offices.’
Gravellier coughed.
The voice was incisive and cold, and he knew he ought to relax, to keep calm, above all to shut up, but somehow he couldn't.
‘No, of course, Monsieur de Chavigny.
If you are concerned about the transfer of the archives, I just wanted to assure you that it is right on schedule.
I brought some papers with me, in case you…
I have the details here.
Layout.
The new staffing arrangements…‘
‘Monsieur Gravellier.
How long have you worked for de Chavigny?’
‘Twenty-one years, Monsieur de Chavigny.’
‘Twenty-one years, two months and three weeks.’
He flicked open the white file in front of him.
Gravellier tried desperately to read it upside-down.
‘I have here the report of the head of our security division.‘
There was another of those silences.
Gravellier went white.
‘I don't think we need to itemise the details, do you?
You began passing details of archive designs fourteen months ago.
Comparatively trivial details to begin with, which was why you were allowed to continue.
I wanted to see how far you would go.’
Another silence.
‘Last month you were given access to highly confidential details regarding our plans for designs for 1956–7.
You recall them, I am sure.
They were coded ‘White Ice’, and involved  the extensive use of platinum, white gold, and diamonds.
It makes no difference, in fact, whether you recall them or not, since they were invented for your benefit, and the benefit of the rival company to whom you passed those confidential details yesterday afternoon.’
He gave a wintry smile.
‘Our actual details for 1956–7 designs are, needless to say, quite different, and you will not be receiving them.
You are fired.’
Gravellier stood up, blood washing over his face, sickness rising in his stomach.
You bastard , he thought incoherently.
You cold-blooded bastard.
Eighteen months.
You gave me enough rope for eighteen months, and now …
He gripped the back of the chair in front of him.
Edouard de Chavigny looked up.
His face betrayed no emotion whatsoever.
‘Your company mortgage is cancelled.
Unless you can make private arrangements, the company will foreclose.
Your company car was impounded this morning.
The company has informed your two banks, where you have substantial overdrafts, I understand, that your employment with us has ceased, and we cannot be regarded as guarantors.
Your pension plan with this company is void.
Our solicitors filed action for breach of trust, fraud and embezzlement this morning.
Is there anything else?’
‘Monsieur de Chavigny.
Please…
’ Gravellier clasped his sweating palms together.
‘I'm a married man.
I have four children.
They're still in school.
The eldest is only eleven, and…‘
There was another silence.
For one minute, the most glorious minute in the world, Gravellier thought he had got through to him.
At the mention of his children the eyes of the man behind the desk flickered.
Then he closed the white file in front of him with a snap.
‘There are two officers outside.
One is from the Inspecteurs des Finances.
The other is from the Préfecture Île de la Cité.
You will find you are under arrest.
Good morning.’
Gravellier made it as far as the door.
Then he looked back, anger and fear and loathing rising in him like bile.
He looked at that perfect suit, that perfectly inexpressive face, those cold eyes.
‘God damn you.’
His voice choked.
‘Twenty-two years.
I hope you rot in hell.’
When the door closed on him, Edouard de Chavigny sat very still.
He looked into the turbulence, the red and the black at the heart of the Jackson Pollock painting.
He smiled a small bitter smile, and pushed the white folder aside.
He was already in hell.
It didn't take the curses of a man like Gérard Gravellier to take him there.
He had always had a capacity for ruthlessness.
Before he had curbed it; now he gave it rein.
Disloyalty, subterfuge, inefficiency: these he had once rectified; now he punished.
What he wanted done, he wanted done exactly, and by yesterday.
Those who could stand the pace flourished; those who could not went to the wall.
Those who crossed him — and there were fewer and fewer of those — quickly had cause to regret it.
A small jeweller in Switzerland, who for years had made good profits by flagrantly copying de Chavigny designs, using inferior stones, low-carat metals and cheap workmanship, and then passing them off as de Chavigny originals through an impenetrable network of shady dealers and retailers, found its bank was suddenly very glad to extend credit for new workshops and an expansion programme.
The jeweller was overjoyed; he began spending heavily.
When he was at his most extended, his bank, a subsidiary of a larger group headed by Crédit Suisse, one of the de Chavigny company's Swiss bankers, suddenly called in his loans.
He was unable to repay, and asked for an extension.
The extension was refused at head office; the jeweller went bankrupt.
The advertising company in London handling the de Chavigny accounts, and responsible for the image of de Chavigny jewellery and wine in Great Britain, was twelve hours late with its new presentation, not an uncommon occurrence.
They lost the account the same day.
Within six weeks their most aggressive rivals had a new de Chavigny campaign under way— and not on the drawing-boards, but on the pages of every major magazine in the country.
‘How did he do it.
How did that sonofabitch do it so quickly?’
The art director stared at the glossy double-spread in Harper's Bazaar enviously; he knew, just knew, that it was going to sweep every goddamn award.
‘I don't know,’ said his marketing director.
‘But you better  get your arse on the deck.
We've just had another six major cancellations.’
Six months later the advertising agency was taken over by its successful rivals; two months after that they were both incorporated in De Chavigny (Advertising), a new company with offices in London, Paris, Zurich, Milan and New York, registered in the Balearic Islands, and with sole responsibility for the marketing of all de Chavigny products and investments, from steel to hotels and property, world-wide.
The president of the company, its executive director, and the man holding the controlling interest in its shares was Edouard de Chavigny.
Both his mother and his brother found this new ruthlessness in Edouard's character did not spare members of his own family.
In January 1956, Jean-Paul made one of his rare visits to Paris.
His object was to persuade Edouard — not persuade, he kept reminding himself,tell ! who was the baron de Chavigny after all?— to invest in further acreage of vineyards in Algeria as well as timber and olive plantations there.
Jean-Paul was in no doubt that he was on to a good deal.
‘That cretin Olivier de Courseulles is selling up.
Lock, stock and barrel.
He's nervous.
Got the wind up.
The first sign of unrest and he's running for his life.
Edouard, there's twenty-five thousand hectares of olives — they produce some of the best oil in the region.
Thirty thousand of timber.
Just under a thousand of vines — but it's some of the best land there is.
And he's letting it go for a song.
Because he's in a hurry.
And we're friends.
I told him there'd be no problem.’
‘You shouldn't have done that.’
His brother tapped the surface of his black desk with his platinum pen.
‘Why not?’
Jean-Paul stared at him blankly.
‘You mean there's some difficulty?
There can't be.
I looked at those last reports you sent me, the financial returns.
Well, I know I'm no financial expert, but even I can see the money's there.’
‘It's not a question of that.
Why do you think he is selling?
At such a remarkably charitable price?’
‘Well, as I say, he's nervous.
Obviously, the political situation being what it is out there at the moment, things are a bit unstable.’
‘Highly unstable.’
‘But that won't last, for God's sake.
The French government won't stand for it, we won't stand for it, damn it.
Any more  trouble, and they'll send in troops.
Clean it up in no time.
No problem.
I know the Arabs, you don't.
They couldn't organise a strike, let alone a revolution.
All that talk is just alarmist rubbish.’
‘If you were wrong, and they did somehow manage to organise a revolution…
’ Edouard's voice was coldly sarcastic.
‘Have you any idea what would happen to French-owned land afterwards?’
‘Well, it would be repossessed, I suppose.’
Jean-Paul's voice took on a belligerent note.
‘But that's irrelevant.
I'm telling you, it can't happen, and it won't happen.
Algeria is a French colony, for God's sake.
Perhaps you've forgotten that.’
‘Have you observed recent events in Indo-China?’
‘Of course I damn well have.
It's totally different.’
‘The answer is no.’
Jean-Paul, his face flushed and perplexed, stared at his brother.
He hardly knew him, he realised suddenly.
This cool dark-suited man was a stranger.
‘Look, little brother…
’ He leaned across the desk.
‘I didn't expect this.
I don't understand it.
You sit there, looking like God.
You just say ‘no’— you don't deign to give me any reasons.’
‘I can give you plenty of reasons.
Most of them are contained in the report I had drawn up, which is in front of you now.’
Edouard looked at his watch.
‘It's a high-risk investment, on which, if the political situation worsens, we stand to make a total loss.
I am not always against high-risk investments: I am against this one.’
Jean-Paul's mouth set.
‘Perhaps you're forgetting something.
I am the baron de Chavigny.
Not you.
In the final analysis, what I say goes.
1 can overrule you on this.’
‘Fine.
You can have my resignation in the morning.’
Edouard stood up; his eyes were dark with anger.
Jean-Paul began to feel seriously alarmed.
‘Wait a minute, hang on.
Don't get on your high horse with me.
God — your temper, Edouard.
You know I don't want that.
You know I always let myself be advised by you, and of course I'll bow to your judgement on this if I have to…
‘He hesitated, a cunning look suddenly coming into his eyes.
‘The thing is, just occasionally, you might listen to me.
In this case I know what I'm talking about.
And, after all, you  scratch my back, I'll scratch yours — that's what business is about, they tell me.
You wanted me to talk to Mother about her investments, about making money over to de Chavigny.
Well, I'm happy to do that; in fact I'm seeing her this afternoon, and I'll mention it.
But I don't see why I should when you're being so obstinate about this.
Jesus, Edouard.
I practically promised Olivier de Courseulles.
I shall look a damn fool if I change my mind now.’
Edouard sat down again with a tight smile.
‘By all means discuss that with Maman.
Whether you do or not, I am not going to change my mind.’
Jean-Paul flung out.
The same afternoon he took tea with Louise de Chavigny in the pale grey and rose pink salon of her house in the Faubourg St-Germain.
He sipped China tea from eighteenth-century Limoges cups, and his plump bottom squirmed on the silk upholstered bergére armchair — made for beauty, not for comfort.
Louise, as beautiful as ever, the lines of her face almost invisible since her most recent facelift, wearing the latest sheath dress from Dior, its narrow shape flattering her slender figure, sat opposite him calmly and charmingly talking about nothing at all.
Jean-Paul eyed the Limoges plate of pâtisserie , provided for his benefit.
Perhaps just one more éclair — God, they were minute enough in all conscience.
He reached out a large pink hand, and conveyed the marvellous confection of light pastry, chocolate and cream to his mouth.
Louise watched him fastidiously.
‘Jean-Paul, you have put on a lot of weight since I last saw you.
You should go on a diet.
Exercise more.
Edouard rides every morning, you know, in the Bois de Boulogne.’
Jean-Paul frowned.
He decided to come to the point.
Not very subtly, he raised the question of Louise's investment portfolio.
Louise's eyebrows rose.
‘Oh, but, darling, I thought you saw Edouard this morning?
Then, surely you know, it's all taken care of — though it's very sweet of you to ask.’
She paused to light a cigarette with her platinum de Chavigny lighter.
‘Really, it's all so complicated, but it seems I was being rather badly advised.
And by such a respectable firm, too.
Papa always trusted them implicitly.
I trusted them, too.
So, of course, I'm all the more grateful to Edouard.’
Her eyes narrowed slightly.
‘He really is very clever, you know.
Far cleverer than I realised.’
Jean-Paul glowered.
This was not a song he had heard her sing before.
‘You see, there were all these land-holdings.’
Louise waved her cigarette vaguely.
‘They were advising me to sell, and it seemed they had a taker who was offering a very generous price.
Some of it was ranchland; most of it was semi-desert, I believe.
And I'd seen a most delightful villa — do you know St-Tropez, Jean?
The most charming place — so peaceful — still just a tiny fishing village really.
The house was perfect — well, it would have been perfect; it needed a complete overhaul, of course, redecorating from top to bottom, and then I'd thought of building some guest-houses, and it seemed a little silly to have a villa with perfect anchorage unless I used it, so I'd thought of a yacht…
’ Her voice trailed away.
‘So, all in all, last year, I was quite ready to liquidate some of my American assets, and I would have done so, had it not been for Edouard.’
‘He advised against it?’
‘Darling, it turned out there was oil there.
A great deal, simply waiting to be pumped to the surface.
So, of course, it was worth considerably more than I'd been offered, and there were the most unpleasant suggestions flying around.
That my advisors had been bribed…
Well, I transferred my portfolio, naturally, as soon as Edouard explained.
They've gone out of business anyway now.
The most dreadful scandal.
It was on the front page of the New York Times — surely you must recall, Jean-Paul?’
‘I don't read the New York Times in Algiers.’
‘Darling, you should.’
Louise's dark eyes warmed.
‘I never did, or not the financial pages anyway.
But I do now.
And the Wall Street Journaland the Financial Timesand —‘
‘So what happened about the land?’
Jean-Paul interrupted her quickly.
‘I sold it, of course.
To the oil consortium.’
Louise gave a little smile.
‘For rather a lot of money.
And substantial shareholdings in the consortium itself.
Edouard has a fifteen-per-cent share, I believe, and I have the same, which makes up thirty per cent.
Not a controlling interest, then, but a powerful one.
Do you see?’
Jean-Paul saw.
He took another choux pastry to console himself.
‘So Edouard has the investment capital he needs for his expansion programme?’
He knew it was hardly worth putting the question.
Louise gave a light laugh.
‘Darling, really, you must try to keep up more.
He had that six months ago, at least.’
‘You sold other stock?’
‘Well, Edouard advised it, darling.
And I was going to consult you, but really Algeria is a long way away, and you never seem to be in Paris…so, yes, I sold some rather boring stock that was as safe as Fort Knox and about as immobile, and invested in de Chavigny.
It was a wise decision, Jean-Paul.
Very wise.
The company is diversifying, growing so fast it's almost unbelievable.
I shouldn't think Edouard wants any further investment just now — but if he did, darling, if you have, you know, a little pin money, then, you couldn't be better advised than to-’
‘It's mycompany.’
Jean-Paul stood up, his face red with anger.
‘It's my company.
Edouard is employed by me.
I just wish sometimes that someone, somewhere, would remember that.’
He looked down at his mother, who appeared quite unflustered by his rage.
She had always known which way the wind was blowing, he thought savagely.
Always.
His mother — whose preference for himself, devotion to himself, he had always taken for granted.
Well, he wasn't the favourite any more, that much was obvious.
Edouard had sneaked in behind his back.
He hesitated, his anger subsiding quickly as it always did, and leaving him feeling exhausted.
He couldn't fight Edouard, he knew that.
He didn't have the ability, and he didn't have the strength.
So he'd just damn well have to do what Edouard said, and go back to Algeria with his tail between his legs.
His little brother.
‘Tell me something, Maman.’
He spoke suddenly, the question rising up out of the confusion and indignation in his mind.
‘Tell me.
Does Edouard frighten you sometimes?’
‘Frighten me?’
Louise's eyes widened.
‘Well, he's so changed.
I find him changed.
So cold.
Humourless.
He didn't feel like my brother any more.
It was like talking to a machine.’
‘A useful machine.
A highly efficient one.’
‘Yes, but he's my brother, damn it.
We were always so close.’
‘Edouard is close to no one these days.’
‘Why not?
What the hell's wrong with him?’
‘Darling, how should I know?
He prefers it that way.
And I must confess I find it makes things easier.
He and I get along very well now.
We talk about business, and he enquires after my health, and remembers my birthday and so on…
’ She shrugged.
‘I always used to feel such demands from Edouard.
Even when he was a very little boy.
It was as if he always needed something — it was terribly exhausting.
Now he makes no demands at all.
No emotional demands.
Really, it's much better that way.’
Jean-Paul hesitated; he had never reciprocated his mother's old affection for him, and he now felt positive dislike.
But he wanted to understand.
‘What about women?’
‘Ah, women.’
Louise smiled a slow smile, and smoothed down the skirt of her dress.
‘Well, there are a lot of those — or so I hear.
Edouard never discusses them with me.’
‘Is he going to get married?’
He blurted out the question, and Louise shrugged.
‘Possibly.
Some day.
He'd like an heir.
He has dynastic leanings, I think, just as your father did.
And you've never married, Jean-Paul.’
‘Well — I never found the right woman.
It doesn't mean I won't.’
He shifted about anxiously from foot to foot.
To his own surprise all his anger against Edouard had evaporated.
He was beginning to feel unhappy for his brother.
Louise frowned, and stood up.
‘Of course, it is terribly important whom Edouard marries…,’ she began thoughtfully.
‘Terribly important.
I think about it often.’
‘Why, Maman?’
‘Oh, darling, it's obvious.
Edouard is an obsessional — surely you can see that?
He's obsessed about his work — obsessed with building some kind of memorial to your father.
He was totally obsessed with that dreadful little boy Grégoire — he even brought him to tea here, you know, and the child had no manners at all, he broke one of the Sèvres cups — Edouard said he was nervous…
And so, if Edouard were to fall in  love, to marry, he'd be equally as obsessional then.
His wife would be able to influence him, Jean-Paul, and —‘
‘Influence him?
Some woman?’
Jean-Paul laughed.
‘You must be joking.
No one influences Edouard.’
‘Not yet.’
Louise turned away.
‘But that may change.
You don't understand your brother, Jean-Paul.
He's not a machine, you see.
Underneath, underneath, he's a very passionate man.’
Jean-Paul thought of what their mother had said when he had his farewell interview with his brother.
He had given in about the purchase of the land, of course.
Edouard had shown no emotion, made no acknowledgement of his capitulation.
Jean-Paul looked at the man behind the desk.
The eyes were like flint.
He felt a terrible impotent welling-up of affection.
‘My plane doesn't leave till nine.
We've got time to go out.
Get a drink.
Have dinner even.
What d'you say, Edouard?
I hate talking in offices.
Can't relax in them.
Never could.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Edouard glanced down at his thin gold de Chavigny watch.
‘I have appointments all evening.
I can't break them.’
‘Damn it — you can cancel.
Come on, Edouard — I've hardly seen you in years.
I could do with a drink…‘
‘I'm sorry.
I'm behind schedule as it is.’
Jean-Paul rose awkwardly to his feet.
‘Oh, all right, then.
It's a pity.
Maybe you'll be coming out to Algeria soon?
Yes?
I'd like that…‘
‘It's possible.’
Edouard paused.
‘If the political situation were to worsen.’
‘Yes.
Fine.
Well, let me know.
You call me, though — not some goddamn secretary.
Is that a deal?’
Edouard looked up, and smiled for the first time.
‘It's a deal.’
They shook hands.
At the door Edouard pressed a small file into Jean-Paul's hands.
‘Something that might interest you,’ he said shortly.
‘Read it on the plane.
Or when you get back…‘
Jean-Paul was travelling first class.
He started on the Martinis before takeoff.
Halfway across the Mediterranean, when the stewardess seemed oddly unresponsive to his overtures, he idly opened the file.
It contained the details of the funding of a new paediatric  clinic outside Paris, to be built with a donation from the de Chavigny company, and funded annually from the company's charity portfolio.
Jean-Paul flicked the pages; he couldn't see why Edouard had given him this.
De Chavigny now had a number of such projects — as tax deductions, he imagined.
Then he turned the page.
The infectious diseases wing was being personally funded by his brother.
Jean-Paul stared at the figure.
Ten million dollars down the drain sounded rather a lot.
Then he understood.
The wing was to be named in memory of his son, Grégoire.
In the spring of the following year, 1957, Marie-Ande Roussain, Edouard de Chavigny's senior secretary, a young woman of considerable ability and renowned for the fact that she never became flustered, called Edouard in his office.
She was very flustered indeed.
‘I'm extremely sorry, Monsieur de Chavigny, but I have someone on the line who wants to speak to you personally.
She — er — she won't go away.
I told her you were unavailable, but —‘
‘Who is it?’
‘She says she is the Contessa Sforza-Bellini, sir.’
‘Get rid of her.
I've never heard of her in my life.’
Edouard moved to flick the switch on his intercom.
Then he stopped.
‘Wait a minute.
Does she sound English?’
‘Yes, Monsieur de Chavigny.
Very.’
‘Put her on at once.
And cancel all my appointments for this evening.’
There was a startled silence from the outer office.
‘Cancel them, Monsieur de Chavigny?
But you have a reception at the Saudi-Arabian ambassador's at seven, a meeting with the US Under-Secretary of the Interior about the Little Big Inch Pipeline at eight; Simon Scher is meeting with you at St-Cloud at nine, and you are due at the duchesse de Quinsac-Plessan's reception at ten…‘
‘I said cancel them.
And put me through.’
‘Yes, Monsieur de Chavigny.’
Marie-Ande stared at her telephone with dislike.
Who the hell was this woman?
‘I'm putting you through now, Contessa.’
In his office, Edouard picked up the telephone.
‘Isobel!
Where are you?
The Ritz?
I'm on my way now.’
Among the grand Paris hotels, the Ritz has one incomparable advantage; it is located in the Place Vendôme, and the Place Vendôme is adjacent to the most tempting shopping-street in the world, the rue du Faubourg St-Honoré.
Isobel had taken advantage of this proximity.
She had already visited the de Chavigny showrooms there, and because she was feeling nervous she had been more than usually extravagant.
She sat waiting for Edouard at a table in the beautiful jardin intérieur .
She was wearing her favourite Dior, a narrow dress of violette de Parme silk crêpe, and a de Chavigny collar of amethysts and diamonds.
Her thin leather elbow-length gloves had been dyed to match the dress, and she had intended to wear her most devastating hat, with a black lace veil.
She had put it on and taken it off three times; it now lay on the chair beside her.
Her thick hair was consequently a little disarranged; it flamed against the light.
She was extremely pleased to note that every man in the room was staring at her.
It was her thirty-sixth birthday, and on such a day the stares were reassuring.
She saw Edouard first — she had positioned herself so that she would be able to.
A tall dark man in a very dark suit, striding across the lobby.
Then he was beside her, and looking down at her, and Isobel for a second was taken aback.
She knew he had changed, that he was a man of thirty-two now, a successful man, a powerful man — probably quite different from the young man she had known.
She had read about him in the newspapers, seen him once or twice on television, seen photographs of him in magazines.
Still, she was unprepared.
The gentleness had gone from his face.
That vulnerability which she remembered — there was no trace.
The man who looked down at her was startlingly good-looking-the moment his tall lithe figure entered the room every woman in the place had looked up — he was also a little frightening.
There were lines now from nose to mouth; the lips were stern; she had seen him take in the room, who was there, with whom, with one cold appraising glance as he entered.
She thought:Oh God, I've done the wrong thing .
And then slowly he smiled, and the smile lit the dark blue eyes and transformed the face, and she knew it was all right; she hadn't done the wrong thing after all.
‘Darling Edouard,’ she said.
He took her hand and raised it to his lips, his eyes never leaving her face.
She felt a moment's self-consciousness and doubt, because she knew she had changed, too; that there were lines around the emerald eyes that hadn't been there last time he saw her.
‘It's eight years.
Almost eight.’
She hesitated, and Edouard thought: She's changed; she never hesitated before; she's more beautiful than ever.
‘They just vanished,’ he said, and, still holding her hand, sat down beside her.
‘Two Martinis.’
The hovering waiter sped away.
Edouard never turned his head.
He looked at Isobel.
She knew he was remembering the last time they had drunk Martinis together and what she had said to him then.
She saw the amusement in his eyes, the question which he was delicately careful not to put.
‘Actually, yes,’ she said.
‘And this time they haven't even arrived.’
They talked, easily at first, then a little less spontaneously.
Isobel, watching him, watching the mobile expressive features, the charm for which he was now celebrated, thought:He has changed; there is a guard there that he cannot drop .
She wondered if he ever dropped it; she could sense that, however fluently he talked, however intently he listened — and he listened very intently — his mind was at the same time pursuing some other parallel track.
Eventually, refusing another drink, she rested her hand on his arm.
‘Darling Edouard.
This is very selfish of me.
I'm sure I'm keeping you from a million other appointments.’
He looked genuinely surprised.
‘No.
Of course not.
I'm taking you out to dinner.’
He paused.
‘That is, of course , if I'm not keeping you from a million other engagements.’
‘No.
None.’
They smiled at each other, and he stood up and drew back her chair.
‘Good.
Shall we go?
Where would you like?
We could go to Maxim's.
The Grand Vefour.
You choose.’
‘Nowhere grand.’
Isobel tossed back the red-gold hair, and picked up her hat.
‘Somewhere different.
Somewhere simple.
Where we won't meet anyone we know.
Take me somewhere I've never been before.
Surprise me.’
‘Very well.’
She saw the corners of his mouth lift.
He led her out into the huge marble-floored foyer.
Just as they approached the doors, he stopped as if he had suddenly come to a decision.
‘After dinner I want you to come back to St-Cloud.
I'd like you to see the house.’
‘Darling Edouard-I should love that.’
‘Perhaps…
’ He hesitated.
‘Perhaps you ought to inform your maid?’
Isobel stared at him, then laughed, drew her arm through his and pulled him towards the door.
‘Darling Edouard, you are a sweet idiot.
I haven't travelled with a maid for years.
You are looking at a woman who has survived Europe, South America and East Africa — entirely without a maid.
Now, aren't you impressed?’
‘Deeply.’
He helped her into the seat of the Bentley Continental he was driving.
As he pulled away, he turned to her with a smile.
‘East Africa?
What were you doing there?’
Isobel stretched luxuriously, and tossed her devastating black hat on to the jump-seat behind her.
‘Buying lions,’ she said negligently.
He took her to a tiny cafe in the industrial suburbs, an area of Paris that Isobel had never visited before.
She assumed he had chosen the place, the Café Unic, arbitrarily.
But to her surprise the patron and his very large, round-faced wife greeted him like a long-lost son.
They kissed Edouard on both cheeks, they patted him on the back, they looked at Isobel hard and long, and they seemed to approve of what they saw.
The café was empty.
They were seated at a small table with a red checked cloth surmounted by a clean one of starched white linen, with two glass beakers, two knives and two forks, and a basket of the most delicious freshly baked bread.
The wine, which arrived in a carafe, was a strong excellent vin ordinaire .
The meal that accompanied it was a feast, cooked  and served by the patronne with justifiable pride: tiny moules marinières , which tasted as if they had been cut from the rocks that morning;bifteck, brown and crisp on the outside, perfectly rare within; a platter of thin crisp sizzling hot pommes frites ; an excellent salad, served in a plain white bowl.
The best Camembert that Isobel had ever tasted, which the patronsaid proudly had come from his brother's farm, in the Auge region of Normandy — the only Camemberts worth buying, he assured them, came from there.
They both ate hungrily, and when they had finished, and were sipping their cafés noirs , and the tiny glasses of wonderful rough marc de bourgogne , Isobel leaned back with a smile.
‘That was the most wonderful meal I have ever had.
Much better than Maxim's.
Thank you, Edouard.’
‘I thought you would like it.
Now — tell me about the lions.’
Isobel hesitated.
‘Well,’ she began carefully.
‘I was widowed two years ago — you know that.
You wrote to me.’
‘Yes.’
The dark blue eyes looked up, met hers.
‘And then — I was rather at a loss, I suppose.
I'd been leading such a rackety life — Edouard, you can't imagine.
Rushing about from one racetrack to another, always on planes or trains.
Then, very suddenly, it was over.
All that time, all those years.
I'd been so busy I'd had no time to think.
Just the next ticket, the next hotel.
I preferred not to think, perhaps.
I don't know.
Anyway, suddenly it was over, and I thought —’ She broke off, and reached for his hand.
‘Darling Edouard.
I know you'll understand.
I thought I wanted to do something useful.
Be useful.
To someone.
Something.’
She looked away.
‘And that was difficult.
I wasn't brought up to be useful.
I had a stupid girls’ education.
No training.
Even in the war — now I look back — when lots of other people — women — were doing sensible things.
Driving ambulances.
Joining the ATS.
Being land-girls.
I never did anything like that.’
She shrugged.
‘I suppose I felt guilty — ten years too late.’
‘So what did you do — to be useful?’
He put the question gently, as if he understood her, and Isobel sighed.
‘I went home.
To England.
To Papa.
Oh, Edouard, I can't tell you how sad it was.
I'd hardly been back for years — only briefly, when Mama died.
This time…well, they'd sold the  London place years before.
It's been pulled down — now it's a hotel.
That kept the wolf from the door for a little while, I think.
But not long enough.
So, anyway, I went to the country.
And there Papa was, all alone in that great place, hundreds of rooms, not enough servants, missing Mama-terribly lonely.
William is always in London; he's in the City now.
Do you remember Will, my eldest brother?
So there he was, in a merchant bank, desperately trying to restore the family fortunes.
And there was Papa in this great mausoleum.
Worrying about bills.’
She shrugged.
‘It really is the most impossible place.
No matter what you do, it's never enough.
There are one hundred and seventy-five rooms, two acres of roof — can you imagine?
Well, of course you can.
But in this case most of it hadn't been touched since 1934, and part of it was requisitioned for troops during the war.
So — in short— it was a total mess.
Papa didn't know what to do, and then he got talking to some of his cronies, and he decided on a Grand Scheme.
Open the house.
Paying visitors.
They can troop round and look at the Rubens, and the Gainsboroughs — the ones that are left.
Papa had to sell some of the best ones.
They could go into the chapel, and the Adam library, and the red drawing-room, and with a bit of luck they'd be so busy looking at the Chippendale and the Hepplewhite they wouldn't notice the holes in the rugs.’
She sighed.
‘It was a good idea.
But it didn't really work.
It costs five shillings and sixpence to go round, and you need an awful lot of those to mend two acres of roof.
So.
Papa decided to have a game-park.’
‘A game-park?’
Edouard's eyebrows rose, and Isobel nodded solemnly.
‘Absolutely.
A game-park.
Lions and giraffes and wildebeest.
Roaming over the parkland.
And as a matter of fact, mad as it sounds, it was rather a good idea.’
She smiled impishly.
‘They look rather sweet — Capability Brown would have approved, I'm sure.
And they don't seem to mind the rain — which surprised me.
And Papa adores them.
He goes out and talks to the lions every morning from the back of a land-rover, and they all have names, just the way the dairy herd had when we were children.
Only not Daisy and Posy and Carnation, of course, but African names — Ngumbe, Banda, things like that.
Papa spent weeks researching it.’
‘And do the people come to see the lions?’
‘In droves.
Absolute droves.
Much more fun than the Rubens, and I must say I rather agree.
So.
There you are.
I went off to Kenya to buy lions.
As I'm not a man, it turned out to be the most useful thing I could do.’
The green eyes flicked up at him teasingly, but also a little apprehensively, as if she were afraid he might mock her.
Edouard, who knew she was most vulnerable when she seemed most frivolous, pressed her hand.
She snatched it away, with a sudden quick anger.
‘Oh, Edouard, don't.
Don't be kind.
I know it's ridiculous.
I despise myself.
I wish sometimes — oh God, I don't know…
I just wish I had been a man, that's all.
Then….’
He took her hand back, and raised it gently to his lips.
‘You are the most beautiful woman I know.
Also one of the cleverest, however much you pretend not to be.
I'm very very glad you are not a man.
Now.’
He stood up.
‘Come back to St-Cloud with me.’
It was late when they reached the great house, but the moon was full, and the night air was warm and still.
Edouard, at Isobel's suggestion, took her on a grand tour.
They walked through the wild informal gardens, then through the allées of clipped hornbeam, then yew, to the rose garden, and on to the parterre, which had been planted with herbs, and — for the spring — wallflowers.
Isobel sighed.
‘Gillyflowers — that's the old English name.
I love them.
I love their scent.’
She picked one, and held it to her face, and in the lights which shone from the long windows of the house, Edouard saw that the colour of the flower, that rich deep red shot through with gold, was the colour of her hair.
There was a little silence between them, then they moved on.
He showed her the stables, and one of the old mares nuzzled Isobel's hand, with a mouth as soft as velvet.
Then he took her into a long flat-roofed building like a small aircraft hangar.
He flicked the light-switch, and Isobel, who loved cars, gave a cry of delight.
There were twenty cars — no, more, thirty at least— each one of them perfect, each the finest example of their marque.
She moved along the rows in delight: a Bugatti, a Jensen, a Bristol, one of the great Mulliner Bentleys, the legendary Porsche 356, a Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost, with running-boards.
Isobel ran from one to another, touching the gleaming coachwork, the glittering chrome.
Edouard stood back by the doors, watching her, his face oddly closed.
Isobel turned back to him.
‘Edouard — they're beautiful.
Absolutely beautiful.
The Bugatti must be unique — only seven were built, weren't they?
I thought there was none left…
’ She paused.
‘I didn't know you liked cars so much.’
He shrugged.
‘I like driving fast.
Alone.
I do that sometimes at night, when I need to think.’
‘But so many…‘
‘Yes.’
He shrugged.
‘I bought them really for someone else.
Someone I knew who was interested in cars.’
He turned to the door.
‘I suppose it's a little absurd to keep them all now.’
He switched off the light, and began to walk away.
Isobel looked after him.
She had heard about the little boy Grégoire — Jean-Paul's son, so people said.
She had heard about Edouard's attachment to him.
She felt a stab of pity.
Was that what the cars were for?
A priceless collection, for a little boy?
She ran after Edouard, and put her arm through his.
Later, after looking at the rest of the house, they returned to Edouard's study on the first floor.
A quietly efficient English manservant brought them coffee and Armagnac, and then withdrew.
Isobel moved restlessly around the room.
It was like Edouard, she thought, a room that contrived to be both French — with its delicate painted panelling — and also English in the severity of the furnishings.
A room that was restrained, masculine, and formal.
Bookcases of leather-bound volumes; some exceptionally fine eighteenth century watercolours; a Chippendale writing desk; chairs covered in exquisitely faded Spitalfields' silk.
Each object in the room was perfect of its kind; each spoke of taste and discernment, and unlimited means, and also of loneliness.
Like the rest of the house, the room felt cared-for and curiously empty.
She looked down at Edouard.
He was sitting before the log fire, his Armagnac untouched, his face in repose sombre.
As she looked at him, he suddenly turned and held out his hand to her.
Isobel took it, and he drew her down so she sat on the silk rug at his feet, on a pattern of birds and flowers, of blues and scarlets and browns.
She rested her head against his knee, and he rested his hand against her hair.
‘Now,’ he said softly.
‘Tell me, Isobel.’
She turned her head to look up at him.
With that intuitive understanding she had always had with him, she knew exactly what he meant.
‘I was happy, Edouard.
I did love him, you see.
And I think he loved me, in his way.
But he loved danger more.’
She paused, surprised that her own voice should be steady.
She had spoken of her marriage to no one, not during it, not since her husband's death.
‘I knew what would happen all along.
I'm sure he did.
I think he almost wanted it.
He wouldn't have liked old age, even middle age.
He wouldn't have liked losing.
So I think it ended the way he would have wanted it to end.
Very quickly.
One skid.
The car exploded.
I was watching.’
There was a silence.
Then Edouard said: ‘You never had children.’
‘No.’
The green eyes clouded momentarily.
‘I wanted them, to begin with, wanted them very much.
And then I realised it would be impossible.
Not fair to him.
He couldn't have attachments — not really.
It would have made him unable to race.’
‘Weren't you an attachment?’
‘Oh, no.’
Isobel smiled.
‘I'm much too good an actress for that.
He thought I liked the danger as much as he did.
In fact, every race, I used to be sick.
Before it, and after.
And I used to pray, of course.
All the time.
On every single bend.
But he never knew that.’
There was a little silence.
Edouard stared into the fire, and eventually Isobel lifted her head once more.
‘And you?’ she said gently.
‘Darling Edouard, tell me.’
‘There is nothing to tell.’
‘In eight years?’
She smiled up at him, wishing she could will the tension out of his body, wishing she could make him relax that guard.
‘I've read about you,’ she went on, after a pause in which he did not answer her.
‘Lots of things.
You're very famous now, Edouard.’
‘Anything you've read is sure to be lies.’
‘That's a shame.
Some of it was rather poetic.’
She smiled up at him wickedly.
‘Those presents.
For your mistresses.
Jewels to match the colour of their eyes, or their hair, or their skin.
Black pearls.
Sapphires.
Rubies.
Never diamonds.’
She  paused.
‘I read all that, and I cheered.
I thought: That's my Edouard.
It had style.’
She reached for his hand.
‘Was it true?’
‘Some of it.’
He paused.
‘None of it mattered in the least.’
‘Really?’
Her eyes met his, and she began to smile.
‘Really.’
They held one another 's gaze for a moment, a look of understanding and amusement; and then, both at once, they began to laugh.
Isobel felt the tension leave his body, saw the amusement, and then the sudden seriousness in his eyes.
They stopped laughing; then Edouard leaned forward, gathered her in his arms and kissed her.
Then he drew back, looked down into her face, and said: ‘Will you marry me, Isobel?’
And Isobel rested her face against his arm, and sighed.
‘Darling Edouard,’ she said.
‘Of course I will.
You know quite well that's why I came back to see you.’
Then Edouard took her into his bedroom, and they remained there for three days and three nights.
On the fourth day, they drove out into the country, and were married by an extremely flustered official in a small mairie, some fifty kilometres outside Paris.
No guests.
No reporters.
Isobel had her wedding-ring first.
She chose her engagement-ring belatedly in the de Chavigny Paris showrooms.
She passed over the trays of sapphires, of rubies, of diamonds; she chose an emerald.
When Edouard slipped it on to her finger, she looked up at him and smiled.
‘This one has no superstitions attached to it, I hope?’
Edouard put his alms around her.
‘My darling, none.
It's very very lucky, I promise you.’
They had six months of unclouded happiness.
They made love a disproportionate amount, Isobel told him, in the certain knowledge that Edouard would then make love to her again.
He was the best lover she had ever had: the most skilful, the most understanding, the most gentle, the most fierce.
He took her body and he made it come alive.
They were inseparable.
In six months which included many business trips, they were never apart for one night.
Other women ceased to exist for Edouard; he gently terminated his affair with Clara Delluc, and Isobel, knowing this woman had meant more to him than  any of the others, asked if she might meet her; she did, and the two women became friends.
Isobel found herself fascinated by the diversity and challenge of Edouard's work; she also quickly found that she could be of help to him.
Not simply as a hostess —‘The only task I was ever trained for,’ she said to him wryly — but also as an adviser.
Like her husband, she had sharp and brilliantly intuitive instincts for people; she knew at once whom Edouard could trust.
But she was more patient and more sympathetic than he, and so colleagues and advisers Edouard might have overlooked, Isobel drew out and nurtured.
Being English she knew little about wine — that had been her father's province.
There, she was content to let Edouard educate her.
Being a woman, and coming from the background she did, she knew a great deal about jewellery.
There, Edouard discovered, she could educate him.
Her taste, which had never been for understatement, influenced his, which had always been a little austere.
‘I adore these.’
She held up a heavy necklace of cabochon rubies intertwined with emeralds and pearls.
‘Thank you.
They're Bulgari.’
‘Don't sulk.
They're wonderful.
Pagan.
A little barbaric.
Jewellery ought to be like that.
It ought to be flamboyantly seductive.
To show off a little.
Diamonds seem to me totally pointless if they're discreet.‘
It was Isobel who found Edouard his designer of genius, succeeding by chance where his head-hunters, in years of patient searching, had failed.
She had a friend from finishing school, Maria, who came from a rich Hungarian family, and who had fled her country for Paris in 1956, at the time of the Russian invasion.
Maria had brought out no money, but she had smuggled out some of her jewels.
Isobel helped her friend to settle in Paris and find work; one day Maria asked her if de Chavigny might be interested in buying her jewellery.
‘It seems pointless to me now.’
She smiled at Isobel.
‘I can't think how I ever cared for the things.
But the money would be useful.’
She laid the jewels out on the bed in the small ateliershe was renting.
Isobel took one look at them and telephoned Edouard.
They had been made for Maria by a Polish émigré, Floryan  Wyspianski, a man in his early thirties, who had settled in Budapest after the war.
He was skilful, Maria said — she and her mother had always loved his work, but he was not very successful.
He had only a small shop; it was difficult, in Budapest, for a Pole.
Edouard examined the jewellery carefully, standing in the north light of the atelier 's large window.
He examined the pieces with the naked eye, then with his glass, while behind him Isobel held her breath.
What he saw was incredible to him: imperfect stones, yes, flawed, sometimes of poor coloration, but cut and set with such skill and ingenuity that their imperfections were disguised.
Dazzlingly accomplished workmanship.
Some of the most original and beautiful designs he had seen in thirty years.
He could trace the influences, he thought; this man had scholarship, as well as talent.
One of the necklaces — a collar of Byzantine magnificence — had clearly been influenced by the classical revivalist designs of Fortunato Castellani, and his pupil Giuliano, whom his great-grandfather had once tried to woo into working for him in London.
The use of enamel, the brilliant understanding of colour, yes, that piece reminded him of Giuliano, though-the design was more subtle, less heavy.
That necklace was one of Wyspianski's early pieces, Maria said.
Later, he had moved away from these classical designs; he had become interested in Arabic jewellery, she said, and in their techniques of wiring jewels so delicately and invisibly that they moved with their wearer.
This necklace, she said, picking up another, this was the last piece she had bought from him.
It showed the Arabic influence, she thought.
Edouard held the necklace reverently.
It was the finest of the pieces Maria had bought, the work of a master.
A delicate circlet of gold, wired with pearls and diamonds, the diamonds shaped like flowers, the pearls suspended like dew from their petals.
Alexander Reza, at the turn of the century, had done work resembling this, but never anything so fragile.
Edouard looked back at the collection.
What excited him most of all was that these pieces, each so different, each showing a restless determination to experiment, all had the signature of Wyspianski.
They bore the unmistakable stamp of one man's genius: to anyone who knew anything about jewellery, that was immediately obvious.
Looking at them he  knew at once that his long search was over.
He turned round slowly.
‘Yes?’
Isobel was trembling with excitement.
‘Yes.
Oh, yes.’
There was a silence.
Isobel and Maria exchanged glances.
‘There is a problem,’ Isobel admitted finally, with reluctance.
‘Wyspianski is still in Hungary.
With his family.
He would like to leave, but he cannot.’
‘That is no problem.
I shall get him out.’
Maria sighed.
She did not know Edouard very well.
‘Alas, it is impossible.
Two years ago — yes.
A year ago — maybe.
Now the Russian hold is very tight.
It cannot be done.’
‘I shall do it.’
He flew, with Isobel, to Moscow the following week.
One month later, the young wife of a senior member of the Politburo was astonishing her friends with a necklace, earrings and bracelets of positively Tsarist splendour.
The Pole, Floryan Wyspianski, and his wife and young daughter had exit visas from Hungary.
‘Bribery and corruption,’ Isobel said tartly, as she drew her sables more tightly around her, and they mounted the steps to Edouard's plane for the flight back to Paris.
Edouard looked injured.
‘I tried pleas first.
Rational arguments.
Commercial incentives.
Bribery and corruption were a last resort.’
‘Have you tried them before?’
Isobel looked up at him curiously.
‘Of course.
When I had to.’
Edouard scowled suddenly.
‘It was one of the things I hated most.
Discovering there was no one— almost no one — who could not be bought.’
That had been one month before.
Wyspianski and his family were due in Paris the next week.
Isobel, thinking of that as she walked in the gardens at St-Cloud in the autumn sunshine, hugged herself with secret joy.
That afternoon she had been to see her doctor in Paris.
He had finally been able to confirm what she had believed and prayed for these past six weeks.
She was going to have a baby.
A baby — and the designer Edouard had been searching for so long.
Both at once.
Isobel danced for sheer happiness.
Now, she thought, now Edouard will have what I know he wants so desperately, what I want for him.
A child.
An heir.
A family.
And that darkness, that sadness she still sometimes glimpsed in his eyes, will be banished for ever.
She lifted her arms up to the warmth of the sun, filled with a sudden wild joy.
It shone on the falling leaves, on the burnished red-gold of her hair.
She turned her face to the light, and silently, incoherently, not knowing which deity she addressed, she thanked the gods, who had been so kind to her, and to the husband she loved so much.
Tonight , she thought,this evening, as soon as he comes home I shall run to meet him, and I shall tell him.
A day later, Edouard still did not know about the baby.
Isobel had heard the wheels of his car on the gravel.
She ran quickly round to the front of the house, just as she had planned.
The driver was already pulling away in the Rolls, and Edouard already striding towards the house.
Isobel took one look at his face, and kept silent.
They went into the small drawing-room they always used when they were alone in the house.
Edouard kissed her, but absentmindedly.
He began pacing up and down the room.
He poured himself a drink.
Isobel refused one, and watched him, knowing something was wrong, longing to speak, to burst out with her news, and knowing she must make herself wait.
Eventually he sat down, and passed his hand tiredly across his brow.
‘My darling, I'm sorry.
I thought you would have seen the newspapers.
Heard the news.
You obviously haven't?’
‘No.
I went into Paris — for some fittings.’
Isobel hesitated, then sat down.
‘Then — then I was in the gardens…‘
‘I warned him.’
He put down his glass angrily.
‘I told Jean-Paul this would happen — nearly two years ago now.
I knew this was inevitable.
’ He paused.
‘The Front de Liberation National blew up the second largest gendarmerie in Algiers this morning.
Thirteen men died.
Two others were shot by snipers.
Fifteen men — in one day.
And, of course, nine French policemen have already been killed during the past month.
Reprisals, they say, for those raids that were made on the Kasbah.’
He shrugged wearily.
‘I spoke to Mendès-France, briefly, this evening.
It's going to get worse, Isobel, much worse.’
‘But there are French troops there, Edouard…
’ She  hesitated.
‘They will stop it, won't they?
Stop the terrorism?’
‘My darling, it's not terrorism.
It's a revolution.
If you'd been there, if you'd seen the country, you'd understand.
The FLN won't rest until the French are out; every last colon .’
‘But it's a French colony…‘
‘It's an Arab country.’
He stood up angrily.
‘The days of colonialism are over .
Finished.
Jean-Paul can't see that, and never will.
As far as Jean-Paul is concerned, the French haven't put a foot wrong.
They've built roads and bridges and rail systems.
Houses.
Hotels.
Factories.
They've created a civil service, and trained Arabs to work like French bureaucrats.
Jean-Paul thinks the French brought prosperity to a poor country, and he goes on believing it because he takes care never to set foot outside the European quarter.
So he never sees the poverty.
Never smells the squalor.
Do you know why it is that Jean-Paul's Algerian estates are so prosperous?
Why they make the profits of which he's so proud?
Because he pays his Algerian workers a pittance, that's why.
They earn in a year what he'd pay a French worker in a month.
But they're still better off than the other Arabs, the ones that don't work for the French.
And so he can make his profits and feel like a philanthropist at the same time.
Isobel, I loved Algeria when I first saw it; but the poverty — the attitudes, the intolerances.
I came to hate it.
I've hated it more every time I've been back.
When I saw Jean-Paul there, I was ashamed .
Ashamed of my own brother.’
Isobel looked at him silently.
She had rarely heard him speak with such vehemence, never seen him so angry.
‘Eighteen months ago…
’ He swung round to her again.
‘In 1956, when there were clear signs of what was going to happen, Jean-Paul came to me, and asked that the company to invest in more estates out there.
Vineyards.
Olive plantations.
They belonged to a friend of his who'd decided to get off the sinking ship quickly.
I turned him down — and do you know that to this day Jean-Paul has no idea why?’
He paused, his voice growing calmer.
‘I gave him financial reasons.
Business reasons.
Of which there were many.
And in the end he accepted it.
Profit and loss, that's what we talked about.
But it wasn't the true reason I refused him.
The true reason was that I want nothing to do with that country while it remains  as it is, and if it hadn't been for Jean-Paul I'd have ceased all our operations out there years ago.’
Isobel smiled.
‘And Jean-Paul can be as stubborn as a mule, and you knew perfectly well that if you'd told him what you felt, he would have dug in his heels and insisted.’
She sighed.
‘You can be terribly devious, Edouard.’
‘Possibly.’
Edouard hesitated, and looked down at her.
‘Do you think I did the wrong thing?’
‘I don't know,’ Isobel said quietly, and looked away.
There was a silence, a moment of tension between them.
Edouard thought of Isobel's family, of her grandfathers, uncles, cousins, who had propped up and maintained an empire, who had fought, and ruled, in India, in Africa.
He thought it unlikely she would understand his arguments, and he felt a sense of distance, a moment's regret, there and then gone.
Isobel, bending her head, thought:I can't tell him about the baby; not now.
She sensed his withdrawal from her, and slowly looked up.
‘You're going out there, aren't you, Edouard?’
Her quickness and her resignation touched him.
The regret instantly passed, and he crouched down to her, and took her hands gently in his.
‘My darling, I have to.
I've tried speaking to Jean-Paul on the telephone, and it's hopeless.
I shall have to go out.
I want to persuade him to come back to France.’
‘Leave Algeria?’
Isobel's eyes widened.
She felt a moment's scorn.
In her family, the men had never walked out on their colonial responsibilities.
She thought of her father's many remarks on that subject, his outrage when India was finally granted independence.
But her mind shied away from politics, and she had no wish to cross Edouard on that front.
She sighed, and chose her words carefully.
‘Surely he'll never agree to that, Edouard?
He loves it there, you told me.
It's obviously meant so much to him, since he left the Army.
He'll never agree to leave the vineyards, his land….‘
‘It won't be his land much longer whether he goes or stays.’
Edouard's tone was dismissive.
He stood up and moved away.
‘He might as well realise that now.
Two years from now — maybe more, maybe as much as five, though I doubt it — the French will pull out.
You're probably right about Jean-Paul.
But I have to try.
Algiers isn't a safe place for any Frenchman — particularly one like Jean-Paul —’ He broke off abruptly, an expression of distaste on his features.
Then he swallowed the last of his drink, shrugged, turned back.
‘So — I have to try to persuade him.
That's all.
He is my brother.’
Isobel watched him closely.
She wondered what he meant by that last remark about his brother, so quickly bitten off, but she knew better than to ask.
‘When are you going?’ she said quietly.
‘Tomorrow.‘
‘I shall come with you.’
‘My darling-no.
’ He swung round again, his face softening.
‘Not this time.
I'd rather you stayed here.’
Isobel stood up.
‘If you go, I go,’ she said firmly.
‘And if it's too dangerous for me, then it's too dangerous for you.
And you don't think that, do you?’
‘No, of course not, but —‘
‘Then, I'm coming with you.’
She gave him her most disarming smile.
‘You know perfectly well that I can persuade you, so you might just as well give in now with good grace.’
‘Oh, really?’
She saw his lips curve at her challenge, and before he could protest she crossed quickly to him.
‘Darling Edouard.
I m coming.
No ridiculous arguments.
Kiss me.
If you like, we can argue later.’
She put her arms around his neck, and Edouard managed to resist her for about thirty seconds.
Then he groaned, and then he kissed her.
They did argue about it, later, but Isobel got her way.
When Edouard left for the airport the next morning, Isobel was with him.
And she still hadn't told him.
Jean-Paul leaned back, and watched the naked boy who was oiling his body.
He had long supple fingers, slender hands with surprising strength.
They worked their way down over Jean-Paul's flesh, expertly kneading the muscles, smoothing the lax skin, seeking the most sensitive folds and crevices.
Down over the stomach to the groin, then back to the chest, feeling for each rib under its layer of flabby muscle and fat.
He parted Jean-Paul's thighs, and began on his legs.
Slowly up from the ankle and then down again.
The knee, then the still strong muscles of the thighs.
Slowly up to the groin once more.
Then, at last, between his legs, under his balls, feeling the loose pouchy skin of the scrotum, carefully under the back, tracing the crevice of the buttocks with one delicate forefinger.
Then back to the ankles again.
Jean-Paul closed his eyes.
Jesus, the little bastard knew how to tease.
Jean-Paul's body was pale, flushed red on face, neck and arms where he had been burned by the sun.
He was fresh from the shower; his body smelt of the oil, which was scented with jasmine.
The boy smelt, faintly, of sweat, and also of something else-of poverty, of cheap food, overcrowded lodgings, oil applied to hair that was not quite clean, Arab buses, dust.
Jean-Paul liked the smell: it was part of the ritual, part of the game, part of the reality — servant and master.
The boy was very beautiful.
He was half-Arab, with a pale olive skin that now gleamed golden in the thin ribbons of light from the half-closed shutters.
He could pass for a European, an Italian or a Frenchman from one of the Southern regions, like Provence.
He had been a student in France — or so he said.
Jean-Paul wasn't sure if he believed him.
But he spoke good French, with scarcely a trace of an Algerian accent, so it might be true.
He said he was nineteen years old; he also said he was an orphan, but they all said that, they thought it made people pay more.
He worked as a lift-boy in one of the smaller French hotels, moonlighting occasionally, and serving drinks in a café in the evenings.
That was where Jean-Paul had first met him.
Three months ago.
Down again from knee to groin, that delicate forefinger tracing, tracing.
Jean-Paul could feel himself getting hard at last.
He opened his eyes, his consciousness hazed and slowed by the kif he had smoked, and focused with difficulty on the watch on the bedside table.
Nearly four.
Jesus, they hadn't got long.
Edouard and Isobel would be back at five.
Not that they were likely to walk into his bedroom, but still…
The need for secrecy, the need for haste excited him.
He reached down and grabbed the boy's wrist.
‘Come on.
Come on.
Get on with it.’
The boy's black eyes flicked up at his face impassively, with  just the slightest suggestion of contempt.
He knelt between Jean-Paul's legs, bent his head, and began to lick.
Jean-Paul grunted, cupped the boy's head in his hands.
He liked that contempt, that resentment; the first time he saw it in the boy's face he knew it reminded him of something, but it was weeks before it came to him what it was.
Then, suddenly, he remembered.
The night in the war; the night his father died; the night at that bitch Simonescu's, with Carlotta.
She had looked just the way the boy did, and Jean-Paul liked it because it made him feel…
What did it make him feel?
His mind drifted away on the tides of the kif , and then floated back.
It made him feel powerful, that was it, because he paid, he bought and, even if they hated him, they sold.
That felt good; simple and good.
It made him feel big.
He felt his cock strain and press to the back of the boy's throat.
He almost gagged, and Jean-Paul's hand tightened around the nape of his neck, pulling him down, so the whole of his cock was in the boy's mouth.
The first time he'd done it with a boy, he'd been ashamed.
He knew it was commonplace here, taken for granted almost.
Other men talked about it quite openly in the club, when they'd had a few drinks.
Tighter, sweeter, better than a woman any day — that was what they said.
The boys were more skilled, less inhibited than the Arab women, ready to do anything, anything, for money.
Jean-Paul had felt slightly disgusted; also oddly threatened and, beneath it all, excited.
It wasn't for him: he was no pansy; he liked women, not boys with made-up eyes and sly insinuating glances.
But, still, he liked to hear about it from the others.
Then, the first time — well, he'd been drunk, so drunk he hardly knew what was happening, so it didn't matter.
Then, the next time he went with a woman: nothing-nothing that counted.
Plenty of excitement, plenty of anxiety, and no hard-on; just a limp cock hanging between his legs.
Not a twitch out of it, no matter what she did, and she'd tried everything.
So he went back to a boy — one of the best, came highly recommended.
He'd been fearing the worst but, no, the boy undressed him, and there it was standing up proudly, machinery in full working order once again, ready for action.
The boy had been impressed, and he'd seen plenty.
He'd said it was very big, too big, even with oil, even with Vaseline; he'd cried out when Jean-Paul pushed up him.
But that was just another trick they had, like being an orphan.
It didn't mean anything, not really.
There had been a lot of boys after that, and some women, but he found them less exciting than he used to.
Especially the French ones.
He'd had a good line going with a number of the wives out here — what man hadn't?
They were all bored out of their minds, had nothing else to think about except bed.
But after the boys they seemed tiresome: too demanding; wanting love as well as sex; too many ideas about how it should be done, and which position they liked best, and whether they came or not.
I don't give a shit, he'd wanted to say.
Just shut up and let me get the fuck on with it .
But he hadn't, of course.
He'd just stopped going back for more.
He got it from the boys instead.
The boys who did exactly what he said, when he told them…
Mother of God.
He'd never done that before, and it felt good.
Very good.
No doubt about it, this boy was a find.
The best.
‘That's enough.
Lie down…’
He pushed the boy back, and pulled his cock out of his Mouth.
The boy never said a word.
He just moved to the other side of the bed, and lay on his back.
He didn't have an erection — but, then, he hardly ever did.
Jean-Paul had stopped worrying about that weeks ago.
‘Imbécile .
Turn over…‘
The kif was beginning to wear off, and Jean-Paul could feel irritation, incipient anger, somewhere at the edge of his mind.
It often took you like that, when it was wearing off.
But it didn't matter: anger helped.
‘Lift your arse up.’
The boy raised himself a little from the bed.
Jean-Paul looked down at his own oiled body, then spat on to his palm for added lubrication.
He held himself poised for a moment, then he thrust hard into the boy's body.
The boy cried out, once.
Then he bit his lip, and was silent.
Jean-Paul heaved and thrust, panting now, holding the boy's beautiful narrow pelvis tight between his hands.
Heat and rage built in his body, such rage, swirling  through the clouds of kif, that it was blinding, fiercer than desire for an instant, so he lost his rhythm, misjudged his pace.
Like war, he thought confusedly, like war, like battle, fucking is like that, it's…
Then the thought eddied away again out of the grasp of his mind; he looked down at the subservient curve of the boy's back, found his rhythm again, pumped, and came.
He slumped across him, breathing heavily, feeling a little sick.
Too much kif .
He must lay off the kif.
It played tricks on your mind when you least expected it.
Jesus.
He'd nearly blown the whole thing then.
The boy waited five minutes.
He always waited five minutes.
Then he got up, and went into the bathroom: There was the sound of running water.
He came out dressed.
Jean-Paul had lit a cigarette.
He smiled at the boy.
‘There's a present for you.
Over on the chest.’
The boy didn't even glance at the folded franc notes.
He pouted, and hung his head.
‘I don't want presents.
I told you.’
Jean-Paul sighed.
This was a newish tack; it had started about two weeks ago.
‘What do you want, then?
You must want something.
I'm only trying to show you how grateful I am.
I like you — you know that.’
He lifted his hand to the boy, but the boy ignored him.
He looked at Jean-Paul sulkily.
‘I told you.’
His voice was hardly audible.
‘I want us to be friends.’
‘We are friends.
Good friends.
You know that.’
Jean-Paul gave a sigh of exasperation.
‘No, we're not.
You just want me here for this.’
The boy gestured sullenly at the bed.
‘We never meet anywhere else.
Just here.
Just for this.’
‘Well, where should we meet, for God's sake?
What do you want me to do — take you down to the club?
A hotel?
You know that's impossible.’
‘You could meet me for a drink sometimes.’
The boy stuck his lip out obstinately.
‘That's what friends do.
They meet for drinks — in a café or a restaurant.
They go out for a meal.
We could do that.
I can pass — you know I can.
You said so.
I'm half-French.
I studied in France…‘
His voice was rising petulantly.
Jean-Paul looked anxiously at his watch.
It was nearly five.
‘Look, all right, all right .
We'll do that some time.
We'll meet in a café — have a drink.
Go to a cinema maybe.
Will that make you happy?’
‘It might.
When?’
‘I don't know when.’
Jean-Paul heaved himself upright, and reached for his dressing-gown.
‘Look, we can't argue about it now.
I haven't got time.
I told you.
I've got friends here.
My brother.
His wife.
They'll be back soon.
Now, be a good boy and run along-’
‘I shan't come again.’
The boy raised his face, and to Jean-Paul's horror the black eyes were welling with tears.
‘Not unless we can be friends, proper friends.
I don't like it.’
‘All right.
All right.’
Jean-Paul hurriedly crossed the room, and picked up the francs from the chest.
He pushed them into the boy's top pocket.
He could hear a car drawing up on the drive outside.
Quickly he added one more note: thirty francs, that ought to do it, in the boy's terms, it was a fortune.
The boy didn't move.
Jean-Paul gave him an exasperated push.
‘Look, go on now.
I'll meet you.
We'll arrange it next time, I promise…‘
‘Not next time.
Now.’
‘All right.
Very well.
I'll meet you tomorrow.
The Café de la Paix — you know it, off the Place de la Révolution…‘
Instantly the boy's face lit up.
‘You will?
You promise?
What time?’
‘About six.
I'll meet you at six.
I may not be able to stay long.’
He frowned.
‘I might have to bring my friends, and if they're there — well, you'll be careful, won't you?
Pretend it's a casual meeting — something like that?’
Already he was regretting it, but it was too late now, the boy's face was alight with excitement.
‘Your brother?
You mean I shall meet your brother?
You will introduce me?
I should be very proud — and very careful, I promise you.
I don't want you to be ashamed of me.
You'll see — I know how to behave.
Truly.’
He looked so eager that Jean-Paul was quite touched.
He gave him an affectionate pat on the bottom.
‘Very well.
Don't let me down now, all right?’
He hesitated, then squeezed the boy's arm.
‘You've been good today — very good.’
‘I hope so.
I want you to have pleasure.’
He spoke a little stiffly, and again Jean-Paul thought he saw that flash of resentment in the eyes, there and then gone.
The boy was proud, that was all.
He glanced at the window, and the boy nodded.
‘It's all right.
I'll go out the back way.
Through the kitchens.‘
Just after five the next day, Edouard and Jean-Paul came out of the offices of the Governor-General.
They were escorted down long corridors — cooled by fans, for the weather was still very warm-by a senior aide, who was French, and by his aide, who was Algerian.
Flanked by the two men, they walked down a wide marble staircase, and out into the brilliant sunshine.
The senior aide stopped, and made a polite half-bow.
‘Monsieur le baron.
Monsieur de Chavigny.
I hope we have been of assistance to you.’
He paused, then turned to Edouard.
‘You are returning to France tomorrow, I think you said, Monsieur de Chavigny?’
‘Yes.‘
‘If in the meantime we can be of any further assistance, I shall be honoured —‘
‘Of course.
’ Edouard cut him off.
‘Thank you.
Thank you both.’
He glanced at both men.
The Frenchman smiled suavely; the Algerian, a small dark man in heavy horn-rimmed spectacles, did not smile.
He had not uttered one word during their entire briefing.
The two aides turned back into the offices, and Edouard and Jean-Paul walked slowly down the wide steps to the street.
Jean-Paul paused at a kiosk to buy a packet of Gauloises.
They were handed to him by a tiny nut-brown man in a red fez, who also sold little packets of sugared almonds and pistachios.
And newspapers.
Figaro ;Le Monde; the Herald-Tribune ; the Wall Street Journal ;El Moudjahid , the main Algerian daily, which was in French.
Edouard glanced at the large photograph on the front page and looked away.
He moved to the shade of a palm-tree as Jean-Paul counted out  his change.
A military vehicle passed, filled with French paratroopers.
The offices were closing; the wide elegant boulevard was busy with traffic.
He looked down it, past the beautiful white shuttered houses to the bay in the distance, and the blue glitter of the sea.
‘Come on.’
Jean-Paul put an arm around his shoulders.
‘Let's get a drink.
I'm parched.
It's so bloody hot.
I told Isobel we'd wait for her at the Café de la Paix…‘
‘Isobel?
I thought she was staying up at the villa to rest?’
‘Oh, she changed her mind at the last moment.
Wanted to look at some shop or other — you know what women are.
She's got the car — we can all drive back together.’
‘Oh, very well.
But I don't want to stay long.
I've some calls to make.’
Edouard shrugged, and allowed himself to be drawn along the street towards the Place de la Révolution.
They crossed the square and went into the café.
It was already beginning to fill up with French businessmen, and Jean-Paul made purposefully for a table in the window.
He sat down.
‘Two pastis .’
He leaned back in his chair.
‘We'll see Isobel from here.
And it's cooler inside with the fans…
’ He paused to light his Gauloise, and drew on it deeply, looking appraisingly at his brother.
It was a mystery to him how Edouard managed it, he thought.
There he was, at the end of a solid day of meetings with French officials, looking exactly the way he had when they set out.
His white linen suit was unmarked and uncrumpled.
He wasn't sweating.
He didn't look hot.
Jean-Paul glanced down at his own suit, which was too tight for him, and damned uncomfortable.
There was wine on the sleeve, and it was a mass of sweaty creases.
However, he didn't care; he was feeling smug.
Maybe now Edouard would see — he didn't know it all.
‘Well.
Salut .’
He lifted the glass of pastis, and took a large swallow.
‘Feeling better, are you now, little brother?’
‘Should I?’
Edouard regarded him coolly.
‘I would have thought so, yes.
All right, all right — I know you wouldn't listen to me, but maybe you'll listen to them.
They've got their finger on the pulse all right.
If there was going to be trouble — serious trouble — then, they'd know about it.
It stands to reason, doesn't it?
And what did they tell you — every single one of them?
Exactly the same I told you.
It'll all blow over.
It's under control.’
‘That was what they said, yes.’
‘And you didn't believe them, I suppose?
Jesus, Edouard, you can be bloody arrogant, you know.
The Governor-General lays it on the line, no ‘ifs’ or ‘buts’, and you — you don't believe him.’
‘I wasn't impressed by the Governor-General.’
Edouard paused.
‘I was interested in that junior aide.’
‘What — the Algerian fellow?
Never said a word once.
Looked scared shitless if you ask me.’
‘That's precisely what I thought was interesting.’
Edouard's voice was cold.
He turned his head and looked around the café.
Its clientele was almost entirely male, with just a few women — secretaries being bought a drink by their bosses, presumably.
The café was closed to Algerians; everyone in it was French.
‘Oh, I give up.’
Jean-Paul finished his drink and called to the waiter for another.
‘What the hell — let's not argue any more, Edouard, I'm sick of it.
You've had your say, and I'm not going to change my mind.
Now, let's forget it.
It's your last evening here, for God's sake.
Loosen up a bit, can't you?
Let's have a good time.’
Edouard's face had suddenly cleared.
He stood up.
‘Here's Isobel.
She's looking for us.
Excuse me a moment…‘
He walked out on to the terrasse , and Jean-Paul saw Isobel spot him, turn, smile, move quickly into his embrace.
He sighed, and lit another cigarette.
They were very happy; that much was obvious, and he was glad of that.
He hadn't felt jealous — why should he?
The thing between himself and Isobel had been so long ago he had difficulty remembering it, and it had been a mistake from the first.
And she seemed to suit Edouard, to understand him.
He was different with her from everyone else — gentler, softer, more like the old Edouard.
Obviously she knew how to get through to him, and that was a good thing.
He'd been beginning to think no one could any more.
Well, she was very beautiful, and they'd start a family soon, presumably, and that ought to make Edouard happy…
He heaved himself to his feet as they approached the table.
Isobel was laughing at something Edouard had just said; she was wearing a white linen suit, her green eyes sparkled.
She reached up now to kiss him on both cheeks.
‘Jean-Paul, that car of yours is a monster.
And the traffic!
I've had to park miles away.
And then I got lost.
Look — I've brought you both a present…‘
She handed them two little tissue-paper parcels, tied with string and sealed with wax.
They slowly unwrapped them, while Isobel watched them eagerly.
‘It's sandalwood-sticks of sandalwood.
You know, Jean-Paul.
Don't they smell heavenly?
You put them in a little brazier thing, like a tiny cup, and they smoulder — the man said they'll scent the whole room.
Oh…
’ She leaned back.
‘I wanted to get so many things-just because the colours were so lovely.
Powdered indigo-that wonderful blue, like lapis.
And henna.
And spices of course— cumin and turmeric — oh, and they had saffron, piles of it, freshly dried, and…‘
The two men looked at each other.
Edouard sighed.
‘Darling, have you been in the Algerian quarter?’
Isobel looked vague.
‘I might have been.
I'm not sure where I was…‘
‘Don't lie…‘
‘Oh, all right.
I nearly was.
I didn't go too far, truly.
Just to the part in between— the no man's land.’
Her eyes sparkled mischievously.
‘And then I found the market, and then I came back here.
Now, don't look so stern.
Say ‘thank you’.’
‘Thank you,’ they said in chorus.
Then Edouard smiled.
‘Oh, all right, forget it.
You're safely here anyway.
I might have known we couldn't keep you within bounds…
’ He gestured to the waiter.
‘What will you have to drink, my darling?’
‘Oh, just some Perrier and ice,’ Isobel said casually.
Edouard looked at her in surprise.
‘You're sure?
You wouldn't like a glass of wine?
An aperitif?’
‘No, darling, really.
I'm too thirsty.
Perrier would be lovely.’
She hesitated.
‘And actually I'm starving.
Walking must have made me hungry.
Maybe I'll have a sandwich.
No, I won't.
I'll have a glass of cold milk.’
‘A glass of Perrier and a glass of cold milk?’
Edouard stared at her.
She nodded unconcernedly.
‘That's it.
Thank you, darling.’
The waiter's eyebrows rose as he took the order, otherwise he made no comment.
He returned shortly with the two  drinks, and Isobel calmly sat and sipped the milk, a secretive smile on her beautiful face.
Tomorrow, she thought.
I shall be able to tell him tomorrow.
The second we leave.
Oh, hurry up, tomorrow!
She looked around the café, as Edouard and Jean-Paul talked.
She thought it was beautiful.
She thought every single person in it, all the greying businessmen, all the young secretaries, were beautiful.
The world was beautiful.
Life was beautiful.
She felt so happy it was intoxicating.
She glanced up at Edouard, as he leaned forward across the table to make some point: the thick black hair, the sharply etched features, the incisiveness with which he always spoke.
She wondered if the baby would look like Edouard; she hoped it would — babies with red hair looked horrible.
No, she could have a red-haired baby later.
But this baby, boy or girl, she wanted this baby to look like Edouard, who had made her happy, truly happy, for the first time in her life.
Surreptitiously she slipped her hands beneath the table and rested them against her stomach.
She wished she were not still so flat, wished the baby would grow quickly.
She wanted to feel its body, see her stomach swell, have Edouard rest his hand there, over the curve, and feel their baby stir beneath his fingers.
Four months: they began to move at four months, that was what the doctor had said.
Her face had fallen.
‘So long!
Another two months!’
He had smiled patiently.
‘A lot of other things have to happen first.
And they're happening now — even though you're unaware of it.
At two months, you can see the head of the foetus quite clearly, and the curve of the spine.
By three months, the arms are discernible, and the legs, and the features.
By four months, Madame de Chavigny, when you'll start to feel it stir — and then maybe give you the odd hefty kick-the foetus is —‘
Oh,not ‘foetus'! she had wanted to say.
The baby.
My baby.
Edouard's baby.
Our miracle — for that was how it felt, how she hoped it felt for all women.
A miracle: new life.
She looked up, then touched Jean-Paul's arm.
A boy was standing next to the table, looking at Jean-Paul shyly.
He was very young, and handsome in a slightly effeminate way: about eighteen or nineteen, Isobel thought.
A Southerner, perhaps, with very dark hair, and an olive skin.
He was wearing a nylon drip-dry shirt, open at the neck, freshly pressed trousers; he had a leather satchel of books under his arm.
A student, perhaps.
‘Monsieur le baron…
’ The boy spoke hesitantly, and Jean-Paul looked up.
To Isobel's surprise he went beetroot red, flushing from the collar of his shirt to the roots of his now receding hair.
He stood up, and held out his hand with slightly excessive cordiality.
‘Why, François!
How nice to run into you.
How are you?
Were you just passing?
Maybe you'd like a drink…
Join us, join us.’
Edouard looked up in surprise, and the boy eagerly drew forward a chair.
He put the satchel of books on the floor, and sat down.
Jean-Paul made vague introductions.
‘This is Edouard, my brother.
Isobel, his wife.
Edouard, Isobel, this is François.
Did I mention him to you?
He's a student, working over here for a few months.
I've been helping him to find his feet a bit in Algiers.’
The boy gave a nervous smile; Jean-Paul gestured to the waiter.
‘François, what will you have?
Just coffee?
You're sure?
Fine.
Nothing for you, Edouard?
Another Perrier, Isobel, yes?
And I'll have a pastis…‘
The waiter disappeared.
There was an awkward silence.
Then the boy said, very formally: ‘I am honoured to meet you.’
He nodded at Isobel.
At Edouard.
Isobel glanced at her husband, and saw his face had hardened, and that his eyes were angry.
He looked across the table at Jean-Paul, and Jean-Paul's eyes slid away.
He lit another cigarette, and Isobel noticed his hands were shaking slightly.
He offered one to the boy, and the boy politely refused.
He sat there, looking from face to face expectantly.
Isobel leaned forward, feeling sorry for him.
‘A student?
Where are you studying?’
‘At Lyons, Madame.’
He paused, then added, with a slight swagger: ‘La philosophie et les sciences politiques.’
‘Goodness.’
Isobel cast around in her mind for some comment to make.
There didn't seem to be one.
She couldn't imagine why Jean-Paul had issued the invitation to join them.
‘I read the same subjects.’
Edouard was now making an effort.
He hesitated.
‘You are enjoying your stay in Algiers?’
‘Oh, very much.’
The boy's eyes went from face to face.
He smiled.
‘I find I am learning a great deal.’
‘You're late returning to your course,’ Edouard said pleasantly.
‘The university term began at the beginning of the month.’
There was a little silence.
The boy's colour rose.
He lowered his eyes.
‘Well, yes,’ he muttered.
‘I needed to work here just a little longer.
To raise the fees, you know.
I had permission — from my professor.’
‘François is a clever boy,’ Jean-Paul cut in quickly.
‘In the top five per cent of his class, so he tells me.’
He took a large swallow of pastis , and looked at his watch pointedly.
If the hint was directed at the boy, he seemed not to take it.
He took another small sip of his coffee.
Edouard was tapping the table idly with one finger, which Isobel knew was a sign of irritation.
Jean-Paul seemed to have exhausted his conversational overtures.
She leaned forward quickly.
‘And you work here?
Are you enjoying that?’
‘It's not bad.’
The boy gave an indifferent shrug.
‘I work in one of the hotels — the Marine.
It overlooks the bay.’
He paused, and Isobel saw him glance up at Jean-Paul slyly.
‘I work the lifts,’ he went on, more expansively.
‘The pay's bad, of course, but the tips are good.
The French always tip very generously.
If they're pleased with you.’
Edouard turned his head; he gave the boy a cold stare.
Isobel looked around the table in confusion.
She could sense some undercurrent of tension which she was at a loss to explain.
Jean-Paul was looking flustered and embarrassed; she knew that Edouard was coldly furious.
Only the boy seemed now quite at ease.
He turned, and glanced up at the clock above the bar.
Then drained his coffee.
‘It's getting late.
I'm on the evening shift tonight.’
‘Please.
Don't let us detain you.’
Edouard's voice was icy.
Isobel stared: it was so unlike him; she couldn't think why he was being so rude.
‘Maybe François would like some more coffee,’ she began, and then stopped.
The boy was getting to his feet.
His colour had risen, and Isobel felt very embarrassed for him.
‘No.
Thank you, Madame.’
He bowed to each of them in  turn.
‘I must go.
I shall be late.
I am honoured to have met you.’
His eyes met those of Jean-Paul for an instant.
The boy fumbled in the pocket of his shirt, and drew out a couple of crumpled notes.
‘Please…
’ He tossed them down on to the small saucer on the table.
‘I must pay for my coffee.
Messieurs.
Madame.’
‘François — please, there's no need for that.
I…
‘Jean-Paul half-rose from his seat, but the boy had gone, weaving his way through the throng of people behind the bar.
Jean-Paul shrugged, and sank back into his chair.
He looked very flushed, almost guilty, Isobel thought curiously.
Edouard stood up.
‘We should go,’ he said curtly.
‘I'll fetch the car and bring it round.
Where did you leave it, Isobel?’
‘In the rue Pascal.
Just around the corner to the right and then first right and —‘
‘I'll find it.
I know it.’
Edouard walked out, his face stiff with anger.
There was another awkward silence, broken by the laughter from the bar.
Isobel frowned.
‘I'm sorry, Jean-Paul.
What was that all about?
Edouard's not usually so rude.’
‘Oh, God knows.
He's been in a foul temper all day.
He has these moods.
You must be used to them by now.’
‘I suppose so.’
Isobel shrugged.
‘Oh, well, it doesn't matter.
I hope your friend wasn't offended, that's all.’
She stopped, suddenly catching sight of the notes in the saucer.
She reached across, and unfolded them.
‘Oh, look, Jean-Paul.
Your friend's made a mistake.
You'd better keep this for him.
There's thirty francs here…‘
She stopped.
Jean-Paul's colour had suddenly faded; he sat very still.
‘His satchel,’ he said.
‘His satchel of books.
Did he take it?’
Isobel bent down.
She  straightened up with a smile.
‘No — he's left that, too.
What a forgetful young man!
Jean-Paul, you'll have to take it with us, and —‘
She stopped.
Jean-Paul was clasping her wrist.
She saw his eyes grow round, bewilderment and disbelief on his face.
Then the bomb in the satchel went off.
Edouard was in the car, on the far side of the square, when he heard the explosion.
It was deafeningly loud; he felt hot air burn his face; the car veered across the road.
In the equally deafening silence that followed, he looked up, and saw the dust, glass, debris settle in slow motion.
Then he was out of the car and running.
He ran towards the remains of the café as everyone else ran away.
Suddenly the square was filled with fleeing people.
He pushed past them frantically, his eyes smarting from the dust.
Then he stopped.
The bomb had taken out the café, and the two floors above it.
Girders gaped.
Half the wall of the next house had been blown out, and he could see into the room beyond.
An iron bedstead, skewed across a smashed floor; a torn curtain.
I have seen this before, he thought, still with his mind in that crazed slow motion.
Where?
In the Blitz.
The curtain flapped in a glassless window.
In front of him was a mound of concrete blocks, dust, jagged glass and twisted metal.
It was fifteen feet, twenty feet high.
Yellow dust was settling, choking his throat.
The mound of masonry was still and silent.
No moans; no sighs; no cries; nothing.
He stared at it in frozen incomprehension.
Trapped under one of the huge concrete blocks was part of a man's leg, severed at the knee.
The black trouser material was ripped to ribbons; the shoe, intact, was still on.
Further up, like part of a discarded doll, was the top half of a woman's torso, blood billowing from where the head should have been, the remnants of a flowered dress settling under the dust.
Not Isobel, he thought.
Not Isobel.
Isobel was wearing white.
He heard someone cry out, a terrible cry, and then realised it was himself.
He was not alone now.
A woman was standing near him, an old woman, plump, with grey hair, wearing a black frock.
She, too, was staring at the debris.
He saw her lift her arms in a slow gesture of horror, or perhaps rage, to the clear sky above.
He saw her mouth open, but he did not hear her scream.
Then both the woman and Edouard fell to their knees.
They began frantically to scrabble in the stone and dust.
Behind them, in the city, Edouard heard the sirens begin to wail.
Forty-three people died in the explosion, among them Isobel and Jean-Paul, who, so close to the bomb, were killed instantly.
The majority of the bodies could not be identified from their remains; a few were confirmed by dental records, or by jewellery and belongings that survived the blast intact.
The boy François, alias Abdel Saran, and a member of the FLM since the age of sixteen, was picked up within twenty-four hours.
His elder brother had been shot by a French gendarme in a street incident two years before.
François, alias Abdel, died — according to the army reports — in his cell, of self-inflicted injuries.
Four years later, much as Edouard had predicted, Charles de Gaulle ended the strife in Algeria, the majority of the French left, and Algeria became a free state.
Edouard never returned there to see the accuracy of his own prophecies.
When the immediate formalities were over, he left Algeria for the last time, and flew back to Paris, where he shut himself away in the house at St-Cloud, seeing no one.
It was there, about two weeks later, when he forced himself to look at Isobel's correspondence, that he found the letter from her gynaecologist, with the recommendations she had requested regarding maternity clinics.
It had been posted the day they left for Algeria.
He understood at once why she had not told him; he remembered the glass of milk in the café, and for the first time in weeks he was able to weep.
Once a Catholic, always a Catholic.
He did not blame the boy, or Jean-Paul, or Algeria, or colonialism, or even himself: he blamed God, the deity of his childhood, whom he had not worshipped since his sixteenth birthday.
Once, Jean-Paul had accused him of acting like God, and that accusation had stayed with him, paining him.
Yet if he, just a man, could not find it in his heart to condemn his brother or the boy who had used his brother's weaknesses to lure him to his death, how could this God of love of his childhood destroy so savagely and so arbitrarily?
Not just his brother, not just his murderer, but a woman of Isobel's innocence and courage, the life of a child not yet born?
And — more than that — do it day after day, month after month, year after year, throughout this miserable planet he was supposed to have created?
For the past weeks Edouard had had to force himself to look at  newspapers: all he saw there when he opened them was confirmation and repetition: accident, sickness, violence and sudden death, handed out evenly to the guilty and the innocent.
It was that which made his anger so violent: the knowledge that it was not his alone; that it was shared and felt by thousands upon thousands of others, rich and poor, strong and weak, man and woman, parent and child, all around the world.
A God that created a world that should logically bate and revile its creator?
No, he could not believe in such a God.
But if he did encounter that God, he thought, his dearest wish would be to spit in his face.
Some three months after the bombing, at the very end of the old year and on the eve of the next one, choosing the date with a certain bitter amusement, Edouard left the house at St-Cloud in the late evening, and drove, alone, into the centre of Paris.
He took the car which had been Grégoire's favourite and also, by chance, Isobel's.
Its long black bonnet gleamed in the light of the passing street-lamps, and its powerful engine echoed through empty streets.
He avoided those parts of Paris where revellers had gathered to celebrate the New Year out of doors with drink and dancing.
He drove through the backstreets, and the quieter residential boulevards, where people had either ignored the date and retired to sleep, or were celebrating it in the privacy of their homes.
He drove past the Café Unic, where his father and Jacques, and other members of their cadre had held their last meeting, and where he had dined with Isobel the night he asked her to marry him.
He drove past the parks and gardens where he had played as a child; past the houses of some of his past mistresses; past the apartment where Clara Delluc lived.
He drove past the house of his mother, who, he knew, was holding a party that night for her new lover, a celebrated patron of the arts.
He drove past the Ecole Militaire, where his brother had begun his career as a soldier, in that uniform he still remembered so clearly.
He drove past the dark oiled surface of the Seine; he saw a bateau-mouche pass, brilliant with lights, saw two lovers, entwined in each other 's arms in the shadows; saw a clochard out cold, slumped over the warmth of the vents from the Métro, a brown paper bag and a puddle of alcohol  by his side.
He drove through the poorest streets of Paris, and some of the richest ones, and at length, shortly before midnight stopped the car in a wide and gracious street of tall and beautiful houses.
He had not visited the place he was seeking before, but he knew it was there, and had heard tales of it from numerous acquaintances.
Pauline Simonescu, finding the austerities of post-war London bad for business, had moved back to Paris at about the same time he, too, had returned, from Oxford.
That coincidence pleased him.
It was as if she had been waiting for him for all these years.
Some of his acquaintances favoured her premises by night; like Jean-Paul, they felt the dark hours were the ones in which to drink and go hunting.
Others favoured the day, the long pleasure of an afternoon.
It makes little difference in any case , one of them had said to him once.
In that house the shutters are always closed, the lamps lit.
In that house it is always night.
He thought of that remark now, as he paused outside the house.
It was dark, and silent, from the outside no different from the respectable family mansions that flanked it.
Ah, but when you entered it…
He knocked once on the door, and it was instantly opened, not by the black man whom he had quite been expecting, but by Pauline Simonescu herself.
Perhaps she heard his steps before he knocked — she opened the door very quickly — and he wondered for a moment if she had been as she had when he last saw her, standing just inside the door, her head on one side, listening, as she had listened to the bombs, and to the siren she heard before it was sounded.
She did not greet him, but drew him quickly inside into another wide marble-floored hall, so similar in form to the previous one, with its glittering crystal lights and its wide forked staircase, that for a moment he felt only confusion, a sense of time warped, speeding him at once back and forwards.
He looked around him.
The Fragonards.
The Titian.
From the adjoining room, the sound of conversation and laughter.
Madame Simonescu drew him forward, into the light, her hand, again wearing the heavy ruby, resting with a light tension on his arm.
Again he felt that sense of an unseen force, an intense will.
She said nothing; her head was slightly tilted, listening.
He listened, too, and for a moment the noises from the next room ceased, and he heard only a great and total silence, a silence that extended beyond the city, beyond the planet, a silence as empty and bleak and beautiful as space, as the universe itself; the endless harmonious silence of the spheres.
Then, through the silence, he heard the advent of the year: the ringing of the church bells, the rattles, the hoots of the ships on the Seine, the clatter and concatenation of men and women.
He looked at Pauline Simonescu, and felt a great and total relief, as if a burden of enormous weight had been lifted from his shoulders.
He knew he needed to say nothing; she needed no history, no fumbled accounts of the past, no pleas, no explanations.
She knew him, and he recognised her; they had both heard the silence.
‘Monsieur le baron,’ she said, as she had said to him once before.
Then, not even glancing at the room beyond, or at a woman who had come out on to the stairs, she led him away to a small room of perfect luxury at the back of the house, which was clearly her own.
She seated him before the blaze of the bright fire; she brought him, unasked, a glass of the Armagnac he preferred.
Then she seated herself opposite him, and drew forward a small table, on which were two packs of cards.
 An ordinary pack; a Tarot pack; she spread them out on the polished mahogany.
The Baron looked down at their butterfly colours, and saw they were very old and much used.
He saw images: a ruined tower — and he thought of those black gaps behind the Eaton Square terrace; death by drowning — and he thought of Hugo Glendinning; a hanged man — and he thought of his father's cadre; two lovers — he thought of himself and Isobel; a king of cups, a queen of diamonds — he thought of nothing.
Pauline Simonescu looked up, her thin hands moving over the cards, her black eyes holding his.
Her fingers hovered over La Morte ,Les Amoureaux , over the king of cups, the jester.
‘Monsieur le baron,’ she said.
‘It is the beginning of the new year.
First, I shall read the cards for you.
Then — if you still wish — you can do whatever it was you came here to do.’
She smiled.
‘The cards first.
Then you can begin your future.‘