

FREE 32 PAGE GREENWELD Summer Catalogue Supplement HOSEPIPE CONTROLLER ELECTRONIC CRICKET CLASS ‘A’ HEADPHONE AMPLIFIER THE No. 1 INDEPENDENT MAGAZINE for ELECTRONICS, TECHNOLOGY and COMPUTER PRODUCTS
1 EVERYDAY ELECTRONICS INCORPORATING ELECTRONICS MONTHLY
The No. 1 Independent Magazine for Electronics, Technology and Computer Projects
VOL. 21 No. 7 JULY 1992
PROJECTS…
THEORY…
NEWS…
COMMENTS…
POPULAR FEATURES…
Projects
CLASS-A HEADPHONE AMPLIFIER by P. Henderson
Get the very best quality from your CD player or tuner and headphones
QUICK PROM by John Becker
Speed up the development time of microcontroller systems
UV EXPOSURE TIMER by Alan Winstanley
Get the production of p.c.b.s under control with this unit
CRICKET GAME by Steve Knight
An electronic simulation of the real thing — without the interference of rain
GARDEN HOSEPIPE CONTROLLER by T. T. de Vaux-Balbirnie
Automatic watering for your garden
Series
CIRCUIT SURGERY by Mike Tooley
Our clinic for constructors — your problems solved
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM by T. R. de Vaux-Balbirnie
Part Nine: Logic Systems
MAKING YOUR OWN PCBs — 3 by Alan Winstanley
A guide to p.c.b.s and how to make your own
ACTUALLY DOING IT by Robert Penfold
Transformer wiring
INTERFACE by Robert Penfold
Transformer wiring
INTERFACE by Robert Penfold
Bar Codes
AMATEUR RADIO by Tony Smith G4FAI
RSGB Open House; Services Provided; Youth in Action; Radio Bygones
Features
EDITORIAL
FOR YOUR ENTERTAINMENT by Barry Fox
Organised; Hang-On!;
In The Picture; Video Phone; Photo CD
EVERYDAY NEWS
A window on the world of electronics
ELECTRONICS VIDEOS
Learn about your favourite subject with these videos
SHOPTALK with David Barrington
Component buying for EE projects
DOWN TO EARTH by George Hylton
Distortion measurement
EVERYDAY READOUT
The best feature in the mag — its written by you!
Our letters page
DIRECT BOOK SERVICE
Selected technical books, EE books and all Babani books by mail order
PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARD SERVICE
A special PCB SALE (while stocks last)— boards for EE projects
ADVERTISER'S INDEX
Readers Services •Editorial and Advertisement Departments    
NEXT MONTH
FREE MARCO TRADING 32 PAGE SUMMER SALE CATALOGUE
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
What is the future for Alternative Energy?
Next month we start a short series about renewable energy; In part one we shall take an overview of the topic and look in some detail at the direct use of solar power.
In the following months we shall examine some particular examples of renewable energy which have the potential for large-scale exploitation in the U.K. We will also examine at first hand the technology used in the design, construction and operation of modern wind turbines used to generate electricity.
SOLAR-POWERED LIGHTING UNIT
In line with our Alternative Energy series we show you how to build a unit that will provide ‘free’ lighting for a shed, boat or caravan.
There is also a simple version of the circuit that can act as a trickle-charger for a car-type battery.
GAS ALARM
A mains or 12V powered unit that will detect the build up of fuel gas plus many other types of smoke.
SUB WOOFER
Most modern hi fi speaker systems are incapable of delivering good solid bass below about 50Hz.
This single speaker unit is designed to add to an existing hi fi setup to provide a dramatic improvement in bass reproduction.
EVERYDAY ELECTRONICS AUGUST ISSUE ON SALE FRIDAY 3RD JULY 1992
EVERYDAY ELECTRONICS INCORPORATING ELECTRONICS MONTHLY VOL. 21 No. 7 JULY ‘92
THE MODERN AMATEUR ELECTRONICS MANUAL
I am sure a large number of our readers will have been aware of the advertising and inserts for The Modern Amateur Electronics Manual , previously available from WEKA Publishing, and advertised extensively in a wide range of hobbyist and technical media.
The title has been widely purchased by hobbyists, student, trainees, colleges, training departments and a very wide range of retail and industrial organisations over the past four years.
Earlier this year WEKA decided to close down its UK publishing operation and a number of titles, appealing to a broad spectrum of business and hobby readers, were put up for sale.
I am pleased to tell you that Wimborne Publishing — the publishers of Everyday Electronics — have purchased The Modern Amateur Electronics Manual and will continue to market this product and produce bi-monthly updates for it in the way that WEKA previously did.
PARTNER
We see this new ‘sister’ to EE as an excellent addition to the range of publications we produce for those interested in learning about various aspects of technology.
It complements EE in many ways and builds into a living encyclopaedia of electronics which keeps up with the ever advancing world of technology through regular updates/supplements.
The same editorial team will continue to produce the updates/supplements and we will endeavour to keep up the high standard WEKA have achieved and add few new ideas of our own.
One change that we have already started to introduce is to shorten the title of the publication to The Modern Electronics Manual .
While the manual is undoubtedly of great benefit to hobbyists it has also established a very firm base in education, training and in the general electronics industry, we therefore feel the word Amateur in the title is inappropriate and will in future drop it.
If you are receiving the manual and updates you will have already heard from us, if not why not investigate this excellent product.
You will find an advertisement for the manual on pages 456 and 457.
READERS' ENQUIRIES
We are unable to offer any advice on the use, purchase, repair or modification of commercial equipment or the incorporation or modification of designs published in the magazine.
We regret that we cannot provide data or answer queries on articles or projects that are more than five years old.
Letters requiring a personal reply must be accompanied by a stamped self-addressed envelop or a self addressed envelope and international reply coupons .
All reasonable precautions are taken to ensure that the advice and data given to readers is reliable.
We cannot however guarantee it and we cannot accept legal responsibility for it.
COMPONENT SUPPLIES
We do not supply electronic components or kits for building the projects featured, this can be supplied by advertisers.
We advise readers to check that all parts are still available before commencing any project in a back-dated issue.
We regret that we cannot provide data or answer queries on projects that are more than five years old .
ADVERTISEMENTS
Although the proprietors and staff of EVERYDAY ELECTRONICS take reasonable precautions to protect the interests of readers by ensuring as far as practicable that advertisements are bona fide , the magazine and its Publishers cannot give any undertakings in respect of statements or claims made by advertisers, whether these advertisements are printed as part of the magazine, or are in the form of inserts.
The Publishers regret that under no circumstances will the magazine accept liability for non-receipt of goods ordered, or for late delivery, or for faults in manufacture.
Legal remedies are available in respect of some of these circumstances, and readers who have complaints should first address them to the advertiser.
TRANSMITTERS/BUGS/TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT
We would like to advise readers that certain items of radio transmitting and telephone equipment which may be advertised in our pages cannot be legally used in the U.K. Readers should check the law before using any transmitting or telephone equipment as a fine, confiscation of equipment and/or imprisonment can result from illegal use.
The laws vary from country to country; overseas readers should check local laws.
Constructional Project
CLASS-A HEADPHONE AMPLIFIER
PAUL HENDERSON
Get the very best results from your hi-fi when using headphones with this inexpensive class-A amplifier
ANY AUDIOPHILE knows the frustration of wanting to enjoy his/her favourite music when the rest of the household is intent on watching the ‘box’.
Or alternatively someone is asleep and cannot be disturbed.
In these circumstances the project described here comes into it's own.
Although simple, the circuit is capable of giving far higher fidelity than many standard power amplifiers on the market and substantially better than would be obtained from the headphone socket of a standard power amp.
Used with a CD player and/or tuner and tape deck a very high quality system can be assembled at reasonably low cost.
DESIGN CONCEPT
Before describing the circuit in detail it will be as well to review the basic design concepts and explain just how this level of performance can be obtained.
Most standard stereo power amplifiers operate in class-B.
What this means is that the output stage consists of two halves.
One half handles negative going output signals whilst the other handles positive.
Using this method the idling current can be limited to very low values whilst maintaining the large voltage and current swings required to drive a loudspeaker.
Unfortunately, these amps suffer from a form of distortion known as ‘crossover distortion’ which occurs at and near the zero crossings of the output signal.
Crossover distortion is actually due to the fact that the two halves of the circuit are not perfectly matched.
The distortion generated is worst at the kind of levels needed for headphone listening.
Another problem associated with headphone sockets on main amplifiers is that a series resistance is inserted between the phones and the output stage to reduce signal levels.
This is not as innocuous as it first sounds.
Speakers and headphones are designed to work from a zero impedance source.
Feeding either through a series resistance results in a loss of control on the moving diaphragm by the amplifier, usually resulting in a peak in the bass response with a rapid ‘roll-off’ below the frequency of the peak.
To produce an amplifier to drive headphones successfully and to obtain the maximum performance which they are capable of requires that both these problems must be addressed.
To design any piece of audio equipment successfully the first stage is to define exactly what it is that you require and determine the circuit from this information.
A decade ago most stereo headphones were 8 ohm units, now most quality units employ Mylar film diaphragms and are usually rated 32 ohm impedance.
Visiting several hi-fi shops, most units, including the 8 ohm types have a sensitivity of between 87db and 96b/mW.
Almost universally the maximum power input is limited to 100mW/channel.
Of the ten pairs of headphones tested with this amplifier most were delivering truly deafening levels with 10mW input.
CLASS-A
Along with output power the amplifier also requires the usual low distortion levels, low noise and wide frequency response expected for a piece of hi-fi gear.
To avoid crossover distortion the output stage must be operated in class-A.
To understand what this means consider the normal small signal class-A transistor stage.
To ensure maximum signal swing the collector will be biased at half the available line voltage.
The current consumption of the stage will be fixed by the load resistance to which the collector is connected.
In a power amplifier the load would normally be a 8ohm loudspeaker.
Although the maths is beyond the scope of this article it can be shown that the output stage would need to consume twice as much power as delivered to the load.
Hence a 50W class-A amp would need to dissipate 100W continuously to operate properly.
As you may well imagine this would mean huge heatsinks and power transformers.
Such amplifiers are made but you could buy a reasonable family car for the same price.
HEADPHONES
Going back to headphones, to provide 10mW of pure class-A into a pair of 32 ohm ‘phones requires a voltage swing of 560mV r.m.s. and a current consumption of 25mA.
This can easily be obtained with small signal transistors in the output stage.
In fact the maximum output of the amplifier is just over 100mW and the ‘cans’(headphones) will begin to distort long before the amplifier does with high level inputs.
The output stage is only half the story however.
We need to drive this properly.
Several circuits were tried and the final choice was made in favour of an op.amp driver with it's output stage biased into class-A.
The Class-A Headphone Amplifier  described here has been measured for THD (total harmonic distortion) and bandwidth etc.
The results were as follows:
CIRCUIT DESCRIPTION
One channel (left) of the Class-A Headphone Amplifier and the common power supply components is shown in the circuit diagram Fig. 1.
Components for the right channel have one hundred added to the component numbering, i.e.  and so on.
Essentially the amplifier is a boosted op.amp designed with both the op.amp and output stage biased into class-A.
To allow direct coupling a dual rail power supply is used.
Starting from the beginning.
Input signals are first coupled to the volume control VR1 via the d.c. blocking capacitor C1.
This latter component has a relatively large value and sets the — 3db point in the bass region.
The use of the value specified sets this at 2Hz.
For most sources the capacitor could probably be removed as any reasonable signal will not have any d.c. impressed upon it.
However, it's certainly better to be safe than sorry especially better to be safe than sorry especially as one of the symptoms of a d.c. offset at the input would be a similar offset at the output.
At best this will increase current consumption in the output stage producing unwanted hum at the output.
At worst the headphones could be damaged.
The volume control VR1 also sets the input impedance of the amplifier at 47 kilohms (47k).
Since IC1 is a j.f.e.t. input device with an input impedance of about 10–12 megohms.
There are a large number of op. -amps on the market which purport to be ideal for audio applications.
Most of these have been used at one time or another but still the TL 072 op.amp seems to combine the best characteristics at a reasonable price.
The device is low noise, has a slew rate of  and a high current sink/source capability.
All these features make for an excellent package.
Nevertheless these devices are rarely run under optimum operating conditions.
For example the output stage of the op.amp operates with a current of a couple of milliamps and can only work in class-AB into loads of less than 10k or so.
This problem can be circumvented by using a dodge from American audiophiles who bias the output stage into class-A by the simple expedient of connecting a resistor, of appropriate value, from the output to the  negative supply rail.
This forces the upper transistor to source current and thus biases it into class-A.
We are using the op.amp IC1 here as a non inverting amplifier feeding the input signals from the slider (moving contact) of VR1 to the non inverting input (+).
Resistors R3 and R4 perform two functions.
Firstly, as just described, they force the op.amp into class-A operation and secondly they provide bias for the output stage consisting of transistors TR1 and TR2.
The complementary transistors TR1 and TR2 operate in the emitter follower mode.
This provides a relatively high input impedance looking into their bases and a low output impedance at the emitters.
OUTPUT STAGE
Resistors R5 and R6 are vitally important in this design.
As they are in series with the emitters of TR1 and TR2 they provide local negative feedback, linearising the operation of the output stage.
Just as importantly the voltage drop across these resistors, in conjunction with the voltage drop across resistor R3 set the output stage into class-A operation.
Overall negative feedback is taken from the junction of resistors R5/R6 to IC1's inverting input (pin 2), via resistor R2.
The voltage gain of the amplifier is set by the ratio of resistor R1 to R1 at 11 times.
Capacitor C2 is included to reduce the gain at d.c. to unity whilst appearing as a short circuit to a.c. signals.
The output from the amplifier is fed directly to the headphones which are returned to the 0V rail.
Power indication is provided by l.e.d.
D1 in series with resistor R7 which limits the l.e.d.s current to a suitable value.
Having described the amplifier circuit attention can be turned to the power supply.
The mains transformer T1 has dual 6V a.c. secondaries which are connected in series to provide 12V a.c. to the bridge rectifier REC1.
After rectification the raw d.c. is smoothed by the electrolytic capacitors C3 and C4.
Transformer T1, of course, steps down the main voltage which is connected to it's primary winding.
Finally S1 provides an on/off switching function.
CONSTRUCTION
The prototype model was built in a small aluminium case, dimensions 152mm by 102mm by 51mm.
This being sufficiently large to accommodate the circuit board, mains transformer, sockets, switch and volume controls.
Initially, an ABS plastic case of similar dimensions was tried.
However when using this the circuit was prone to electrostatic hum pickup.
The result was a low level annoying buzz in the phones.
The screening provided by the aluminium case eliminates this problem.
I   mention this for those who might want to use the circuit in other applications.
For optimum results a screened box is required with the case connected to 0V and earth.
Most of the components are mounted on a piece of 0.1″. matrix stripboard, size 19 strips by 34 holes.
The component layout and details of breaks required in the underside copper tracks is shown in Fig. 2.
Commence construction of the circuit board by inserting the i.c. and use this as a reference point for the rest of the components.
It is probably best to use an i.c. socket and only insert the i.c. on completion of construction and after a final wiring check.
Some people recommend soldering resistors first then capacitors and finally semi-conductors.
However, it's easier if you solder the smaller parts first and work upward in size; the smaller parts are much more difficult to keep in the board prior to soldering if the board has to be balanced on larger components.
Whatever method you decide to use to wire the board remember to ensure that all polarity conscious components are correctly orientated.
Failure to do so can be expensive.
When you have completed the circuit board check it to ensure that there are no dry joints or unwanted blobs of solder bridging tracks.
Also check that the breaks in the tracks are made in the correct places.
Now solder the flying leads to the board in the positions shown leaving these at least 300mm long to facilitate easy interconnection.
Put the board to one side and start the mechanical work.
CASE
The drilling detail for the aluminium case is shown in Fig. 3.
As you can see it's quite simple due to the fact that only the controls, input/output sockets, transformer and board mounting holes are required.
The main point to note here is that the mains entry hole needs to be fitted with a 10mm cable clamping grommet.
The case can be finished to taste.
The final model was sprayed matt black with car touch up paint.
For a neat finish use white rubdown lettering for the legends.
These can be protected by a final coat of clear varnish.
Small tins of this are available from model shops.
Of course, this needs to be undertaken before the parts are attached to the case.
Final construction consists of fitting the various parts to the box and terminating the flying leads to their various destinations.
Mount the board on small spacers, say 0.25″ above the case.
At a pinch the spacers can be substituted for four appropriately sized nuts.
Having finished the job and checked that your work is satisfactory the unit can be tested.
Provided the instructions have been followed the project will now be functional.
No setting up is required.
All that remains is to wish you good listening!
Fig. 1.
Complete circuit diagram of the Class-A Headphone Amplifier
Fig. 2.
Construction and wiring of the stripboard and interwiring of the controls and output socket.
Fig. 3.
Drilling details for the case.
FOR YOUR ENTERTAINMENT by Barry Fox
Organised
I was recently put into an awkward position.
Several years ago I wrote some pieces about the Psion  Organiser , telling how I had devoted  many months to trying to learn how to use this tiny alpha-numeric keyboard.
I got a call from the Chairman of a company, asking if I would be willing to spend some more time — on learning to use a completely new keyboard used by the then-new British system called Microwriter.
I wasn't too keen but said I would.
There was then silence for a few years.
When the product finally went onto the market, as the Agenda, I was sent a sample which was unusable.
There was then more silence, and I was later told that the Microwriter company had been improving the Agenda system.
So I tried again, talking with Microwriter's press office.
I was promised a new version Agenda, which never arrived.
When I queried this I learned that Microwriter no longer employed a press officer.
The job was being done by the Marketing Manager.
I spoke with the MM who had never heard of me, never read anything I had written and never heard anything I've said on radio, e.g. to callers on advice line phone-ins.
I was however sent an Agenda, on loan and with the very clear proviso that if I wanted to keep it I would have to pay for it.
In the meantime several companies, including Psion, have launched similar  products with Qwerty keyboards so there is less incentive for anyone to learn completely new fingering.
The proviso about having to buy to keep is perfectly reasonable.
But it is also a very real disincentive to spending time on learning to microwrite and transferring large quantities of address data from my Psion 128K packs.
If I worked hard and cracked the Agenda system, I would end up either having to spend a lot of money to continue, or seeing the time and work wasted.
The value to a company of an experienced press officer is being able to distinguish between journalists who are looking for free samples and those who are serious about their work.
I cannot afford the time to try everything and often refuse review loans, both of hardware and software.
When I ask for something it is because I think it is worth trying but in this case the very clear proviso about needing to buy was a strong psychological deterrent to investing the time and effort needed to learn yet another keyboard technique and language.
Microwriter now have their Agenda back.
And this is all I can write about it.
Hang-On!
Do treat stories of LCD hang-on-the-wall TV screens with a pinch of salt.
Sharp is world leader in LCD technology.
The size and price of Sharp's range of pocket LCD TVs confirm what a nonsense it is to predict large panel screens to hang on the wall are ‘just around the corner’.
The largest LCD screen currently available in the UK is now Sharp's 5.6 portable TV (shown below).
It costs £900.
This has 170,000 pixels (each a triad of red, green and blue coloured cells).
An 8.6″ monitor screen (without a TV tuner) costs around £2000 in Japan.
Hitachi charges £1300 for a combined VHS playback recorder and 5″ LCD.
Can you imagine how much it would cost to extrapolate from these screen sizes to a wall-sized panel?
In The Picture
Mitsubishi's new video recorders have a feature called ‘Twin Intelligent Picture’.
The idea is to tune the record and playback parameters of the machine to the tape being used.
This approach with Intelligent HQ has already been pioneered by Akai.
When a tape is put in the VCR, it automatically switches to record a test signal for a few seconds, then rewinds, replays and tweaks the recording parameters to optimize picture quality.
Akai has been reducing the test time, but Mitsubishi's TIP system drops it to just 1.5 seconds by taking advantage of the fact that the video head drum has four heads.
While two record the test signal, the other two play it back.
Video Phone
British Telecom has been demonstrating a video phone with BT says will sell for £800 a pair.
These will plug into a normal telephone line socket and show one still colour picture every ten seconds.
Quite why anyone should want this feature remains unexplained.
How well it works is anybody's guess, too, because BT has been showing the trade a non-working prototype, with a hole where the 3″ colour LCD should be.
The only two working models were at the ‘Ideal Home Exhibition’, and there they were working only from signals generated by a personal computer.
Photo CD
Kodak has recently demonstrated Photo CD.
The quality of thermal prints available from Photo CD are good, but the price is likely to be high.
The printer handles only 11 x 8.5″ and 11 x 11″ size prints.
The thermal paper materials alone cost £2.75 to the trade.
Kodak's printer will not handle postcard size prints — surely a curious  omission .
Users of PCs and workstations can access images from Kodak Photo CDs using any CD-ROM XA input device, or one of the new Photo CD compatible CD-ROM drives.
CD-ROM XA technology was jointly developed by Microsoft, Philips and Sony as an industry standard to integrate audio and images into computing applications.
Because of its compatibility with this standard, it is claimed that Photo CD can be used with virtually any type of computer adhering to common industry standards.
Kodak Photo CD system.
Constructional Project
QUICK PROM JOHN BECKER
This speedy interface could save you many hours of system development time.
It's most satisfying to suddenly recognise an easier way of doing something you've been doing the hard way for ages!
Such was the case regarding my addiction to designing microprocessor controlled circuits.
The obvious dawned when a method of speeding the development time was spotted.
Those familiar with writing software for microprocessor controlled systems will know that a lot of development goes into the process.
Much of the software debugging can initially be done on a computer.
Eventually, though, the program has to be tested in-circuit.
This first requires the code to be downloaded from the computer out to a dedicated programming unit and transferred into an EPROM or EEPROM, which is then removed and placed into the module under test.
Frequently, further development is required, and many improved software versions have to be repeatedly downloaded.
My own system required the use of two program which had to be loaded independently.
One controlled the code assembling and debugging operation, the other controlled the E(E)PROM programmer.
After downloading the umpteenth version of one program, loading and reloading assembling and EEPROMming software, I chanced to query the need for using the EEPROM programmer.
All it was doing was essentially the same operation as that performed by the computer when it copies data from one location to another.
Why note use a battery-backed SRAM (static random access memory) in place of the EEPROM, plugging it directly onto the computer bus and treating it as an other RAM in the system?
Having its own independent power supply built in, this type of SRAM can be removed from circuit without data being lost.
It's ideal for prototyping work.
QUICK PROM
The interface circuit described here illustrates the way the technique was put into use.
It was designed for use with a computer having a spare ROM (or RAM) location and for which read/write control is performed by a single line producing a  write pulse.
It is not suitable for computers which have separate read and write control lines, such as IBM-compatibles.
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 show the unit's block and circuit diagrams.
The computer bus directly offers the address, data and control lines required to program an SRAM.
What is not allowed for, though, is the need to isolate all the chip's pins (except ground) from the computer lines before extracting it.
Failure to do so is likely to result in erroneous data being written into the chip during removal from its socket.
Essentially, then, the circuit here is simply an isolator.
CIRCUIT DESCRIPTION
In the full circuit diagram, Fig. 2 the SRAM is IC4, an MK 48Z02 2048 x 8-bit device with built-in Lithium battery.
Its eight data input/output lines are buffered  from the computer's data input/output lines by IC5.
This chip is an octal tri-state non-inverting bus transceiver type .
It has three modes of operation controlled by its pins 1 and 19.
Pin 1 controls the data direction, a high logic level setting the direction from side A to side B. A low logic level reverses the direction.
Data is only transferred form one side to the other when the output enable control pin 19 is set low.
When this pin is held high, the output pins are set into a high impedance state, behaving as though they are, in effect, switched off.
The SRAM IC4 has 11 address lines, the first eight of which, A0-A7, are isolated by IC2.
This chip is an octal tri-state non-inverting buffer type  whose outputs are put into a high impedance state when either pin  or pin  is set high.
When both pins are low, data on the chip's A1–A8 inputs is transferred to the Y1 to Y8 outputs.
Fig. 3 shows the logic diagram and truth table for the .
Another  (IC3) isolates IC4's A8–A10 address lines, as well its positive power line and the  and  control lines.
Each output pin of a  can sink or source a current of 35mA., provided that the chip's total power dissipation does not exceed 750mW As the SRAM can draw about 70mA when fully active, power is supplied to it via two lines of IC3, along paths A7/Y7 and A8/Y8.
The output enables pins (1 and 19) of IC1 and IC3 are controlled by switch S1.
When the switch is open the pins are held at +5V via R1 — allowing the SRAM to be removed, whereas when it is closed the pins are switched direct to ground —() V) switching the SRAM into circuit.
The output enable pin of IC5 is controlled by the chip select line  of the computer.
This line, via IC3 A1/Y1, also controls the SRAM's  (chip enable) line at pin 18.
In conjunction, with the computer's read/write line , also controls the SRAM's read/write and output enable lines, WE and OE.
The chip select (CS) is inverted by IC1 a which sets the logic on one input of the NAND gate IC1c.
The other input to IC1c is controlled by the  line generating a negative-going pulse across C3/R2 which is then inverted by IC1b.
Only when both inputs to IC1c are high simultaneously will its output go low.
The output from IC1c is passed via IC3 A4/Y4 to control line  (read/write) of the SRAM (IC4), it is also inverted by IC1d to control line  (output enable) of the SRAM via IC3 A3/Y3.
When writing to the SRAM, the computer's  and   lines must both be low.
When reading from SRAM, must again be low, but  must be high.
For some computers it may be possible to omit capacitor C3, resistor R2 and diode D1, taking the  line direct to IC1b.
This will depend on the synchronisation of the  toggling relative to the data and address line timings.
The ending of the  pulse must occur before the address and data lines change their states otherwise data intended for one address may erroneously be written into the previous address as well.
The values of C3 and R2 were chosen to shorten the  pulse generated by the computer's 1MHz system clock to about 
The unit is powered direct from the computer's 5V power line, which must be capable of supplying at least 80mA.
ASSEMBLY
The quick Prom is built on a single-sided printed circuit board (p.c.b.) and the component layout and full size copper foil master pattern is shown in Fig. 4.
This board is available from the EE PCB Service , code EE799.
Ordinary dual-in-line (d.i.l.) sockets should be used for all i.c.s except for IC4 for which a ‘Zero Insertion Force’(SIF) socket should be used.
Connections between the p.c.b.
and computer may be via ribbon cable or individual wires drawn together into a neat harness secured with cable ties.
About one metre of cabling should be sufficient.
As constant access is needed to the board, it is probably better not to put it in a box.
The switch S1 is mounted directly on the board, consequently the height of the p.c.b.
supports must allow clearance for its body.
The computer with which the original unit is used has a unused 24-pin ROM socket providing all the necessary pinouts except for the  line.
Consequently, all the unit's leads except for were soldered to the upper side of a separate 24-pin socket which was then plugged into the ROM location.
The  lead was connected to the computer's  line on its expansion plug.
This plug could not readily be used for all the connections since a dedicated  line is not available on it, whereas  on the ROM location is dedicated to that specific address block.
IN USE
If your computer does not have a suitable spare socket, consult the computer manual and consider whether it is practical to temporarily remove a RAM or ROM (more likely a RAM) to allow the unit to be plugged in.
Check the pinouts before wiring the 24-pin connector.
Once the unit is plugged in, the computer does not need to be switched off each time the SRAM is inserted or removed since switch S1 controls all the necessary isolation.
When copying data into the SRAM, switch off S1, insert the SRAM, switch on S1 (taking the  pins to 0V), run the copy routine, switch off S1 and remove the SRAM, after which it is ready for use in the circuit you are developing.
The copying procedure will depend on what facilities you have on the computer.
Some machine-code assemblers or monitors have a facility for high-speed copying of memory data from one location to another.
In this case, machine code is written in the normal way and then transferred under the monitor to the unit by copying the code to the chosen ROM or RAM location.
For example, I might assemble code into RAM block  and then copy it to the unit plugged in at location .
(Using a Supermon min-assembler, for example, the copy (transfer) command is simply ‘T 2000 27FF 9000’ and the process takes a mere fraction of a second.)
Note that it would be inadvisable to assemble the code directly into the location at which the unit is plugged since data could be lost if a mistake is made when relocating the SRAM.
It is better to assemble code at the SRAM.
It is better to assemble code at another computer memory location, save to disk, and then copy to the unit.
Copying can be done via a Basic program, albeit at a much slower rate.
In the following example, the code and unit locations are the same as those above but expressed in decimal.
If copying errors have occurred (unlikely, but possible), the software can be written to allow for the recopying of just single bytes or short blocks from within the main memory block.
It is not necessary to copy all 2048 bytes.
When system development has been completed and you are happy with the machine code, it should then be down-loaded from the computer into an E(E)PROM in the normal way via a suitable programmer.
Although it might appears that this unit could be used to copy into EEPROMS, this proved impractical with my own computer because it is not capable of providing the longer write pulses necessary (typically about 10mS).
Fig. 1.
Block diagram for the Quick Prom.
Fig. 3.
Functional logic diagram and truth table for the 74C541.
Fig. 2.
Complete circuit diagram for the Quick Prom interface
Fig. 4. printed circuit board component layout and full size copper foil master pattern.
IC4 is mounted in a ZIF socket the rest are inserted in standard d.i.l. sockets.
The completed board is shown top left.
The completed p.c.b.
mounted on plastic standoffs showing a close-up of the ZIF socket.
Regular Clinic
CIRCUIT SURGERY MIKE TOOLEY B.A.
Welcome once again to Circuit Surgery, our regular clinic for readers' problems.
This month has brought in another bumper crop of mail and, in an attempt to deal with as many of your queries as possible, I have tried to include quite a few topics this month.
Hopefully, there is something for everyone.
Our July Surgery provides information on how to detect the state of a contact breaker in a magneto, the circuit of an experimental pulse comparator, and a simple a.m. radio tuner.
We also revisit Mark Stuart's popular Variable Bench Power Supply and offer a timely warning concerning the purchase of electrolytic capacitors.
For good measure we have some advice on the selection of analogue to digital converter (ADC) chips and a listing of popular logic gates by their function.
Synchronising engine speed
W. Roberts writes from Jersey to ask for some help in the design of a circuit which will allow him to adjust the timing of engines fitted to a light aircraft.
‘This instrument is a project which I would very much like to build and utilize.
All light aircraft maintenance workshops would most certainly have one for synchronizing and timing port and starboard magnetos on piston engines.
Classic motor cycle restorers and others used to the time consuming ‘cigarette paper technique’ for determining opening time would undoubtedly benefit from the ease and accuracy of timing magnetos afforded by this method.’
For the benefit of readers who may not know how a magneto operates, Fig. 1 shows the basic principle of this device.
The important thing to note is that this form of HT generator does not require the services of a d.c. supply in order to generate the HT voltage required by the engine's  ignition system.
The current in the primary winding is induced by the rotating magnet.
As this current reaches a peak value, the contact breaker mechanism (which is driven by a rotating cam) opens and interrupts the primary current.
This results in a sudden collapse in flux which, in turn, produces a very high value of induced e.m.f. across the secondary winding.
Mr Roberts quotes typical values of capacitor and primary coil resistance of  and 0.7 ohm respectively.
Clearly, detecting the opening and closing of the points under static conditions will be somewhat problematic since most ohmmeters will not just be able to detect such a small change in resistance.
The circuit shown in Fig. 2 (based on a comparator) will, however, detect changes in resistance of less than 0.1 ohm.
The circuit requires a 9V d.c. supply (50mA maximum) and operates an l.e.d. which will provide a visual indication whenever the contact breakers are open.
The threshold sensitivity of the instrument is adjusted by means of VR1.
In order to set this for optimum sensitivity, a one ohm resistor should be connected across the probes and the control is adjusted until the l.e.d. just becomes illuminated.
The resistor can now be removed and the instrument will be ready for use.
If necessary, the circuit of Fig. 2 can be duplicated to permit simultaneous adjustment of both engines on a twin engined aircraft.
Finally, the pulse comparator arrangement shown in Fig. 3 has been provided as ‘food for thought’.
This circuit should be capable of adaptation for use in synchronizing the speed of two engines  when the engines are actually running.
It should be noted that the circuit assumes that both contact breakers interrupt the current for an identical proportion of the cycle.
The circuit has been ‘bench tested’ and, with the values quoted, it was found quite possible to detect synchronism of two pulse trains to within two per cent.
Simple a.m. tuner
Many of today's audio systems are fitted with tuners which only receive f.m.
signals.
This can be something of a problem when the user wishes to receive one (or more) a.m. stations on the medium or long-wave band!
For such occasions, and provided that only local station reception is required, a simple single-stage a.m. tuner can suffice.
Fig. 4 shows the circuit of such an arrangement.
The tuned circuit L1/VC1 comprises an inductor wound on a conventional ferrite rod and a variable capacitor (having a maximum value of between 200pF and 500pF) both of which can be removed from a discarded radio.
TR1 (a field-effect device) provides a small amount of r.f. gain and its high input impedance is ideal for directly matching the input tuned circuit.
The r.f. gain is made variable by means of VR1.
This control is adjusted to produce a satisfactory value of gain coupled with a sufficiently ‘sharp’ degree of selectivity in order to eliminate strong a.m. signals which may be present on adjacent frequencies.
A short length of aerial wire (not more than about three metres) may be necessary in order to receive signals at the high frequency end of the medium waveband.
In some cases, it may also be necessary to experiment with the indicator (L1) for optimum results.
The output of the a.m. tuner may be taken to the ‘ auxiliary ’ input of almost any hi-fi audio amplifier.
This input will usually exhibit an input impedance of about 50 kilohms.
This will usually have sufficient sensitivity to provide ample volume from the 20 to 100mV output signal obtained from the a.m. tuner.
Versatile Power Supply
Mark Stuart's Variable Bench Power Supply was featured in the February 1988 issue of Everyday Electronics .
This circuit provides a d.c. output fully variable over the range 0V to 24V at up to 2.5A.
The design was somewhat unusual in that it used a power MOSFET rather than the usual 2N3055 (or similar) series-pass transistor.
Mark's circuit also employed a quad operational amplifier (LM324) and offered separate output voltage and current limit controls.
Mr R. Bolton writes from Pendlebury with a query concerning this popular constructional project:
bquo; All voltages are OK and the voltmeter works however the ammeter and op-amp output all read zero.
There is only 2.6mV across R13 () which gives 0.104V at pin-14 which should be 10V varying to 0V as the pot is rotated.
The power supply is a ‘must’ for my benchwork but I am stuck.
Perhaps a breakdown of the circuit would be an answer to my problem.’
Well, Mr. Bolton, I am not really certain that you DO have a problem!
One piece of useful information which you have not given me is what happens when you place a load on the power supply.
I assume that the readings you have quoted are under ‘no-load’ conditions.
If this is the case, they are not far from what should be expected!
Try placing the unit under load (a current of a few hundred mA would be useful) and see if the voltage drop across R13 increases.
Then adjust the current limit control (VR1) and check that the output voltage falls to zero when the limiting value has been reached.
If the voltage dropped across R13 does not increase and the ammeter (ME1) still fails to produce an indication, then you DO have a fault!
If there IS a voltage drop across R13 (but no indication on the ammeter) it would be worth replacing IC1 (the LM324) with another device.
Failure of IC1b would certainly give rise to the conditions which you describe.
Finally, it is worth pointing out that the voltage at pin-14 does not behave in quite the way in which you suggest.
This voltage is imply an amplified version of that which is dropped across R13.
It will not normally be affected by the setting of the current limit control (VR1)unless the circuit has begun to ‘current limit’.
If any other reader has had any problems with Mark Stuart's Variable Bench Power Supply (or can throw any other light on this subject) please drop me a line!
Incidentally kits for this design are available from Magenta Electronics Ltd who advertise in EE.
Analogue to digital conversion
Matt Manktelow writes from Co.
Antrim, Northern Ireland, to ask if I can suggest a suitable chip for use in an analogue to digital converter.
Matt has asked particularly for a device which can be interfaced with a computer so I have searched through my data library in order to find a short-list of suitable devices.
All of the devices listed are ‘micro-computer bus compatible’.
This means that their outputs can be connected directly to a microprocessor data bus without having to resort to the use of a parallel interface device.
In order to avoid an unwanted conflict of data on the bus, the ADC output must only be enabled when it is actually being addressed by the microprocessor.
To ensure that this is the case, additional address decoding logic will be required.
The ADC will be allocated an address within the system I/O or memory map (depending upon the microprocessor type involved).
Assuming that the system is based on a common 8-bit Z80 microprocessor, the ADC should be allocated a unique I/O address (chosen so as to avoid conflict with other I/O devices which may be present).
Reading the data from the ADC is then a relatively simple matter of executing a port input instruction (this has the form IN A,(port) where port is the address of the ADC.
In a practical system, the ‘data available’ output of the ADC chip is used to generate an interrupt request (via the active-low IRQ line).
Note 1: The ‘number of channels’ specifies the number of analogue inputs that may be connected to the ADC chip.
Where more than one channel is provided for, the device is question will incorporate some form of analogue multiplexer.
Note 2: The basic resolution of an ADC chip is dependent upon the number of bits used to represent the analogue input.
The greater the number of bits, the smaller the change in analogue input level that can be detected by the device.
Basic logic functions
Matt  Mantelow has also asked me to list some of the more common logic gates according to their function.
So, here goes:
The foregoing lists are not exhaustive but should cover the vast majority of eventualities.
The LS series of TTL devices is available from a great many component suppliers but I have listed a few useful CMOS devices as well.
Caveat emptor ‘Next time you purchase electrolytic capacitors, take a careful look at the markings!’.
This is the timely advice offered by Colin Pickwick .
He recently purchased some capacitors (from a well established supplier) only to find (on close examination) that the marked working voltage was well below the advertised value.
It would appear that either the values had been substituted by the supplier (without warning) or the capacitors had been mistaken for components having an identical capacitance value but with a much reduced voltage rating.
In some cases this would not matter to much, however there could very well be serious implications of operating a component at a potential which is appreciably greater than its rated voltage.
Readers will doubtless already be well aware that the voltage ratings quoted for electrolytic capacitors are really quite important.
As an example, a capacitor rated at 16V will invariably not operate safely in a circuit which specifies a component rated at 35V.
The moral to this little story must therefore be that it is always worth checking that the components you receive from a supplier are the ones that you actually ordered!
Next month:In next month's Surgery we shall be describing an improved low-battery warning indicator and have a computer program for designing 555 timer circuits.
Fig. 1 Basic magneto arrangement (note that the transformer windings are wound on the laminated steel core)
Fig. 2 Simple instrument for sensing the state of the contact breakers
Fig. 3 Circuit of the experimental pulse comparator
Fig. 4 Circuit of the simple a.m. tuner
DROP ME A LINE
If you have any comments or suggestions for inclusion in Circuit Surgery , please drop me a line at:.
Please note that I cannot undertake to reply to individual queries from readers however I will do my best to answer questions from readers through the medium of this column.
Note:If you have a specific query on an EE project see the information under Readers Enquiries on the Editorial page and write to the Editorial Offices at the address shown at the top of that page.
Special Series
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM T.R. de VAUX BALBIRNIE PART 9
This is the ninth in a 12-part series concerning Information Technology, Logic Systems and related matters in and around the Science National Curriculum.
We shall devote the whole of this month to bistable-based circuits.
HAPPY FAMILIES
The bistable is a circuit which is stable in either of two states — hence its name.
It is a member of the multivibrator family the other two of which are the monostable and the astable .
Readers who have been following this series will remember that the latter pair were met in Part 5 (March, 1992 issues).
It will now be useful to describe all three using mechanical models since this shows where the bistable fits into a complete picture.
Imagine we have a swinging pendulum (a piece of string with a weight on the end)— see Fig. 1a.
We could think of the extremes of its swing to be called states A and B. We can see that the pendulum is not stable in either of these states.
No sooner has it reached A than it reverses and goes to B, returns to A and so on.
This is a mechanical astable .
Now imagine we lift a marble above the table (Fig. 1b) we can call the raised-up position state A and table level, state B. Here, the object is only stable when it is on the table.
If it is raised and released it will fall from state A to state B and remain there.
There is a mechanical monostable — it is stable in only one state.
Now think of a two-section piece of egg box and marble (fig. 1c).
We could place the marble in one hole (state A) and it would remain there indefinitely.
We could equally well have placed it in the other hole (state B) and it would similarly remain there.
It appears that the marble is stable in either of the two states.
This is a mechanical bistable .
Although it helps to illustrate the multi-vibrator family in this way, here we are really concerned with the electronic version.
FLIP-FLOPS
Today, bistables used in practical circuits almost invariably take the form of integrated circuits .
However, bistables based on individual transistors are sometimes used and valves were used for the purpose many years ago.
The bistable has some important uses in information handling, some of which are to make a circuit latch , to make binary counters and frequency dividers also to store data — that is, to provide computer memory .
Readers who have not been following the series are advised to read Part 6 (April, 1992) issue).
This gives certain background information about logical gates which form the basis of bistables.
The bistable is often called a ‘flip-flop’ because you can ‘flip’it into one state or ‘flop’it into the other.
The simplest electronic flip-flop is a form of Set-Rest (S-R) bistable consisting of the pair of cross-coupled NOT gates shown in Fig. 2.
This circuit has two outputs (one to represent each state) called Q and  (pronounced Q bar).
The significance of these names is that Q and  normally have opposite logic states — that is, if one of them is Logic 0, the other will be Logic 1.
In the mechanical analogy, this is like saying that when the marble is in stage A (Logic 1) it is not in state B (Logic 0).
The bistable has two inputs — one called Set (S) and the other Reset (R).
These are used to change the output states as required.
Fig. 3 shows the symbol for an S-R bistable.
HOW IT WORKS
In theory, an S-R bistable could be built from the arrangement of NOT gates shown in Fig. 2.
However, this is not a practical circuit and, although simple, would be difficult to control.
It is best not to  build it at all but to imagine how it would work.
Consider the instant when the supply (not shown) is connected.
The output states of both gates would be 0 (because nothing has happened yet).
Now consider Gate A. Since its output () is 0 the input to gate B (R) will also be 0 because they are connected together.
A NOT gate inverts the logic state of the input so the output of Gate B (Q) will become 1 and this makes the input of gate A (S), 1 also.
The output of Gate A will therefore remain 0.
The existing states of the outputs Q = 1,, are therefore  maintained — that is, the bistable is stable .
This is called the Set condition.
We must, however, consider what would have happened if the 0 state at Gate B output (Q) had given Gate A an output of 1 first.
This state would have been fed to Gate B input whose output would therefore be 0.
This condition, Q =0,, would be equally stable and is called the Reset condition.
It appears, therefore, that whether Q =1, or Q = 0 and , depends on which gate processes the information presented to its input first — there is a race between the two gates.
Since no two gates are identical, one will always do this first.
The bistable will therefore power-up in either the Set or Reset condition.
Such racing is not good because it introduces an unpredictable element and is avoided in real system.
Suppose on switching on, the bistable is Set (Q = 1 ).
By making R = 1, Q will be forced to become 0 and , 1 — the outputs will change states i.e. it is Reset .
If S is now made 1, the outputs will revert to their Set conditions.
A PRACTICAL S-R BISTABLE
To be useful, a bistable needs to have more sophisticated access to its inputs.
With the NOT gate bistable, the inputs are connected direct to outputs.
This means that in controlling the inputs, the outputs can be short-circuited.
A practical S-R bistable circuit which does not suffer from the problem mentioned above is shown in Fig. 4.
This consists of pair of cross-coupled NOR gates.
Switches, S1 and S2 respectively are used to set and reset the device and l.e.d. 's, D1 and D2 indicate the logic state of the outputs, Q and  — when lit the state is 1, when off , it is 0.
As a basis for this month's experiments, the simplest approach is to use a modular kit (for example, the Unilab Alpha Kit).
Alternatively, circuits may be built using basic components on the Plugblock (prototype board)— layouts are given in all cases.
Note that a description of the Plugblock and its use in circuit-building was given in Part 5 (March, 1992) issue).
The component ‘shopping lists’ assume the use of the Plugblock and a few short pieces of single-strand connecting wire to be used as link wires.
A PP3 or other 9V battery and a suitable connector are also needed.
Remember, if you have been building circuits from previous parts of the series, check your stock of components before ordering new ones.
Special low-current l.e.d. 's are available from several suppliers and it is worthwhile using them.
Ordinary l.e.d. 's may be used but they will not be as bright.
To build the practical bistable you will need the following:
Following the Plugblock layout (Fig. 5).
Note that two of the four NOR gates contained within the 4001 chip are used.
Resistors, R1 and R2 are ‘pull-down’ resistors which keep the inputs at logic 0 (negative battery voltage) when switches S1 and S2 are released.
This prevents possible false operation.
The l.e.d. 's must be connected the correct way round or they will not work — the shorter lead denotes the cathode (k) end.
When complete, connect the battery and note that one output assumes a Logic 1 state and the other, a 0.
You should find that you can change the output states by pressing the appropriate set or reset switch.
The S-R bistable operates as follows.
When the battery is connected, all inputs and outputs first assume Logic 0.
Since a NOR gate will produce a Logic 1 output when both inputs are at Logic 0, it follows that the race condition occurs.
There will be a competition between the two gates to process this information and one output will take on a Logic 1 state before the other.
This will be applied to the input of the other gate making its output 0.
The bistable will now be in a stable condition.
Suppose it is output Q which assumes the 1 state and output  that is, the bistable is set .
A Logic 1 pulse applied to the Reset input now changes the output states to Q = 0,.
This is because Logic 1 applied to the Reset input will make Q Logic 0 (a NOR gate produces a Logic 1 output only if both inputs are Logic 0).
This then feeds the input of the other gate making this Logic 0 to.
The corresponding output,, will then assume Logic 1.
It will then remain like this until the circuit is Set by making S = 1 whereupon Q will become 1 and .
Unlike the NOT gate bistable, the Set and Reset inputs are not directly coupled to outputs so there is no chance of short-circuits occurring.
The best way to summarise the action of the S-R bistable is by using a truth table:
The table above resembles the truth table for a gate but, although the circuit is made from gates, it is not itself a gate.
In a gate, the output is always the same for any given set of input conditions.
Here, the outputs depend on the states they had previously that is, Q = 1, if S was 1 previously.
This being so, we could say that the bistable has remembered what the input states were — it has the memory whereas a simple gate has not.
This is very important because it is the basis of computer memory .
BURGLAR ALARM
The S-R bistable may be used to illustrate a burglar alarm.
When an intruder opens a door or window and operates a switch, a Logic 1 pulse is given to the set input.
Output Q then assumes Logic 1 (equivalent to being a battery positive voltage).
This operates a transistor or a relay (see Part 6: April, 1992 issue) and switches on a siren or bell.
Nothing the burglar can do will silence the alarm since once the bistable has set , it will remain like that until reset .
For security, the reset switch is situated in a secret place and may be key-operated.
Build a model of the burglar alarm (fig. 6 and Plugblock layout Fig. 7).
Assume the bistable is set by pressing the TRIGGER switch, S1, Q becomes 1 and current passes to the base of the transistor, TR1, via resistor R3 and operates buzzer, WD1.
S2 may subsequently reset the bistable and cancel operation.
The l.e.d., D1, operates when  (i.e. when reset ) and indicates the standby (READY) state.
Note that buzzer, WD1, is polarity-sensitive and must be connected the correct  way round in the circuit or it will not work — the red wire is the positive one.
Note also the orientation of transistor TR1.
When the battery is first connected, the buzzer may sound if Q happens to be left high (i.e. set ) due to the race condition mentioned earlier.
In addition to the components used previously, you will need the following:
CLOCKED S-R BISTABLE
It is sometimes useful to allow the Set or Reset condition to take effect only when a pulse is applied to a third input called the Clock (Ck).
This allows input conditions to be set up in advance.
The circuit for a clocked S-R bistable is shown in Fig. 8.
This consists of an S-R bistable with inputs S' and R', controlled by the outputs of a pair of AND gates.
Only when a Logic 1 pulse is applied to Ck (clock input) it is possible for data applied to the S and R inputs to be allowed through to the bistable proper and take effect.
This is because an AND gate needs both inputs to be Logic 1 for the output to be Logic 1.
The clocked S-R bistable can be  built using the Plugblock layout shown in Fig. 9.
In addition to the components used previously, you will need the following 
Push-button switch, S2, applies clock pulses.
When the battery is connected, the initial output stages are unpredictable due to the race condition.
Pressing the Set or Reset button should have no effect.
Now,keeping the appropriate Set or Reset switch pressed , apply a clock pulse.
The bistable will set or reset — try it a few times.
THE D-TYPE BISTABLE
The D-type is a special variety of clocked bistable with several uses in electronics.
Its symbol, and a practical circuit to illustrate how it works, are shown in Fig. 10.
The D-type bistable has two inputs — one called Data (D) and the other, Clock (Ck).
The D-type bistable operates as follows.
When data — that is, a 1 or a 0 — is applied to the D input, nothing happens.
However, when a clock pulse is applied to Ck, output Q assumes the same state as D and output operates as follows.
When data — that is, a 1 or 0 — is applied to the D input, nothing happens.
However, when a clock pulse is applied to Ck, output Q assumes the same state as D and output  the opposite one.
For example, if we put a logic state of 1 on the D input and give a Logic 1 pulse to Ck, Q will become 1 and Q, 0.
If we subsequently put a 0 on the D input then apply a clock pulse.
Q and  will change states i.e. Q = 0 and .
The clock pulses have no effect if the data applied to D has not changed.
The action of the D-type bistable should be compared with the simple clocked S-R bistable.
Operation of the D-type bistable may be illustrated using the circuit shown in  Fig. 10.
Note that the 4013 chip contains two separate D-type bistables but here we are using only one of them.
In addition to previously-used components you will need:
IC1 4013 dual D-type bistable
Switch S1 supplies the data — when pressed, D = 1 when released D= 0 (due to the effect of pull-down resistor, R1).
A clock pulse is given by pressing switch, S2.
Light-emitting diodes, X1 and X2 indicate the logic states of  and Q respectively.
Note that from now on in this series, l.e.d. 's are denoted by X1 and X2 instead of D1 and D2 to avoid possible confusion later with the data inputs D1, D2 etc.
Following the plugblock layout shown in Fig. 11.
The connections between pins 4 and 6 and the battery negative line keep the unused inputs which exist on the 4013 at Logic O and prevent false operation.
Connect the battery.
The outputs, Q and , should have opposite states that is one l.e.d. will be on and the other one off.
Say Q = 0.
Make D = 1 by pressing S1 and,keeping it pressed , apply a clock pulse.
The data will transfer from D to Q i.e. Q = 1,(X2 on, X1 off).
This is how it will remain until fresh data is applied and a further clock pulse given.
If S1 is left unpressed then D = 0 and when a clock pulse is given, this will be transferred to Q (X2 off, X1 on).
Check that clock pulses have an effect only when the data applied to the D-input is new .
In this way, a single D-type bistable can remember one binary digit — or 0 or a 1.
It could therefore be called a 1-bit data latch .
THE 2-BIT DATA LATCH
A data latch remembers binary numbers and this is often useful in IT systems.
Some basic information about Binary Arithmetic was given in Part 7 (May, 1992 issue).
It is now helpful to consider a 2-bit number since this shows the general principle of operation.
Although a 1- or 2-bit latch is not in itself very useful any larger number may be accommodated by having more flip-flops — one for each bit.
The 4013 i.c. contains two independent bistables so a 2-bit latch may be made using only one chip.
The circuit for the 2-bit data latch is shown in Fig. 12 and the Plugblock layout in Fig 13.
No additional components are need to build this circuit.
If a 2-bit number is set up on Data inputs D1 and D2 using switches S2 and S3, this number can be ‘remembered’ by giving a momentary clock pulse using S1.
Note that the clock input is common to both bistables.
After building the 2-bit latch, connect the battery and check operation by setting up a binary number such as 10.
Remember, for Logic 0 the appropriate switch is left unpressed.
Now keeping the data switch or switches pressed , apply a clock pulse.
The data transfers to the Q outputs and the flip-flops latch; l.e.d. 's, X1 (for Q1) and X2 (for Q2) then display the number.
Fresh data may be supplied and a further clock pulse given.
Try all possible 2-bit numbers — 00, 01, 10 and 11.
TOGGLING A BISTABLE
It often happens that we wish to change the status of the bistable outputs with successive lock pulses.
That is, on the first clock pulses.
That is, on the first clock pulse Q = 1, on the second Q = 0, and so on .
this action is called toggling .
It is easy to achieve with a D-type bistable by connecting the  output to the D input (see Fig. 14).
Think the operation through before actually building the circuit.
Consider the situation where D = 1 and a clock pulse is applied.
Q will become logic 1 i.e. Q = 1 and .
Since  is connected to D, D now becomes 0.
On the next clock pulse this is transferred to Q i.e. Q = 0 and .
This state of 1 is again transferred to Q i.e. Q = 0 and .
This state of 1 is again transferred to the D input i.e. D = 1.
On the next clock pulse this 1 will be transferred to Q so Q = 1 and .
This sequence of events repeats indefinitely.
Note that the number of times Q changes state is one half the number of the times the clock is pulsed.
We have therefore divided the number of clock pulses by 2 — that is we have made a frequency  divider.
This will be examined in more detail presently.
COMING CLEAN
Toggling a bistable may be investigated using the Plugblock layout shown in Fig. 15.
No additional components are required.
The main problem with using this circuit is providing the clock pulses.
An ordinary push-button switch usually produces several pulses instead of one.
This is because the contacts bounce as they touch.
In view of the greet speed at which the bistable can operate, it would toggle on each bounce and the results would be unpredictable.
To overcome this, a debounced switch is needed.
If a modular kit is being used, then a debounced switch will be provided or ‘built in’ so there should be no problem.
In practice, for simple experimental work an ordinary switch may give reasonable results.
Sharp and deliberate pressing of the switch helps.
It is worth remembering that luck often comes to the aid of the experimenter.
Sometimes the switch contacts happen to bounce an even number of times, say 2 or 4, and this achieves the same result as having no bounce at all!
In real systems, a monostable is used to provide the clock pulses.
An ordinary push-button switch triggers the monostable whose output goes from Logic 0 to 1.
This, in turn, provides the clock pulse for the bistable.
Whilst it is in the triggered state further pulses due to switch bounce have no effect.
An unconventional method of producing reasonably bounce-free switching may be carried out using a small amount of water in an egg-cup.
The block pulse input wire leading to battery positive is dipped permanently in the water.
The wire leading to pin 3 is then dipped in to give a pulse.
With practice this works well.
For some reason, a pulse is given as the wire enters and another as it leaves!
If using this method, it is necessary to use a higher value of resistor R1 (100k works well).
THE BINARY COUNTER
A binary counter displays the number of pulses fed into it.
It consists of a series of interconnected D-type flip-flops each connected in toggle mode (see Fig. 16).
Each  output activates the clock for the next one in line.
One bistable is needed for each bit — thus, a 4-bit counter (able to count up to 1111 or 15 in decimal) could be made using 4 flip-flops (or 2 off 4013's).
For ease of construction it is helpful to make a 2-bit counter — that is, one able to count up to 11 (3 in decimal).
Again, not very useful in itself but by adding further stages any number may be counted.
Fig. 17 shows the Plugblock layout.
No additional components are needed to build this circuit.
Note that clean clock pulses are once again needed and the water dipping method described earlier works fairly well.
Refer to Fig. 16; l.e.d. 's X1 and X2 count units and two's respectively.
Imagine an initial state where D1 and D2 = 1 with Q = 0 and Q1 = 1 — X1 is therefore off .
Similarly for the second stage, D2 = 1 with Q2 = 0 and  is also off so the count is 0 0.
On the first clock pulse, the logic state on D1 (1) is transferred to Q1 (X1 lights) and Q1 = 0.
This makes D1 = 0 also.
In the absence of a clock pulse to CK2, nothing yet happens at the second flip-flop and X2 remains off.
Thus the count is 0 1.
On the second clock pulse, data is transferred from D1 (0) to Q1 so Q1 = 0 (X1 goes off) and Q1 = 1.
This makes D1 = 1 and a clock pulse is also given to CK2.
The data is transferred from D2 (1) to Q2 — X2 lights and .
This makes D2 = 0 also.
The count is therefore 1 0.
On the next pulse, data is transferred from D1 (1) to Q1 so Q1 = 1 and X1 lights.
The count is therefore 1 1.
On a further pulse the cycle would begin again and repeat continuously.
If the above sequence is written down we can see that the device is counting in binary.
If it is re-written (without the decimal equivalent) but this time extended through a few complete cycles something else emerges.
— and so on.
Inspection shows that whereas the clock has pulsed 12 times, X1 has pulsed on 6 times and X2 only 3.
Thus, we have extended the idea of frequency division mentioned earlier.
Division by two can be carried out any number o times by using more bistables.
This idea is used in an electronic clock or watch to produce the 1 second pulses for the display.
It is easy to produce accurate pulses at very high speed yet it is 1 second pulses which are needed.
To solve the problem, pulses are produced at a precise rate of 32,768 per second (32.768kHz) by means of a crystal controlled oscillator .
This is divided by a string of 15 flip-flops.
The first one divides by two to produce 16,384Hz.
The next divides  by two again to give 18,192Hz and so on.
After successive divisions, the output of the 15th bistable is 1Hz (check this with a calculator).
Of course, if you take the back off a watch you won't find 15 individual flip-flops inside.
These are built in a single ‘dedicated’ integrated circuit.
THE SHIFT REGISTER
A shift register is another multi-stage D-type flip-flop circuit with each Q output connected to the following D input.
The following explanation is for a 4-bit serial shift register.
Suppose all four Q outputs are initially at logic 0.
When data is fed into input, D1 and a clock pulse given, the data moves along one place.
Suppose we wish to send binary data along a telephone line.
This is commonly done where information needs to be transferred from one computer to another as in banking or for the operation of a fax machine.
Since only one bit at a time can be sent, we could not send the 8-bit binary number: all at once until we had eight separate telephone lines and this would be obviously impractical.
Instead, we work sequentially .
First, the number is set up in a shift register and when the system is ready, it is clocked repeatedly.
The digits move along one step at a time and eventually arrive at the end of the chain whereupon they are fed along the line.
Some computer printers — so called,serial printers — receive their information from the host computer sequentially.
The circuit of a 2-bit shift register is shown in Fig. 18.
Suppose a Logic 1 state is applied to D1 by pressing S1 (DATA IN).
On the arrival of a clock pulse, this will be transferred to Q1 so X1 lights.
This also supplies the data for D2.
However, nothing more will happen, until a further clock pulse is given whereupon this logic 1 state will be transferred to Q2.
Meanwhile more data can be input to D1.
It can be seen that digits move (shift) 1 place to the right with each clock pulse.
Eventually, data is lost as it ‘falls off’ the end.
The 2-bit shift register may be constructed using the Plugblock layout shown in Fig. 19.
No additional components are needed.
It is necessary to apply ‘clean’ pulses to the clock input, Ck1, to avoid the effects of contact bounce.
It may otherwise be difficult to trace through the action of each pulse.
This may be done using the water-dipping method described previously.
Switch S1 sets the input data — pressing it gives Logic 1 and leaving it released, Logic 0.
After building the circuit, connect the battery.
Apply clock pulses and check that the data shifts along as it should.
A 2-bit shift register may not be very useful but by adding further identical stages, any size number may be accommodated.
RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY
Bistables form the basis of computer memory.
We have seen that a single flip-flop can remember one binary digit.
With sufficient flip-flops we can remember as many bits as we choose.
With modern technology many thousands of bistables can be formed on one silicon chip.
The memory device called Random Access Memory (RAM)enables data to be written (placed) into memory cells and read (retrieved) from them again.
The principle of operation is shown in Fig. 20.
For simplicity there are only 9 flip-flops in a 3 x 3 array.
Each flip-flop can be accessed by referring to its row and column.
This gives a unique position called its address .
For example, we could call the second flip-flop in the top row ‘Row 1 column 2’.
By referring to the address, we select any flip-flop we choose.
This is what is meant by the rather confusing term random access .
It is like having a large array of small drawers containing electronic components.
If someone wanted a diode you could say ‘go to the third row, fourth column alone’.
This is the unique address of the diode drawer.
A modern RAM i.c. can access a given address and retrieve or place data in a matter of 100 nanoseconds (100 thousand millionths — 0.0000001 — of a second) or less.
That's all for this month.
Next time we shall look at the use of IT devices to monitor and control experiments.
Fig. 1.
Mechanical models of the multi-vibrator family.
Fig. 2.
NOT gate bistable.
Fig. 3.
Symbol for S-R bistable.
Fig. 4.
Practical S-R bistable.
Fig. 5.
Practical S-R bistable construction.
Fig. 6.
Demonstration burglar alarm.
Fig. 7.
Burglar alarm  Plugblock layout.
Fig. 8.
Clocked S-R bistable.
Fig. 9.
Clocked S-R bistable layout.
Fig. 10.
D-type bistable symbol and a practical circuit.
Fig. 11.
D-type bistable construction.
Fig. 12. 2-bit D-latch.
Fig. 13.
Layout of the 2-bit D-latch.
Fig. 14.
Toggling a bistable.
Fig. 15.
Construction of the toggling circuit.
Fig. 16. 2-bit binary counter.
Fig. 17. (right) 2-bit binary counter construction.
The working parts of a digital watch.
Fig. 18. 2-bit shift register
Fig. 19 (left) 2-bit shift register construction.
Fig. 20.
Random access memory illustration.
Special Feature
MAKING YOUR OWN P.C.B.s ALAN WINSTANLEY
It's easy if you have the right chemistry
Part Three: Originating your own artwork
This part suggests some ways of designing your own printed circuit board artwork, which will appeal especially to those who have invested in the necessary equipment to fabricate boards with the ultra-violet method.
As we said earlier, one benefit of using the UV technique is that all artwork can be retained for future use, perhaps being modified if necessary.
Identical boards can also be produced this way in small batch quantities using the same artwork.
Rather than lay an etch-resist pattern directly onto the copper foil of a board, it is much more convenient to prepare artwork on a polyester film where the opaque transfers and crepe papers decals can be altered at will.
Utilising existing artwork — such as that given in a project — simply involves tracing the copper track layout onto a film, using the methods described last month.
But you might want to create your own track pattern from a circuit diagram, or perhaps convert a stripboard layout to a printed circuit board (p.c.b.).
Guidelines
This month's feature suggests ways of designing your own artwork, and will be of interest to those who do not have the benefit of a computer-aided p.c.b.
routing system.
Before drafting the artwork, it is worth considering the following aspects of the circuit you are assembling:
1.
The physical features of the components used in the circuit.
Some parts like transformers may be relatively large or heavy or might have unusual terminals or mounting requirements.
2.
The operating characteristics of both the individual components and the circuit itself — voltages, currents and operating frequencies etc.
High voltages and currents (either localised or  ‘global,’throughout the circuit) need to be taken into account when deciding the coper track widths and distances from neighbouring tracks.
3.
The available space in the cabinet or box housing the p.c.b.
which determines the overall size of the board.
4.
The need to take various flying leads to or from the board (for indicators, switches, sockets etc.).
5.
Any components which become hot in normal operation, e.g. power transistors/heatsinks or resistors.
This controls the proximity of any adjacent parts which might be affected by excess heat.
6.
The method by which the board is going to be mounted into the enclosure.
In the absence of any other guidelines it is best to start the design of the artwork by defining the above factors, perhaps listing them out for reference.
Neat and Tidy
As far as the size of the board is concerned, one of the enjoyable challenges of designing your own board may actually be to make the p.c.b.
as compact and neat as possible, and with practice you will soon become skilled in routing the copper track layout accordingly to limit the size of the card.
Where the size of the board is not critical, it is often preferable to draft the p.c.b.
artwork allowing yourself plenty of design space if necessary, and then finalise the board size afterwards before selecting a suitably-sized housing for it from supplier's catalogues (if indeed you are using a box at all).
Obviously one has to bear in mind the general sizes (and cost!) of boxes that are available, and not make the p.c.b.
impractically large!
The designer can thus either simply design the copper track layout first, and then make the board the correct size to accommodate it, or alternatively define the size of the board to start with and then try to make the copper track pattern fit it.
The latter option may take some skill (and patience), especially with more complicated circuits.
Your initial design brief might also allow for the fact that many plastic boxes (for example) incorporate mounting bushes in their bases so that the p.c.b.
can be retained with either self-tapping or machine set screws.
No other mounting hardware is generally required in these instances, and the design of the p.c.b.
could include the mounting hardware fixing centres, so these would be designed into the artwork to begin with.
Components
Having defined the size of the board the next stage is to consider the circuit and the components themselves, before getting down to the job of designing the copper track pattern itself.
Let's consider an actual design example which will demonstrate the principles of drafting a p.c.b.
master artwork from a circuit diagram.
A useful accompanying project,UV Exposure Timer is described elsewhere in this issue, so the circuit description and constructional details are given in that article.
Once the circuit has been designed and finalised, we can  specify the basic p.c.b.
design in accordance with the above criteria.
It is a very good idea to employ p.c.b.
-mounted parts wherever feasible.
Often it is possible to build the mains side of the circuit directly on the p.c.b.
to reduce any mains interwiring — this makes the project assembly quicker, neater and safer.
So when planning the board for the UV Exposure Timer we could utilise a p.c.b.
transformer (T1) along with the fuseholder FS1 (see article).
Both components will fit directly onto the board without any necessary extra hardware being required.
The relay too can be a board-mounted type to simplify assembly even more.
Hot Lines
The circuit mains and low voltages.
In this design the low-voltage size is straightforward though certain circuits (like power amplifiers or heavy duty power supplies) might need extra design considerations to maintain stability and performance.
These aspects relate to more advanced designs and will not be discussed further here.
Radio frequency (r.f.) circuits can also have their own quirks, especially when one considers that two adjacent copper tracks can act as an air-spaced capacitor!
Alternatively a double-sided board may have an inherent capacitive characteristic when you consider that copper tracks on both sides of the board, separated by the board itself, may give rise to a dielectric effect.
This can unintentionally cause ‘stray capacitance’ around the p.c.b.
which could affect the performance of the circuit.
Apart from planning the layout carefully, one might also use very thin copper tracks wherever possible to reduce the capacitive effect of the conductors on the circuit.
You might see this on an oscilloscope board, for example, where the C.R.O. can operate at very high frequencies (10MHz or more): steps are taken by designers to ensure that the design of the copper tracks does not affect accuracy or performance.
Mains Voltage
In our UV Exposure Timer example, a major factor to bear in mind is that a.c. mains voltage is present on the board and is also switched through a relay.
It is best to try and group all mains-voltage components into one area rather than disperse them around the board.
Also, the tracks which carry mains voltage must be adequate thickness to carry the peak current safely.
The rest of the circuit is at a low voltage and the design of the p.c.b.
tracks in that area should be straightforward.
Having pondered the operating characteristics of the circuit, the next criterion in our list relates to the space available in the housing used to accommodate the finished board.
In fact, the author opted to select the (plastic) box first and design the p.c.b.
to fit it and so the dimensions of the board were finalised at 110mm x 68mm.
The plastic box used (see parts list) is also high enough to accept the highest component on the p.c.b., namely the mains transformer.
Also we need to consider the flying leads which we wish to take from the board and hook up to external switches, indicators etc.
Two sets of mains-voltage flying leads will be utilised — live (L) and neutral (N) mains input, and also live and neutral mains output to the outlet socket.
The safest way to connect mains leads to the board is via p.c.b.
-mounting screw terminal blocks, so two two-way terminals will be required.
All other flying leads for the switches and indicators are at low voltage and these can be soldered directly to the p.c.b.
More elaborate designs might use pin headers and sockets so that flying leads can be plugged into the board, making it easy to disconnect them to remove the board for servicing or repair.
None of the components in this design get unduly hot during operation, we do not need to worry about leaving ample space for a heatsink.
The final specification for our board relates to the mounting hardware for the board.
The plastic box chosen does not have any mounting bushes moulded in the base, so the board will be mounted firmly with nylon screws, nuts and stand-off pillars.
We need to remember to incorporate mounting holes in the p.c.b., therefore.
Light Work
Having outlined the main p.c.b.
design parameters let's now look at the process of preparing the artwork itself.
This is best drafted onto polyester film, which is translucent and tear-resistant.
Other media which could be used included transparent acetate film (such as overhead projector film) but some types are liable to rip very easily, destroying the artwork with it!
The job of drawing up the artwork is made considerably easier by using a light-box, especially when dealing with more complex designs involving integrated circuits.
Light-boxes have a translucent surface and are illuminated from inside with fluorescent tubes.
Using a light box enables you to superimpose electronic component arrangements onto copper track layout artwork so that you can design the p.c.b.
on paper and see the copper tracks underneath through the component layout.
Thus, with a light-box, you can juggle both the component layout and the copper track design around, and see one side of the board in relation to the other.
A light-box also obviously illuminates the work while you draft it and makes the artwork easier to see!
It is relatively simple to make a fluorescent light box from readily-available materials (e.g. Conti Board and Perspex) and the author designs all his artwork on the light console which will be described next month.
The design utilises a Thorn ‘2D’ compact fluorescent tube which fits a standard bayonet (BC) light socket and requires no external starting or control gear.
The box also has a sloping front making it easier to use when sat at a desk.
Starting Grid
Many components such as transformers, relays and integrated circuits have their terminals arranged on a regular grid, and generally — but not always — a 0.1″ matrix ‘pitch’(distance between the lines on the grid) is employed.
It is obviously necessary to make sure that the holes drilled in our p.c.b.
have a pitch which matches the terminals of the components if the parts are to fit the board properly.
It is possible to buy an accurate 0.1″ pitch grid printed like graph paper onto polyester film, which helps to gauge distances between terminals when designing the artwork.
(The grid is often included in packs of plain polyester drafting film).
It is best to tape this grid using Scotch Magic Tape to the light box  to enable the designer to accurately align components onto a 0.1″ pitch.
The next stop is to try and determine the best arrangement of the components on the board, and it often helps if at least the major parts (large transformers, relays etc.) are to hand so that the designer can visualise the arrangement of the components.
Using a pencil and paper, draw out an approximate actual size layout of the components to get an idea of how the parts can best fit together.
You will probably need to change the layout around as the artwork evolves.
Bear in mind the specification we drew up earlier, so that hot components are not too close to other parts, mains-voltage parts are all grouped together where possible, etc.
Board Room
At this stage the author uses the light box to see through the paper, and by turning over the paper it is possible to drawn in with pencil on the reverse, a rough copper track layout which will link up the components in accordance with the circuit diagram.
If a copper track cannot be routed because it is blocked by existing copper tracks, use jumper link wires to bridge over the obstruction.
When the paper is viewed on the light box, a see-through view is obtained so that it is possible to see the rough copper track layout, like an X-Ray, in relation to the components.
There are no hard and fast rules regarding the best way of drafting out a rough layout, and you may wish to use tracing paper for both the parts arrangement and the copper track layout.
View them in alignment with each other to realise the overall artwork design.
Whichever method you adopt, the use of a light box will certain make the job a lot easier.
Eventually, after some trial and error (a lot, on complex boards!) you will have a rough draft of how the parts are to be arranged on the p.c.b.
and also how the copper track pattern is to be designed.
The next stage is to translate this into actual artwork, ready for exposure using the ultra-violet system.
Place a piece of polyester drafting film, cut to a suitable size and leaving a generous margin, over the 0.1″ pitch grid on the light box, and tape it down with Scotch Magic Tape.
Ensure the film is completely flat against the light box.
Using your rough pencil copy as a guide, commence the  preparation of the artwork by placing down the mounting pads of the components, using either crepe tape circles or rub-down dry transfers of appropriate diameter.
Use the same technique as described earlier (May ‘92 issue — Supplement) in the ‘Direct Etch’ method of p.c.b.
production.
Large circles (roughly 3.6mm outside diameter (o/d) or more) are best for mains components and terminals.
For general purpose pads 2.4mm o/d are quite adequate and again special shapes are available for integrated circuit pin-outs which are already conveniently laid out on the correct 0.1″ pitch.
Lay down all pads on the intersections of the 0.1″ matrix so that they match the pinouts of the various components used.
Trim the pads if necessary with a scalpel to prevent them touching any neighbouring pads or tracks.
You will see that several large pads have been trimmed for this reason on our working example layout for the UV Exposure Timer .
Some components are manufactured on a metric grid, often showing up in data as a distance of 5.0mm between pins.
An equivalent part in a true imperial pitch of 0.1″. would be shown as 5.08mm distance in catalogues.
The two parts are not always interchangeable; the small difference of 0.08mm can give rise to a cumulative error which could mean that a metric pitch part will not necessarily fit an 0.1″ pitch p.c.b., and vice versa.
Where a metric pitch part is used (certain mains transformers, for instance), the 0.1″ grid taped to the light box will have to be ignored if the metric component is to fit the board correctly.
Making Tracks
Next, start to interlink the pads with either crepe tape or dry transfer lines, using the relevant thickness as necessary.
Looking at the artwork for the UV Exposure Timer , it will be seen that all mains parts are at one end of the board, with 240V connections via screw terminals for safety.
The mains-voltage tracks need to be of adequate thickness.
As a rule of thumb, the author designs these mains-voltage tracks in 2.5mm wide section (which is good for up to 5 Amps of 1.5mm to 2mm minimum where possible.
Extreme care is needed not to space the tracks so closely together that any high voltages flash over between tracks can occur.
The primary and secondary windings of the transformer have been interlinked as shown in the circuit diagram, such that the twin 120V primary windings are in series, making the transformer suitable for domestic 240V mains operation.
The two secondary windings are in PARALLEL (both 0V terminals joined together, and both 9V pins similarly linked.)
It is absolutely vital that the transformer is wired correctly to avoid any unpleasant occurrences!
Double check with supplier's data and look at the part itself to confirm the pinouts.
There appears to be no standard pinouts for p.c.b.
mounting transformers and different manufacturers each have their own style.
Likewise double check the bridge rectifier connections and the smoothing captivator C1 for polarity, as there is no standard arrangement.
Reversed polarities here could prove dangerous.
Again, supplier's catalogues will be of help when determining distances and pinouts.
It is often a good idea to make the positive and negative power supply conductors as thick as possible to avoid any noise or ripple being induced on the power supply lines when thin conductors could create an unwanted electrical resistance.
One may also need to consider high switch-on surges amongst other factors, the effects of which will be reduced by keeping the power supply tracks as thick as practicable.
It is not critical in this design, where supply requirements are not very demanding, but it is not a bad habit to use wide (say 2.5mm) track for main power conductors, even though they are at low current.
The rest of the copper track layout is really a matter of translating one's rough pencil sketches onto the polyester film using more opaque transfers.
The rest of the UV Exposure Timer artwork is quite straightforward and uses 1.00mm or 0.8mm wide lines for most of the low-voltage component interconnections.
You can be as elaborate as you like and you will doubtless develop your own style.
Retouching
The ultra-violet process method will reproduce any flaws in the artwork, so it is necessary to ensure that there are no breaks in the conductor lines etc.
Any faults can be touched up using more transfers laid on top.
Any pads or tracks which are laid down in error can often be removed by laying some sticky tape over the offending area, and pulling away sharply.
The transfers will often come away with the adhesive tape.
Alternatively, the transfers can be scraped away with a scalpel.
It will be seen on the example artwork that there are several relatively large areas of copper.
These can be drafted by outlining the area with tape or transfer lines, and then painting in the central area with matt black enamel paint; or, fill in the middle by laying down wide transfer lines, slightly overlapping each other and cut to shape with a scalpel.
It must be borne in mind that more copper equates to more adhesive holding the copper foil onto the glass fibre panel.
Extremely thin tracks and very small pads are not able to withstand much heat when soldering and may lift off.
(Tips were given in Part Two about repairing the board under these circumstances).
By laying down larger areas of copper track, you will not only make the copper foil pattern better able to adhere to the board, but you will speed up the etching time also.
Component View
When eventually the artwork has been drafted, you will finish up with a ‘see-through’ view of the copper track pattern, as seen through the board from the component side.
The next thing to do whilst it is still taped to the light box is to draw up a component layout diagram, actual size.
Lay a piece of paper over the artwork and draw on the actual positions of the components, showing the locations of all pinouts and terminals clearly.
Also labels the components on your drawing as per your circuit diagram and retain for future reference.
At this stage, you will have drawn both the copper track layout and have separately superimposed the component layout onto it: you can now double check your work thoroughly.
Look especially for incorrect or reversed connections to integrated circuits, transistors etc.
A mistake spotted now can be rectified on the polyester film, but once you have committed your design to the board, it could be difficult or impossible to effect any corrections.
Check carefully!
On the Right Side
Now remove the artwork from the light box and turn it over .
You will now be looking at the actual design which is to be etched into the copper foil.
It is strongly recommended that you put an adhesive label on this side of the artwork in the margins and mark it with the title of the project, date etc. and very clearly mark words to the effect of ‘this side copper track view/this side to UV light’ or similar.
You can, incidentally, also add rub-down lettering such as the name of the board in the layout, on this side of the artwork and it will appear (the right way round!) on the copper foil layout of your board.
You are now only interested in the labelled side of the artwork, i.e. the side on which you did NOT apply any layout transfers.
This view represents the actual foil pattern layout and is the side which will be placed down against the UV light source.
The sensitised board — which is cut to size to fit the artwork — will be placed on top of it.
The board can then be exposed and processed as normal using the techniques described in previous months.
When you have finished with the artwork, it can be stored in a stiff envelope or a file, along with the component layout diagram, so that it can be modified or re-used at a later date.
Take care when handling the artwork as the rub-down dry transfers of the artwork are liable to be damaged by scratching.
Designing your own printed circuit board from scratch and then fabricating it from just a plain board can be a very rewarding experience.
This series has shown the constructor the various techniques for both originating artwork and producing your printed circuit boards at home.
The reader will certainly benefit from experimenting to develop his own preferred methods — have fun!
Next Month:The construction of a simple Artwork Light-Box will round off this short series.
The circuit diagram of the UV Exposure Timer which is used here to demonstrate the approach taken in designing your own p.c.b.
A photograph of the completed project is also shown.
Photo 1.
Designing your own artwork starts by drafting a rough component layout diagram, referring to the circuit diagram and manufacturer's data as required.
Here, the EE Light Box (next month) is being used, which proves invaluable in the following stages.
Photo 2.
Starting to prepare the master artwork using Alfac rub-down transfers.
Also on the Light Box is the author's rough draft — the proposed copper track layout shows through the paper so that an ‘X-Ray’ view of the rough version is seen.
Photo 3.
The completed artwork on the light box — the precision 0.1″ matrix grid is also visible.
The view is actually equivalent to seeing the copper track pattern ‘though’ the board from the component side.
Photo 4.
The artwork with the finalised component layout superimposed on it.
This stage can also be used for double-checking your copper track design for errors or omissions.
Photo 5.
The artwork is turned over and clearly labelled ‘Copper Track View Side’— this is your first sight of the actual copper foil pattern which will be etched into your p.c.b.!
Constructional Project
UV EXPOSURE TIMER ALAN WINSTANLEY
You will only obtain consistent results if your ‘light sensitive’ p.c.b.
receives the right exposure.
Covers a time period of 2.24 minutes in two minute steps.
When producing printed circuit boards (p.c.b.s) with the more advanced ultra-violet processing system, it is necessary to expose a sensitised board to a UV light source through the artwork positive.
Exposing the board for too long a period will rarely cause any damage, but troublesome problems can be caused by underexposure , when the UV sensitive coating will not have thoroughly reacted to the UV light.
This will only become apparent when you try to develop the board, because it will be impossible to remove all of the unwanted resit coating.
The surface of the etch-resist ink might wash off in the developer but a layer of ink can still be left on the board, because the UV light has not had enough time to penetrate all the way through the resist.
Under these circumstances, all you can do is try to re-align the board on the artwork and expose it for a further period, but you may well have to scrap that attempt and start again with a freshly-coated board.
Further information is given in the ‘Making Your Own Printed Circuit Boards ’ series.
MAKING TIME
In order to obtain consistent results, it is best to expose the board for a timed period, though only the more expensive UV Light Boxes have a built-in timer.
The UV Exposure Timer described here enables the constructor to operate an ordinary UV Light Unit for a predetermined period (from 2 to 24 minutes, in two-minute steps) and will then automatically turn off.
You can use this time to prepare the developer etchant etc., or carry out any other tasks.
Using the timer also means that you can experiment to optimise the exposure times with different makes of sensitised boards and not worry about under- or over-exposure.
You will certainly need to experiment with exposure periods if you are coating your own boards with a UV sensitive aerosol lacquer.
CIRCUIT DESCRIPTION
The full circuit diagram for the UV Exposure Timer is given in Fig. 1 and is seen to be based around a simple 555 timer chip IC1, wired as a monostable.
The time period is determined by the resistor network R5 to R15 which are switched through S2.
Rotating the switch S2 increments the monostable period by almost exactly two minutes, as measured on the prototype.
The unit generates delays of between 2 and 24 minutes, which should cover every eventuality.
Since the 555 timer IC1 can be both triggered and reset by grounding pins 2 and 4 respectively, these functions have been combined into one control S1, a single-pole biased centre-off toggle.
When IC1 is enabled, the output at pin 3 goes high, the l.e.d.
D5 glows green and changes back to red when the period is up.
The 555 also drives a mains relay RLA through the transistor buffer TR1.
The relay contacts RLA1 switch on the UV Exposure Light Unit, which is connected to the Timer via the miniature mains socket SK1.
It is possible to manually operate the UV ‘Light Box’ by operating switch S3, which completes the circuit to the relay coil and also illuminates D8.
The whole circuit is driven by a simple mains power supply and associated components.
The circuit is fused, along with the mains load connected to SK1, by a 1A quick-blow fuse FS1.
CONSTRUCTION
In order to simplify construction, nearly all parts are mounted on a single-sided glassfibre printed circuit board, measuring 110mm x 68mm.
This board can be purchased from the EE PCB Service code EE792), but you might want to make it yourself!
The actual design of the p.c.b.
artwork is discussed in Part 3 of ‘Making Your Own Printed Circuit Boards ’ and may be of interest to the constructor.
The 1:1 (full size) artwork positive of the underside copper foil master pattern and topside component layout is shown in Fig. 2.
It can be seen that all the mains parts, except socket SK1, are mounted on the board which greatly simplifies the interwiring, also making the unit that much more reliable.
Both the mains transformer and the relay MUST possess pinouts which match the p.c.b., and only the specified components (see Shoptalk ) should be used in this respect.
Other parts may not fit the p.c.b.
artwork given, though the constructor making his own board can easily adapt the artwork to accept any component which he has available, provided that the electrical characteristics match those specified.
CASE AND INTERWIRING
The p.c.b.
was designed to fit an instrument box measured 155mm x 79mm x 91mm which has a clip-together plastic top and bottom with drop-in aluminium front and rear panels.
The board is secured to the base section with M3 mounting hardware.
The front panel carries the switches, and the timing resistors are soldered directly to the tags of the rotary switch S2 as shown in Fig. 3.
The two light-emitting  diodes D5 and D8 require either mounting bushes or lens-clips.
The bi-colour l.e.d. can utilise a transparent lens-clip to good effect.
You may wish to embellish the controls with rubdown lettering followed by a coat of spray-on protective lacquer as usual.
The interwiring is generally straightforward and is completed with general purpose hook-up write.
Six amp three-core mains flex is used for the mains input which connects straight to the p.c.b.
You can, if you wish, for added safety wire an illuminated, double-pole, mains rocker or rotary switch between terminal block TB2 and the mains lead.
The switch can be mounted on the front panel and will show when the unit is powered-up.
The front and rear metal panels MUST be soundly Earthed as shown.
A series of solder-tags is connected together with a countersunk mounting screw on the rear panel.
The screws used for p.c.b.
mounting must be nylon as they pass through the plastic case.
The mains output socket SK1 is a Euro-style snap-in type which is fitted into a suitable cutout on the rear panel.
The mains inlet cable must be secured to prevent it from pulling out, and a cable gland or ‘P’ clip can be used as normal.
TESTING
When all construction has been completed in accordance with the diagrams, check all interwiring etc. carefully, set the rotary switch to ‘2 Minutes’ and then power up the unit.
The bicolour l.e.d.
D5 should glow red (‘Reset’ mode) and operating switch S1 to ‘Start’should change D5 to green and the relay should be heard to click in.
After the selected delay the relay will click out and the bicolour l.e.d.
D5 will revert to red.
Finally, check that the ‘Reset’ S1 and ‘Manual’S3 functions operate and the unit is then ready for use.
The UV Light Unit is connected to the Timer with a miniature 3-pin plug to match SK1.
MAINS SUPPRESSION
The author's UV Light Unit contains two fluorescent tubes along with the usual control gear.
It was occasionally found in practice that the timer would re-trigger when the light tubes were switched off when the timer timed-out, presumably caused by a switch-off ‘spike’ on the supply.
The result is that the relay RLA is heard to click at the end of the timing period, but the timer re-starts as it is caused to re-commence timing for a further period.
This problem was entirely eliminated by adding a suitable R/C suppressor between the Light Unit and the Timer.
A standard delta-capacitor type device was used which has a built-in inductor and bleeder resistor (Roxburgh suppressor type SDC051, rated 250V 5A).
In fact, since there was no room within the timer box to add the filter, a separate plug-in suppressor unit was built, which has the output wired to a miniature plug to mate with SK1: the unit has a 13A flush mounting socket into which the UV Light Unit is plugged.
It is very simple therefore to plug the suppressor in-line.
Readers can determine whether or not any extra suppression is required with some simple usage tests, as it may not be necessary to go to the added expense of incorporating any spike suppressors, depending on the characteristics of the light unit used.
Fig. 1.
Complete circuit diagram for the UV Exposure Timer.
A Light-Box is connected to the timer via the ‘Mains Out’ socket SK1.
Fig. 2.
Printed circuit board component layout and full size copper foil master pattern.
Fig. 3.
Interwiring from the circuit board to the front and rear panels.
The Earth lead from the rear panel solder tag to the front panel can be ‘earthed’ under either switch S1 or S3 mounting washer.
The completed unit showing layout of components inside the case is shown below.
Where the mains leads are soldered to the output socket SK1 the solder joints and tags should be covered with plastic sleeving.
EVERYDAY NEWS
BUGGING THE TRUCK
Satellite communications are getting more versatile.
And growing: BT's big ground station at Goonhilly Downs in Cornwall is just one of a number.
A terminal in London's Docklands now carries 41 TV channels to Europe.
The early analogue systems are giving way to more powerful digital ones.
These can cater for the smaller user.
The range of services already includes automatic telephones for commercial passenger aircraft.
Under a new development contract BT will extend this Skyphone service to include fax, probably next year.
Such developments are aided by the possibility of using small omnidirectional aerials compatible with airframe structures.
Another likely development will be a global paging system.
Costs fallen
The concept of the Inmarsat marine communications facility, designed for commercial ship use, has now been extended to embrace smaller vessels such as yachts.
The necessary aerials are a fraction of the original size and costs have fallen too.
But why stop at aircraft and shipping?
Land vehicles could also benefit from satcom links.
A promising type of customer is the trucking fleet operator.
Satcoms based on modern digital satellites like C-Sat could provide affordable data links.
Even a one-way (headquarters to driver) link could deliver money-saving changes of schedule to the driver.
A two-way link could be revolutionary.
By also fitting the truck with a receiver for the GPS global position-finding system its whereabouts could be monitored automatically at base, with an accuracy of 100 metres.
BT is currently carrying out a survey of customers' needs.
In the USA a truck system has already performed a feat comparable with the arrest, in the earlier days of radio, of the murderer Dr. Crippen in an Atlantic liner as the result of a Morse message.
A hijacked truck's progress was mapped.
When it stopped in a remote area police pounced and arrested the robbers as they off-loaded the cargo.
Future hijackers may be smart enough to disable the satcom link but simply knowing where and when it happens could be a useful clue.
Less exciting but profitable uses could be redirection of the driver to alternative delivery points and early warnings of temperature rise in refrigerated cargoes.
Efficient use of C-Sat is ensured by a message store-and-forward system.
When the satellite is busy messages queue up and are sent out at a steady rate.
Delays are unlikely to exceed a few minutes while capacity is maximised.
By using low data rates (600 bits/sec) the mobile aerial can be compact and omnidirectional.
The huge dishes at the BT ground stations don't seem to change much over the years.
But the technology behind them does.
The front end receiving amplifiers were once elaborate parametric or maser types which were cooled to very low temperatures (to reduce noise) by elaborate cryogenic refrigeration systems.
Now they are simple GAs-f.e.t.s, equipped with compact Peltier coolers which reduce temperature to the required 80–100°K.
Low Profile Transformer
A new range of encapsulated low profile mains transformers are now available from Cirkit.
These high quality, p.c.b.
mounting transformers are ideal for applications where space is at a premium, the 6VA size, for example, is only 44 x 52 x 22mm.
Independent primary windings allow 120 or 240V 50/60Hz operation, together with independent secondaries which may be connected for series, parallel or centre tap operation, giving a wide choice of voltage/current combinations.
Would on twin double section bobbins to provide maximum isolation — 4kV — between windings and near toroidal characteristics.
SHARP APPLES
One of Japan's leading electronics companies, Sharp Corporation, has announced a long-term agreement with Apple Computer Inc. of America for the development, manufacture and distribution of the next generation personal information equipment.
Apple Computer, Inc. in the States is claimed to be the world leading computer manufacturer, and in January 1992, they advocated a prospect and development for ‘PDA (Personal Digital Assistant)’ information devices of a new category which would bridge the gap between the current personal computers and consumers electronics.
Sharp is claimed to be leading the world in the area of development and production of individual/home information tools and plans development and exploitation of ‘the next-generation of products based on their ‘Personal Information Tool’ initiative which advocates considering communication among people and co-possession of information going beyond the conventional personal idea and creating a new life culture’— Their words not ours!
FM BREAKTHROUGH
A new method of decoding narrow band f.m.
signals has recently been announced by Ampsys Ltd., a small spin off company of Paisley College.
This patented technique removes the spikes (or spurs) from the radio signal just as the link is breaking down and also provides inaudible squelching.
The two effects, it is claimed, greatly reduce listener fatigue especially over sustained periods.
Other advantages include a 25 per cent increase in usable range for any f.m.
PMR and/or a reduction of fifty per cent transmitted power for the same reception range.
A further improvement is that co-channel interference is reduced and two f.m.
channels on the same frequency can now be decoded without mutual destruction.
The circuitry is currently under evaluation by a number of multinationals.
The new decoder uses an amplitude locked loop in combination with a phase locked loop to achieve this breakthrough.
Speak Up
Three flight cased loudspeakers made by IBL are now available in the UK via B.K. Electronics.
The full range are: 12″ 100 Watts rms: 12″ 200 Watts r.m.s.
All models are fitted with wide dispersion horns and include grilles, factory-fitted to the die-cast aluminium loudspeaker chassis.
These models are priced respectively at £159.00, £175.00 and £229.00 per pair, including V.A.T. Delivery, via a specialists carrier, is charged at £12.50.
B.K. Electronics are at .
NEW FACE OF C&G
City and Guild's Information Technology (7261) scheme, first launched in 1985, now boasts 55 modules in subjects ranging from Coding and Programming in ‘C’, Program Design Techniques and Data Processing, though Microcomputer Business Applications, Computer-aided Graphics and Desktop Publishing, to Digital Electronics, Analogue Circuits and Fault Diagnosis and Microcomputer Systems Installation and Maintenance.
Many of the modules have been extensively revised and updated, and further development and revision work on other modules is continuing.
New diplomas and certificates, made up of particular groupings of 7261 modules, are now available as listed below.
These groupings have TEED (the Employment Department's Training, Enterprise and Education Directorate) approval as VQs, and are accepted as being equivalent to NVQs at levels 1, 2 and 3.
Certificate, Diploma, Advanced Diploma in:
Information Technology
Wordprocessing
Programming
Business and Office Technology
Data Processing and Information Systems.
C&G tell us that named diplomas and certificates in other subject areas will be considered in due course.
Let us hope that the various electronics related subjects will be among them.
WEATHER EYE
A new range of weather monitors that enable everyone to keep an eye on prevailing conditions is now available from Davis Instruments.
Shown below is the Weather Wizard II, it can measure inside and outside temperature, high and low temperature, wind direction, wind speed and wind  chill and has a recording facility, alarms plus time and date.
An optional extra is a rainfall monitor.
The basic unit costs £229.95 and a computer link is available plus various cables and adaptors for car/boat use etc.
For further information contact .
Dry Cell Recharger
Our Dry Cell Recharger project back in the September ‘91 issue stirred up plenty of interest amongst readers and the national press.
Quite a few readers have asked if such an item is available commercially and we are pleased to report that a unit is being pilot marketed by Coltronics Systems.
Their Dry Cell Recharger will charge AA, C, D, and PP3 batteries.
It will recharge Ni Cad, Zinc-Chloride and Alkaline cells.
During one complete charge cycle of 96 hours the charger consumes approximately 1½ worth of electricity, so it is not expensive to run.
The act of charging any battery causes a chemical reaction inside the cell, restoring battery voltage and capacity, with excess energy being dissipated as heat.
Overheating degrades battery electrolyte, and rechargeable types are designed to cope with this to a large extent, but dry cells are not.
Any attempt to charge dry cells with conventional battery chargers causes severe electrolyte degradation, eventually shorting out the cell completely and leading to a very rapid heat build up inside the cell.
Consequently, dry cell manufacturers, quite rightly, put warnings on their products as such abuse can lead to the cell rupturing and electrolyte leakage.
The Coltronics charger avoids these problems, employing state-of-the-art electronics to carefully control and profile the charging current to eliminate heat build up and minimise electrolyte degradation.
We should say that this is a more sophisticated design than the simple unit we published and is available by mail order for an inclusive price of £39.95.
This price includes adapters, which incorporate dedicated circuitry, for the four sizes of battery.
Constructional Project
ELECTRONIC CRICKET GAME Steve Knight
Come rain or shine, you are sure of a perfect pitch with this enthralling game — No ‘Rain stopped play’ signs here!
Over the years there have been a great number of electronic games concocted for the hobbyist, including one or two cricket games.
The author has felt that these latter efforts have not in some way brought out the real flavour of the game in the sense that the play does not take place on a real pitch, surrounded by players who get in the way of run-making and occasionally do their stuff by bowling the batsman out or sending him back to the pavilion by some other means.
This present offering is a portable game, suitable for two or more players and is guaranteed to be in action whatever the weather or the time of year.
It is played on a ‘filed’ measuring 300mm by 230mm (12″ by 9″), though this can be enlarged or reduced, to suit your own particular liking.
The field has a pitch which shows the path from bowler to batsman, and there are, of course, a range of bowling speeds, ‘slow’, ‘medium’ and ‘fast’, to test the batsman's reaction.
If he happens to take his eye of the ball, he is very likely to be bowled, and if he hits the ball it may go to any point on the ground where the possibilities of making runs, being caught or surviving an appeal to the umpire are all on the cards.
However, to the system and its construction, with more about playing the game later on.
CIRCUIT DESCRIPTION
The complete circuit diagram of the Electronics Cricket Game is given in Fig. 1.
All the components for this excepting the three control buttons S2, S3 and S4, the bowling rate switch D1 and the twenty-one l.e.d.s, are assembled on a single p.c.b.
measuring 133mm by 100mm (5¼″ by 4″).
Current consumption is about 35mA using a 6V battery, though a simple power unit may be added so that the mains supply can be used.
Integrated circuit IC1 is a 7555 chip, which is a CMOS form of the familiar 555 timer (though a 555 may be used at the cost of an increased current consumption), operating as a clock generator.
The pulse repetition frequency is selected by the three position switch S1 and this switch provides the three bowling rates (style).
BOWLING
With the component values specified, around switch S1, these rates are approximately 8, 12 and 20 pulses per second and these seem about right for the game as the author has played it.
Individual constructors can easily adjust the rates to suite their own fancy.
The pulse output from the timer IC1 pin 3 is fed to pin 14 of IC2, a 4017B 5-stage decade ‘twisted-ring’ counter, then to the output pins of IC2 which are connected to a sequence of l.e.d.s (D1 to D10 inclusive) which we might call the ‘Wicket Sequence’.
Only one of these ten l.e.d.s is on at a time, the position changing to the following l.e.d. with each successive input pulse.
A running light is therefore obtained from l.e.d.s D1 to D10 at a frequency determined by the setting of switch S1.
If this running light is to emulate the movement of a ball along a pitch, from the bowler's end represented by D1 to the wicket represented by D10, the l.e.d.s must light in the correct order and necessarily stop on reaching D10, in spite of the fact that the clock pulses are continually applied.
This is accomplished by allowing the run from D1 to D10 to occur while pin 13 of IC2, the clock enable pin, is held low by way of resistor R9.
The pin is switched high by the Q output of a D-type flip-flop, IC3, when D10 lights and passes a high input to the reset, pin 6, of IC3.
The ball is reset to the bowler's end when necessary by the action of pushbutton switch S2; this switch is consequently labelled Ball Return.
The ball then waits at the bowler's end of the pitch until the reset button switch, S3, on pin 4 of the IC3 is operated; taking pin 4 high and then resets the flipflop and pin 13 of IC2 goes low, enabling the clock again to run the wicket sequence from D1 to D10.
Push switch S3 is appropriately labelled Bowl.
BATTING
Now l.e.d.
D10 is the ‘wicket’ and if the ‘ball’Reaches this, the batsman in action at the time, is deemed to have been bowled.
To try to prevent his fate befalling him, ‘batsman’ must halt the light sequence at l.e.d.
D9 which is the batting position.
He can do this by pressing push switch S4 (the Batting switch) at the precise moment that the ball reaches the ‘bat’ position (l.e.d.
D9).
Pressing S4 before or after this moment, or holding it down all the time, will have no effect on allowing the ball to pass the bat and scatter the stumps!
The circuit performs this function by feeding the output at the Bat position (pin 9 on IC2) to one of the inputs, via diode D13, of a discrete coincidence gate made up from transistors TR3 and TR4.
The other input to this gate derives from pressing the Bat switch S4 which feeds a high signal via the anti-bounce switch comprising IC4a, IC4b and diode D11.
Only when these two inputs are simultaneously high does an output appear at the collector of TR4.
This output is in turn fed to a monostable made up from NAND gates IC4c, IC4d which is turned on for a period of a few milliseconds determined by the values of resistor R17 and capacitor C4.
The negative-going edge of this output enables IC3 by way of pin 3 and the Q output at pin 6 goes low, locking the Bat position in the wicket sequence.
Any failure to press the Bat switch while the Bat diode D9 is momentarily lit results in a low output from transistor TR4 and the ball moves on to the wicket l.e.d. where it stays to let the batsman know he has been bowled out.
This high at pin 11 of IC2 sets IC3 and changes the Q output, so locking l.e.d.
D10 firmly on ‘out’.
Reset switch S2 returns the ball to the bowler's end when required as already explained and D10 is then extinguished.
the following ball can then by played by pressing the Bowl switch S3.
This completes the description of the upper part of the circuit diagram.
SCORING SEQUENCE
The ‘scoring’ or run making part of the circuit includes IC5, IC6 and IC7 and transistors TR5 and TR6.
Its function is to randomly send the ball (provided it has been correctly ‘hit’ by the resident batsman) to some part of the field where it may (or may not) score runs or, unhappily, be caught by a fielder or perhaps a loud ‘Howzat?’may be asked of the umpire.
When the ball has been successfully played, l.e.d.
D9 is lit and this high signal remains on.
Let us look first of all at that part of the circuit associated with TR6, IC6 and IC7.
In the same way as the wicket sequence of l.e.d.s was operated by IC2, so the scoring sequence of ten l.e.d.s (D19 to D28) is similarly controlled by IC7, another 4017B decade counter.
The ten l.e.d.s concerned here are placed at various positions in the ‘field’, each representing a number of runs or a no-score, plus a couple which may lead to a catch or an appeal for lbw.
Our object is to illuminate one of these l.e.d.s in a random manner directly a correct hit has been made by the batsman at the crease.
What is used is a run-down clock generator of the kind often found in electronic dice games.
This clock runs the sequence of l.e.d.s at a very rapid rate for a fraction of a second and then halts the process very quickly to leave just one of the indicators illuminated.
This l.e.d. then tells the batsman his score — or his fate!
The control if IC7 is made by IC6, a 4046B phase locked loop i.c. which houses a voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) as part of its circuitry.
The frequency at which this oscillator works is controlled by the voltage on pin 9, the resistance between pin 11 and ‘ground (0V)’ and the value of capacitor C9 wired between pin 6 and pin 7.
A square wave output appears at pin 4.
With the values used, the frequency is several kilohertz but is in no way critical for this present purpose.
When relay RLA contacts are closed (this is a relay operating as a switch — but more about this later), transistor TR6 is switched on by way of diode D16 and potential divider chain resistors R25, R26 and connects pin 11 of IC6 to ground through resistor R28.
This causes the VCO to oscillate at a relatively high frequency so that an unpredictable number of plates are fed to the input of IC7 all the time the relay contacts remains closed.
When the relay contacts open, transistor TR6 switches off and the oscillation then depends only upon the small charge remaining on capacitor C8 and the value of resistor R29.
The presence of resistor R24 ensures that the  oscillation falls very quickly to zero, hence the input to IC7 vanishes and only one of the scoring sequence of l.e.d.s remains on.
GOOD SHOT
Now if the output of pin 9 of IC2 is used directly to trigger the VCO, then the scoring sequence will be set into action even if pin 9 is passed in the normal wicket sequence.
This is not wanted to there has to be a circuit arrangement which does not respond to a short pulse from the batting l.e.d. but acts only if this l.e.d. remains on for a longer period, that is, when the batsman has correctly intercepted the ball.
The action takes place by way of a simple op.amp comparator, IC5, and transistor TR5.
The inverting input to IC5, pin 2, is held at half the supply voltage by the divider chain resistor R19, R20.
The output from pin 9 of IC2 feeds to IC5 non-inverting input (pin 3) by way of resistor R18 and capacitor C5.
This integrating combination has a long time-constant and for a momentary pulse output from IC2 does not allow the voltage across capacitor C5 to rise much above the ground.
The voltage on pin 3 if IC5 stays, therefore, below that on pin 2 and the output at pin 6 remains low.
For a sustained output from IC2 however, capacitor C5 is enabled to charge up to a level exceeding that on pin 2 of the op.amp and the output switches high, so    turning transistor TR5 on and operating the relay which closes RLA1 contacts.
This closure is only momentary because of the differentiating action of the coupling components capacitor C6 and resistor R21, and the rest of the circuit is then activated in the way already explained.
The use of the relay at this point may seem a bit odd as the switching could be electronically activated, but the use of a mechanical relay introduces a small but desirable time variation (as well as possible bounce!) in the duration of the relays closure and so helps in enhancing the random operation of IC6 during the short time that the VCO is producing its high frequency output.
Only the function of diode D18 remains to be mentioned.
This l.e.d. is the game's ‘Umpire’ and gives a verdict for or against the batsman.
The output of IC6 may, when the VCO oscillations cease, settle randomly in either the ‘high’ or ‘low’state.
In the former case D18 will be lit and in the latter case it will be extinguished.
If the D18 l.e.d. is lit, the appeal is allowed.
We will return to this point when the actual method of play is discussed.
CONSTRUCTION
There are essentially three parts in the construction of the game: first, the assembly of the printed circuit board (p.c.b.) which is quite straightforward; secondly, the assembly of the wicket and fielding l.e.d.s on to the board which can be a piece of thin plywood or hardboard sheet, an assembly which is a bit fiddly but not insurmountable; thirdly, the fabrication of a very simple box which holds the finished job in a nice compact manner.
The component layout and full size copper foil pattern of the printed circuit board is shown in Fig. 2.
This board is available from the EE PCB Service , code EE798.
There should be no problem in assembling this board provided all the usual precautions about soldering and the orientation of polarized components are observed.
The integrated circuits are best mounted in low-profile holders, otherwise there is little to comment on.
On the prototype the l.e.d. outputs from IC2 and IC7 terminate on 10-way header strips; this is done purely for convenience in the later interconnections stage and you can, if you wish, simply connect ordinary outgoing wires or ribbon cable at these points for later connection to the various l.e.d.s.
Different coloured wires are essential to avoid confusion.
Solder pins are fitted to the other output points, that is, the various switch connections and the output to the ‘Umpire’ l.e.d.
D18.
PITCH
Turning now to the actual pitch, the layout of the prototype is shown in Fig. 3.
This was made on a piece of 3mm hardboard measuring 300mm by 230mm (12″ by 9″) although you can adjust these measurements to suit yourself; nothing else is affected by this.
The l.e.d. holes are all drilled 6mm. (¼″) diameter as are the specified pushbutton switch holes.
The bowling rate switch S1 needs a measuring (⅜″) hole and there are six fixing holes along the longer edges to take ordinary wood screws when the ‘ground’ is later attached to a simple case.
Two 6BA countersunk clearance holes are also required at each end of the wicket to support a small auxiliary p.c.b.
which carries the ten l.e.d.s associated with the wicket sequence.
Additionally, two pins are driven into the hardboard on each side of the of the ‘fielders’ l.e.d.s, but we return to these points in a short while.
In the layout of the fielding positions you can, of course, do your own thin; a piece of 3mm ply, may be substituted for the hardboard and the various fielding points (and the scores or penalties associated with them) can be moved around to please yourself.
The central ‘pitch’ should not, however, be altered in any way.
WICKET SEQUENCE
The board which holds the wicket sequence l.e.d.s is shown in Fig. 4.
The l.e.d. spacing is 10mm and the panel drilling must, of course, be identical with this.
The ten l.e.d.s are fitted to the board as Fig. 5 illustrates, making sure that the cathodes (k), usually indicated by a flat on the l.e.d. casing, go to the common wire which connects to one side of resistor R6.
The other side of R6 has a wire attached which should be taken to the common (-V) foil track on the main board.
The use of sleeving on the l.e.d. wires ensures that they are all at the same height above the board: Also make sure that they are in line when viewed along the length of the sequence.
Preferably use yellow l.e.d.s for pitch positions D1 to D8, with a green for the batsman's position (D9) and red for the wicked (D10).
Fig. 5 also shows how the board is fitted to the panel — but don't do this just yet.
FIELDER'S SEQUENCE
Wiring up the fielder's l.e.d.s is a bit fiddly because these have to be hard wired and it is necessary to provide some sort of anchorage at each of the indicator positions.
The method used (and you may well think of a better one!) is to drive two brass gimp or panel pins into the panel on each side of each of the l.e.d.s such that the l.e.d. wires can be looped around (no tightness here) and be soldered to the pins rather as Fig. 6 shows.
Don't use steel pins as there is then a possible soldering problem without acid fluxes, though brassed or coppered style pins can be employed.
A simple wiring harness can then be made up to bring the eleven anode (a) points (including D18 here) and the common cathode (k) wire to a tag strip, twelve connections in all.
Wires from this tag strip then go down to the main p.c.b.
The photograph shows the completed underside of the pitch panel.
COMPLETING THE ASSEMBLY
Before mounting and wiring up the panel l.e.d.s, a bit of preparation is needed if the finished job is going to look neat and presentable.
The two 6BA screws for the ‘wicket’ l.e.d.s and the gimp pins for the anchorage of the others must be fitted and the surface blemishes left by these levelled off with a filler and smoothed with fine sandpaper, before anything else is done.
A coat to paint is now required to simulate the field.
A light green is best and matt emulsion or undercoat, preferably rolled on, is ideal.
Alternately, a piece of light green paper might be glued over the hardboard.
Whatever you use, all the legends should next be added using rub-down lettering, after which the l.e.d.s and the switches can be mounted.
Use green l.e.d.s for the scoring positions and red for the ‘out’ positions and Howzat?
To tidy up the l.e.d. holes, use panel bushes which fit into the 6mm (¼″) holes already drilled and the l.e.d.s themselves then snap into these.
To make up a box, get a piece of hardboard the same size as the panel for the box bottom.
Screw to this as the sides of the box four pieces of wood of thickness about 9mm (⅜″) to give a depth of about 51mm (2″).
The main p.c.b.
along with a suitable  battery (or a simple mains unit if wish) are fixed to the base, and the interconnections between the field panel and the p.c.b.
can then be made.
Prop the panel against one side of the box to do this; don't make the leads so short that there is a strain on any connection.
You want to be able at any time to get into the box, perhaps to change the battery, and you want to be able to flip the lid (the field) back as though it was on a hinge in order to do this.
Apart from the ‘Howzat/Umpire’ l.e.d.
(D18) which connects to resistor R30 on the board, the other fielding l.e.d. anodes can go to any of the output pins of IC7, the whole sequence being random anyway, unlike the wicket sequence which must be wired to the outputs of IC2 in the correct order.
In this it is essential to note that the diode numbers (apart from D2 and pin 2) do NOT coincide with the pin numbers on IC2.
The correct sequence is shown in Fig. 1 and must be followed, i.e. D1 to pin 3; D2 to pin 2; D3 to pin 4, and so on to D9 to emitter (e) of TR1; D10 to emitter of TR2.
The common lead returns through resistor R6 to the negative line.
Unless you get this order right, you are going to bowl some amazing googlies!
PLAYING THE GAME
The bowler's end of the field has three control points: two  push-button switches marked Bowl and Return Ball respectively, and the Bowling Rate selector switch.
At the batsman's end there is one pushbutton switch marked Bat and the Umpire l.e.d.
When the game is initially switched on a number of the field l.e.d.s may light up, but by pressing the Return Ball button the bowler positions the ball at his own end of the pitch.
At this point one of the field l.e.d.s will be lit but this is ignored.
The game is now ready to play.
The bowler starts things off by pressing the Bowl button; the ‘ball’ will then move down the pitch at a rate selected by the Bowling rate switch.
When the ball reaches the batsman's position (l.e.d.
D9) the batsman must simultaneously press the Bat button to halt the ball on this l.e.d.; this constitutes a hit and the field display will then indicate his score or his penalty.
If the ball is missed by the batsman, the wicket will be hit and the tenth l.e.d. will light.
The batsman is then dismissed.
The bowler returns the ball to his own end and prepares for the next delivery.
The fielding scores are self explanatory but if the Howzat l.e.d. lights, reference must be made to the ‘Umpire’ which is the l.e.d. next to the batsman's button.
If this l.e.d. is lit, the batsman is adjudged out lbw; if the l.e.d. is not lit, the verdict is not out.
It is suggested (though you can make your own rules) that each ‘side’(even if there are only two players) play through ten wickets each (or to an agreed score), recording each score along with any extras and how out.
The bowling rate for each batsman should start off at Slow for the first ‘over’ of six balls, then go to Medium for the next over, and Fast for the third over; this sequence then repeating if the same batsman is still at the crease.
For the enthusiast, a second innings might be played to determine the outcome, with a side following on if it fails to come within an agreed number of runs of its opponents score.
Clearly, any reasonable number of players can have to go at this game, taking it in turns to bat and bowl.
An individual scorer might be useful where an odd number of people are concerned.
SUPPLIED
A brief note about power supplies might not be out of place here.
The unit will run quite satisfactorily on a 6V battery supply, though this should be made up of four U2 size cells, in preference to the small single 6V batteries.
You may, if you wish, use a 9V supply, but this does increase the current consumption and is not so economic.
A simple mains unit is the best bet if you are going  to play the game a lot, or indoors, and a suitable circuit is shown in Fig. 7.
This can be easily assembled on a suitable board or piece of stripboard and will provide an output of about 8V.
Good battling!
MAKE A BIG HIT WITH YOUR FELLOW PLAYERS Fig. 1.
Complete circuit diagram for the Electronic Cricket Game.
All components except D1 to D10 to D28 inclusive, resistors R6 and R31 and switches S1 to S4 are mounted on the p.c.b.
Circled letters refer to outgoing points.
The ‘Pitch’ slid back to reveal the battery clamped in one corner of the case
Fig. 2.
Printed circuit board component layout and full size copper foil master pattern for the Cricket Game.
(Right) Completed prototype printed circuit board.
The transistors here have been replaced with BC108 types.
(Bottom Right) Pitch layout on the completed board.
Fig. 3.
Suggested field layout.
The ‘wicket’ l.e.d.s are spaced 10mm apart.
Fig. 4.
Using a small board to wire the wicket l.e.d.s This board could be made from stripboard.
Fig. 5.
How the l.e.d.s are mounted on the  subsidiary ‘wicket’ board and fixed to the pitch panel.
Fig. 6.
How the ‘fielders’ are mounted and wired on the pitch panel.
Fig. 7.
Suggested mains power supply.
The transistor should have a clip-on heatsink.
Layout of components on the rear of the pitch panel.
The use of the tag strip eases the wiring to the ‘fielders’ and the p.c.b.
Note the use of the header connections on the p.c.b.
ACTUALLY DOING IT! by Robert Penfold
Some time ago the topic of mains power supplies was covered in an Actually Doing It article, but it is worthwhile covering broadly the same ground again here.
It is a subject which seems to provide a small but steady flow of readers' letters.
Mains transformers seem to be the main cause of problems, and I suppose that when building power supplies you do so sometimes have to connect the transformer in an apparently illogical manner.
However, if you look at things in the right way it is all quite logical and straightforward.
DANGERS
Before proceeding further the usual warnings about working with the mains supply have to be given.
For anyone building their first few projects the best advice is to avoid any mains powered project.
Choose battery powered projects as these enable you to make mistakes without any drastic consequences.
If you make an error in a project powered from a PP3 size 9 volt battery, about the worst that will happen is that one or two semiconductors will be destroyed.
It is quite possible that no damage at all will result, and there is probably no risk at all of any personal injury.
If you make a mistake when building a mains powered project there is almost certain to be some damage, even if it is only something minor such as a blown fuse and damaged switch.
A serious error could easily result in every semi-conductor in the project being destroyed, possibly in spectacular fashion.
At worst you would get a severe electric shock,which could prove fatal .
When dealing with the mains supply you should proceed with the same care you would exercise if your life depended on it, because it does!
Here are some do's and don'ts:
Never work on any project that is connected to the mains supply.
It is not enough to switch off at the mains supply.
It is not enough to switch off at the mains supply or at the project's on/off switch.
The device must be unplugged from the mains socket.
If you are not sure about the right way to connect something in a mains power supply circuit, do not resort to trial and error.
This could cause expensive damage and could be extremely dangerous.
Youngsters should not construct mains powered projects unless they are supervised at all times by a suitably experienced adult.
Mains powered projects should always be housed in cases that have a screw fitting lid.
Do not use types having clip on lids, slide-in panels, etc.
It should not be possible to get at the dangerous mains wiring without using a screwdriver or other tool.
Any exposed metal must be reliably earthed to the mains Earth lead.
The normal way of ensuring this is to use a case of all-metal construction which is connected to the mains earth lead.
Any screws etc. fitted on the case will then be earthed via the case.
Even if you normally do not bother too much about checking the wiring before trying out a new project, always at least double-check the mains wiring on any mains powered projects .
TRANSFORMATIONS
A mains power supply should always include a mains transformer.
With modern circuits that run on low voltages the mains transformer provides two functions.
One of these is simply to reduce the 240 volt mains supply down to the much lower voltage required by the circuit.
The second, and no less important function, is to provide safety isolation.
There is no direct connection between the mains input to the primary winding and the low voltage output from the secondary winding of a mains transformer.
This ensures that anyone touching any wiring on the output side of the mains transformer will not be in contact with the mains wiring, and that (providing the secondary is a low voltage winding) they cannot receive a severe electric shock.
In fact, provided the secondary potential is only around 30 volts or less, you cannot get a noticeable shock from the secondary circuitry.
Of course, the wiring on the primary side of the transformer connects to the mains supply, and is potentially lethal.
Also any transformer with a high voltage secondary winding (of the type used to power most valve circuits) is potentially lethal.
Due care must be taken to ensure that none of the primary wiring comes into electrical contact with the wiring on the secondary side of the transformer.
SECONDARY EDUCATION
Many modern mains transformers are designed to be versatile, but this versatility can (and does) cause a certain amount of confusion.
It is now quite common for mains transformers to have two secondary windings that are identical.
These can be connected in three basic ways.
Suppose that a transformer has to 6 volt 250 milliamp secondary windings.
These could actually be used as two separate windings driving separate supply circuits, but it would be very unusual for a transformer to be used in this way.
SERIES
A more likely method of connection is with the two secondary windings connected in series, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
This effectively adds the two 6 volt windings to give a combined output potential of 12 volts.
The current rating of the combined secondaries is the same as when they are used separately, 250 milliamps in this example.
Note that this method of series connection will not work properly if you link two 0 volt or two 6 volt terminals.
This will wire the windings in series, but there phasing will be such that the output of one winding will cancel out the output from the other.
The result is no output whatever.
The second method of connection is much the same as the series one just described, but the interconnection between the two secondaries is utilized, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
This effectively gives a 6-0-6 volt transformer having a current rating of 250 milliamps.
A transformer of this type is needed with a power supply that has push-pull full-wave rectification (the type that uses only two rectifiers).
It seems that this is the method of connection that causes the most confusion, and the correct way of connecting the secondary windings is not really the obvious one.
The obvious way of handling things is to connect together the two 0 volt terminals in order to give the central 0 volt output.
The two 6 volt terminals would then provide the two 6 volt outputs.
Although this may seem to be the  logical method of connection, it will definitely not provide the desired result.
The two 6-volt outputs will be in-phase, whereas it is out-of-phase signals that are required.
This would effectively reduce the power supply to a simple half wave rectified type.
The practical result would be substantially reduced maximum output current, and a lot of ripple on the d.c. output.
This would almost certainly prevent the main circuit from working properly.
The connection method shown here gives the correct anti-phase outputs, and a suitable alternative to a true centre tapped secondary winding.
PARALLEL
The third method is to connect the two windings in parallel, as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
It has to be stressed that this method of connection is only acceptable if the mains transformer is a type which has accurately matched secondary windings which are intended for use in this way.
If the retailers catalogue or other literature does not specifically state that a mains transformer is suitable for this parallel operation, it should be assumed that it is unsuitable for use in this manner.
With parallel operation the output voltage is equal to the voltage rating of one winding, or 6 volts in this case.
However, the current rating is the sum of the individual current ratings, or 500 milliamps in this case.
Having twin and matched secondary windings clearly makes a mains transformer very versatile, but it also means that you have to be rather more careful when wiring it up.
Make sure that you do not get a link-wire in the wrong place so that it short circuits a secondary winding.
This could easily result in the transformer being ruined.
Also be careful not to use series connection where parallel connection is required.
This would give double the required output voltage which could easily cause damage to the power supply components and beyond.
Other errors are unlikely to cause any damage — the supply will simply not function correctly.
PRIMARY EDUCATION
Provided a mains transformer has a single primary winding there should be no difficulty in wiring up this section of the supply.
Unfortunately, a substantial proportion of modern mains transformers have either twin primary windings, or a tapped winding.
The latter is the easier to deal with.
If the transformer is suitable for operation on the 240 volt UK mains supply it should have terminals marked ‘OV’ and ‘240V’, and these are the two terminals to which the mains input should be connected.
The other tags are left unconnected.
Some mains transformers seem to have twin 120 volt windings, and this is presumably to permit them to operate on continental 120 volt supplies or the 240 volt UK supply.
For operation with the latter the two windings must be wired in series (Fig. 2(a)).
From time to time I have encountered mains transformers which have twin 240 volt primary windings.
I have never been able to ascertain just why such an arrangement should exist, since there would seem to be no 480 volt mains supplies.
Series connection of the windings would therefore seem to be something that would never be used in practice.
The only suggestion that I can offer is that this system enables mains transformers of various ratings to be put together form a limited number of standard sub-assemblies.
This would presumably help to keep down production costs.
Anyway, if you should encounter one of these transformers, the primary windings are connected in parallel, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
Note that the same basic method of connection is used for transformers which have twin 120 volt primary windings when they are used with continental 120 volt mains supplies.
ROTARY SWITCH
It is essential to get the on/off switch of a mains power supply connected correctly.
If you should get it wrong, you will probably find that switching on has the effect of short circuiting the mains supply through the on/off switch!
The fuse in the mains plug (which should be a 2 or 3 amp type for most projects) should ‘blow’ and prevent any serious problems.
The on/off switch might not survive the experience though.
With most switches the correct method of connection is fairly obvious, but if in doubt it is always a good idea to check any switch with a continuity tester before making any connections to it.
A few checks will soon show which tags (if any) connect together at each position of the switch.
The switches I find the most awkward to deal with are the mains rotary on/off switches that are supplied by several of the main electronic component retailers.
Checks with a continuity tester have invariably revealed that I was about to connect the switch incorrectly.
Fig. 3 shows the correct method of connection for this type of switch.
Fig. 1.
Methods of connecting twin secondary windings (a) in series (b) pseudo-centre tap (c) parallel.
Fig. 3.
The correct connections for a rotary mains switch.
Fig. 2. (left).
(a) Wiring two 120V primaries in series for 240V mains operation.
(b) Twin 240V primaries are used in parallel.
Constructional Project
GARDEN HOSEPIPE CONTROLLER T.R. de VAUX-BALBIRNIE
No need for your prize plants or garden produce to feel neglected while you take your annual holiday.
This mains-pressure hosepipe controller is designed to keep your garden watered while you are away from home.
This does it by operating a sprinkler for a preset time each day.
A control on the front panel adjusts the operating time between limits of less than one second and four minutes approximately.
However, these timings could be easily altered if required.
It would also be a simple matter of alter the ‘daily’ timing to a period of more or less than one day.
A reset button may be used to cancel operation and a further pushbutton switch used to trigger the unit at any time.
Readers should realize that this device does not provide precise ‘daily’ timings and that these will drift with ambient temperature.
Under reasonably constant temperature conditions, the prototype unit provided a time period of 24 hours within two or three minutes.
When the temperature changes, the timing period will vary by up to two minutes per degree approximately.
Readers require precision timings, perhaps for other purposes, should use an alternative circuit.
Further details about the effect of temperature on time periods are given towards the end of the article.
WATER SUPPLY
The device which controls the supply of water to the sprinkler is a 12V d.c. solenoid valve.
The specified valve will operate at mains water pressure and has standard ½″ b.s.p. threaded male ends.
Connectors may be obtained from a local plumber's merchant or DIY store to enable it to be fitted to a standard threaded water tap at one end and the hosepipe itself on the other.
It is essential to use proper secure fittings especially if the unit is to be left unattended.
Although for safety the main unit must be situated indoors, the hosepipe and solenoid valve will probably be outside but so sited that catastrophic failure of the circuit or a sticking solenoid valve would not cause problems with flooding.
The wire connecting the main unit to the solenoid valve may be of a light-duty twin type of any reasonable length.
The Garden Hosepipe Controller is mains-powered so needs a supply socket available nearby.
It must NOT be connected permanently  to the mains .
Under standby conditions, the circuit requires 20mA approximately and while operating the solenoid valve, 200mA.
Thus, the cost of powering the circuit is negligible.
CIRCUIT DESCRIPTION
The full circuit diagram for the Garden Hosepipe Controller is shown in Fig. 1.
IC1 is a precision timer integrated circuit.
This is a sophisticated device which operates in the following way.
With a power supply established, timing capacitor C1 charges through fixed resistor R1.
The time (nominally 21 seconds) taken for the voltage to reach a predetermined level is recorded by an on-chip 12-stage binary counter.
C1 now discharges and repeats the cycle.
When 4095 such charge/discharge cycles have been counted the two outputs, pin 2  and pin 3, change state — pin 2 going from low to high and pin 3 from high to low.
With the values of C1 and R1 specified, the time taken to do this is nominally 24 hours.
Preset potentiometer VR1, in conjunction with fixed resistor R2 connected between IC1 pins 11 and 12, provide an adjustment which will be used to trim the timing period for best accuracy at the end of construction.
When IC1 pin 2 goes high at the end of the timing period, current flows into transistor TR1 base (b) through current limiting resistor, R5.
This turns TR1 on and its collector (c) goes low.
This low state is transferred to pin 2 (trigger input) of the 555 timer IC2.
TIMING
The Timer IC2 is connected as a monostable — that is, once triggered in this way the output, pin 3, goes high for a certain time then reverts to low.
Between operations, IC1 pin 2 is low and transistor TR1 is off.
IC2 pin 2 is then held through resistor R6 and this prevents triggering.
The time period of IC2, during which the solenoid valve will be operating, depends on the adjustment of potentiometer VR2 in conjunction with fixed resistor R8 and capacitor C5.
With VR2 providing minimum resistance the time period is less than one second but at maximum resistance, it is four minutes approximately.
Normally IC2 reset input, pin 4, is kept high through resistor R7 and this prevents resetting.
However, pushbutton switch S2 (Reset) may be used to make it low and this cancels the operation immediately.
A further push-to-make switch, S1 (Trigger), may be used to initiate IC2 timing and operate the solenoid valve at any time.
This it does by making IC2 trigger input, pin 2, low.
Note that the monostable timing capacitor, C5, is of the electrolytic type.
This will not provide great accuracy but is thought to be quite satisfactory for the present purpose.
For a longer operating time it could be increased in value.
At the end of IC1 (‘daily’) timing cycle, the low state of pin 3 is applied to pin 1 (the trigger input) through resistor R4 — this re-triggers the i.c. and initiates a further timing cycle.
This process will repeat indefinitely until the supply is switched off.
SOLENOID VALVE
The output of IC2, pin 3, is incapable of supplying sufficient current to operate the solenoid valve SOL directly so, for this purpose, transistor TR2 is used as a simple current amplifier.
When IC2 output, pin 3, goes high (positive supply voltage) current flows through resistor R9 into TR2 base and turns it on.
Collector current now flows through the solenoid coil.
This produces a magnetic field which pulls an iron armature and actuates the water valve.
Diode, D1, connected in parallel with the solenoid coil bypasses the reverse high-voltage pulse which occurs when the current switches off and the magnetic field collapses.
Without this, semiconductor components in the circuit could be destroyed.
POWER SUPPLY
Power for the circuit is obtained from a conventional arrangement of mains transformer, T1, on-board rectifier diodes, D2 and D3 and smoothing capacitor, C6.
The fuse, FS1, in T1 secondary circuit, provides protection in case of component failure or short-circuit.
No voltage regulator is required for IC1 since this is provided on the chip in conjunction with resistor R3.
Voltage regulation is not required for IC2 either because its timing is largely independent of the supply voltage.
In any case, the exact value of the time period — that is, the time during which the hose operates — is not thought to be particularly critical.
Mains transformer T1 must have a generous current rating.
This ensures cool and stable operation during continuous operation.
It also makes sure that the extra load of the solenoid valve does not cause problems due to sudden voltage drops.
Do not use a transformer having an output rated at less than 500mA.
CONSTRUCTION
Safety Note: In constructing the Garden Hosepipe Controller, mains connections need to be made.
Anyone who is not certain of being able to make a safe job must consult a qualified electrician.
In particular, the unit must be built in an Earthed aluminium box and plugged into an adjacent supply using a plug fitted with a 2A fuse.
If a fused plug is not used, a separate 1A or 2A mains-type fuse must be fitted in the transformer primary circuit.
Construction is based on a circuit panel made from a piece of 0.1″ matrix stripboard, size 16 strips x 50 holes.
This carries most of the components.
Topside component layout, details of underside track breaks and inter-strip links needed are shown in Fig. 2.
Drill the two fixing holes and mount all on-board components taking care over the polarity of diodes D2 to D3 and of electrolytic capacitors C4, C5 and C6.
In the case of the polyester capacitor C1, the specified value () is higher than many suppliers stock.
However, ample space has been left on the circuit panel for two  polyester capacitors to be connected in parallel (see photograph).
Additional capacitors could also be used to increase the time period.
Note the two short ‘stalks’ or terminal posts to which test resistor Rx is connected temporarily — these consist of 10mm pieces of clipped-off resistor ends.
The timing period of IC1 is shortened to approximately one minute by Rx and simplifies the testing and adjustment procedure.
Solder 10cm pieces of light-duty stranded connecting wire to copper strips D, E, G, J and P along the right-hand side of the circuit panel and to trips M and N on the left as indicated.
CASE AND INTERWIRING
In the prototype unit, all internal components were mounted on the base section of the case.
This method imposes least strain on the interconnecting wires.
It also means that the unit is easily attached to the wall if required.
Prepare the case by drilling holes for transformer T1 mounting for switches S1, S2 and S3, potentiometer VR2, fuseholder FS1 and terminal block, TB1.
Drill holes also to align with the mounting holes already drilled in the circuit board.
Make holes for the solenoid valve output wire and for the mains input wire.
Make sure these holes are large enough to accommodate the strain relief bushes to be fitted later.
Solder T1 secondary output wires to strips A and C on the board then, referring to Fig. 3, mount all internal components and complete the wiring (see photograph).
Note the solder tag at one of the T1 fixing lugs.
This will be used to Earth the transformer core and is an essential safety requirement —do not use a makeshift method .
Note also that one of switch S1 terminals is a meeting point for several ‘earth’ wires — make sure these are secure.
Mount the circuit board on 5mm long plastic stand-off insulators to keep the copper strips and soldered connections clear of the metalwork.
Place a piece of cardboard between the circuit board and the box if necessary.
Insert the fuse into its holder.
Fit VR2 control knob and adjust both VR1 and VR2 sliding contacts fully anti-clockwise (to provide minimum timings).
Make and fit the mains lead.
This consists of a suitable length of 3-core mains-type wire of a 3A rating minimum.
Fit this through the hole drilled for the purpose using a strain relief bush — this will prevent it dislodging from ON/Off switch S3 in service.
Connect the Live and Neutral wires to switch S3 — hook the wires through the holes and solder securely.
Use a similar hooked connection to attach the Earth wire and the wire leading from S1 to the solder tag.
These wires must be secure — especially the mains Earth one.
Prepare the solenoid valve connecting wire.
This may consist of any light duty twin type such as bell wire.
However, if the unit is to be sited some considerable distance from the water supply, it may need to be  thicker to prevent excessive voltage drop — loudspeaker wire, for example.
Tests will reveal if this is necessary since on test the solenoid valve will operate sluggishly or not at all.
Fit one end of the wire with spade connectors to fit those on the solenoid valve.
Secure the other end using a strain relief bush and connect to TB1/1 and TB1/2 (polarity unimportant).
TESTING AND ADJUSTMENT
There are exposed mains connections at switch S3 inside the case.
For safety reasons therefore, the box must be assembled whenever the unit is plugged in.
Adjustments to VR1 are made in small steps with the lid replaced each time.
For testing, it will be found convenient to connect a small 12V bulb (2.2W rating) to the output wires in place of the solenoid valve.
Plug the unit into the mains and switch on.
It usually self-triggers and the lamp will light for one second or so.
After one minute approximately, the lamp should light again and the process repeat indefinitely.
If the lamp remains on for a longer time it is possible that the incorrect outer (track) connection to the rotary potentiometer VR2 has been used.
Check by rotating the control knob fully clockwise.
If the circuit now behaves correctly, connect the wire leading from strip E on the circuit panel to the other outer tag of VR2.
You will save time later by adjusting VR1 sliding contact clockwise in very small steps so that an operating time for one minute (within one second or two) is obtained.
Rx may then be removed.
IC1 time period will now be approximately one day.
Over a trial period, adjust preset VR1 slightly to provide a timing of 24 hours or as required.
If the correct timing cannot be obtained even with VR1 at an extreme of its travel, resistor R2 will need to be increased to increase the timing and vice-versa.
By triggering the unit manually, rotary control VR2 could be calibrated and a scale of operating time in seconds marked out on the front panel.
This was not though worthwhile in the prototype.
EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE
This circuit is not designed to produce precise daily timings and maximum repeat accuracy will only be obtained if the temperature of the unit is kept reasonably constant.
If the unit is situated in a centrally heated room where the temperature is thermostatically controlled, accuracy of a minute or two per day may be expected.
IC1 itself introduced a daily timing error of up to 800ppm (parts per million) per degree — the timing falling with a rise in temperature.
Capacitor C1, also introduces a temperature effect — using the specified polyester type this is typically 200ppm per degree.
This is a positive coefficient — that is, capacitance rises with a rise in temperature.
This is useful since it offsets the effect of IC1 itself to some extent.
Resistors R1, R2 and preset VR1 also introduce a small temperature effect.
The final effect of temperature on timing error may be expected to be in the region of 1000ppm per degree maximum which corresponds to approximately 1½ minutes per degree in the finished circuit.
IN USE
Attach the unit to the wall if required.
Remove the test lamp.
Fit the solenoid valve to the water tap — note the arrow on the body which indicates the direction of water flow.
Connect the hosepipe.
Attach the output wires.
Turn the tap on and check for leaks.
Switch on the mains and if the unit does not self-trigger press switch S1.
The solenoid valve should operate and water issue from the hosepipe for a time set by control VR2.
If rain can reach the solenoid valve, remember to provide some protection to the terminals so that corrosion and consequently poor contact cannot occur.
The Hosepipe Controller may now be put into service.
Note that it is normal for the case to become slightly warm.
Remember to have a neighbour on call so that the unit may be switched off should a hosepipe ban be imposed by the local water authority.
Remember also, that a licence may be required to use this type of device since it is not handheld — if in doubt, consult your local water company.
Fig. 1.
Complete circuit diagram for the Garden Hosepipe Controller.
Fig. 2.
Stripboard component layout and details of breaks required in the underside copper tracks.
Fig. 3.
Interwiring from the circuit board to off-board components.
The complete circuit board mounted inside the metal case.
The metal case must be ‘Earthed’ through the mains lead, see Fig. 3.
Low voltage mains-pressure water solenoid valve.
INTERFACE Robert Penfold
The subject of bar codes is one which seems to crop up in reader's letters from time to time.
Judging from letters I have received, and some I have seen published in various magazines, there seems to be a few misconceptions about the precise way in which bar codes operate.
Before proceeding further it would perhaps be as well to dispel one or two myths.
Code Cracking
Many people seem to think that bar codes carry a lot of information.
For example, if you read the contents of a bar code on a can of baked beans, the common belief is that you would get something along the lines of ‘Heinz Baked Beans, 225g, 38p’.
This seems reasonable, because reading the bar code into a supermarket checkout system would result in this sort of information being displayed, and printed on the receipt.
In reality matters re not as simple as this, and a do-it-yourself system that will provide a similar function is not a very practical proposition.
The problem is that the bar code only provides detailed information in an indirect fashion, and it is not readable straight from the code.
If you look at a bar code it will normally be accompanied by a long number (usually eight or thirteen digits long).
There is a bar code plus thirteen digit number on the front of this copy of Everyday Electronics .
When a bar code is read, all that is fed into the computer system is the same number.
Thus, if a bar code becomes damaged and cannot be read, the number can be typed into the system by hand.
This quite often has to be done at supermarket checkouts, as many readers will no doubt have noticed.
Look-up
So how is the detailed information extracted form the multidigit code number?
It is apparently done in quite a crude fashion, using a look-up table.
There are actually large telephone directory style books which contain details of standard bar codes.
Using one of these you can look up the code number on a can of beans, magazine, or whatever, and the relevant entry will give the string of text for that particular code.
Using a bar code reader and a suitable computer system greatly speeds things up of course, and the books of codes are presumably only needed for reference and checking purposes.
The basic method for extracting the detailed information is much the same though.
The code number is read into the computer, and then the text string for that number is read from the computer's data base.
Without this massive data base, all you read in from the bar code is a meaningless number.
This is a good way of doing things in that it enables what is effectively a limitless number of different codes to be used, with as little or as much data as desired being attached to each code.
The data associated with each code number can be as small as the price such as‘38p’, or 100,000 words of text.
The upper limit on the amount of data is set by the database that has to handle it all, rather than by the car code system.
The system is less satisfactory in that you can only extract meaningful information from a bar code if you have a computer equipped with a suitable decoding system and database.
This makes it rather impractical to implement a home produced system that can read bar codes from everyday products and provide the appropriate string of text.
Reading bar codes into the system is a practical proposition, but the database side of things is not.
Being realistic about it, a bar code system that would directly provide text string is not a very practical proposition.
Even a simple price such as‘38p’ would required three seven bit ASCII codes, or some 24 bits in total.
Adding a product description would require hundreds more bits to be included.
Bar codes hundreds of bars in length are not usable in most practical situations.
The look-up system may be an inconvenient one, but it is perfectly usable.
DIY Bar Codes
While reading commercial bar codes and displaying the relevant information is not a very practical proposition for the home user, that is not to say that do-it-yourself bar codes are totally impractical.
It is quite possible to use your own system of bar codes if you can come up with a suitable application.
Bar codes are not restricted to supermarket stock style applications.
One of the more imaginative commercial applications is in certain Canon EOS cameras which have an optional bar code reader and a book of pictures.
Each picture is, of course, accompanied by a bar code.
The basic idea is that you look through the book until you find a picture that is of the type you are going to take, and you then read the accompanying bar code into the camera.
Its programmed exposure system then sets the most suitable shutter speed and aperture under the prevailing circumstances.
If you are taking some sort of action shots for instance, the camera will set fast shutter speeds (to freeze the action) and use wide apertures if the light level is indifferent.
Such a feature is clearly a waste of time if you are a reasonably expert photographer (and there is no bar code reader input on the professional EOS models), but it helps the non-expert to get good results.
Another use of bar codes is in security applications, and there must be many other novel uses for them.
Software
There are programs available for some computers that will print out various sizes and types of bar codes.
There is at least one set of shareware bar code generator programs available for the IBM PCs, and you should find this set listed in any of the larger PC shareware catalogues (but note that the output is only suitable for Epson 9-pin and true Epson 9-pin compatible printers).
Reading the bar codes is more difficult, since this type of software only seems to be sold as part of a complete bar code reader and software package.
The do-it-yourself bar code user therefore has to write his or her own reader software.
Of course, you do not have to do things one of the standard ways if a system is only for your own use, and compatibility with someone else's bar code system is not needed.
Indeed, it is probably more practical not to do things the standard way as this avoids what is likely to be severe over-kill for do-it-yourself applications.
Implementing a practical bar code system is slightly more difficult than you might think, as anyone who saw one of the early commercial systems in operation will no doubt have realised.
Quite a high percentage of bar codes could only be read in after several attempts, and a not insignificant percentage simply would not read in at all.
Modern readers are very much better, but they use some expensive technology which goes beyond the scope of do-it-yourself projects.
However, it is possible to obtain quite good results from simple systems.
Practical Matters
It is not too difficult to devise a simple but practical bar code system, but there are a few important factors to bear in mind.
One of these is that there will inevitably be widely different reading speeds.
Each user will wave the ‘pen’ over the bar code at a different speed, and there may well be significant variations each time the same person uses the system.
The way around this problem is to use a relative rather than an absolute approach to reading the bars.
A binary number can easily be coded into the bars by using narrow bands for Os and wide bands of 1s (or vice versa).
Fig. 1 shows how an eight bit binary number can be bar coded using this system.
Reading the bars on this basis of narrow bars being below a certain read time, and wide bars being above it, will not work very well.
Anyone ‘waving’ the reader slightly too fast or too slow will produce all Os or all 1s.
A better method is to measure the time taken for the full code to be read in.
This is then divided by an apposite amount to produce the threshold time that is used to distinguish between the 1s and 0s.
The threshold time is therefore automatically raised or lowered to compensate for the reader being swept  too slowly or too quickly.
Although this may at first seem to be an absolute method of reading the bar widths, it is actually reading the widths of the bars relative to the total width of the bar code.
This gives much better reliability than a truly absolute method.
Implementing a system of this type in hardware is far from straightforward, but it is easily implemented in computer software.
It will give good reliability in general, but it will not cope with variations in sweep speed while a code is being read.
It should be possible to detect and compensate for this using ‘intelligent’ software routines, but this would seriously complicate the software.
It is better if this problem can be avoided by having the operators work the system properly.
It is really not too difficult to wave the reader at a reasonably constant speed while it is over the bar code.
Refinements
It is possible to add a couple of useful refinements to the basic system if desired.
One possibility is to have start and finish codes.
The idea of this is to enable the system to detect whether or not the bar code has been read the right way round, or in reverse.
If a reversed code is detected, the system can automatically invert it to produce the right result.
Another useful refinement is to add error checking.
This type of thing is usually implemented using some form of checksum system.
The basic idea is to have one or more extra digits in the code.
When the main code is mathematically processed in some way, this gives an answer equal to the additional number.
If when the main code is read in it becomes scrambled, this will prevent the right checksum value from being obtained, even if only one binary digit has been affected.
This can be detected using a software routine which would alert the user to the fact that the code had not been read correctly.
A fresh attempt can then be made.
Resolution
Using a relative system of bar code decoding means that, for once, size really is not important.
In theory, you can scale the bar code up as large as you like, or make it as small as necessary.
Provided the relative widths of the bars are unaltered, the code can be read properly.
In practice matters are not as simple as this, and there is the resolution of the reader to be taken into account.
The widths of the lines on commercial bar codes are mostly quite small.
There are actually exceptions to this, and bar codes on warehouse containers are usually ‘Jumbo’ sized.
This is so that they are easy to find on the large boxes.
Obviously it is not practical to have large bar codes on small products such as tins of peas.
This results in some bar codes that have very narrow bands.
If you make some measurements on the bar code on the front of this magazine you will find that the wide bars are actually less than one millimetre wide.
The narrow bars are only a fraction of a millimetre wide.
To read in such a small bar code successfully requires a very high degree of resolution.
In fact it requires special sensors that are difficult to obtain, and quite expensive.
For the do-it-yourself bar user it is best to settle for a narrow bar that is at least one millimetre thick.
This still enables reasonably compact bar codes to be used, but keeps the reading process easy enough for inexpensive sensors to be used successfully.
Next month some practical bar code hardware and software will be described.
Fig. 1.
DOWN TO EARTH George Hylton
DISTORTION happens when output is not strictly proportional to input.
In an audio amplifier, the kind of distortion which causes severe problems is harmonic distortion.
A ‘pure’ signal in the form of a perfect sine-wave contains only one frequency, the fundamental and no multiples of it (harmonics).
If the sine wave is distorted, harmonics are generated.
This leads to a simple way of stating the amount of distortion: as the ratio of harmonics to fundamental.
Harmonic distortion is usually expressed as a percentage.
Total harmonic distortion is sometimes expressed as the sum of all the harmonic power expressed as a percentage of the fundamental power.
In very bad cases this leads to the curious result that the distortion is more than 100 per cent.
A more reasonable figure is given by comparing distortion with total power, i.e. with fundamental plus distortion.
Distortion Factor
In practice total harmonic distortion is not easy to measure, especially when small.
One thing that blurs the picture is noise.
All amplifiers generate noise.
If the level of distortion is very low it is difficult to separate distortion from noise.
This has led to an alternative way of stating amplifier performance: compare the distortion plus noise with the total output.
This gives a ‘distortion factor’.
.
Again this is usually expressed as a percentage.
For moderate levels of distortion (such as five per cent) the distortion factor is virtually the same as total harmonic distortion.
For very low distortion the distortion factor is higher because noise becomes comparable with harmonics.
Measurement Systems
There are several ways of measuring distortion.
A common scheme is shown in Fig. 1.
The amplifier (or the circuit) under test is driven by a sine-wave system of great purity (i.e. virtually no harmonic content).
The input is adjusted to set the output some standard level (such as the rated output power).
A sharp filter giving infinite attenuation of the fundamental is connected.
This allows harmonics and noise to pass freely.
With switch S1 in position 1 the distortion-plus-noise is measured.
In position 2 the total output is measured.
Comparing the measurements gives the distortion.
Strictly speaking, the voltmeter should give true r.m.s. measurement.
The distortion is really proportional to power rather than voltage.
Sometimes the distortion is really proportional to power rather than voltage.
Sometimes the distortion is given as a decibel figure: if the distortion voltage is one thousandth of the fundamental voltage the distortion is -60dB, i.e. 60dB down on the fundamental.
Fundamental Filter
Eliminating the fundamental is not easy.
A distortion of 0.1 per cent means that the harmonic power is 60dB down.
A filter which attenuates the fundamental by 60dB still allows as much fundamental to get through as distortion, giving an exaggerated distortion figure.
Modern amplifiers may have distortion levels as low as 80dB below fundamental, or even lower.
Filters of exceptionally good performance are needed.
However, they need only eliminate one single frequency.
This eases the problem, because a number of circuits exist which give a complete null at one frequency.
The Twin-T network of Fig. 2 gives zero output at the frequency where the reactance of C is equal to the resistance R , but attenuates the lower harmonics to some extent.
For good results the tolerance of the components must be very tight.
More sharply tuned is the Bridged-T trap (Fig. 3), which eliminates signals at the resonant LC frequency when R is correctly adjusted.
Spectrum Analysis
An alternative way of examining harmonic distortion is to display the total spectrum of frequencies on an oscilloscope (Fig. 4).
Incoming harmonics applied to the modulator give an output pulse when the sweep frequency coincides with the harmonic frequency.
If the oscilloscope timebase is synchronised to the frequency-sweep control waveform the display shows successive harmonics as blips.
The height of a blip shows the intensity of the harmonic.
The system is much used for radio-frequency investigations but in principle is applicable at audio frequencies too.
The sweep rate must be very low and an ordinary scope cannot then give a steady display.
Intermodulation
A consequence of some forms of harmonic distortion is that a strong signal modules a weak one.
In spectral terms this means that new frequencies are generated, the main ones being the sum of the strong and weak frequencies are generated, the main ones being the sum of the strong and weak frequencies and their difference.
Thus a strong 400Hz signal and a weak 1000Hz one intermodulate to yield 600Hz and 1400Hz.
Since these frequencies are not present at the input they are distortion products.
It is arguable that intermodulation gives a better indication of audio quality than total harmonic distortion, since its use of simultaneous signals on different  frequencies mimics speech and music to some extent.
A particularly simple technique for intermodulation measurement has been evolved by telephone engineers.
In a wide-band multichannel carrier telephone link the presence of many different speech signals can be simulated quite closely by white noise, which is an equal mixture of all frequencies.
To test such a wide-band network (Fig. 5), the output of a white noise generator is passed through a notch filter which cuts a slot in the spectrum at a narrow band of frequencies around .
Thus the signal applied to the system contains all possible frequencies except .
Intermodulation in the system causes spurious signals (distortion) at  to appear.
These are selected by a sharp filter tuned to  and their amplitude measured to indicate the severity of the distortion.
White noise is not a good simulator of music, which contains more energy at low frequencies than at high ones.
If white noise is passed through a spectrum-shaping filter which applies the right degree of top cut the resulting ‘pink noise’ is more like real audio signals.
Fig. 1.
Distortion factor measurement setup.
Fig. 2.
Twin-T network.
Fig. 3.
Bridged-T trap.
Fig. 4.
Spectrum analysis.
Fig. 5.
Intermodulation measurement by ‘noise in slot’ method.
EVERYDAY READOUT
CONSIDERABLE RELIEF
Dear Ed.,
When I last wrote to you in January I mentioned that I hoped to be relieved of the secretarial duties of the B.A.E.C. by another member who had volunteered to take these over.
At the beginning of this week I visited Jeremy Hind, the member in question, to finalise the arrangement.
He already has about three quarters of the membership on his computer database of members' electronic expertise, so the amount of extra work will not be too great, but it will be a considerable relief to me.
I shall continue as chairman for the present, and shall continue to edit the newsletter.
I should be grateful if you would amend the small advertisement for the B.A.E.C. at the next time of insertion so that the last part reads: ‘For details, write to the Secretary,.
Some of the other magazines have carried small ads for a club calling itself ‘Electronics UK’, based in Lancing.
I wrote as chairman of the B.A.E.C, asking for details, but have had no reply.
the National Components Club seems to have folded up — I haven't seen any of their adverts recently.
I am pleased that you have started publishing readers' letters.
Your correspondent Mr. Pike wrote to me before writing to you about his diesel tacho.
I get a few letters of this sort from people who think the advert for the B.A.E.C. in your classified section, which says it ‘exists to help electronics enthusiasts’, is a general invitation to all and sundry to send their problems to me.
I do help if I can, but I also point out to them that the help is to members of the (and I send them details and a membership application form — but this rarely has any effect; I don't even get an acknowledgment as a rule).
Your editorial pat on the back was well justified.
I always find much of interest in each issue as it reaches me and if I do criticise from time to time, this is meant to be constructive and helpful.
The number of enquiries I get from distant countries is ample evidence of  EE's wide circulation, and some of them are not a little odd or amusing.
I respond to them all, but in many cases that  is the last I hear from the senders.
Perhaps they expect to get the club services free of charge.
H. F. Howard Chairman B.A.E.C.
This is part of a lengthy letter from Herbert we hope to publish more of it next month.
PULSED MOTOR PROBLEMS
Dear Ed.,
Robert Penfold's advocacy of pulsed controllers for model railways in the April issue should perhaps have contained a motor health warning!
Pulsed controllers arouse considerable controversy in specialised model-railway publications, with sad stories of smoking armatures and demagnetised magnets said to sometimes follow their use as well as complaints of excessive hum from some motors at the drive frequency.
I believe the present main warning is that they should not be used with ‘canmotors’, and the May issue of Continental Modeller reviewing a German-made locomotive quotes the accompanying leaflet as saying that it is powered by a ‘Faulhaber’ motor which must not be used with ‘pulse power units’.
My own experience when devising a controller for use with computer control is that if low-enough frequencies are employed the motors respond like ‘stepper-motors’ advancing a small amount for each pulse.
Unfortunately, with a mixed fleet of locomotives, the optimum frequencies vary between about 12 and 30Hz, and I have compromised on 18Hz.
Readers might like to experiment with a shunting locomotive — reliable progress seems possible at scale speeds as low as 2mph on clean track.
Mindful of pulse control warnings I employ increasing pulse width at 16V up to about 15 per cent mark-space ratio and then further increase speed by raising the ‘space’ voltage so that the top-speed waveform is 10V d.c. with the 16V 16 per cent pulses superimposed.
This works satisfactorily for me, and I find that charging the capacitor carrying the control voltage from a constant-current source over about 15sec. gives visually acceptable acceleration.
For stopping I use a track reed switch to trigger an initial slowing to about 20mph using a C-R discharge of the capacitor to the lower voltage over about 6sec., with a second reed then triggering a discharge to a control-voltage rather below the zero-speed value over about 3sec.
These decelerations look reasonably realistic to me, and consistent stopping positions are obtained to within a few cms.
A gimmick I employ with this pulse system is that train-detector circuits are referenced to 13V so that l.e.d.s on the track-diagram show an 18Hz flicker for moving trains and are steady for stationary ones.
T. B. Owen Aberystwyth
COMPUTER UPSET
Dear Ed.,
Not long after moving house just recently I began to experience intermittent malfunctions with my home computer.
These machine errors happened two or three times a day, I put it down to mechanical damage whilst moving.
I myself, not having much knowledge of computer electronics called for the services of a professional Computer Engineer, after explaining the symptoms he gave the PC a thorough check, he then informed me no fault could be found but suggested that as the problem was intermittent and the PC was somewhat old, it could be susceptible to noise not conducted but radiated at some external source, Radio Frequency Interference (R.F.I.).
This sometimes occurs in certain environments and when asked how this could be rectified he said it was not viable to work on a computer of that age and invest in a new one.
Do older machines suffer from R.F.I.?
Have you or any other readers experienced problems caused by R.F.I. in computer or microprocessor controlled equipment?
What are the potential sources of R.F.I. and how do you overcome them?
Are there any good books on the subject, I have searched several good bookshops but to no avail ‘Please help’.
J. Conners Cambridge
It sounds more like r.f.i. or spikes on the mains, often caused by inductive loads switch on and off, rather than a radiated r.f.i. problem.
We would suggest you try a mains filter before getting involved with trying to eliminate radiated r.f.i.
Perhaps other readers will have had similar experiences?
REPORTING AMATEUR RADIO Tony Smith G4FAI
RSGB OPEN HOUSE
The Radio Society of Great Britain threw open its doors on Saturday 11th April to show-off to members its newly re-vamped headquarters at Potters Bar, Herts.
Previously, visitors to HQ, including myself, had commented on the rather unwelcoming aspect of the reception/enquiries area and the feeling of being kept at bay from ‘their’ society.
Now everything is changed.
A light spacious reception and shop area with friendly staff draws visitors right inside the building.
Close at hand is a small but interesting museum with radio equipment, home-made and commercial, dating from earlier days of amateur radio.
Adjacent to this is a well-equipped radio station, callsign GB3RS, which licensed members can operate by arrangement.
Visitors were taken round the headquarters' accommodation, including the editorial offices of the Society's journal,Radio Communication , which nowadays is produced by the latest ‘new technology’ processes.
To put members ‘in the picture’ about just what goes on at Potters Bar the tour extended to the membership department, the various offices and even the accounts department.
Of great interest was the QSL bureau which is the service used most frequently by most members.
Here, thousands of QSL cards pour in each week for sorting and onward transmission in bulk to other bureaux at home and abroad, for eventual delivery to individual amateurs in confirmation of radio contacts made.
Down in the basement, what is effectively a small warehouse holds and dispatches all RSGB publications and other radio books purchased by mail order, with the income earned providing a useful supplement to the Society's funds.
SERVICES PROVIDED
Like most of the visitors, I was impressed and reassured by what I saw.
When one is a member of any society from a distance it is easy to get a wrong impression about what goes on at headquarters.
There have been rumblings in recent years about the need for a more open Society but recent changes, typified by this open day, augur well for the future.
Apart from paid staff at headquarters, around 800 volunteers provide specialists services for members such as QSL sub-bureaux, an audio-visual library, organisation of operating awards and contests, technical advice, advice and help on interference problems, propagation predictions, exhibitions and conventions, help in obtaining planning permission for antennas, news bulletins, slow Morse training broadcasts, Morse tests for licences, provision of radio beacons and repeaters, Novice training courses and much more.
The greatest benefit in having a national society, however, arises from the fact that although amateur radio is a hobby it is governed by national and international regulations which define not only the radio communication modes which can be used, and the nature of the communications allowed, but also the frequencies allocated to amateurs.
DEFENDING FREQUENCIES
These frequencies are under constant threat as commercial and broadcast radio services seek to expand, and an absolutely essential link is maintained by the RSGB with the DTI's Radiocommunications Agency, Britain's radio licensing authority.
This ensures that the needs of amateur radio are taken into account whenever frequency allocations or licensing conditions are discussed by the authorities at either national or international level.
Without a national society to maintain such a link it is doubtful if amateur radio could survive in today's cut-throat world of radio communication where a single frequency in commercial terms is estimated to be worth millions of pounds.
The strange thing is that not all amateur operators seem to understand this and only about half the country's licensed amateurs are members of the RSGB.
The other half, presumably, just haven't thought about the implications or are content to let the others do whatever is necessary on their behalf!
Membership of the Society is open to anyone interested in amateur radio, whether licensed or unlicensed.
Further information can be obtained from RSGB .
YOUTH IN ACTION
Denby Dale Amateur Radio Society's annual ‘Youth in Action’ weekend will be held on 14 to 16th August.
This ambitious presentation of amateur radio to young people involves inviting Novice trainees, Scouts, Guides and ATC members to take part in amateur radio related activities arranged over a whole weekend plus some social activities.
These events take place in a field at Crosland Moor, conveniently located for radio purposes at 1000 feet a.s.l., where caravans, tents and marquees are installed for the weekend, including special event amateur radio station, GB2YIA.
Last year's activities included explanatory talks, simple construction projects, radio fox hunting, Morse instruction, radio operating with contacts as far away as Australia, USA and Japan, including opportunities for attendees to chat to the overseas operators, and experiments with a kite antenna.
Additionally, there was an evening barbecue entertained by a local pop group.
It appears that ‘a good time was had by all’ and I am told by Tony Galvin, GODDB, that planning for this year's event is proceeding well.
‘The idea is to keep everything fairly simple and let the young people actually make a useful piece of equipment, e.g. a crystal set.
We also have ideas for a Morse exercise which should be quite fun.’
RADIO BYGONES
There seems to be a lot of interest nowadays in the radio of the past.
Apart from pure nostalgia, perhaps this is because in the ‘old days’ it was fairly easy to look at a faulty circuit, identify components used for specific functions, replace them and get the set going again whether it was commercially or home-made.
This can still be done, old components can still be obtained and it is often possible to restore 50/60 year old, or even older, wireless sets to their former glory.
I was reminded of the techniques of early home-construction by a piece in Radio Bygones , a magazine devoted to the radio art of the past.
An article in the February/March 1992 issue describes the technique of ‘breadboarding’ where all components are assembled and screwed down on a thick board and straight lines around the board.
Large diameter coils, glowing valves, brass fittings, large meters mounted in ebonite front panels, all evoke the atmosphere of the past and the article suggests ways of re-creating your own authentic or individual masterpiece — or maybe just a glorious Spiders' Nest!
Edited by Geoff Arnold, G3GSR,Radio Bygones is a high quality authoritative publication which covers all aspects of early wireless, transmitting and receiving — professional, amateur and domestic, with superb colour photographs helping to bring the whole subject to life.
Examples of recent articles show the range of subjects covered.
‘Wireless on RMS Queen Mary’ provided an in-depth survey of the design and installation of the equipment on this famous liner.
A photo-feature illustrated a collection of domestic receivers from the 1950s–60s located at the Bampton Museum of Communication and Domestic and Local History in Devon.
Other, self-explanatory, titles included ‘Birth and Growth of Pye Radio Ltd’, ‘from Cat's Whisker to Integrated Circuit’, ‘Starting a (vintage radio) Collection’, ‘The Vintage Years of Amateur Wireless’ and ‘Saved by Radio — Evolution in Air-Sea rescue radio transmitters’.
For anyone interested in the history of radio, or collecting those beautiful radios of yesteryear, this wide-ranging magazine is a ‘must’.
Obtainable by mail only from Radio Bygones,, the annual subscription, for 6 issues, is £17.
A sample copy can be obtained at a special price of £2.50 if you mention EE when writing.