

Howden
Howden, a small old market town but with a sense of village community, stands across the river Ouse four miles from Goole, off the M62 in North Humberside, the old East Riding of Yorkshire.
Howden, its medieval name Hovedene, was the centre of a vast ecclesiastical establishment in Howdenshire, belonging to the Prince Bishop of Durham.
It is dominated by its minster, the collegiate church of St Peter and St Paul.
The minster leads into the largely undisturbed Georgian town centre, which has taken on a new lease of life under the guidance of the local Civic Society.
The society and private individuals have won many awards for the restored cobbled streets and buildings, particularly the Bishop's Manor, the summer palace of the Bishop of Durham.
Howden was renowned for centuries as the site of an important horse fair which lasted six days, beginning on 26th September.
In medieval times it was one of the largest in England.
The numerous inns providing car parking in their spacious yards and former stables are remaining links with Howden's previous importance.
The Hygena furniture factory is the largest centre of employment, and Howden Dyke on the river Ouse brings trade to Howden.
There is a magistrate's court, a newly built health centre, three schools, plus a Roman Catholic church and Methodist chapel.
Howden Marsh, situated on the outskirts of Howden, is a low area of over eleven acres, the habitat of wild flowers, animals and birds, which the parish council is developing as close to nature as possible.
The marsh has been drained so the water forms a lake with small islands for birds and wildlife.
Probably the most remarkable native of Howden was the 12th century historian Roger de Hoveden, confidante of King Henry II and friend of Thomas a Becket.
 Neville Shute, the eminent author, widely known for his book A Town  called  Alice , once resided in  Howden, along with Barnes Wallis, one of the greatest inventors of the 20th century, who designed and helped to build the airship R100.
During the Second World War, Sir Barnes Wallis designed the ‘Bouncing Bomb’ of Dam Busters fame, which did much to turn the tide of war to victory for Britain.
Near the minster there is the Ashes playing fields which  was given to the town by a local benefactor, Charles Briggs.
It contains fine old trees and floral displays, and provides facilities for cricket, football, tennis and bowls, with a children's adventure playground.
This is also the venue for the annual Howden Agricultural Show, which every year brings friends and visitors together to revel for two days in the old-fashioned atmosphere of an English country fair.
Humbleton
Humbleton is a small country village situated in the heart of Holderness, which is the part of Yorkshire that stretches between Hull and Bridlington southwards to the river Humber.
There has been some form of settlement in Humbleton for at least 900 years and it was mentioned in the Domesday Book in 1086 as Humeltone.
The village is surrounded by rich agricultural land and there are five farms all bearing the village name — Humbleton Manor, Humbleton Hall, Humbleton House, Humbleton Moor and Humbleton Grange.
The village school was known as the Herons endowed school.
Children travelled from the surrounding villages of Elstronwick, Lelley, Fitling, Flinton and Danthorpe until it was closed in 1960.
Since then the building has been used as a village hall for the local community but still belongs to the Herons Trust.
The building dates back to the early 1800s and although it was partly rebuilt in the early 1900s it still resembles the original design.
The church was rebuilt in the 13th century and further modifications and restoration were carried out in the 15th century.
The oak pews and present pulpit were installed at the turn of this century and hot-water heating was installed in 1899 it a cost of  £75.
The 65 ft tower is said to be the best-proportioned tower in Holderness.
There are three bells in the belfry dating from 1594 but ringing of the bells ceased in 1935 as the bell rollers became in need of extensive repairs.
The clock was installed in 1920 with money raised by the parishioners with the intention of creating a long-lasting memorial to those who served and gave their lives in the First World War.
The well-equipped organ has two manuals and was built by T. Hopkins and Sons of York who installed it in 1910; the air was pumped by hand until 1950 when an electric blower was installed.
The Humbleton Recreation Club was founded in 1946, which accommodates a thriving cricket club with two men's teams and two junior teams, a football team, a ladies' hockey team, a snooker room and a tennis court, and a ground which is highly respected throughout the area.
Hutton Cranswick
Hutton Cranswick is two communities, both pleasantly situated and just under one mile apart.
They are administered by one parish council, which takes in the hamlets of Sunderlandwick and Rotsea.
It is four miles south of Driffield, and skirted by the Driffield–Beverley road.
Passing over the parish boundary at Sunderlandwick, the old toll bar is on the right, and Bar Farm opposite.
The mill at Hutton is still standing, minus sails, and implies a once thriving community, and a self sufficient one, as were many old villages mentioned in the Domesday Book.
At the present time it is well served by British Rail, so is mainly a dormitory village for commuters to Hull, Beverley and Driffield.
It is an agricultural area, growing roots and grain, with milling facilities on the modern industrial estate.
Hutton is the smaller village and stands on higher ground, the very name Hoot meaning ‘a hill’.
There is much history connected with the area, as it was originally the site of a fortified camp where fierce battles were fought between the Saxons and the Danes.
A curiously named farm at the eastern end of the parish, adjacent to the waterway which leads into the river Hull, is Corps Landing, the legend being that corpses were landed here for interment, but this cannot be proved.
The church is situated at Hutton, and serves the combined villages of Hutton and Cranswick.
In AD 699, Wilfrid, Bishop of York, built several churches all dedicated to St Andrew, so in later years Hutton Cranswick was rededicated to St Peter.
The church is very attractive in a well-treed setting, and fronted by a small village green.
The church gates of locally grown oak were fashioned by a local craftsman.
Of great interest are the church bells, very fine for a small village church.
Campanologists come from far and wide to ‘ring the changes’.
Six in all, the largest was hung in 1635 and recast in 1949.
Tradition says the original three large bells should have gone to Driffield but were delivered to Hutton by mistake.
The vicarage house is a handsome brick building in the Gothic style.
It was built in 1874 at the expense of Lord Hotham, who at the time owned much of the parish.
It is now privately owned, and in 1967 a new vicarage was built in the extensive grounds.
The Jubilee Methodist chapel at Hutton, 1860, is still used for worship.
‘Tween towns’ between the two villages is reputed to have a ghost, a lady who crosses the road occasionally.
The focal point of Cranswick is the village green, six and a half acres, believed to be the largest in East Yorkshire.
It is surrounded by cottage homes, once thatched.
The pond, now landscaped, is fed by underground springs, and was the watering place for horses and cattle in days gone by.
In 1976 the green was designated a conservation area.
Cottages on Bunkers Hill face directly onto the green, and evidence of a pinfold or pound can be seen by the school wall.
There is a refurbished children's playground in one corner of the green.
Stately horse chestnut trees guard the green, and that sacred piece of greensward, the cricket pitch, laid down in 1929, is the perfect backdrop for the players in white clothing.
Many famous Yorkshiremen have wielded a bat there.
Country lanes, farms and fields have attractive names — Hobman Lane, Howl Lane, Sheepman Lane, Ricklepits, Clay Floors, Scurfe Dyke and Botany Bay.
The whole area is criss-crossed with  rights of way, used by local people before roads were made, and now used for rambling.
The Methodist chapel, 1861, along with other buildings in the village, is of some architectural interest.
John Wesley once passed through on his way to preach in Driffield.
The county primary school at the western end of the green is now modernised.
An infants school, at the eastern end, was completed in 1850 and closed in 1923.
It then reverted to the church, not without some controversy, and it is now known as the church rooms.
An interesting donation of £10 to the building of the school was from George Hudson the railway king, who was constructing the Hull to Bridlington line at the time.
This line has had many threats of closure, and this would end a vital link to Hutton Cranswick.
Kexby
The small village of Kexby lies about five miles due east of York.
It stands at a point where firm ground lies close to the river Derwent, and from olden times has been the site of an important river crossing, first by ferry, later by bridge.
For this reason it has always enjoyed a notability out of all relation to its size.
The road from Dunnington to Wilberfoss, now part of the York–Hull trunk road, runs through the village.
The ferry across the Derwent, mentioned as early as 1315, was last mentioned in the middle of the 17th century.
At the latter time, it crossed near the bridge and belonged to the lord of Kexby.
According to some experts, the first bridge, of stone, was built in the early part of the 15th century by a York merchant, but another school of thought suggests an earlier date, declaring that it was mentioned in the reign of Edward III.
In any event, it is certainly the oldest bridge over the Derwent.
A lot of work was done to the bridge in the years 1648–50 and an inscription on it states that it was ‘built’ in 1650.
A new bridge was built during the 1960s, bypassing the old one — an attractive structure of three semi-circular arches divided by piers with cut-waters.
Kexby village, strung out along the main road, consists mainly of 19th and 20th century houses, but Manor Farm which stands not far from the bridge is an 18th century building.
Formerly it was the Coach and Horses inn, where travellers changed horses, and is said to incorporate some of the features of the inn.
Apparently in the old days it was the place where tenant farmers paid their rent to the estate.
The village has a small delightful church in an attractive setting.
Dedicated to St Paul, it is stone built in an early Gothic style.
It was consecrated in 1852 and consists of chancel, nave, north-west bell turret with spire, and west door with canopy.
There is one bell.
The chancel ceiling is lavishly decorated in blue, red and gold.
An interesting feature of the church is the array of gilded heads high up on the walls of the nave.
Though no one seems certain, it has been suggested that they may represent the saints.
In the churchyard a massive rhododendron bush provides a vivid splash of mauve to churchgoers and passers-by during the early summer.
The churchyard is said to be the scene of a visitation from a ghost — reputedly a ‘young man in black’, who caused the frantic barking by a dog one evening and then promptly disappeared!
Two more ghosts, two women — also in black — are said to have been seen about the village in days gone by.
At one time there was a mill at Kexby, either a windmill or a horse mill, according to one resident.
It stood ‘near where the new road is’.
A brick and tile works in the village closed in 1974, and a blacksmith's shop was pulled down in 1953.
There has been no school in the village since 1906.
Keyingham
Keyingham is properly pronounced ‘Kayingham’.
Early settlement by Caega and his people gave the village its name.
In the Domesday Book it is recorded as Caingeham, and as having a church and a priest.
The Main Street is part of the main A1033 road from Hull, which runs to Withernsea and Easington and to the Spurn  peninsula.
The houses stand close to the road, with some of the oldest of the village's houses, its two public houses, the post office and the local supermarket all enduring the unremitting throb of the traffic as cars and lorries pound through its narrow confines taking holidaymakers to the coast at the weekend and workers to the British Gas terminal at Easington through the week.
The church, dedicated to St Nicholas, shows clear signs of its growth over the centuries.
Its earliest parts were built of large cobbles and later additions in small stones, very early brickwork and dressed stone.
It once had a spire which, along with those at Ottringham and Patrington, helped to guide the mariners sailing on the river Humber some two and a half miles to the south.
After being severely damaged in a storm, the spire was replaced with a square tower in 1969.
Inside, a memorial tablet inscribed in Latin can be found, also an hour-glass timer that ensured that the sermons did not last too long.
The Methodist church has also undergone renovation and modernisation.
The cenotaph provides a fitting frontispiece to the chapel and here the memorial garden, cared for by members of the Keyingham Royal British Legion, now houses the remains of the ancient village cross, moved from its site a few yards away where it would have caused an obstruction to modern traffic flow.
The village is punctuated at each end by the tower of a windmill.
The Old Mill, at the west end of the village, was still operative until the early years of the Second World War, and the New Mill at the east end, which lost its sails in a gale so severe that parts of them were found in the next village, has been restored in recent years and is now a very attractive dwelling.
As at Domesday, agriculture is still at the heart of the economy of the village.
There is a dairy farm and two farmers who keep pigs quite close to the centre of the village, but the larger farms with their pigs and sheep and production of cereal crops are on the outskirts of the village.
But by far the greatest employers of local labour in the village itself, at present, are the nurseries with their spreads of greenhouses producing a large proportion of the country's salad crop requirements, and plants for the nursery industry are also produced here.
Other farms that were once situated in the centre of the village have been displaced by extensive house building which began in the early 1960s and continues to the present day.
This new housing brought inevitable changes to the life of the village, and many of those who live here now work in the city of Hull or at the nearby installations at Saltend and Easington.
The school was extended to accommodate the increased number of children and an additional school was built for the infants.
A meals-on-wheels service was started in Keyingham in 1963, which still operates and serves up to 20 people twice a week.
Good Neighbours, Darby and Joan and the day centre at Horrox Court provide regular support and entertainment for the older villagers.
The Neighbourhood Watch Committee provides a regular newsletter for the village and has taken over the distribution of Christmas parcels to the pensioners.
Gradually the old has merged with the new and the grandchildren of the ‘young couples’ who moved into the ‘new’houses are now becoming the second generation to attend Keyingham school.
It is their village now, just as much as it was for the old village families.
Kilham
From the Iron Age (at least) to the present day, people have found Kilham a good place to settle.
Nine roads lead into the village and Celts, Romans, Anglo-Saxons, Vikings and even Daniel Defoe, found their way here.
Killum or Killom means ‘at the springs’ and in a chalky area the presence of surface water is a boon, unless you lived in a house which flooded every time the springs rose.
There are today houses with the remains of ingenious devices for channelling away the water.
The village lies in the heart of Winifred Holtby country, between the main Wolds area and the contrasting lowlands of Holderness.
It is conveniently near and pleasantly distanced from Hull, Beverley, York and the Yorkshire coast.
Evidence of its long lively history is abundant in the village and although some of it is  impressively obvious, much of it is tucked away in farmyards and back gardens.
East End, Kilham
There is a bull ring, now secured in a stone block resting on the verge near the church, which is a reminder of the baiting which entertained our ancestors, and a sun-dial strangely set into the top of a small upright coffin-shaped stone in the churchyard.
Modern building work has revealed Iron Age remains, old almshouses and a Quaker burial ground.
The earliest parts of the church date from about 1100, but nonconformist groups have often dominated the religious scene: Methodists, Baptists, Quakers, Salvationists have all left their mark in buildings and street names.
The Methodist chapel stands on the site of an 1815 building, and there is at present a vigorous campaign to raise money for the restoration of the church.
The very successful Twydale turkey business began in Kilham.
There have been bakers, blacksmiths, carpenters, shoemakers, millers, tailors, bricklayers, glaziers, weavers, booksellers, watchmakers, brewers and rope makers.
One of the mill towers still stands as a private house and the old ropery is the base for an antiques shop.
At one time there were six schools in Kilham and a lunatic asylum.
The thriving C of E primary school of today is the successor of the National school of 1847.
But the modern equivalents of the apothecaries, surgeons, druggists and vets of the past now operate from Driffield, which began to take over from Kilham as the ‘Capital of the Wolds’ in the late 18th century and through the 19th.
The population which had been 1,252 in 1861 fell to 853 in 1921.
Now, with the influx of newcomers, the population is rising again and Kilham has the air of an active community which appreciates its roots.
In 1988 the WI produced a village information sheet and it was heartening to list all the trades and professions still being practised in the 20th century in Kilham.
At the same time, the Institute worked on a survey of field names and has rescued from oblivion such field names as Strums, Honeypots, Knagsfield and Skitterdale.
Kilham had an honourable war.
Crash runways were built nearby for the bombers returning from missions in Europe, and Free French forces were billeted in the village.
Kilham also had the distinction of housing the Pigeon Corps which, perhaps surprisingly, played an important part in Second World War communications.
Preparations for the Normandy landings took place here because the terrain is similar to that which faced the Allied invasion forces.
Kirby Underdale
Kirby Underdale is a pretty little village, lying in a fold of the Yorkshire Wolds, a mile or so from the busy road between Stamford Bridge and Fridaythorpe.
Being part of the Garrowby estate, owned by the Earl of Halifax, it is rather unusual in this day and age as having no privately owned houses or farms, other than the old rectory which was sold several years ago when the parish became part of a joint ministry.
The charm of this village lies not only in the pleasing situation, but in being quite unspoilt by modern buildings, and in still  retaining a genuine ‘olde worlde’ atmosphere.
The church of All Saints stands in a hollow and is of great historic interest, dating from the 12th century.
The squat tower is almost level with the rectory garden above it.
Hills and meadows surround the church, and a gravel path leads from the quiet lane through an iron kissing gate, which is an alternative entrance to the wooden gates, bought to commemorate the Queen's Silver Jubilee.
This churchyard is a mass of primroses and daffodils in the spring.
An old stone coffin lies near the porch, and beside the path is the ‘stone chair’.
This is thought to be the base of an old stone cross, and was found in a field higher up the hill which is still known as ‘Stone Chair Close’.
A steep flight of brick steps leads from the churchyard to the rectory garden, and another long flight in stone connects the churchyard with the street above.
This rectory, dating back to 1740 gradually increased in size over the years as large families were accommodated.
Rev Monson is known to have had 15 children!
Further up the village is the old school, which is now used as the village hall.
The war memorial is near what was once a busy joiner's workshop, manned for many generations by members of the Boyes family.
There is a small shop flanked by brick cottages with pantiled roofs, and round the corner near the lane leading to the neighbouring hamlet of Uncleby is the now disused blacksmith's forge, once so busy in the days of working horses.
Cows still meander through the village to pastureland near the stream which runs alongside the graveyard.
Behind the church, under the spreading branches of an ancient Spanish chestnut tree, is the burial ground of the Halifax family, where not only the graves of past earls can be seen, but those of much-loved servants too.
Royalty, when guests at Garrowby Hall, have attended services in this secluded little church, mixing with the regular congregation with no fuss at all.
A short distance from the village, beside a steep and narrow hill, there is a tall wooden crucifix.
This is in the grounds of Painsthorpe Hall, a pleasing manor house built in 1814, once the home of Sir Charles Richardson, who had a brilliant naval career.
In 1902, after the Hall had stood empty for some years, Lord Halifax lent it to a small community of Church of England Benedictines  under Abbot Aelred Carlyle, the subject of a book Abbot Extraordinary .
The brothers converted part of the building to make a chapel, and set up an industry in old railway huts which produced exquisite ecclesiastical embroideries, many of which can still be seen in local churches.
The brothers were much loved in the village and joined in all activities, until the abbot sought fresh fields.
This area is full of history.
Little is known of the inhabitants of the old manor house with its interesting architecture in the centre of the village, but the oddly named Hanging Grimston is within the parish, and here the Bouchier family lived in what must have been a grand castle with cottages nearby, and owned much land.
Nowadays, a gated road leads past scattered farms, and only a few uneven mounds give evidence of the castle.
A member of the Bouchier family served under Henry VIII at the Field of the Cloth of Gold, and later in the reign of Charles I, Sir John Bouchier was a member of the Long Parliament and one of those responsible for the King's death.
In this day and age, a few walkers find pleasing footpaths leading through this quiet old village, which was once very much a self-supporting community when access to the world outside the dale was difficult, especially in a hard winter when few travellers braved the snow-blocked lanes between the hills.
Kirkella
Kirkella, Westella, Northella, Southella and Willerby were all originally separate villages and settlements connected by rural pathways and cartroads on the approaches to the Yorkshire wolds.
Over the past 60 years these villages have developed into an area of suburbia covering four and a half miles to the west of the city of Hull.
Links with Hull and its river industries brought prosperous merchants to live in their Manors and Halls, some of which still exist as residences, or such as Willerby Old Manor, now converted into flats.
Communication with Hull was maintained by horse-drawn  vehicles, daily local carriers taking anything and everything needed by the villagers.
Horse buses gave way to motor transport, and the Hull and Barnsley Railway with stations at Springhead Halt and Willerby village.
The rail link has gone and the family firm which provided the public services was absorbed into the East Yorkshire Motor Services, who are still in operation.
The separation of these villages is fast disappearing with the development of land for houses and industry.
That magnificent engineering achievement the Humber Bridge is further opening up the area, improving communications and eventually leading to an East Coast motorway, linking up with newly completed roads on the north bank.
The district of Haltemprice is named after the no longer evident Haltemprice Priory.
There is also a legendary site containing a Druids Circle in Kerry Pit Way.
Kirkella church, St Andrew's, was mentioned in the Domesday survey.
Its registers date from 1558.
The vicar of that time had tithes and rights, one consisting of ‘pigs, pidgeons and ducks to the value of 16 shillings’.
Part of the graveyard was reserved for deceased gipsies, and at the church gate stood the village stocks until about 1880.
The church tower, built later than the rest of the building, has a clock, and six bells presented in 1883 by Arthur Egginton Esq in memory of his mother.
A daughter church, St Luke's, of recent erection, is situated in North Ella.
In the latter part of the 18th century South Ella was the property of Arthur Eggington Esq JP, who kept one of the finest herds of black Aberdeen Angus cattle in England, prize winners at many English and Scottish agricultural shows.
Dairying and arable farms still occupy what open land is left, and one could wish that old and evocative names like Willywire Bottom, High and Low Gillenders, and Folly Flatt could be incorporated into modern developments.
Methodism is represented by a first building dated 1897 and a more recent and well-supported church, both in Willerby Square.
Two modern hotels at Willerby offer superior services over a large area, in addition to several public houses dispensing their brands of hospitality.
De-La-Pole Hospital, once a mental asylum, has  been considerably expanded to deal with general medical and surgical requirements, following the decline in the need for its original purpose.
Langtoft
Nestling in the Wolds, six miles north of Driffield on the B1249 in a valley surrounded by rolling countryside, lies the village of Langtoft.
A farming community, existing as a hamlet in ancient times, it probably developed its agricultural resources to fit in with Kilham, which was at one time the chief market town in this part of the East Riding.
One of the earliest of our English poets, Peter de Langtoft, was born in the village in the 13th century, and died a canon of Bridlington Priory in the reign of Edward II.
Amongst Peter's works was a five book history of the reign of Edward I, and a chronicle of England from its origin to the reign of Edward II.
Although he died around 1307, his memory is preserved on the Langtoft Cross which was erected by the last Sir Tatton Sykes of Sledmere on the small green at the southern end of the village.
The cross rises on an octagonal base and depicts on its eight sides the history of the village.
Peter is shown on the plinth, being taken by his father to be educated by the monks at Bridlington.
Langtoft is perhaps most notorious for its record of freak weather conditions and violent storms.
Many of these are recorded by J. Dennis Hood in his book Waterspouts on the Yorkshire Wolds which was published in Driffield in 1892.
In May 1853, a terrific thunderstorm broke over the village.
Two men were ploughing on one of the hills, and though they escaped with their lives, their ploughs were destroyed and three of their horses struck dead.
A waterspout burst over the village in June 1888, washing soil from the surrounding hills and depositing mud and boulders in the streets —‘pots, pans, chairs, stools, mats, and a host of smaller household goods were swept out by the current and deposited in the village pond’.
The two ‘Great Floods’ of 1657 and 1892 are commemorated in the village by plaques showing the  height to which the floodwater rose.
On 3rd July 1892, a cloud burst on a hill to the west of Langtoft, on almost the same spot where the waterspout of four years earlier had fallen, gouging out two great fissures in the chalk, and rushing along the valley of Briggate towards the village.
Mr Bell, schoolmaster at the time of the flood, described the scene: ‘The water forced its way across the Nook and made its way down Back Street.
It forced in Mr Woodmansey's front window, and in a moment filled his house.
It soon forced the back door out, and then took away a great part of his furniture.
A joiner's shop belonging to him was washed clean down, and all his tools and stock of wood carried off.’
A modern drainage system means that the village rarely floods these days, but the village green, known locally as ‘The Pond’ though it was filled in many years ago, shows signs of its former glory whenever there is a heavy rainstorm, and a decent fall of snow, combined with the winds so common to the Wolds, can still cut the village off from the outside world.
Considered in the mid 1970s to be a dying village, with its school in danger of closing, Langtoft's population is now on the increase as property development flourishes.
It is the home of light industry, with several small businesses based in the village, and numbers artists, writers and craftsmen amongst its present inhabitants.
There is a lively church and chapel community, based around St Peter's church and St Mary's Methodist chapel, and the church rooms, school hall, Methodist school room and the recently renovated British Legion hall, play host to numerous activities including social evenings, jumble sales, whist drives, bingo nights, antiques fairs, coffee afternoons and the like.
The 20th century may have been slow to arrive in Langtoft, but it is all the better for that, and whilst the village has now caught up with modern times, it remains a haven of peace from the mad pace of town and city life.
Laxton
Laxton is situated one mile north of the river Ouse, near Howden.
It takes its name from the Norse word ‘lax’ meaning salmon, which once swam in the river.
In days gone by, the village belonged to the Saltmarshe family, from which the railway station takes its name.
The church of St Peter was built in 1875 by public subscription, and contains several fine stained glass windows.
A chancel ruin stands in the-graveyard opposite, the only remaining part of the original chapel built in the reign of Charles I. The former Wesleyan chapel was closed before the Second World War, and now houses the local garage.
The old village school, which closed in 1968, is now a private house and schoolchildren go by bus to Howden.
Further down the street can be found one of the only blacksmiths and farriers in the area, a very busy place, which also doubles as a local meeting place.
Other amenities include a post office and general store, and a free house, the Bricklayers' Arms.
The village hall, known as the Victory Hall, was an old army hut used in the First World War.
It has been much updated and is regularly used by the WI, the youth club, indoor bowls club, and an over 55's club.
Leconfield
The village of Leconfield is to be found approximately three miles north of Beverley on the A154, the main Beverley to Driffield road.
The name Leconfield derives from Llecen-Fylliad, meaning ‘the flat stone in the gloomy shade’, and its enclosed area was the sacred theatre in which rites of initiation into druidical mysteries were solemnized and in which aspirants performed their probationary noviciates.
At the time of the Domesday survey, Leconfield was held by the Earl of Moreton, William de Percy and the canons of Beverley.
The Percys subsequently appear as lords of Leconfield, who built an 84 roomed castle west of Main Street, the old and original part of Leconfield, surrounded by a wide and deep moat, the remains of which are still to be seen.
In 1541 King Henry VIII and his new queen, Catherine Howard, with a ‘gallant train of attendants’ visited the Earl in his castle.
The magnificent castle was doomed to fall prey to the hand of desolation.
The ninth Earl, Henry Percy, was fined £30,000 and imprisoned for 15 years in the Tower of London for omitting to administer the Oath of Supremacy to Thomas Percy of Beverley.
This heavy fine so impoverished him that his northern castles fell into decay, and in 1574 the decay was such that all buildings of the castle were demolished and valuable materials removed and used for the repair of Wressil Castle.
The estate was ultimately divided into several plots under separate ownerships.
The A164 bisects the village, the old and original parts on the east side, and post-war residential development on the west side.
There are three shops in the village, a ‘corner shop’, a post office and general store, and an electrical goods shop.
Leconfield is the home of the Army School of Mechanical Transport, occupying Normandy Barracks, formerly the RAF station commissioned in 1936, which served in an operational capacity during the Second World War.
The east coast Search and Rescue Squadron of the Royal Air Force occupies part of the barracks.
There are two churches in the parish of Leconfield, the church of St Catherine in Leconfield village on the east side of the A164, on the road to Arram, and the church of St Leonard at Scorborough.
Both churches are Church of England denomination and services are held each Sunday.
The church of St Catherine holds particular interest.
The first church on the site dated from the 7th century.
The present church dates from the 11th century, with many fine features, notably the brick tower at the west end, the porch and the pulpit.
Records of baptisms and burials date from 1551 and of marriages from 1552.
The population of the parish of Leconfield, which comprises Leconfield, Scorborough and Arram is approximately 2,060.
Together with farming, mainly cereals, it is a mixed community, with those travelling to employment in Beverley and Hull and those employed at the Army School of Mechanical Transport in both a uniformed and civilian capacity.
The local school, with a maximum roll of 150, serves both the civilian population of the parish and the children of uniformed staff at Normandy Barracks.
A playing field on the north side of the village caters for the social and recreational needs of the community, and houses a sports pavilion, a private member's club, football, cricket and bowling green facilities, and a children's play area.
A new community centre-cum-sports hall is nearing completion.
A parish newsletter, detailing events taking place in the community, other items of interest and a vehicle for expressing points of view, is written, edited and distributed by a group of volunteers to over 400 homes each month.
Leven
Unlike its Scottish namesake, Leven is not by the sea but six miles from it on the main Beverley to Bridlington road, 14 miles from Bridlington and six miles from Hornsea.
In the past 25 years the population has trebled due to the building program.
It is one of the few villages that has changed position over the years.
Little Leven was once known as Lleven, a name meaning ‘smooth’ or ‘level’a description reasonably applicable to this area.
In 1735, Leven was known as ‘Rosedale in Leven’.
The church of St Faith, in use from 1350 to 1843, was probably preceded by an earlier wooden church of the same name.
Although the church is no longer standing the old graveyard is still there with tombstones which are still readable, on a site one and a quarter miles from the present church.
The present Holy Trinity church was consecrated in 1845 on a site on the main road and beside an already established village.
A pilgrimage is made each year by villagers from Holy Trinity to St Faith's where a short service is held.
Another place of worship is the Methodist chapel situated on East Street.
The old rectory, sited on the Beverley road  on the outskirts of the village, is now known as Abbeyfield House, a residential home for senior citizens.
A settlement of flats and bungalows house about 20 senior citizens, with a resident warden.
Leven Canal is well known for miles around by fishermen.
It was built in 1802 at the expense of Mrs Charlotte Bethell, the wife of the then lord of the manor.
It stretches for three and a quarter miles from Leven to the river Hull.
It was navigable by vessels of up to 90 tons, mostly keels which were used for transporting coal and lime to Leven and took away corn and various commodities made in the village such as candles, rope, and a certain type of brick.
At one time there were houseboats on the canal, there are now holiday caravans on the canal bank and the canal is no longer used for transport.
The Church of England school caters for children from the age of five to eleven years, they then attend Hornsea comprehensive.
According to old documents, a school appears to have been built in 1796.
There were three schools at one time, a dame school, British school and National school.
The dame school is now used as a cafe, and is situated on High Stile.
The present school, 1862, has been greatly altered and extended over the years.
The old police station is now the health centre with four doctors and several community nurses.
Leven has a playing field second to none which is the envy of many villages in the area.
Started in 1958, the fund for the purpose of purchasing land was initially raised through various village events.
There is a hall for indoor games and social functions, and a large playing field with tennis courts, bowling greens and children's playgrounds.
An annual Gala is held on the last Saturday in June.
Thriving troops of Scouts, Guides, Brownies, Cubs and Beavers meet in their own purpose-built building in the playing field grounds, and the Youth Club have their own hall in the school grounds.
The recreation hall is another building used by various organisations, renovated over the years from a building of First World War days; it also houses a twice weekly library.
A flourishing Horticultural Society is responsible for the flower show, a twice yearly event for classes in vegetables, flowers, handicrafts, cookery and children's classes.
The Wray Education Trust is a fund which benefits young people under 25 years of age who attend further education establishments, also apprentices, and other education activities within the village.
It is administered by seven trustees.
There are two public houses, and several shops to supply this large village.
A publication of village life compiled by a group of volunteers is issued quarterly and is eagerly looked forward to.
Lockington
The village of Lockington is situated roughly halfway between Beverley and Driffield.
It is reached from the A164 by a lane about one mile long with wide verges, or by a lane about one and a half miles long from the B1248.
Thus it nestles in a hollow with the Wolds rising to the north.
It is thought the name means ‘the enclosure of the family of Loca’ and the settlement dates from Anglo-Saxon times.
Lockington keeps its appearance of an estate village — it forms part of the estate of Lord Hotham of South Dalton and some of the more modern buildings have kept to the style of the estate cottages with their pointed-roofed upper windows.
Some 400 people live in the actual village of Lockington as opposed to the parish.
A very small number are employed on the three working farms in the village.
Other occupations are of necessity followed in the neighbouring towns so to some extent Lockington is a commuter village.
There is a coach business which also does break-down work.
The other non-agricultural employment is in the recently refurbished Rockingham Arms.
This used to incorporate the shop and post office.
The post office is now situated in School Farm.
The church of St Mary the Virgin is not easily found and is approached from Church Lane.
It has been there in one form or another since Anglo-Saxon times, probably the first building being of wood.
The main restoration of the Norman stone-built church was done in 1893 and remains much the same to this day except for modernisation of lighting and heating, addition of carpets, kneelers etc.
There is a fine organ by Prosser of London.
The modern primary Church of England school which caters for about 60 children serves a wide catchment area — in fact at the moment Lockington village provides the smallest number, the rest travelling from Lund, Aike, Wilfholme and surrounding farms.
The old school building is now used as a village hall and is in constant use by the community.
A beck runs alongside the main street but due to the vagaries of the rainfall, springs etc it is more often a dry bed.
When water is running it enhances the village aspect and in spring flotillas of ducklings can be seen on it.
There are many interesting walks around Lockington and from vantage points the pantiled roofs of the village interspersed with some ancient trees (alas, many have succumbed to Dutch elm disease) provide a delightful panorama.
Londesborough
The village is situated about three miles north of Market Weighton, just off the A163.
There are 57 dwellings, with another 25 made up of farms and farm cottages in the rest of the parish.
The highest part rises to 500 ft on the Wolds which is thin chalk land, the low land is heavy clay with a little sandy gravel.
The first documentary reference is in the Domesday Book of 1086, but there has been evidence of Roman and Saxon occupation.
The Clifford family owned the estate for almost 200 years from 1469, and there is a legend that Henry Clifford was sent into hiding by his mother to Londesborough and brought up as a shepherd.
Eventually the estate passed by marriage to the Burlingtons.
The most notable member of this family was Richard, the third Earl, who was an architect.
A great deal of work was done at that time in enlarging and landscaping the park, creating lakes and the kitchen gardens.
The gardener Thomas Knowlton was more of a plantsman and obviously did not really enjoy digging the lakes or ‘canals’ as he called them.
Fortunately many of his letters still exist.
In 1753 the estate again passed by marriage, this time to the Devonshire family, who held it for almost 100 years.
It was in this time that the Hall was demolished and farms were built following the enclosure of the open fields.
Londesborough was sold to George Hudson, the Railway King, in 1845, who wanted to build the line from York to Market Weighton.
His downfall came five years later and the new owners were the Denison family who eventually took the name of the village for their title.
They made a great many improvements, built houses, restored the lakes and park and enlarged the mansion house.
King Edward visited several times when shooting parties and other entertaining took place on a lavish scale.
During the Second World War the house and many other parts of the village were requisitioned.
Various regiments were stationed in the village, and visits from former servicemen and women are always a pleasure.
Visitors who knew the village in the past are surprised to find the place little changed.
There is an increase in the number of dwellings through careful alteration of old buildings such as the Burlington stable, or the division of large houses.
The school was built by the Duke of Devonshire in 1830, but sadly it closed in 1980.
It is now a dwelling.
Some sort of a school had existed before, possibly from 1680, and it is thought to be part of the reading room where the WI now meet.
At the west end of the village there are a group of six almshouses, known as Londesborough Hospital.
Built by Richard, the first Earl of Burlington about 1679, they were originally for twelve people, but were altered in 1920 to six dwellings of two rooms each.
On 6th December 1774, Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire wrote about visiting the almshouses and taking gifts.
The first reference to the church of All Saints was in the early 12th century, and it seems to be the date when it was built.
There are various Norman features, and a number of alterations and restorations have taken place over the centuries.
The farming is mainly arable of corn, oil seed rape and peas, with beef, sheep and pigs; there are now no dairy farms.
Londesborough is a truly country village with many families having lived there for  generations.
There is no road going through which makes it fairly quiet and peaceful, though low flying aircraft and farm machinery make up for traffic noise.
Long Riston
Long and straggling, Long Riston stands off the main road from Hull to Bridlington.
The traffic problem was solved in 1986 by the building of a bypass, thus keeping the heavy goods vehicles from the main street.
The church, which was built in the 13th century, stands isolated in a field at the north end of the village, and is dedicated to St Margaret.
Its position indicates that in the past houses were grouped around this area rather than in the lengthy one-street formation as now.
However, over the years this has been augmented by dwellings branching out from the main road.
In former days there were in addition the church, a Primitive Methodist chapel and a Wesleyan chapel, these being no longer in use.
The school was built by public subscription as a National school in 1873, and was originally intended to accommodate 100 children; at the present time there are 27 pupils.
A modern village hall was built in 1976 replacing a First World War army hut, originally purchased and maintained over the years by the Women's Institute.
There is a post office and general store, a garage, a joiner's shop, various resident builders, and a local inn, the Travellers Rest.
In the distant past there was also a cobbler's shop, a tailor's establishment and various carrier's businesses.
Whereas Long Riston used to be totally agricultural with ancillary trades, joiner, blacksmith etc (at one time there were three blacksmiths in the village), it is now still agricultural but in the modern way, and most of the population earn their living in Hull, Beverley and elsewhere in the district.
Long Riston has housed many notable characters.
Prominent amongst them is Peter Nevill who built Riston Grange and endowed many charities.
The Nevill Trust still functions to assist  scholars and apprentices financially.
Richard Fewson, who taught in the mid 1840s, was a schoolmaster of note.
There have been many interesting people amongst the schoolmasters, vicars, landowners and dignitaries over the years.
For a small village Long Riston is well equipped for sporting and other leisure activities.
Adjoining the village hall is an excellent playing field comprising a football pitch, two grass and one hard tennis court, and a functional children's play area and a car park.
In abeyance at the moment is a cricket pitch.
Events in the past have included money raising occasions to erect the aforementioned facilities.
These included galas, barbecues, dances, concerts, and dramatic productions, a flower festival, social events, coffee mornings, art exhibitions, and sponsored walks for St Margaret's church.
No doubt when money is required in the future Long Riston residents will rise to the occasion once more.
Low Catton
The tranquil village of Low Catton lies six miles east of York on the east bank of the river Derwent.
Originally an Anglian settlement, the name stems from the Old English personal name ‘Catta’.
The village stands along a single street roughly parallel with the river.
Its houses and cottages — apart from recent additions — are mainly of the 18th and 19th centuries respectively, the former rectory being perhaps the most noteworthy.
The approach to Low Catton from the direction of Kexby is attractive.
A narrow lane, it is bordered for much of its length by an avenue of trees, patches of bluebells along the grass verges beneath them adding a delicately pleasing touch of colour to the scene in springtime.
From the northern end of the village street, a lane runs towards the river and the church.
Dedicated to All Saints, the church is tucked away behind mighty trees on a high bank of the river.
The external appearance of the building is most unusual, with a sturdy, embattled tower at the west end of the south aisle, and a big  chancel much higher than the nave.
The imposing chancel is in fact almost as long as the nave, and has four wide steps to the altar.
The original church was Norman and cruciform, and though little of it remains, some interesting detailing of the period is reflected in the north transept, the nave and aisles.
A round arch near the pulpit is thought by some authorities to belong to an earlier period.
The tower, which houses three bells, is part of the old building; the north arcade is mainly 13th century.
The purpose of the opening in the south wall of the choir behind the rector's desk is open to conjecture: is it to give light at the desk, which otherwise would be in deep shadow, or is it a hagioscope (peephole)?
The church has some fine windows.
Two are specially worthy of note — the east window and the children's window.
The former, the central panel of which depicts the Crucifixion, is said to be one of the finest examples in the North of the noted stained glass expert, William Morris.
Beautifully appropriate, the children's window in the transept on the north side of the church, shows Christ holding a child in his arms, a lamb at his feet.
It was given by the children of the Sunday school during restoration work in 1908.
The cast-iron lampstands in the lane outside the church commemorate the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria.
The manor house stood immediately south of the church.
It was apparently moated in 1258–9.
The final reference to it in 1577 described it as being ‘so utterly ruinated…that (it) hardly can be judged where (it) hath stood’.
There was once a small water mill at Low Catton.
It stood north of the village, and some experts believe it may have been the fulling mill called Beckmill in 1474.
Low Catton has no school.
It closed in 1923 and the children transferred to Stamford Bridge.
Temporarily reopened to cater for evacuees in 1939, the building was converted to a village hall in 1955.
An unendowed school is recorded at Low Catton as early as 1734.
It had 30 children attending.
Lowthorpe
Lowthorpe is a small elongated village, situated five miles northeast of Driffield, which stretches southwards for nearly three and a half miles across the plain of Holderness.
It has a long history and in 1843 twelve Bronze Age artefacts and two portions of a sword were found whilst digging a drain.
Lowthorpe is mentioned four times in the Domesday Book, where it is spelt Logetorp, and in King Edward the Confessor's time it was valued at the princely sum of eight shillings.
Some time after 1066, the estate came into the possession of the Heslerton family from whom it passed by marriage in 1336 to the St Quintins and then by marriage again to the Legard family who are the present owners.
It has been said that the name Lowthorpe or Logetorp could have meant ‘Law-village’ in ancient Norse.
It is also believed that the old Scandinavian rulers of the area held their annual ‘folk mote’ at which the laws were read to the assembled inhabitants at a large circular mound, now overgrown with trees, and known to the local people as Fox Hill, supposedly a corruption of Folks Hill.
A church has stood in Lowthorpe from as early as the Norman Conquest.
The present building is supposed to have been erected in 1333, when the church was made collegiate by Sir John de Heslerton and housed six chaplains and three clerks.
The college survived until its dissolution in 1579, when it declined in status to a parish church.
The church in those days was a large and handsome edifice.
The present day building has a small western tower and 12th century nave standing away from the road on the edge of a wood.
The chancel is open to the sky.
In the 1800s there were two large ash trees growing inside the chancel, these were cut down in 1892 but the stumps are still clearly visible.
Inside the church, the earliest feature is an Anglo-Saxon carved stone cross head which was found in the churchyard in 1934.
The font is thought to be medieval.
The parish registers begin in 1546 and contain among the memoranda reference to a large gold ring  with the inscription ‘Obey and Rule’ which was given to the church by a Mrs Francis Rokeby on 26th August 1711 for the use, of any who came to the church to be married and were ‘unprovided with a ring’.
There is a cross in the churchyard which is said to have been brought from Kilham at the time of the plague which decimated that village.
On route from Kilham to Lowthorpe, the heavy stone base of the cross fell off at Ruston Parva and embedded itself in the verge side there, from where it was rescued in recent years and now stands on Ruston Parva village green.
In 1826 the Hall, Lowthorpe's ancient manor, was demolished and later replaced by Lowthorpe Lodge which the St Quintin family used mainly  as a shooting lodge, swelling the population of the small village greatly every summer with their visiting shooting parties.
During Lowthorpe's history there has been little in the way of non-agricultural employment.
The St Quintin family provided employment for several men not directly concerned with farming, land agent, gamekeepers, water bailiff and woodmen.
There was also a water mill in Lowthorpe as early as 1327 but the latest building on the site was said to have been built in the 1700s and was finally demolished in 1959.
During the early 1900s the post office at Lowthorpe was a hive or activity.
Mail for villages as far afield as Langtoft and Boynton came by post train from Hull, was dropped at Lowthorpe station at 7 am and then brought by horse and cart to the post office at Lowthorpe.
Postmen were waiting there to take it on bicycle to the outlying villages and make the return journey with outgoing mail to be despatched on the 6.20 pm train to Hull.
Needless to say this service ended many years ago and the old post office is now a private house, the station is closed and the trains no longer stop at Lowthorpe.
Much of the village housing, including the farms, still belongs to the Legard family, although The Elms, a large 19th century house formerly occupied by the bailiff of the St Quintin estate, is now the offices of a turkey farm.
There are still some inhabitants of the village who work locally in agriculture though not as many as of yore and many of the  newer villagers commute further afield to their daily jobs.
Village life is therefore not as close knit as it once was, which is common in many villages today, but nevertheless local functions held in nearby Harpham village hall are always well attended proving that there is still a sense of community in the area.
Lund
Lund is a village of some 120 houses on the Wolds between Beverley and Driffield.
Though founded by the Vikings a thousand or so years ago it has, like most East Riding villages, very few really ancient buildings.
The exceptions are the church and the market cross on the green.
The church tower stands out on the skyline in the middle of the village and the church dates from the 14th century, though extensively restored and to some extent rebuilt in Victorian times.
It is a large church for what has always been a small village — perhaps the work of some medieval lord of the manor intent on impressing the neighbouring gentry.
The cross is or slightly earlier date in origin and was the centre of a weekly market on Thursdays, for which a charter was granted in the 13th century.
It provides its own record of centuries of repairs, using different kinds and shapes of stone from other buildings, each added to fit the current alignment, so that a permanent list is built into the whole edifice.
The shaft was probably renewed in the 17th century and was surmounted by an oval ball till it succumbed to schoolboy vandalism some 40 years ago.
Also facing the green at the entrance to the church is the old forge, worked by many generations of the same family of blacksmiths till the 1970s when it was converted to a bus shelter.
To the north of the green, adjoining the Malton road, stands a group of three trees surrounding a small hollow.
This was the cockpit, used for cock-fighting in times past.
The 18th century building next to the church is the manor house, built on the site of an earlier building.
In front of it is an old wall broken by an imposing 17th century gateway, placed there by  the Remington family, lords of the manor, who probably furnished the market cross with its new shaft in the same style and type of stone.
The Remingtons emigrated to America in the 18th century, where they founded the great engineering company which bears their name.
Opposite this wall is the Methodist chapel.
In the 19th century and into the 20th there were two Methodist chapels in the village and this was for those of the Primitive Methodist persuasion.
The evidence suggests that almost all the village houses in earlier days were built of dried mud with thatched roofs.
By about the end of the 18th century they began to be replaced by the brick and pantiles which form the pattern of the present village.
There are no outstanding houses but the lines of brick houses grouped around the central green and round smaller greens in other parts of the village form a pleasing composition.
The village is also known for the care it gives to its gardens and grass verges.
Apart from several popular Open Gardens events, it has in recent years twice won the North Humberside prize for the Best Kept Village.
In the Britain in Bloom competitions it has won the first prize in the Village Section successively for Yorkshire and Humberside (for which it retained the Challenge Shield after winning three times), England and the United Kingdom.
It was also invited to compete in the European Entente Floriale.
Like most villages, Lund in past times was much more self-sufficient than it is now, with its own grocers, shoemakers, tailors and the like and, during the 19th century, a second public house, the Speed the Plough.
Even in 1949 there were two joiners and a blacksmith, a school, post office and eight shops.
Now there is only the Wellington inn.
Yet Lund is by no means a dead village.
There is a pleasantly refurbished village hall, centre of a thriving carpet bowl club and many other activities, a newly renovated pub doing good business with a well supported darts club, and smaller church and chapel halls for more intimate meetings.
The recorded history of Lund is scanty.
Nothing of national importance has happened there.
As far back as can be traced it has been a village of yeomen, small independent farmers, and never  since medieval times an estate village ruled by one big landowner, though for a period in the 18th and 19th centuries the Grimston family of Kilnwick and later the Hothams of South Dalton acquired some farms.
Perhaps the biggest event in recent times was in the 1950s when a film company made the church the setting for the film Lease of Life with Robert Donat.
Many villagers took part in the film as extras.
Mappleton
Mappleton is situated on the coast of East Yorkshire in the Holderness district.
The name Mappleton is said to have evolved from the Saxon ‘Moe pel tun’, the farmstead by the maple tree.
It is mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086; indeed evidence seems to indicate that it was one of the oldest and largest settlements at the time of Domesday.
At the time of the Armada in the reign of Elizabeth I, Mappleton had three beacons to light to give warning of invasion.
The village is mainly given to agriculture, though tourism will play an increasing part in the future.
A farmer's wife of Middle Farm has over the years developed a very attractive plant and shrub centre with success.
A retail milk business is run by the owners of the post office and general store which also delivers newspapers and magazines.
The largest employer in the village is Maple Garage, employing 19 people.
As there is no access to the shore there have never been any businesses based on the sea.
There are six farmsteads, 25 houses and approximately 100 residents in the village.
There is now no school.
The school built in 1872 closed many years ago and the school building and school house are now two very attractive residences.
All children attend school in nearby Hornsea.
The Wesleyan Methodist chapel likewise closed a number of years ago, but serves the village well in its present capacity as the village hall.
All Saints' church stands on a high mound of land in the centre of the village — one might say it is the guardian of all it surveys.
The church originally had a square tower at its western end, but in  1855 when it underwent considerable restoration, a tall spire was added, built of stone from a ship wrecked on Mappleton sands.
This is a landmark visible for miles along the coast; indeed there was a protest from seafarers when in recent years it was feared the spire might need to be dismantled.
However, it was found only necessary for repairs to be made and the spire remains in place as a valuable landmark for passing shipping.
The village has one main street, the B1242 coastal road which runs south from Hornsea to Withernsea.
A by-road branches west to Hatfield village.
Next to the church there is a crossroads.
Church lane leads westwards to a row of council houses, Church Mount, the old vicarage (no longer used as a residence for the vicar) and Mill Farm, now empty.
The walls of the mill, first mentioned in 1343, are still intact.
Eastwards, Cliff Lane goes past the old school, the post office and a row of cottages to the cliff top, where it is demonstrated why Mappleton has recently achieved tremendous publicity as it is the next English village in danger of being swept into the North Sea.
The soft clay cliffs on this coast have been eroded by the sea since Roman times and 29 villages have been lost to the sea.
Mappleton is at the cliff edge, indeed at the northern end of the village the main road is only 50 metres from the cliff top.
In February 1988 the parish council launched a campaign for the provision of sea defences.
Holderness Borough Council has accepted a design for three groynes and an access ramp to be constructed off Mappleton cliffs, but this cannot go forward without government financial aid.
Residents are now anxiously awaiting the decision which will either give Mappleton a future or condemn it to perish in the North Sea.
One other place of interest, outside the village limits but within Mappleton parish, is Rolston Hall.
It is said that Paul Jones, the American privateer, fired a salvo at Rolston Hall to mark his hatred of the then owner, William Brough, Marshall of High Court of Admiralty, who was entitled to hang Paul Jones as a pirate if he was captured.
One of the cannon balls was said to be in the Hall in 1840.
Nafferton
Situated at the foot of the Yorkshire Wolds, the village of Nafferton is one of the largest in the East Riding.
The village itself stretches for about a mile southwards from the Driffield-Bridlington road.
Evolving over centuries, the fabric of the Nafferton which stands today bears witness to a continuous process or both change and continuity.
The population in 1981 was 1,640 but housing development since then has substantially increased this number.
As in so many villages, the parish church is the oldest building, the earliest parts of which date from the 13th century.
It dominates the centre of the village from its elevated site where the four main village roads converge.
A former vicar here was Francis Orpen Morris, who, besides making many alterations to the church, wrote a standard book on British birds.
A workaday village, Nafferton has no pretensions to ‘prettiness’ although there are many attractive features.
near the church, the mere, a large expanse of water fed by natural springs and formerly a mill pond, is a picturesque area attracting many birds to overwinter, whilst in summer whole families are to be seen feeding the ducks.
Due to the varied types of building, and its historical features, most of Nafferton was designated a conservation area some years ago.
Although many of the houses were originally built earlier, development in the 18th century is marked by the numerous date stones on property about the village, the earliest being 1746.
Nafferton supports many organisations from toddler groups to clubs for senior citizens.
Sports and hobbies are also well catered for.
The recreation club has its own sports field, whilst some club meetings and classes are held in the school or the village hall.
This hall was built in 1861 by the Loyal Order of Ancient Shepherds, a Friendly Society, but presented to the village in 1946.
Nafferton is very much a self contained village, having a school, doctor's surgery, post office and newsagent, two small  supermarkets, a greengrocer, a fish and chip restaurant, four public houses and several mobile tradesmen including a library, besides many small businesses.
Fortunately it has retained road and rail links with Hull, Scarborough and the historic town of Beverley.
The seaside town of Bridlington, with its bracing air and good shops, is only ten miles away.
That Nafferton is a pleasant place to live is shown by the rapid sale of new houses, both to local people and those from further afield.
Newbald
Newbald (North and South) lies in a hollow, sheltered to the north and east by the Wolds, which rise to about 150 metres, with a good water supply from clusters of springs.
The site has been occupied by man for thousands of years.
Prehistoric tools and pottery, and the remains of a Roman villa, have been found.
The Roman road from Brough to York passed to the west of the village.
The new building was an Anglian settlement, the name first recorded in the 10th century.
In AD 963 the Saxon King Edgar granted 30 ‘casati’ of land to  Ealdorman Gunner, which he bestowed on St Peter's church at York.
It would appear that the Danes then occupied the area.
Ulphus, son-in-law of King Canute, dedicated his lands, including Newbald, to God and St Peter.
His hunting horn, title to his estate, is still in York Minster.
Thus the lands of Newbald remained in the possession of the Church for nearly 1,000 years.
The income of the lands was divided among the canons of the minster, and they built their respective manors to the north and south of the church.
The canon for North Newbald became the rector.
Domesday Book records land for 16 ploughs at Newbald, and a church.
The present building, dedicated to St Nicholas, dates from 1125.
It is recognised as one of the finest Norman churches in East Yorkshire.
It is cruciform and aisleless, built of locally quarried ashlar stone.
It stands on a small mound at the junction of the  two villages.
A small carving on one of the capitals of the south door arch depicts the Hound of Heaven, straining to gain admittance to the church.
The lovely font is 700 years old.
The iron handle on the vestry door is reputed to be the original ‘sanctuary, handle.
Made in the shape of two serpents, it is said to represent sin, and also the fact that there are two sides to every dispute!
Newbald possesses a spacious green.
A charter to hold a market and an annual fair was granted in 1348, but it is not known when the use was discontinued.
A large circular flat stone on the green is said to be the remains of the market cross.
It may have had a more sinister purpose later, as it is now known as The Whipping Stone.
A record is said to exist of a whipping which took place in 1624, when a man was whipped to death.
The main occupation of the village throughout the centuries was obviously agriculture, but three quarries have been worked since Roman times, and the oolitic limestone is found in many local churches, including Beverley minster.
Four mills were located along the beck, the last one being demolished in 1954.
The Civil War did not pass Newbald by, as the Monkton family of South Newbald were Royalists, and the parish registers of 1643/45 recorded 30 soldiers being buried in the churchyard.
The enclosure of the open fields was completed in 1783 and brought prosperity.
All the medieval buildings were torn down and replaced by stone built ones, with red pantiled roofs.
With few exceptions the cottages and houses opened directly onto the street with no front gardens.
A terrace of visually pleasing stone cottages facing the neat village green are dated 1846.
The stream is fascinating, disappearing from view from time to time, to re-emerge from beneath road or path in an ever delightful manner.
For much of its length it is bordered by sloping lawns, and sometimes edged with stones and flowers in a most attractive display.
A school for 150 children was built on the green, and remained in use until 1914 when a new school was built in Beverley Road.
The old building is now a storeroom.
The medieval street names were retained, and there is still East-gate, West-gate, Burgate, Galegate and Trundlegate, though the ‘Rabbit Warren’ in South Newbald, known as ‘The Coney Clappers’, has gone.
Newbald did not have a railway and remained very self contained.
In the late 19th century, besides the usual rural trades, it could boast ten grocers and drapers, eight tailors, a tea vendor and 14 dressmakers.
There were four public houses.
This for a population of 627 in North Newbald, and 172 in South Newbald.
There were also four nonconformist chapels.
There are now only two village shops and two public houses.
Three of the chapels were demolished, the remaining one is converted to a house.
The ‘twin' villages were officially united in 1935 as Newbald civil parish.
This would not have pleased the old 19th century residents who took care to have the information ‘of South Newbald’ or ‘of North Newbald’recorded on their tombstones.
The depression years of the 1920s and 1930s hit the village hard.
As a result many of the buildings fell into disrepair and were eventually demolished.
After the war, 60 council houses were built, and two small private estates.
The centre of Newbald was made a conservation area in an attempt to preserve some of the more attractive features of the village.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England commissioned a village study in 1974.
Sadly, few of the recommendations were acted upon.
Two more private estates have been built and the proportion of commuters has risen sharply.
Many of the old village families still work in the area, in agriculture, or in the thriving haulage industry.
Surprisingly, the village still retains its compact ‘cosy’ atmosphere with plenty of activity going on during the day, but any large scale development could reduce it to just another dormitory for Hull.
North Cave
North Cave is an extensive village situated in the foothills of the Wolds in the East Riding of Yorkshire, with Hull 14 miles to the east and York 25 miles north-west.
The population is around 1,200 and the main occupations are in agriculture and, in more recent years, industry.
The ancient and beautiful church of All Saints is the oldest  building in the village, newly built in 1318, although an unendowed building probably stood on the same site from 1086 when the Domesday Book was compiled.
The Georgian vicarage, built in 1823, stands south of the church, where the north wing was demolished in 1950 after the vicar's wife fell through the floorboards!
North Cave beck, where trout may be seen, meanders pleasantly through the village, in earlier days providing the water for three mills, where corn was milled until earlier this century.
From the 1740s North Cave was the meeting place for Quakers in the area, and Quaker Cottage on Church Street was built in 1892 on the site of the old Friends' meeting house; the cottage garden once was their burial ground.
The Primitive Methodist chapel on Westgate was built in 1871 to replace a smaller chapel on Quaker Lane, and a campaign is in progress at the present time to raise funds for its refurbishment.
The Wesleyan Centenary chapel was built on Church Street in 1839, but is now used as a warehouse and the Young Farmers' Club meets in the original schoolroom.
John Wesley preached at North Cave in 1761, probably in a barn or in the open air.
North Cave boasts two public houses: the White Hart on Westgate, built in 1776, but much altered at the front, was one of the main coaching inns in the mid 19th century; and the Black Swan on Church Street, rebuilt in 1813, where ladies could buy bonnets and trimmings in a little shop in the small single-storied part at the far end.
The old church school, situated near to the church and now a private dwelling, was built in 1833 and extended in 1870.
The school moved to a new building in Station Road in 1974.
The village playing field stands opposite the old school and occupies the old titheyard where tithes were paid to the church up to the early 19th century.
A children s adventure playground has been built in recent years, and the field is well used by the village football and cricket teams.
North Cave is a very pleasant place in which to live, with a thriving Women's Institute, Pensioners' Club, Mothers' Union and playgroup.
There is a real sense of community, and the village hall  provides a focus for many activities.
The village has a post office, newsagent and two general stores, a butcher, florist, bank and building society/estate agent and a garage, as well as a restaurant, two antiques shops and hairdressers.
Other facilities include a doctor's surgery, a joiner and funeral director, and building and electrical businesses.
The shopping facilities of Beverley are only nine miles to the east and the M62 motorway starts at the western end of the village.
The surrounding countryside, with many fine old trees, is ideal for walking.
North & South Cliffe
There are only some 40 dwellings in North and South Cliffe, and most are widely scattered.
Six farms, one shooting lodge, one private house and eight cottages are all built of a white brick which was brought from Derbyshire.
St John's church, North Cliffe, was built in 1873 by Mr Samuel Fox, and the deed of consecration was signed in October of that year by the Archbishop of York, Dr William Thomson.
The church cost £2,000 at the time.
The architect was the first Lord Grimthorpe, who also designed Big Ben.
The church is a neat stone building, lined with white brick, and consists of chancel, nave and organ.
The chancel fittings are of oak, and the pulpit is carved stone.
A rent of £50 was paid yearly, and this is still the same today.
Samuel Fox Esq was born in 1815, and when he died in 1887 he was the first person to be buried in the cemetery attached to the church.
A massive, handsome monument of granite is placed over the grave.
He was a prominent Victorian industrialist with extensive ironworks in West Yorkshire.
He was the inventor of the first reliable light steel umbrella frame, and early in his business life purchased the Cliffe estate from Sir William Worsley.
In 1844 he bought Hotham Hall where his wife and son principally lived, until another estate was purchased at Bradwell in Oxfordshire.
However, Mr Fox made frequent visits to his estate in Cliffe, staying at his house, The Lodge.
He took a close interest in his  adopted village and urged Canon Jarrat, who was the vicar of nearby North Cave from 1830 to 1891, to have a school built.
A portrait of Canon Jarrat and his wife hangs in the church today.
Canon Jarrat offered to build the school if Mr Fox would build the church, and so the two buildings were constructed, immediately adjacent to each other.
The school ceased to function as such many years ago, and now serves as a village hall.
St John's church cannot claim to have any outstanding architectural merit, but it can boast two unusual features.
Firstly, the altar faces north and not west, as in most churches, and secondly, the tower is most attractive and in perfect proportion to the intimate size of the church.
Mr Fox planned to build himself a home very near the village, of which he had plans ready, but unfortunately he passed away before it was built.
North Dalton
This picturesque village is situated in a delph valley on the Yorkshire Wolds and centres around the mere and church with an extension eastwards along Main Street.
Two council house estates have been introduced to the south and west.
The village is six miles from Driffield and ten miles from Beverley.
It houses approximately 200 residents in 115 dwellings.
The first documentary reference to the village occurs in the Domesday Book of 1086, but most of the buildings, with the exception of the church, date from after 1780.
Originally North Dalton was a self-supporting agricultural village with farming being the only means of employment.
Before the Second World War it boasted a church, two chapels, a school, three shops, a post office, two joiners, two tailors, a ladies dressmaker (specialising in high quality garments!), a cobbler, a slaughter-house and butcher, a fish and chip shop and two public houses.
Today, all of this is reduced to a church, a public house and a small shop-cum-post office.
The school was the last to close in 1968 and now primary school children have to make a four mile  return journey to Middleton-on-the-Wolds.
Secondary schooling is in Driffield.
North Dalton Village
The mere is the large village pond surrounded on three sides by a dense bank of elm and sycamore, and is closely associated visually with the churchyard.
It is a very attractive feature and has only been known to dry up once in the summer of 1826.
Wildlife is abundant in fish, ducks and water hens, and it is a great joy in springtime to see mother ducks bring their families down the steep church embankment, across the road and onto the pond.
All Saint's church stands on a conical mound of earth in the village and is an ancient edifice.
It has a nave, chancel and low embattled tower.
The south door is Norman with clustered cylindrical jambs and the north door, although much plainer, is of the same style.
The arch between the nave and the chancel is also Norman with zig-zag ornaments.
At the west end is a beautiful pointed window, and at the east end three lancet windows.
The font is circular.
In the not so distant past, North Dalton's church was well supported.
It held regular services, ran a Sunday school and was involved in numerous village activities.
Indeed the vicar was the most important figure, taking an active part in village life.
He was also on parish councils and acted as the school's manager.
In fact, sometimes the vicar was inspired by the village, like the Rev Baring-Gould, who wrote Onward Christian Soldiers amongst other hymns during his time as vicar of the parish.
Today the church is no longer‘active’ in the village as it once was, and sadly the congregation rarely has more than 15 worshippers.
There is no Sunday school, and the vicar is ‘shared’ by four parishes and no longer lives in the village.
Today developers are trying hard to increase the size of North Dalton, wanting to build houses on every spare piece of land.
Indeed eight such houses have already been built.
Consequently the few younger inhabitants of the village are being driven away.
Fortunately the village is in a conservation area and hopefully little more development will be permitted.
North Ferriby
The village of North Ferriby is situated on gently rising ground on the north bank of the river Humber, about seven miles west of the city of Hull.
As the name suggests, there was once a ferry crossing the river from here to the village of South Ferriby on the south bank, probably from Viking times — about AD 876 until 1300.
In recent years, even the paddle steamers linking Hull and Barton have been made obsolete by the building of the magnificent single span Humber Bridge, completed in 1980 — the north bank approach of which is just three miles east of North Ferriby.
Between 1937 and 1963, the Wright brothers discovered the well-preserved remains of three oak-planked boats embedded in mud and clay at the water's edge.
They were successfully raised and after being carefully examined and analysed with carbon dating techniques, they appear to have been under construction around 1500 BC — that was at the same time as Stonehenge was built.
They are now thought to be the oldest planked boats built anywhere in the world outside Egypt.
One boat is in the Hull Museum and the other two are in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich.
Although like most villages North Ferriby has increased greatly in size, especially since the Second World War, there are still some very pleasant walks in the area, and the Wolds Way walk actually starts at the foreshore car park.
Standing on the south bank and looking across the river at the village, one can see that it is still well-wooded with only the church spire and a small number of houses visible through the trees.
The village school comprises one old building dating back to 1868 and two modern buildings with ample playing field facilities.
There are now 160 children under the age of twelve and ten teachers.
Most of the older children go on to South Hunsley school — approximately two miles to the west in the village of Melton.
There is a railway station served by trains running from Hull to Doncaster, Leeds, Manchester and York, and a fairly frequent bus service to Hull.
In the Domesday Book (1086) a church is recorded and most likely the present building is on the same site.
Until St Mary's, Lowgate, Hull, was built, North Ferriby was the parish church for a large area stretching from the river Hull westwards.
In 1844 the church was declared unsafe, so money was raised from the rates and voluntary subscriptions and a new church was consecrated in 1848, which is the building one can still see today.
The Methodists first established a chapel for worship in 1828, in a small building later converted into the Oddfellows Hall, and so named until a couple of years ago when it became a private residence.
The present larger chapel in High Street was opened in 1878 and provision was made for a Sunday school behind it in 1883.
When, in the 18th century, Hull became a prosperous port, rich merchants began to look westwards for clean Wolds air and scenic views.
Ferriby saw the erection of stately homes and mansions, notably in the High Street, and some still remain today.
An outstanding example is Ferriby house, which dates from circa 1775, and was built by Sir Henry Etherington.
This is now used as a private residential home for the elderly.
The manor house and Ferriby Hall are still extant and remind one of the former grandeur of the High Street.
Aston Hall, which sadly was demolished in  1970, was built and occupied in the 1740s by William Wilberforce — grandfather of the William Wilberforce famous for his anti-Slavery Bill in Parliament.
North Ferriby is an extremely pleasant place in which to live and property is keenly sought after by those wishing to join this village community.
North Frodingham
North Frodingham is predominantly an agricultural village, conveniently located between the principal towns of the area, being situated on the B1249 ten miles from Bridlington, eleven from Hornsea, 13 from Beverley and six miles from Driffield.
In addition to several arable and livestock farms, there is extensive pig and turkey breeding in the area.
The current population is over 600, the great majority being involved in agriculture and local trades.
The village is a typical ‘street’ type of community, with the original single line of houses having been augmented in recent years with additional housing developing along the back lanes, behind the Main Street.
This development has not yet however spoilt the essentially rural nature of the village.
The church is outside the village at the west end, on high, safe, ground and doubtless on the site of the original village.
That pre-Conquest village is mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086.
Even then there was a church, indicating some importance in those times.
Until the last century the bridge at Frodingham was only one of two across the river Hull.
Originally a ford, this crossing made Frodingham an important crossroads in medieval times and even earlier was part of the southern Viking route from Flamborough to York.
After the Conquest the village and manor was given by William I to the lord of Holderness who later bestowed it on the newly founded Thornton Abbey, in Lincolnshire.
It remained with the abbey until the Dissolution in 1539, when it reverted to the Crown.
Church Farm, close to the church on the outskirts of the  village, was the rectory when Thornton Abbey held the manor.
Charles I sold the manor to the City of London in 1628 to raise finance, after which it changed hands several times until the Bethell family of Rise held it through most of the 17th and 18th centuries.
The open fields in the parish were enclosed in 1808.
The village possessed a charter to hold a fair twice a year, on 10th July and 2nd October, and a market was held every week in the Market Place, near to the cross, until Driffield developed to become the principal market town in the area, after which it was transferred there.
The village reached its peak in the middle of the 19th century-when the population reached 846 and the occupations listed in the census of the time show it to have been totally self-sufficient.
There was also consideration for two railways, one from Beverley and one from Bridlington, neither of which came to fruition.
The village cross, in the Market Place, is believed to be the second cross, the current one being erected in 181 1 after the original was destroyed by workers on the Hull drainage scheme.
This second cross has suffered the effects of today's traffic pollution and is being replaced with a replica.
The church, uniquely dedicated to St Elgin, was largely renovated in the 19th century, although a Norman font remains and also the remains of a 10th century Viking cross of unusual detail, found in the churchyard.
The nonconformist movement built their first chapel in 1821, with four having been erected over the years for the Primitive, Congregational, Baptist and Methodist movements, only the latter still regularly meeting.
The primary school serving the village and the surrounding area celebrated its 75th anniversary in its current building in 1990, having been established in 1845.
There is a sub post office and general store, and two public houses, the Star inn and the Blue Post inn.
The village has an active community with several local organisations, including a branch of the Yorkshire Countrywomen's Association.
There has been a social centre since 1964, used regularly by various groups, young and old.
Football and cricket teams in the village play in the local leagues.
The free landing place, by the bridge, is frequently used by pleasure boats, particularly in the summer, with a gala being held there each year.
In the current commuting age, when there are diverse calls on people's time and energies and the countryside is constantly under pressure from urban development, the village community is anxious to retain the village's rural character, whilst acknowledging the need to attract and maintain a balanced community.
Ottringham
A rural community of approximately 200 houses, Ottringham is situated in the area of East Yorkshire called Holderness.
The village is 14 miles from Hull and eight miles from Withernsea on the east coast.
The small village centre is surrounded by arable farms.
An unclassified road to the south leads to Sunk Island, an area of reclaimed Crown farmland.
The village has one general store, an antiques shop, a garage, two public houses and a post office which was opened in 1851 and has been run by the same family since that date.
A mobile library visits once a fortnight.
Older members in the village remember the days when there were two general stores, a butcher, baker, sweet shop, tailor, draper, three blacksmiths, a carrier and a wheelwright.
The fine church of St Wilfrid dates back to the 12th century, although there is mention of a church in the Domesday Book.
The slender 102 ft spire was once a landmark for ships sailing up the river Humber to Hull.
Three interesting features inside are the box pews, the semi-circular altar rail, and the stone lectern dating from Norman times.
There is no longer a resident priest, the vicarage has been sold and the parish is now one third of a united benefice.
It is interesting to note that during renovations to an old house in the village dated 1638, a priest hole was uncovered under the fourth step of a spiral staircase.
The Methodist chapel was built in 1856, replacing an earlier building which was then used as a day school.
This has now been  demolished to make way for new houses.
The village school was closed in 1948 and the children are taken by bus to other schools in the area.
The railway line between Hull and Withernsea was axed in 1965 by Dr Beeching, though the station was a good distance from the village centre.
There is now an hourly bus service.
Two annual events which are popular in the village are the Handicraft and Produce Show in the summer, and a party in the winter for the senior citizens.
These are organised by the WI for everyone to enjoy.
A village gala is held in July, a very popular day with visitors from a wide area.
Various fund-raising events throughout the year finance a Christmas party, and give a gift, such a box of groceries or a basket of fruit to every pensioner in the village.
The village supports a church hall and a village institute.
There are plenty of social activities, a football club, children's play area on the playing field, and a well-equipped snooker room in a building once known as the reading room.
The free monthly village newsletter is called ‘The Beacon’.
It takes the name from the Ottringham beacon, a radar transmitter on the outskirts of the village which is a vital communication link for all civil and military aircraft.
During the Second World War Ottringham was chosen as a site for a BBC station from which European broadcasts were relayed.
The eight 500 ft masts are no longer in existence but the rest of the station remains with its 18 inch thick walls and three ft thick concrete floor, beneath which the vital equipment was housed.
The site has been bought for use by a local builder who plans to make a feature of its earlier history.
There have been some new houses built in the last few years, but Ottringham is one of the few villages in Holderness which has not seen large housing developments taking place.
Patrington
Patrington was one of the ‘towns’ recorded in the Domesday Book and has the earliest recorded evidence of any settlement in  Holderness.
Today it would be classed as a large village.
A charter in 1033, granting the manor of Patrington to the Archbishop of York, describes the boundaries of the manor which, except on the south where changes have taken place along the river Humber, appear to coincide with the present boundaries of the parish.
Bleak House, Patrington (by kind permission of Mr P. Garvey)
Despite its age there are few of the early features of Patrington remaining.
The church dates back to the 14th century, and in the grass fields to the south of Station Road can still be seen the ridge and furrow of the open field arable strips which probably originated before the charter.
The basic street pattern is no doubt as old as the village itself and the street names are mostly of ancient origin.
Otherwise, what can be seen of Patrington today is of the 18th century or later.
The manor passed out of the hands of the Archbishop and into the hands of the Crown in 1545.
Eventually, in 1739, it passed to the Maisters, a family of Hull merchants.
The second half of the  18th century began to see some big changes in the parish and it is from this period, which was one of expansion and moderate prosperity, that the present houses and buildings begin to date.
One such, the manor house, has the date of erection and the name of the first owner on the tablet over the front door, inscribed ‘Elinor Ellis 1743’.
After falling into decay this century, the house, gardens and outbuildings were extensively and sympathetically restored by the present owner in the 1980s.
In the 1760s improvements were made to Patrington Haven, a small port on the river Humber in the days before much of the land was reclaimed, and this facilitated the export of corn from South Holderness to places like the growing towns of the West Riding.
At the same time the road through to Hull was improved by turnpiking, making the markets of Hull more accessible to the farmers of Patrington and the surrounding area.
A flax processing mill was built in the 19th century and some workers were brought over from Ireland.
This closed in 1881.
The new houses of the 18th and earlier 19th centuries were built of small rough bricks made in Patrington's own brickyards.
Many of the old houses have been enlarged or improved, but historically are very interesting.
Rushton House with its grey brick, fine bow windows and elegant Doric porch was built for Robert Clifford, surgeon, about 1810–1820.
The rear of the house is 18th century and belonged to Robert Rushton who died in 1783.
Bleak House, remodelled in Tudor style by Dr D. W. Coates who bought the property in 1894, originated about a century earlier.
This house has recently been converted into a home for the handicapped.
Dunedin House was built by the surgeon J. S. Land in the mid 19th century, and lived in for over 50 years this century by the late Dr Cripps, Medical Officer of Health for the Holderness area.
Linsdall's Hospital was a row of almshouses built in 1843 with money left by  Pheobe Linsdall of Winestead.
The cottages were originally intended to house ‘four poor widows’ who each received four shillings a week out of Pheobe's endowment.
The cottages have recently been modernised and windows have replaced the old front doors.
The old red brick police station was the site of the village lock-up until 1849, when it was enlarged and used for the monthly petty sessions until 1899.
The cells of the station were removed in the 1950s and the building is now a private house.
The workhouse, erected with its fine boardroom in 1838 at a cost of £2,000, was built to accommodate 170 inmates.
It was also the meeting place of the Board of Guardians, whose duty it was to look after the poor, and the Patrington Union which was responsible for 27 parishes.
The building was closed when the National Health Bill became law, and was used as a potato crisp factory.
It was eventually demolished and is now the site for a small housing estate.
The twelve licensed premises of the 18th century have dwindled to four.
In the 1830s a corn market was held regularly by three merchants who had a room each at the Hildyard Arms, still there in the market place.
The usual group of shops occupies the market place today, with a new up-to-date health centre.
The Roll of Honour, dedicated to the men of Patrington who served in the First World War, stands in the middle of the village.
The cricket club have very attractive grounds south of the church, and there are playing fields and football pitches on the Welwick road.
The Meridian Line runs just east of the village, hence the naming of the monthly church magazine, ‘The Meridian’.
The pride of Patrington is the nationally known St Patrick's church, often said to be the most beautiful parish church in England, and locally known as ‘the Queen of Holderness’.
Sir John Betjeman wrote ‘There is no doubt that, inside and out, the parish church of Patrington is one of the great buildings of England.
It sails like a galleon over the wide, flat expanse of Holderness, its symmetry and many pinnacles lead the eye up to its perfectly proportioned spire which crowns the central tower’.
The structure has suffered little at the hand of man, or from the lapse of time, so that without much imagination it is possible to picture it as the builders left it about the year 1410.
The village is also well served by two well attended Methodist churches.
This is an agricultural area still, as it has been through the centuries, and most of the residents are employed in the  district, with some commuting to Hull, the nearest city.
There has not been too much building to spoil the village, and the population has not greatly altered over the years, so it is a pleasant village in which to live.
Patrington Haven today is a compact hamlet.
Until the formation of Sunk Island, it was a small port and most heavy goods were transported through the ‘Haven’.
This is now grassed over and just one old warehouse still stands.
The hamlet has a Methodist church and a public house, but no shops.
A former RAF site nearby is now a large caravan leisure park.
Paull
Paull is a small village lying beside the river Humber some seven miles from Hull and three and a half miles south-west of Hedon.
Once important for shipbuilding, ships carrying 74 guns have been launched from here, including the Anson of 1,741 tons built in 1812.
It has now reverted back to a quiet village, disturbed only at weekends by visitors from surrounding areas who come to fish, walk the frontage and watch the departure or arrival of passenger ferries and other shipping.
The most notable feature of the river frontage is the ‘L’ shaped tidal defence wall built in 1986 to prevent flooding from tidal surges on the Humber estuary, at a cost of nearly £3 million.
Before the new wall was built, serious flooding occurred in the village under surge tides in 1969, 1976, 1978 and 1983, so the new wall came as a welcome relief.
Another feature of the river frontage includes the old lighthouse with the coastguard cottages adjoining, which was built in 1836 by Trinity House.
The lighthouse and cottages are still lived in and command extensive views of Hull waterfront and the Humber Bridge.
Also on the eastern frontages Paull Battery which saw service in the Civil War when Charles I attempted to blockade Hull, the first city to turn against him.
It later saw service in the Napoleonic wars and as an anti-aircraft point in this century.
The whole battery site is now earmarked to become a country park or  war museum but as yet still remains untouched used now and again for playing war games and a place to stable locally owned horses.
Main Street consists of 19th century cottages which back onto the river frontage and mid 20th century terraced houses on the other side.
There are three licensed houses in Main Street.
The Humber Tavern, built 1808, was where the landlord used to try to attract visitors from Hull with a bathing machine.
The second is called the Royal Oak, built in 1823, and there is also the Crown, opened in 1865.
All three are still serving good ale.
The village has only one shop which is the post office and general store.
Up to 1980, there were two and before that a number of riverside cottages at different times were shops.
Also, the fish and chip shop remains.
Other features of Main Street include the village school, the Wesleyan chapel and the shipyard.
The school was built in 1868 on a site given by St John's College, Cambridge and opened a year later.
The building has twice been enlarged and now has temporary accommodation.
The average attendance in the 121 years of its existence has been 60–80 pupils.
The school also suffered war damage in 1942.
The shipyard was opened in 1940 and rebuilt in 1986 along with the tidal wall.
It is a very busy yard and employs 20 workers, mostly from the village.
The Wesleyan chapel built in 1805 and restored in 1912 is still in use today.
The Primitive Methodist chapel built in 1871 and closed in 1915 is now used as a house.
The whole of the Main Street and the river frontage has been made into a conservation area.
Until the mid 20th century, Paull village consisted of a single riverside street (Main Street) connected to a back lane by Town End Road.
Many houses have since been built in and near Back Lane.
There are 82 council houses and 120 private homes.
The population in 1961 was 629 but has now risen to just over 800 and will probably remain at this due to the closeness of BP Chemicals which dominates the skyline at Saltend.
The church of St Andrew stands just outside the village.
Building started about 1355 and consists of chancel with north vestry, crossing tower with transepts and aisled nave.
The church was burnt during the siege of Hull in 1643.
Work done in 1881 included the addition of a gallery and the church was restored in 1879 and an addition to the churchyard was consecrated in 1901.
When Hull was a major fishing port, all the trawlers passed by Paull on their way to Iceland and other fishing grounds.
The Humber was a very busy river and even before the large trawlers, eleven shrimp boats sailed out of Paull along with ferries to Hull and Lincolnshire.
Maybe when the river runs blue again, shrimp boats will return to Paul, which has been described as a village unique in Holderness.
Pocklington
Pocklington is a small market town with all the characteristics of a village.
Situated as it is approximately one mile from the Hull/ York road, it has grown gradually, and yet not been subjected to heavy traffic apart from distribution and collection purposes.
From an aerial view one can still trace the travellers' ways it had in 1245 when a market grant was made.
There is still a Tuesday market with many stalls, the market place and Market Street being closed to traffic on this day only.
The church dominates the commercial centre with its clock tower visible from the housing developments on the outskirts.
Pocklington beck, which played a large part in the 13th and 14th centuries, though no longer used for the running of mills or for carrot washing, is a favourite place for youngsters who paddle in it or catch tiddlers.
The beck runs from fields via springs, down London Street, hides under the road, emerges again round Bridge Street flats, underground again until it appears in the churchyard, then under the road and into West Green where it runs beside an avenue of stately chestnut trees, out of Pocklington and on to the river Derwent.
There are many attractive buildings.
The Roman Catholic church was built in 1807 and enlarged in 1863; the Grecian-style  Methodist chapel, 1864, is of red brick with a large portico supported by six Doric pillars; 1807 is the original date of the Pentecostal church.
Dwellings of note have inspiring names such as Eden Place, Ingledene, Bloomsbury Plate, York View, Alexandra Terrace and Waterloo Buildings.
Attractive modern housing developments have names such as Sherbuttgate, Algarth, Mile End Park, Chapel Hill Estate, Oval, Burnby Lane Estate and West Green, rather like the outer ring on a dartboard.
Street names are unusual too like Chapmangate and Grape Lane.
Railway Street is a name retained as a fond memory for a public transport system axed by Beeching in 1966.
Pen Lane, now widened for parking, was one of the original short cuts around the church.
Brass Castle Hill is the site of a dwelling, a few small shops, the post office and the First World War memorial.
The Feathers Hotel is the principal inn, and was used on hiring days, as were most of the other original public houses, this being an agricultural area.
It is an 18th century building with alterations from a coaching house with stables to an AA listed hotel and motel.
All the remaining public houses do bar meals and meals.
Apart from the local authority-run schools, Pocklington has an independent public school.
First founded in 1514, the most famous pupil to date has been William Wilberforce, the slave law reformer.
The church is of 13th century construction with a 15th century tower.
It has had modest restoration, but fortunately with no drastic alterations to the basic fabric.
On the east wall of the chancel is the inscription to Thomas Pelling, the ‘flying man’ from Lincolnshire, who fell to his death from the battlements when the rope went slack as he was descending from the church tower to the Old Star inn in April 1733.
There have been two benefactors of note.
Francis Scaife died in the 1920s and left to Pocklington monies towards the building of a swimming pool, which turned from a dream into a reality in the 1960s through the legacy and much fundraising.
Percy Marlborough Stewart left to the people of Pocklington his collection of water-lilies, one of the finest in Europe, and the Stewart collection containing illustrations and objects of the many  countries of the world which he visited on his hunting expeditions.
These gardens attract many visitors by car and coach, being listed in the tourist books as gardens to visit.
During the summer, once a month, the Pocklington council arrange band concerts.
Major Stewart also made it possible for many sports clubs to have their own ground so all sport is catered for.
Does Pocklington have a ghost?
Yes, so it is said.
A young girl who haunts the Feathers Hotel, a one time serving wench, and only seen by a very few.
The small market town becomes a village when people say ‘good morning’.
to all they meet, thus making it a friendly place in which to live.
Preston
Preston was founded during the later stages of the Anglo-Saxon invasions and the name means ‘Priest Town’.
The village was mentioned in the Domesday Book and the entry indicates village life was thriving and there was a population of at least 250.
The village developed gradually, and although road communications were poor there was a stage coach going through the village from Hull to Patrington Haven.
Today Preston is a large village and still expanding.
Once mainly agricultural, it is now a dormitory village for commuters to the city of Hull seven miles away, and for workers at one of Europe's largest chemical plants at Saltend on the river Humber, barely two miles distant.
It was during the 1800s that Preston became one of the principal pig producing areas of East Yorkshire.
There were then five butchers in the village.
In 1859 Thomas Storey is listed as a ‘Pig Jobber’.
In 1921  Earnest Fletcher was noted as being one of the biggest pork butchers in the area and his  abattoir provided work for 50 people.
The village also had two corn mills during the 1800s, although no remains can be seen today.
Other interesting trades of the time were shoemakers, a weaver, a straw-hat maker, a druggist and a  castrator, plus the more usual ones.
In the early 20th century the village was flourishing with shopkeepers, tailors, boot-repairers, and others.
Although the population has gradually increased the number of tradespeople has dwindled.
There are two grocery stores, a post office plus groceries, butchers, hairdresser, two garages, estate agent, fashion shop, three public houses, and a blacksmith.
The sound of the forge echoes around the village now as it did in the 19th century.
The village blacksmith was reestablished three years ago and makes hand-forged articles to the customer's requirements.
The church of All Saints has traces of Norman architecture, but most of the building is in Early English or Decorated style, so was probably enlarged in the 13th century.
The chancel was rebuilt in 1870, and the rest of the church thoroughly restored in 1882 by public subscription.
The large rectory in Staithes Road is now a private house.
A board school was built in 1887 and was used until the new primary school was built adjacent to the South Holderness secondary school which caters for pupils from a wide area.
The schools are situated along Station Road, as is the fire station for the area.
The railway station was shared by Preston and Hedon, and when the line was axed the track became a pleasant country walk.
The old school site has now been developed for housing, but the name School Road remains.
The main problem in Preston today is the traffic, especially along the Main Street, and the church's foundations must be suffering, as the tower is only a few feet from a sharp bend in the street.
The Methodist chapel is also in a vulnerable spot, standing as it does at the crossroads.
Some people would say that the most exciting pastime in Preston is to watch the traffic lights change, but others would strongly disagree!
Many are happy to live in the village of Preston — not Lancashire, but Yorkshire.
Rawcliffe
Rawcliffe can trace its history back to 1078, the name of the village undergoing many changes in that time.
Rawcliffe is ‘The Queen of Yorkshire Villages’ and with its picture-postcard prettiness it well deserves the name.
Situated on a wide bend of the river Aire, it was once a thriving port.
River boats brought wool to Rawcliffe from the West Riding, transferring their cargoes to the sea-going vessels that took the wool abroad.
The once bustling riverside is now a quiet street, with many of the old buildings well preserved.
The heart of the village, now a conservation area, is the large green, with many old beech and chestnut trees adding beauty throughout the year.
The parish church of St James, dating from the 18th century, dominates the green and has many associations with the lords of the manor, the Creyke family.
The Creykes lived in Rawcliffe Hall until 1924, when it became a hospital for the mentally handicapped.
One of the six (yes, six) village pubs bears the name Creyke Arms.
Rawcliffe's most infamous son is James Hirst, known as Jemmy (1738–1839).
He was an eccentric who, amongst other exploits rode a bull named Jupiter to the hunt and attracted the attention of George III.
Jemmy then rode to London to visit the King, in a carriage pulled by four mules.
He made money by charging people to look at his coffins.
He kept two in the house, one equipped with a bell so that he could ring should he want anything in the grave!
In his will he left £12 to be given to twelve old maids who were to act as pall bearers.
When twelve women who professed to be virgins were found, only two would swear an oath to that effect, but the executors decided to take the women's word for it.
Rawcliffe Women's Institute once depicted the scene of Jemmy's funeral in the float procession of the annual Rawcliffe Festival.
A coffin, complete with ‘corpse’ and bell, was pushed through the streets by twelve suitably dressed members (who wouldn't swear an oath either!) to great cheers and hilarity.
Rawcliffe's good communications systems serve the local  industries in agriculture and manufacturing.
Paper packaging and chemicals are made in the area, and the international headquarters of the Croda Chemical Company are nearby at beautiful Cowick Hall.
The former boys school is thought to have been founded about 1670 by a member of the Boynton family.
There has been a school on the site ever since.
The building is administered for the Charity Commissioners by a Board of Trustees, all resident in Rawcliffe.
Besides the Women's Institute, there are over a dozen other active groups in the village, which cater for a variety of ages and interests.
There are many long established local families, one member tracing her family back to the time of Jemmy Hirst.
A growing number have moved into the village, attracted by the serenity of village life.
Rimswell
The civic parish of Rimswell is made up of three villages — Rimswell, South Frodingham and Waxholme.
Altogether there is a population of only about 190, who live in a scattered community, largely agricultural.
Most of the families in Rimswell, especially those concerned in agriculture, have lived there for some generations.
Rimswell's most marked characteristic is isolation.
The nearest town of any size is Hull, 18 miles away, to which there are two buses a week.
Rimswell is part of the ecclesiastical parish of Owthorne, which is now combined with Withernsea.
In 1816 the old church at Owthorne finally succumbed to the coastal erosion and its remnants disappeared into the sea.
The church authorities decided to play safe and built its replacement at Rimswell, one and a half miles from the sea, the sturdy, unpretentious but pleasing little church of St Mary.
This was erected in 1801 at about the same time as some of the farmhouses in the parish.
There was also a Methodist chapel in Rimswell, built in 1899 not far from the church, until 1966 when it was imaginatively converted into a comfortable home.
There is no school in the parish, no shops and no public houses.
There used to be a public house, the Rugged World, but this is now a most attractive private house.
Rimswell children go to school in Withernsea on the school bus.
The village hall is run by an energetic committee who have raised sufficient money over the past few years to convert it from a wooden building to a brick one, and to refurbish the interior.
It is the only meeting place in the parish, and local residents have happy memories of such occasions there as Coronation parties, Jubilee teas, wedding receptions, dances, whist drives etc.
Rimswell was mentioned in the Domesday Book, but there are no really old buildings left, although some are of interest.
The most distinctive land-mark in the parish is the Rimswell water tower, built in 1916 to serve South Holderness with water.
The two tanks hold 400,000 gallons of water, which was sufficient in 1916 to last South Holderness for two days but would now last only about two and a half hours.
The tower is now a listed building.
The deeds of Hall Farm, Rimswell (originally Manor Farm) go back to the early 18th century although there was probably a house on the site before that date.
The originally thatched building was extensively altered and enlarged about the middle of the 19th century, as were several farms in the parish.
The house is as interesting inside as out, having a collection of about 70 stuffed birds.
Waxholme is on the coast and suffers badly from coastal erosion.
A landmark on the Waxholme/Withernsea road is the old Black Mill, and has been so for many generations.
It was marked on a map dated 1648 and according to local reports was a working mill until 1900.
It is interesting to note on the old maps how many bridlepaths and footpaths radiate from the mill — it was obviously used constantly by the farmers of the area.
Black Mill also served a useful purpose during the two world wars, when it was used as a look-out by the army.
It is said that Renish Farm at Waxholme was once used as a  Quaker meeting house.
This is another site on which there has been a farm for hundreds of years.
South Frodingham is two or three miles further inland.
The names of two of its farms, Great Newsome and Little Newsome, indicate, to historians anyway, that these settlements were newly colonised, probably in the 13th century.
Frodingham Hall was first recorded in 1240 when it was the home of the Frodingham, or Frothingham family.
The present moated Hall was rebuilt during the 16th century and altered in the early 19th century but the house preserves the plan of the 16th century building.
The Frodingham family emigrated to America soon after the Pilgrim Fathers, and at different times since the Hall has been owned by Sir John Lister the Hull merchant, and the Sykes family.
As well as the above, several other houses and farmhouses have character and charm.
Some have remnants of 18th and 19th century buildings constructed in the local fashion using small boulders from the beach.
During the past ten to 15 years a few new bungalows have been built, and with the eight council houses built in the 1930s, there is a pleasing variety of architectural styles.
There are also many very attractive gardens.
Although it will probably never be a picture postcard village, during the last two or three years some farmers have started to replace the hedges that were removed a generation ago, and to plant trees, so perhaps in years to come the parish will again look something like the pictures of it in days gone by, less bleak and windswept than it does today.
Rise
‘Rise is a pleasant village and parish, six miles south-west of Hornsea, and twelve miles north-east of Hull, contains 164 souls, and 1,920 acres of fertile land, nearly all the property of the lord of the manor, Richard Bethell Esq.’
This extract from an 1830 North and East Riding Gazette still holds good today, with the  exception of the population, which numbers around 120, and the parish now covers nearly 4,500 acres.
Rise Hall, a large and handsome stone edifice, forms the centre of the village with a small but beautiful park.
This fine and little known house has a number of features of interest, and is by far the most important neo-classical house in the area.
the principal entrance to the park near the church is ornamented with two stone lodges, the drawings for which date back to 1818.
The place anciently belonged to the Fauconbergs, but has been for many generations the seat of the Bethells.
The present Mr Richard Bethell now lives in the rectory sited behind the church, overlooking the park.
He is the Lord Lieutenant of Humberside, a member of the Jockey Club and well-known in racing circles, serving as a Steward at many racecourses in the area.
Rise Hall was rebuilt by the Bethell family in 1815–20, and designed by the architect Robert Abraham, a relation of the family.
It is now occupied by an order of nuns, Canonesses of St Augustine, who have been in residence since 1946, and who run religious retreats, holidays, weekend courses and meetings.
The Hall was used as a convent school from 1946 until 1989. the Hall stables and coach house are all listed buildings, along with a Round House a short distance away, and South Lodge Cottage on the western side of the woodlands.
The church of All Saints is a humble edifice with a bell turret at the west end.
It has three bells cast by a London foundry in 1865.
Tradition says the church was once much larger than it is today.
The style of the building is that of the 14th century, and it holds many monuments to previous rectors and the Bethell family, including a reference to Christopher Bethell who was one of the first whites to be killed in the Mafeking riots in July 1884.
To this day a few of the fields around the village tell of its past history.
Black Hall Close contains the moot-hill for Mid Holderness, as well as the foundations of the Black Hall, in which the Fauconberg family once lived.
Farnton, a high piece of ground in the parish, is a training track for racehorses.
A horse bred at Rise and trained on the track won the St Leger in 1779.
Throughout the years, celebrations have been held to  commemorate Coronations, Jubilees, and Royal marriages.
Special church services were held, sports days organized for both adults and children, and parish teas were served in the village hall, which was once the village school.
Before the coming of mains water to rural areas, the water for Rise Hall and stable yard was supplied from a very deep well under a sawmill floor, a full quarter of a mile away.
It was pumped by steam up to tanks at the top of a high brick-built tower, a landmark for miles around, then gravity-fed to the Hall.
Gas was also manufactured, and Rise had its own gas works.
The gas was piped over a quarter of a mile to the Hall and stables.
Later on in the 1920s the Bethell family installed their own plant for providing electricity.
This was done by using a huge oil engine as a generator.
Even horse clippers were powered by this system, but this was replaced by mains electricity.
Steam ploughing was another area where the Bethell family and Rise were in the forefront of development at the turn of the century.
This is one reason why the fields around Rise, in particular on Park Farm, were so large.
At least one brick-built open well remains, where these steam ploughing machines drew their water.
During the Second World War, Rise had a large military camp.
This army unit was the headquarters of all searchlight detachments scattered throughout the area of Holderness, and they were all supplied and maintained from Rise.
Little has changed over the centuries, the main difference being the changing shape of the woodlands surrounding the Park and the village.
There are several footpaths around the village, which during the summer months provide a rich variety of flora and fauna.
It is difficult to realise when walking around the area that you are only twelve miles away from Hull, the surrounding woodlands creating a block to the sights and sounds of modern living.
Although a small village, Rise has tradition, and a love of its history, which will result in it always being remembered by the people who live within its boundaries.
Roos
Roos is a small village lying on the plain of Holderness, 15 miles east of Hull and four miles north-west of the seaside town of Withernsea.
This is a farming area with open fields on all sides.
Its roads are often narrow and usually circuitous, following dykes and field boundaries from one community to the next.
Two miles away at its closest point, the North Sea annually gnaws five or six ft from the clay coastline.
Roos itself is far from any risk of erosion but a private garden in the village contains a sad relic: the rebuilt east windows of the church of Owthorne, one of many coastal parishes swept away over the centuries.
Public transport to Roos is poor: without a private car, residents are as isolated as their forefathers were.
Yet the village has become a favoured home for commuters.
By car Hull is only half an hour away.
There, the North Sea Ferry makes travel to the Continent easy, and to the west of the city the M62 provides the rapid access to the whole motorway system.
There were settlements in Holderness long before the Romans came.
Friesian place-names survive from that time, including that of Roos itself: it is a Friesian word meaning ‘watery land’.
The carrs of low-lying land must often have been water-logged before the complex system of drainage ditches was dug.
There was certainly a settlement in Roos well before the Norman Conquest.
The Domesday Book records that Roos had ‘a priest and a church and 30 acres of meadow’.
King William granted the Seignory of Holderness to Drogo, a Flemish knight.
One of his vassals, Fulk, became lord of the manor of Roos and adopted ‘de Ros’ as his title.
The foundations of his manor house, Roos Castle, can still be seen as regular contours in a field south of the church.
No walls remain.
The stones were probably pilfered for other building.
Fulk's great-grandson married into the Trusbut family who had a seat at Warter village.
He adopted his father-in-law's coat of arms, which shows three ‘bougets’ or ‘bouts’, which are double water bottles of animal skin such as were slung across a rider's  saddle during campaigns in Palestine.
As often in heraldry, the Trusbut device involved a pun — three water bottles, or ‘trois bouts de Wartre’.
for ‘Trusbuts of Warter’.
It is still used as a sign at one of the two public houses, the Roos Arms.
In the 1700s, the Roos and Sledmere estates came into the Sykes family, who still live at Sledmere House, on the Yorkshire Wolds.
Two rectors were members of the family and another was an in-law.
There is a Sykes memorial in the churchyard and a family vault north-east of the sanctuary.
The present.church dates from the 13th century and has many interesting later additions, both structural and decorative.
There are also reminders of church life in earlier times.
For example, the south chancel wall has scratch dials that are probably Anglo-Saxon.
Also known as ‘mass clocks’ they offered a means of telling the time for church services: an appropriately placed stick cast a shadow on the hour-scale.
The Wallis window in the south aisle also reflects early church history: it represents 7th century missionaries converging in East Yorkshire.
For the modern visitor, the main approach to the church leads through an avenue of yew trees and up an impressive flight of stone steps to the west door.
In spring, the churchyard is carpeted with snowdrops and primroses.
Roos today is a friendly village where older residents and newcomers mix very well.
New housing is being built and the community is growing steadily.
At one time villages had to be more self-sufficient and the village used to have more shops and trades than there are now.
There is still a grocer/newsagent s (with a petrol pump) and a butcher's shop selling savouries and cakes.
Owing to the projected increase in population a new school was opened in 1982.
The old school, built when state education first came to Roos, has been tastefully renovated as a private house, as have other local buildings, some no longer needed for farming.
Land for the playing field was acquired on lease some years ago and an energetic committee have worked ever since to maintain and develop it.
Since the 1940s the Roos and District Horticultural Society has attracted impressive entries in its Annual Shows.
The  village hall was built after the First World War and serves the community's needs.
Recently refurbished and extended, it provides a meeting room, a smaller games room with snooker table, and a kitchen, and is well used for all the activities that make up village life.
Rudston
Rudston is a very pretty little village in East Yorkshire of some 350 inhabitants.
It nestles on the edge of the Yorkshire Wolds about five miles west of Bridlington along the A1253 Bridlington to York road.
Driffield, said to be the ‘Capital of the Wolds’, an attractive market town, is eight miles south-west of Rudston and 17 miles away, a little higher up the coast, is Scarborough.
Rudston's history goes back a very long way to Neolithic times and it is believed to be the oldest inhabited village in England.
It has been the site of a number of archaeological explorations in recent years which have yielded valuable information about earlier settlements, with discoveries of bronze spears, remains of chariots, and graves of several warriors.
These and earlier relics are now in museums in London and York.
There were until about 20 years ago, mosaic pavements from Roman times displayed in their original positions where they had been discovered during field work, together with one unearthed some little distance away at a later excavation.
All have since been removed and installed in a museum in Hull.
There is a truly beautiful church, with a 12th century chancel arch and a Norman tower, which is visited and admired by people from all over the world.
Close by, in the churchyard, is the famous Rudston monolith or rood-stone from which the village takes its name.
It is 25 ft four inches high, six ft wide and two ft three inches thick at its base; how far it is sunk into the ground is not known.
It is of a rock type not common to the immediate area, the nearest appears to be found at Cayton and Cornelian Bays, ten miles distant, and is believed to have been brought to Rudston for religious reasons, since it was there long before the church.
It  stands at the meeting place of four Neolithic ditches which enter the village from the four points of the compass.
Its origin is probably similar to Stonehenge which has the biggest ditch, a single one, and many stones, where Rudston has four ditches but only one stone, which is larger than any at Stonehenge.
Another claim to fame by the village is that it is the birthplace of authoress Winifred Holtby, who sadly died in 1935 at the age of 37 and is buried in the churchyard here.
She is perhaps best known for her book South Riding which was based locally.
Unfortunately there is no longer a village school.
Since 1967 the children have travelled to Boynton school three miles away, then transferred to Bridlington for secondary education.
The former school building is now converted to a lovely house.
There is a very well-stocked general store incorporating the post office, a public house, the Bosville Arms, which stands on the site of a previous public house of several centuries ago, and a petrol station and garage.
Rudston is basically a farming community, but mechanisation and modernisation have resulted in much less employment than of old and the majority of people now travel out of the village to work.
The village hall was a disused chapel bought for the use of the village by Sir Godfrey MacDonald, the local squire at the time, to replace an earlier public hall which was destroyed during the war.
It overlooks the Gypsey Race, known locally as ‘The Beck’, which winds its way through several villages from its source at Wharram, high on the Yorkshire Wolds, before finally flowing into the sea through Bridlington Harbour.
As it leaves Rudston, it runs through the grounds of Thorpe Hall on the outskirts of the village which is the home of Sir Ian and Lady Juliet MacDonald of Sleat, descendants of Sir Godfrey, whose family, originally the Bosvilles, arrived in the community in the 1770s.
As the Gypsey Race meanders through the estate it encourages and supports much wildlife and some quite rare birds.
The great community spirit has enabled a children's play park to be established close by the village hall, and more recently a sports field which has a beautiful pavilion and caters for football, cricket, tennis, bowls, and a floodlit area for football training and five-a-side  tournaments throughout the winter.
Most of the work of creating this field and pavilion was done voluntarily and funded mainly by money raised from various village functions.
The land is rented to the village by Sir Ian MacDonald for the annual rent of one white rose.
Volunteer labour was also responsible for recent alterations and improvements to the village hall, which is now able to accommodate indoor bowling throughout the winter.
Villagers are proud and fortunate to be living here in this peaceful little village, surrounded by beautiful countryside.
Sancton
The village of Sancton lies about eight miles west of Beverley on the Market Weighton to Brough road.
It sits in a hollow of the steep western slope of the Wolds, and the slopes above the village are the location of the largest known pagan Anglian burial grounds north of the Humber.
It is recorded that found in one of the graves were the bones of a man with his sword and spear, his wife with her work-basket, and a child with its toys.
The Romans were here too, for the road on which the village stands follows the line of the Roman road from Brough to Malton.
Many of the houses stand in two side roads on either side of this road, sometimes referred to as King Street.
In a commanding position high on a hill overlooking the village stands the church of All Saints.
The tower is particularly striking.
Added in the 15th century, this three-stage tower is octagonal for its full height and has slender buttresses and a lantern top.
It is surely one of the most beautiful church towers on the whole of the Wolds.
The only similar tower in the area is at Coxwold in North Yorkshire.
All Saints is built of ashlar and rubble and consists of the chancel, nave with north and south porches, and west tower.
The chancel has a 13th century priest's doorway and a 13th century lancet with a low window at its foot.
Other noteworthy features are, respectively, the carved capitals of the chancel arch, fragments of the old window tracery, and a stoup inside the doorway.
With the exception of the tower, the church was rebuilt in 1869–71 in the Early English style to designs by J. B. and William Atkinson of York.
Records show there was a church at Sancton as early as 1086.
A free school was built in Sancton before 1609 by the local benefactor Sir Marmaduke Langdale, renowned for his bravery while fighting in the Civil War for Charles Stuart's cause.
The school stood in the churchyard.
It was rebuilt on the same site in 1870 and united with the National Society.
Typically Victorian in style, the school remained in use until recent times.
The brick-built Methodist chapel stands in one of the side lanes of the village.
It was built in 1803 and enlarged in 1840.
Two of Sancton's early dissenters earned the highest honour which Methodism has to confer on its preachers: Thomas and Samuel Jackson both became presidents of the Wesleyan Conference.
They were the sons of Thomas Jackson, a humble farm labourer who brought up ten children in a thatched cottage.
His grave is in the churchyard.
Many of the gravestones record deaths at early ages.
A brother and sister, for instance, died within a month of each other in 1861 — one of them 16, the other 18.
Could there have been an epidemic of some kind in the village around this time?
It would be interesting to know.
Almost entirely agricultural in the past, records show few references to other occupations, but a brickmaker lived in Sancton in 1851.
There was a windmill in the village in 1583 — the only early mention of milling there, but a miller was recorded from 1913 to 1931.
The name Sancton, in common with many English place names, refers to the nature of the soil or ground, ie Sancton —‘sandy’.
Sandholme & Hive
Sandholme and Hive are two hamlets side by side, where many years ago the inhabitants must have lived in blissful seclusion amid a farming community.
Progress and time have wrought many  changes, some good, some not so good.
At one time there were two or three inns, and a little shop in Hive, but ‘the old order changeth’, they no longer exist.
There are several smart new dwellings here, no doubt built upon the old closes and orchards where at one time the Anabaptists were buried.
The village hall has seen many activities, including Fur and Feather Whist Drives at Christmas, when the prizes were often brought very much alive in sacks!
Meetings, rallies, dances and wedding receptions all brought the small communities together.
It is now in need-of complete renovation.
The new meeting place is to be the day centre at Gilberdyke House, cosy and warm, but the villagers feel a sadness to have had to finally abandon Sandholme village hall.
Sadly, the dear little chapel also was demolished some years ago, and the demise of the railway took place about 30 years ago.
The invading motorway, the M62, sliced and slashed its way across the peaceful countryside, separating the lovely old Quaker Farm from some of its pastureland, which is now at the other side of the flyover which almost marks the boundary between Sandholme and Gilberdyke.
Seaton
Seaton is a small village three miles from the coast, on the main Hornsea to Beverley road.
Though lacking in prominent features, it is an interesting and lively place including two working farms in the centre of the village.
There are two village greens; both were levelled, and the pond was reclaimed on one of them about ten years ago.
Trees were planted and picnic seats were purchased, so this now makes a popular place for children and visitors in the summer.
There is a small Methodist chapel which is over 100 years old and still used every Sunday.
One rather unusual feature is the Whin Common, which lies about half a mile to the north of the village.
To get to it there is a right of way through fields.
The common is a piece of land of just over two acres, where the poor of the village could collect  firewood, as much as they can carry, ‘whin' meaning a gorse bush.
An infant school built in 1840 served both Seaton and Sigglesthorne.
This closed in 1923, and is now a snooker club.
Opposite the Swan inn is the recreation hall.
Built in the 1930s this is still well supported and is used practically every day.
The village Horticultural Show is over 50 years old, and is still a very popular event.
Seaton has not grown much over the years due to lack of building land, though there are now new terrace-type cottages in the centre of the village.
These have brought young families into the community, which is good for the continuity of village life.
Seaton Ross
The sundial on a cottage in North End was made in the 1840s and is said to be the largest in England with its twelve ft diameter.
Its maker was William Watson, farmer and surveyor, who made the similar one on nearby Dial Farm, his family home, and another above the church door.
Still to be seen are the remains of two windmills, the Old Mill and the New Mill.
Old Mill, which had its sails removed in 1952, was the last five-sailed mill in the district.
The older houses and the village church are of local red brick.
Most of the original dwellings were built or rebuilt under the aegis of the Everingham estate, owned by the Constables who married into the Norfolk family.
They are solid foursquare houses with solid names like Cross Farm, Green Farm, Manor Farm, Rose Farm and Seaton Old Hall, as well as Old and New Mills.
They are well spread out down the long narrow winding village, built originally along the edge of marshland, hence the ‘Sea-ton’.
The flat open spaces also explain the presence of the mills.
There is plenty of wind!
The church is a plain red brick building, dedicated to St Edmund, and 1989 saw the celebration of the bicentenary of the rebuilding of the church.
Many new houses are being built, infilling between the older houses.
Every spring the village looks very pretty, the aconites, snowdrops and crocuses flower in abundance in gardens and on the grass verges.
The village is well known for its flowers, and has been rewarded several times with a place in the Britain in Bloom Competition.
It is especially colourful at showtime.
The Seaton Ross Show is a two day event.
It has flourished for well over 100 years and is always held on the first weekend in July.
It began life as a village feast and is now an agricultural and country sports show attracting entries from all over the North of England.
The village has bought its own playing field and children's play equipment.
Various events and an annual Family Fun Day in August help the finances.
The village hall is used as a venue for all village meetings and activities.
It was formerly the village school, sadly closed in 1961.
Since then village children have gone by bus to the primary school in neighbouring Melbourne.
Carollers, originally from the church, have sung around the village every Christmas for very many years, and the WI is keeping the tradition alive.
There is even Seaton Ross's own special carol Welcome Christmas .
Seaton Ross is a thriving, growing village.
Council workmen have had to tidy footpaths and repair roads and curbs, partly in response to the number of heavy lorries passing through.
There are at least seven haulage firms or drivers operating from the village.
There is also a builder, a repairer of aircraft parts and a small industrial area on part of the old wartime airfield, with a seed merchant's, the maker of agribuggies, an explosives firm, another haulier, and a repairs garage.
The village boasts a general store, a butcher's shop, a community post office and two public houses.
One of these, the Blacksmith s Arms, is familiarly known as the Bombers, from its wartime associations with Melbourne airfield, built partly on Seaton Ross Common.
The pub has a bar commemorating No 10 Squadron, which was based at the aerodrome.
Outside the Bombers is a seat funded partly by the No 10 Squadron Association in appreciation of the villagers' support during the war.
There is also a permanent memorial to the fliers, erected in 1986 by the Association and the Seaton Ross and  Melbourne Parish Councils.
The number of farmers is decreasing, 16 at the last count, but agriculture is still the dominant industry in this corner of East Yorkshire.
Sewerby
The village of Sewerby is situated between the popular holiday resort of Bridlington and Flamborough Head, a massive outcrop of chalk cliffs which juts into the North Sea and protects Bridlington Bay from the northern winds.
The Danes gave Sewerby its name, which has been spelt in many different ways — Sywardby, Sewardby and Suerby — but its history goes back much further.
Iron Age man built a massive earthwork here, now known as Danes Dyke, and the early settlers also found a ready supply of flints in the chalk cliffs from which they made many of their primitive tools.
The Romans and Danes had settlements here too and the village became permanent in Norman times when William the Conqueror's brother Robert, Count of Mortain, built a manor house.
Later the de Sewardby family, who took their name from the village, owned the estate.
John Greame built Sewerby Hall on the site of the old manor house in 1715 and the property was gradually extended over the years, being completed by the adding of the conservatory in Victorian times.
The threat of invasion too continued into more modern times, for the occupants of the Hall fled to York in great panic in 1779 when the battle of Flamborough Head took place and the Americans under John Paul Jones won a decisive victory.
Danes Dyke farm, which was originally part of the Sewerby estate, found its place in literary history as Anerley Farm in R. D. Blackmore's romantic novel Mary Anerley .
This tale of smugglers, murder and romance was set on this piece of coast and many of the places and people from the book have been commemorated in the names of streets and new houses built in the area.
Being close to Bridlington, Sewerby has lost some of its village atmosphere but life still revolves round the church and, of course, the Hall which is now a museum visited by thousands of people every year.
The grounds of the Hall are very attractive with mature trees, colourful gardens and quiet areas for those who simply wish to sit and rest.
There is a cricket pitch in a village green setting and small zoo for the children.
Not far away is a miniature village; a ‘Noddy’ train takes visitors back to the outskirts of Bridlington.
Sewerby Hall museum has a fine collection of Anglo-Saxon jewellery, clothing, pottery and weapons excavated from the burial site at nearby Home Farm which was also part of the estate, but the most interesting exhibits in the museum are to be found in the Amy Johnson collection.
Amy Johnson was a Hull girl who found fame as a pilot in the early days of aviation.
After going to Sheffield University she worked in a London store and trained to be a pilot in her spare time.
In 1930 she set off on her first solo long distance flight and broke the record from England to Australia.
The difficulties were considerable for aircraft were still primitive with open cockpits, and airfields were very few and far between.
She set many long distance records over the next few years, culminating in the England to Capetown and return record in 1936 in the Percival New Gull.
There are many mementoes of her life in the collection — everywhere she went she was feted and given souvenirs of her visits to distant parts of the world.
Many of these souvenirs are in the museum.
When the Second World War started she joined the Air Transport Auxiliary and spent her time ferrying new aircraft from the factories to their airforce bases.
In 1941 the aircraft she was flying disappeared without trace, crashing in the sea near to the Thames estuary and neither she nor her aeroplane were ever found.
Flamborough Head was defined as a ‘Heritage Coast’ by the Countryside Commission in 1979 and in 1982 the Flamborough Headland Heritage Coast Project was launched to promote and encourage interest in the area.
The twelve mile coastline has magnificent scenery and a wealth of bird life, wild flowers, marine life and features of geological and historical interest.
The project employs a full-time warden and has support from voluntary helpers.
An MSC workforce carries out essential maintenance work and provides guides and information points.
Shiptonthorpe
The village of Shiptonthorpe lies a short distance west of Market Weighton on the main York to Hull road Until the year 1876 it was known as Shipton, it then amalgamated with Thorpe Le Street.
Thorpe was used in the sense of ‘a secondary settlement’ or ‘outlying farm’.
For centuries agriculture was the main industry together with self-employed small businesses giving support, blacksmiths, cobblers, tailors, and village stores.
A village of some attractive properties, Town Street alone contains four Grade II listed buildings.
A charming white house, originally thatched, but now with a red, pantiled roof, is at least 400 years old, and said to contain some fine old beams.
The church is 12th century, and until 1876 was a chapelry under Market Weighton.
It has a narrow Norman tower, the battlements of which were added at a later date.
A fine south doorway has some strange looking beak heads in the richly moulded arch.
Of particular interest and speculation is a carving over the archway of the modern porch, a small, quaint, skirted figure, one hand clasping a crook, the other raised as though in blessing.
It is believed to have been carved some eight centuries ago.
Points of interest inside the church are the finely carved pulpit, the stained glass windows, the ancient corbel heads, and the carving of two creatures in the jaws of a monster.
There are two gates to the church, a lychgate from the main road side, the other on Town Street.
These are referred to by some of the local people as the ‘funeral gate’ and the ‘wedding gate’, respectively.
In contrast to the ancient church, the small Methodist chapel fairly close by in Town Street, is modern.
It was built in the late 1960s.
It is of interest that the altar table was made by the minister of the time.
In times past, Shiptonthorpe has not been lacking in interesting characters.
Legend has it that Mother Shipton of Knaresborough, 1488–1561, whose real name was Ursula Sonthell, lived in Shiptonthorpe during some period in her life.
It is also recorded that in the early 18th century ‘Edwin Calvert, gentleman, apparently died  of alcohol poisoning at the age of 17’.
It is said that his height at the time of his death was only 39 inches.
The village school, built in 1870, is now closed and used for the village hall.
The children now attend schools in Market Weighton.
With machinery being used more and more on the farms, the village has seen the number of people employed on the land drastically fall, and is now one of many with commuters travelling further afield to their place of employment.
The population has remained between 300 to 400, as the village has never been designated for large residential development.
Sigglesthorne
Sigglesthorne is in Holderness, about three miles inland from the coastal town of Hornsea, and ten miles east-north-east of Beverley — the county town of the former East Riding of Yorkshire.
The name is believed to be derived from a personal name Sighel or Signup, and the second part from the thorn bushes which grew in abundance at the time, and dates possibly from the 7th century.
The first written evidence of its existence as Siglestorne was in the Domesday Book, although recent archaeological excavations on Spring Field revealed the existence of a previous settlement which dated back to Roman times or earlier.
Sigglesthorne has a twin village — Seaton — which is about a mile distant.
The Methodist chapel, the inn and the post office are at Seaton, whilst Sigglesthorne has St Laurence's church and the school.
There was an ale house on the outskirts of the village kept by John Skaling — this is now a dwelling house, with a renovation plaque dated 1818; it is known as Skaling House.
The present church of St Laurence dates from the late 12th century although the tower is probably of 15th century addition, being built from ashlar and cobble and various types of old bricks.
There are three bells in the tower — age unknown — but they were mentioned in the churchwarden's accounts in the 17th century.
At the rear of the church was an old girls school erected in 1818  by a former rector, Archdeacon William Henry Edward Bentinck.
This has fallen into disuse, having been used as a military hospital and to sleep troops in transit in the First World War, a Sunday school, a library, and up until five years ago a store for the church gardening equipment.
With the arrival, in 1984, of the present rector, Canon Gerald Pearce, who set about its renovation with the aid of the YTS and other helpers, it is now a useful little hall for church meetings, play groups etc.
Archdeacon Bentinck also provided the present school and schoolhouse.
Sigglesthorne Hall has housed most of the well-known members of the community.
The Bethells bought the house in 1890.
They were Deputy Lieutenants, High Sheriffs and joint lords of the manor.
They provided seats around three old elm trees, which were named Bass, Alto and Tenor.
The trees stood at intervals down the Main Street and provided a meeting place for the villagers and presumably a resting place whilst they journeyed to Lowry Field at the bottom of the village, which had the communal St Laurence Well and provided water when all the house and farm wells were dry.
Tenor tree was only felled in the last ten years — and the stump can still be seen planted with pansies.
Sir William Wright followed the Bethells; he was Chairman of the Hull Dock Company and has one of the docks named after him.
In 1920 David Christian Smith, head of Horsley Smith Timber Merchants, lived there.
The present owner is John Townend, a Hull wine merchant, who is presently the Conservative Member of Parliament for the Bridlington constituency.
There are very few new buildings so the village is largely unspoiled.
Skelton
The village of Skelton lies on the east bank of the river Ouse, near Goole, and has a population of just over 100 people.
The Romans were early settlers here, and the village was thriving during the survey for the Domesday Book.
In 1379, when Richard II levied poll tax to pay for his wars with the French, Skelton was recorded as having 137 people over the age of 15 years.
One mile to the south of the village lies Sand Hall, a large brick building erected in 1774.
It was once a hunting lodge of the Kings of England.
The estate belongs to the Schofield family.
The late Mrs Schofield was a past President of Skelton W.I. and she allowed the grounds to be used for various events.
Until the 1950s the village had a chapel, a school, two shops and a public house.
At the present time there is only the public house left.
The children travel by school bus to Howden, and social events are held in the old school.
It is no longer a farming community.
People travel outside the village to work, so turning it into a dormitory village.
Skerne
Skerne is mentioned in the Domesday Book as a small village and seems to have changed little ever since!
It was a fairly important village, the church having possible connections with Meaux Abbey.
Certainly the Abbey were known to be large landowners in the area.
The Norman church was much larger than its present day form, having a north transept of which the arches leading to it can still be seen.
The entrance porch on the south side and the bell tower were probably 15th century additions, and it is obvious from the stone benches in the porch that as well as church, civil business was also conducted there!
The church seems to be slightly set away from the village, and is very elusive as you drive through, being only reached either through a farmyard or down a lane off the road to Wansford.
In more recent times the village was part of Lord Burlington's estate at Londesborough, and was eventually sold off at the beginning of this century.
At that time it was a thriving community with a blacksmith's shop, bakery, joiner and tailor's, to name a few.
The blacksmith's shop can still be seen near the bus stop but the bakery is now Southlands and the tailor's Holly Bank.
The joiner's buildings are still used as stables.
There is still  Londesborough Lodge on the road to Driffield where the ‘gentry’ used to stay whilst on shooting expeditions.
Further along the village another house used to be the ‘cookhouse’ and game room for them — the meals must have been cold by the time they arrived at the table of Londesborough Lodge!
The school was built in 1877 and is now the village hall.
Local inhabitants recall that thistles used to be placed down the outside school toilets before the unsuspecting used them!
The local meeting place for the young people ‘out of school’ was at one Mrs Ances's, whose house is now part of Lilleygarth Farm.
She was known to regularly have to cook Sunday lunch with all the village youths lounging around her kitchen — times do not change.
The last shop, the post office stores, closed about seven years ago — even that was once a chapel no longer in use, but there is still the pub, the Eagle.
This hostelry has a county-wide following and is one of the few pubs in England that still has no bar and serves its wonderful beer straight from the barrels in the cellar.
Skerne is now expanding with new houses, as are a lot of rural communities, but it still retains the farming background with familiar names still resident, Dixon and Bean to name but two.
There are still old rural traditions retained and newer ones introduced, like auctioning produce from the church harvest at the pub with a small prayer whilst drinking your beer, or taking a stroll through the churchyard on a summer evening to the lane beyond.
Skidby
The village of Skidby is situated to the west of the A164 (the road linking the Humber Bridge to Beverley) about five miles south of Beverley.
The parish of Skidby includes the hamlets of Eppleworth and Raywell.
The village has a long history.
It is believed to be of Danish origin founded about AD 890 when Danish raiders began to settle in the area.
In the Domesday Book the village is recorded as  Schitebi, a berewick or manor cultivated by the monks or canons of Beverley.
At the Dissolution of the Monasteries, Henry VIII gave the manor to Trinity College, Cambridge.
For a period of the late 16th century it appears to have come into the possession of the Earls of Leicester but eventually came back into the full possession of Trinity College, which remained lord of the manor until quite recent times.
Little physical evidence of the village's long history remains.
The parish church of St Michael dates back to the 13th century.
The present porch was added in 1777 and the small tower in 1827.
It is a charming building and is listed as a building of Architectural or Historic Interest.
Another listed building is the fine windmill which stands on the hill above the village and makes an outstanding local landmark.
The mill was built in 1821 and is one of the few surviving working tower mills in the country.
It is also considered by many to be the best surviving example of a tower mill.
The mill is now owned and maintained by Beverley Borough Council and is open to the public at certain times of the year.
On occasion it is put into operation producing stone-ground flour for sale to visitors.
The mill buildings house a museum of old implements and materials associated with corn production and milling.
Other protected buildings in the parish are Braffords Hall on Eppleworth Road, Raywell House, West Cottage at Grange Farm, Eppleworth and 44 Main Street.
The present Methodist chapel was built in 1902, the former chapel now being part of the village hall.
The population of about 1,250 is served by two shops and a well appointed inn.
There is a Church of England primary school in the village and many flourishing social and community organisations.
Among these are a Women's Institute, a village hall and institute and a Darby and Joan Club as well as Scouts, Guides, youth clubs and football clubs for the younger members of the community.
The parish council has recently provided a playing field which, in addition to cricket and football pitches, is being provided with children's play equipment, a pavilion and club room.
Skipsea
The village of Skipsea lies close to the North Sea, which gnaws voraciously on winter nights at its cliffs of boulder clay.
It is flanked to the north, west and south by the villages of Ulrome, Beeford and Atwick, which nestle under the wide open skies and clean air of this piece of East Yorkshire.
Travel the B1249 however, and even in the height of summer, the whole scene can be transformed by the mist which rolls in from the sea, shrouding the landscape in mystery.
Travel back into those mists of time and you will meet many who have gone before and who also may have experienced these sudden sea frets, for that is what these mists are.
Peer back to the time of William the Conqueror who gave the Isle of Holderness to a knight ‘well tried in feats of arms’, Drogo de Bevere.
Drogo built his castle high upon the mound at Skipsea Brough surrounded by ditches and earthworks.
Drogo s wife was a relative of the king himself yet, in an evil hour', Drogo killed her.
Could she be the ‘White Lady’ who is said to haunt the district?
No one knows for sure.
Nor do they know why for many years, almost to this day, footprints were to be found in a field near to the earthworks of the castle where a famous duel was said to have been fought between two brothers during the Civil War and where no seed would grow.
Now they no longer remain except in the memories of people native to this village.
The third mystery concerns another ghost known as ‘Old Moll’ who at times walks around the churchyard, the legend being connected with a horse which threw its rider when it reared at the sight of something supernatural coming down the hill at Skipsea Brough.
Take care then in the mist!
What of Skipsea now?
In daylight the mound is still to be seen and is worth the climb for views of the sea, the plain of Holderness, and the village itself with the church standing proudly at the west end of the village.
The church is dedicated to All Saints and is an ancient building of stone.
One chapel still remains, and the village is well served  with a modern school, a public house, the Board inn, a post office/ grocer's, hairdresser's, grocery shop/cafe, pet shop and craft shops.
There is also a fish and chip shop, betting shop and a selling centre.
Many of the older houses and walls are built of cobbles from the sea shore, and there is a fair amount of new building to accommodate young people and those who wish to retire here.
Farming thrives as it has done down the years and now with the swallows come the caravans to the clifftop with people in search of sea, sand and serenity.
For a time the villagers must share their breezes, shops and sunshine with the leisure seekers.
Harmony prevails, and friendships are made.
One thread which binds the years and the community together is the WI, 1990 saw its diamond jubilee.
To celebrate their 50 years a commemorative wooden seat was given to the village.
The oldest member, Miss Doris Statters, at 83 years old can conjure up many colourful happenings from her years in the village.
Picture then the annual visit through the village of the ‘Plough Lads’— local lads who appeared with blackened faces.
The travelling bear with its master on their journey through the local villages.
The Temperance Society meeting on the village green in the hope of turning the local ungodly into Christians and freeing them from the ‘demon drink’.
The annual fair on the green with swings, roundabouts, coconut shy and the brandy snap stall.
The circus held on the field near the old school.
The annual feast when the ‘men only’ members wearing blue sashes and white gloves marched with a band to the church for a service followed by a dull dinner in the Board inn clubroom, then in the afternoon there were sports for the whole village.
A day when nearly every home in the village was open house to anyone for a cup of tea and something to eat.
In later years the villagers have celebrated Queen Elizabeth's Silver Jubilee, and the wedding of Prince Charles.
What will future travellers remember as they look back through the mist of time?
Who knows?
But, Skipsea hopefully will be as now, a green and pleasant land.
Skirlaugh
Skirlaugh was mentioned in the Domesday Book in 1086 when it was known as Schireslair or Schylake; ‘scyre’— to divide or cut, ‘lake’— a dyke or sewer.
As North and South Skirlaugh were divided by the Lamworth stream, it was well named.
The population of South Skirlaugh in 1891 was 261 and in the North 289, including the officers and inmates of the workhouse.
It is nine miles from Hull and Beverley, 20 miles south of Bridlington and seven miles from Hornsea.
The railway station, built in 1876, was actually in Ellerby one and a half miles away.
It had a station house and station master.
It was closed and pulled down around 1965.
In the late 19th century businesses were varied — tailor and insurance agent, saddler and parish clerk, carrier, shoemaker, wheelwright, pig jobber, taxidermist, doctor, grocer, miller, blacksmith, bricklayer, butcher, cattle dealer, five farms, market garden and three public houses.
The lord of the manor for South Skirlaugh was Sir F. A. Clifford Constable and for the North it was William Bethell.
Skirlaugh church (St Augustine's), built in 1401–1405 by Walter Skirlaw (then Bishop of Durham), is one of the finest examples of early Perpendicular architecture in the county of York.
The register dates from 1719.
Walter Skirlaw was born sometime during the middle of the 14th century, the son of a basket maker — his coat of arms had an interwoven pattern (by 1656 the windows painted and set with his coat of arms were nearly gone).
The interior of Skirlaugh church was thoroughly repaired between 1813–19 and it was at this time that a screen, fine pulpit, pews and a wainscot gallery were finally removed.
In 1967 repairs were carried out, namely rewiring, new roof and ceiling, some windows replaced and belfry woodwork repaired.
The part of the churchyard which was closed in 1883 has been levelled and re-seeded with grass and is now able to be mown and kept generally tidy.
More repairs have been carried out over the years — the most  recent and probably most rewarding is the cleaning, repointing and replacing of stonework — all done by one of the parishioners.
The vicarage was a gift of the Archbishop of York and was built 1869/70.
William Wilberforce and Marmaduke Langdale were patrons of the church and set up the Langdale Charity.
They gave £20 annually for the maintenance of the church and £100 annually for grants towards the marriages of peasants and servants.
The charity is still in force today, but is used for grants for students and apprentices for books and any equipment they may need to help them in their careers.
The Methodist chapel was built in 1892 at a cost of £800.
It had a pipe organ installed in 1924 which cost £400.
The chapel has some fine coloured glass windows.
It has now been sold and is a private dwelling and pottery workshop.
The Methodists have joined St Augustine's as a shared church for worship.
Skirlaugh church school was built in 1861 at a cost of £1,000 and was originally supported by the Langdale Charity.
It was in use until 1968 when a new school was built.
This held 200 pupils, but had to be extended in 1980 to hold 250.
A nursery unit was built in 1977 and has two teachers.
The old school has been converted into the village hall and is in regular use.
Millhouse Cottage, built in 1640, was one of the oldest buildings, adjoined by a windmill built in 1250.
This windmill was the last of the Dutch barn type left in England and was in use until 1930, but had to be pulled down in 1945 as it was in danger of collapse.
The Poor Amendment Act of 1834 grouped parishes together into Poor Law Unions.
Skirlaugh was given a workhouse, built in 1838, housing 132 inmates drawn from 66,898 acres of Holderness parishes.
It remained a workhouse until 1916, when it was used as billets for the army.
It was later taken over by Holderness RDC and used as offices.
It is still used as offices for Holderness Borough Council.
There are some old buildings left apart from the ones mentioned, however most of the existing buildings are post-war.
There are three housing developments and a housing estate.
The old post office, doctor's surgery, saddler's and butcher's were demolished  village store, post office, old established builder's, old established joiner and builder, agricultural machinery firm, pottery and reading room, and many people from the village are employed in these businesses.
There are also thriving rugby, cricket and football teams, a playing field (also equipped with swings, slide, etc) and a pavilion.
Skirpenbeck
Secluded from the old Roman road running eastward from Stamford Bridge, Skirpenbeck is a small, quiet village with some charming Properties, several of which are listed buildings.
In the 18th century — and perhaps earlier — Skirpenbeck had a corn mill which served the village.
It is said that there are surviving accounts of repair work done to the mill both in 1744–5 and 1751–3.
It seems the brick and tile building consisted of two storeys and a loft, and that the wheel was fed from a dam which is now dry.
There is mention of a miller as late as 1937, and evidence that the mill was in use for several years after that date.
The village church, tucked away at the very end of a winding leafy lane, is dedicated to St Mary.
From the outside, the most striking aspect of the building is the tall, slender tower, constructed entirely of brick in contrast to the stone of the rest of the structure.
Inside, the church has cream-washed walls, a brick floor and green painted pews.
A list of past rectors of the parish goes back to the year 1274.
the church's Norman story is illustrated by the doorway, the simple arch connecting nave and chancel, and the massive tub font.
A carved chair close by the altar, a small ancient-looking chest, and an ornately-carved table which looks for all the world like a chest on legs, may well be Jacobean.
A wall monument of 1636 is detailed and of much interest.
It depicts Richard Paget, in court dress, complete with ruff, and his wife — her hair arranged in immaculate tight curls, her wrists and fingers adorned with bracelets and rings respectively.
Their two  children are beside their parents, and all four appear to be looking up into Heaven.
Since two of the past rectors bore the name Paget, it seems likely that there were family connections between them and Richard.
Quiet, secluded places often attract ghost stories.
Skirpenbeck is no exception.
A child seen at the window of a house where no child then resided, for instance, and a ‘strange feeling’ felt about a particular area of the village.
Sledmere
Sledmere is a farming estate village on the top of the Yorkshire Wolds, twelve miles from Malton to the north, and eight miles from Driffield to the south.
Its country folk are very much at one with the land.
There used to be two small hamlets just outside but part of the village, known as Mill Cottages and Pry Cottages.
They both made a contribution to the village and the school, but sadly of late these have been demolished, so shrinking village life.
The population is diminishing due to the advancement of the machine on the farm, so very few men are needed on the land, and many of the young folk have to go elsewhere to find work.
The village is in a beautiful situation, and attracts great numbers of visitors and sightseers during the summer when Sledmere House and grounds are open.
The house was begun in 1751, a magnificent mansion set in 2,000 acres of parkland and gardens landscaped by Capability Brown.
In the grounds the village church of St Mary is one of the most attractive in East Yorkshire with a wealth of detail in the Gothic Revival style.
A Roman Catholic chapel adjoins the house, and the village has a Methodist chapel.
Many interesting architectural features are to be observed in the village, including the stables and carriage house, built at the end of the 18th century just after the house.
Triton Cottage, dating from around 1700, is the earliest house remaining in the village.
The Triton inn was formerly a coaching inn, and is still providing  meals and accommodation.
The village post office is in one of the estate houses designed by John Birch in Queen Anne style, and has a George IV post box incorporated in the left-hand window.
He also designed the school and schoolmaster's house.
The vicarage is the only house not owned by the estate.
There is still the village well, now covered, with a monument above it to the memory of Sir Christopher Sykes, second baronet, in 1840.
In the village are two remarkable monuments.
The first on the village green is in the style of an Eleanor Cross, and dedicated to men from the estate who died during the First World War.
The second is a structure, unique in its figures and inscription, in memory of the Waggoners' Reserve, a volunteer corps of 1,000 local farmworkers, paid only £1 a year, who provided horse-drawn transport carrying vital supplies to the trenches in Europe during the First World War.
There is a third monument on the outskirts of the village, a 120 ft tall Gothic spire, paid for by subscription and dedicated to Sir Tatton Sykes, fourth baronet, who died in 1863, much loved and respected by all his villagers.
The village cottages have been modernised, with lock-up garages and car parking.
There is a sports field second to none, a good village hall with stage, dressing rooms and billiard room, and above all a friendly atmosphere.
Everyone is the same in an estate village, and here estate workers are much in evidence.
There is friendly gossip and fun in conversation, and above all a sense of caring and looking after each other.
Snaith
Snaith is a busy thriving village and lies between Selby, Goole and Doncaster.
To ‘off-comed 'uns’ it is not even a large village, with only 2,080 inhabitants, but to the native it is a town because it has held a market charter since 1223 and although no market has been held for many years, the charter was read once a year in the market place until 1939.
Because the market has lapsed, the Court  of Pie-Powder, which allowed the market to right any wronged there, has also lapsed.
The name Snaith is thought to mean ‘enclosed by water’ and the area is known locally as the Three Rivers area.
The river Aire, which is tidal, runs through the centre of the town and in medieval
times Snaith was a busy port with a harbour and ferry across the river to Selby, one of the few Aire crossings in the area.
The actual founding of the town is obscure, but it was well established as part of the Royal hunting lodge before 1066 and so has no separate entry in the Domesday Book, since Snaith was a royal manor held by the King ‘for the support of his table’, and therefore already documented.
It is, however, mentioned three times as having jurisdiction over the manors of Birkin, Whitley and Hensall.
Today it is still a convenient centre, being close to the M1, M18, M180 and the A1 and A19, and within 20 miles of York, Leeds and Doncaster.
There is little industry except the old dog mill which now makes plastic chairs and the new brewery which brews real ale, but being surrounded by the power stations of Drax, Eggborough, Ferrybridge and Thorpe Marsh, it makes a good base for power station workers, who can move for promotion without uprooting their families.
There is a new primary school and a modern comprehensive school in the village.
There is also work at the modern pit at Kellingley or the new Snaith pit.
In its hey-day Snaith had twelve pubs and four tailors, and although there is no tailor and the pubs are reduced to five, it is still a busy little shopping centre.
There are no big stores but ‘one of everything’ and the old pattern of Snaith, the centre serving about ten villages, has returned.
Parking is a problem but the parish council are working to get a proper car park to give off-street parking.
The railway runs to Leeds and to Hull, and a bus from Leeds to Goole comes through Snaith giving limited access on public transport.
In 1777, in response to a public petition, Thomas Stapleton of Carlton Towers (the family home of the present Duke of Norfolk), built a bridge to encourage the flax trade and to ease the difficulty of transporting bodies from Carlton by ferry to be buried in Snaith churchyard.
With the advent of motor traffic the New Bridge was  built in 1928.
During the Second world War the centre span of the old swing bridge was removed by the Royal Engineers so that they could practise making Bailey bridges against the tide.
Snaith was on the eastern fringe of the West Riding of Yorkshire but since the 1974 boundary reorganisation, it is on the western fringe of Britain's newest county, North Humberside.
Priory Church of St Lawrence, Snaith
The priory church of St Lawrence at Snaith is a Saxon foundation, though very little of the Saxon church remains.
The present building dates from 1086 and the report of its state in 1275 lists among its treasures four tropers (the Anglo-Saxon service book) and several part tropers, so it was a rich church.
There is a rood-loft stair enclosed in a pillar but the rood screen where the priest stood to preach on Good Friday, or to make special announcements, has been removed.
In the Stapleton chapel is a memorial carving of Lady Elizabeth Stapleton, whose husband was the General of HM Horse at the battle of Edgehill in 1642.
In the Dawnay chapel on the south side is a statue of Viscount Downe made by Chantry and an Easter sepulchre.
The east window of this  chapel contains the only remaining fragments of 14th century glass.
Near the chancel arch is a niche dedicated to St Sitha — her only claim to fame, according to local tradition, is that she was martyred, her head was cut off ‘and she picked it up and ran three miles to the nearby (sic!) church to warn the other Christians.’
Not surprisingly the only other shrine to her is in Bradford Cathedral.
Some say Sitha is a corruption of  Etheldreds , sister to the Abbess Hilda of Whitby, but this seems to be wishful thinking.
Certainly Snaith Priory was a staging post for pilgrims travelling from Lincoln to York, as recorded on the altar kneelers.
Snaith was a Peculiar, ie it had its own ecclesiastical court and in many ways it was exempt from the jurisdiction of the Bishop, which may explain the fact that the Bishop's inspectors came to interview the brothers at Snaith for reported ‘indiscretions’ and were unable to carry out their inspection because the brothers had summoned the ferry to the Snaith bank so they could not cross the river!
At the back of the church is the Consistory court, part of the church building but not consecrated and now housing the creche.
It was used to try ecclesiastical matters and to settle disputed wills and land settlements.
Because it was a Peculiar, the priory church had four wardens — one of their duties was to enforce the wearing of woolly hats on Sundays: failure to comply brought a fine of fourpence.
Adjoining the churchyard is the Buttermarket, but only in name now.
The butter booths and the fire station have been removed but the local branch of the Heritage Society has restored the old town lock-up, known as the penny cells.
Men who were drunk at market were put in these cells till sober, and then had to pay a penny to get out.
There were two tiny windows, each with one bar across originally, but friends of the prisoners delayed the sobering up process by passing jugs of ale through the windows, so two bars were fitted.
Nothing daunted, the bearers of comfort brought a flagon of ale and a long clay pipe.
They put the bowl in the ale and the stem through between the bars — perhaps Snaith invented drinking straws.
Exhibitions are held there from time to time and there is an art and craft gallery in the old vicarage opposite the church.
The population of Snaith has doubled in the past 25 years but it is still small enough to ‘know everybody’; ask for people by name, rather than by their address!
There is much modern housing and many restored buildings.
Bed and breakfast is readily available and there is much to see in the area.
South Cave
South Cave was first and foremost an agricultural settlement.
Its name came from Jordan De Cave who owned a large amount of land here many years ago.
South Cave is situated twelve miles west of Hull.
Although classed as a village it has a town hall in the market place.
By the late 18th century it was a thriving corn market, which resulted in the town hall being built in 1796.
It is a very interesting two-storeyed building with an open arcade facing the street.
It was first known as the market cross and part of it was a boys school.
In bygone days all proclamations were made on the market cross steps, and the hiring of labour was carried out there too.
The corn trade in the village gradually died out due to the arrival of the railways in the 1840s.
This new form of transport gave easier access to larger markets and towns.
Opposite the town hall is ‘the Copper Shop’, an antiques shop.
The name originated from the days when this house belonged to the local policeman.
At the back of the house was a lock-up gaol and if any one caused any trouble they were locked up for the night, then transported the next morning by the local ‘taxi’, which was a horse and cart, to the police station at Brough to be tried.
The Market Place has a very interesting history.
In 1291 King Edward I granted a charter which gave the villagers the right to hold a market every Monday, and a fair every year on Trinity Monday and Tuesday.
As a local market centre there was a large variety of trades and crafts.
In the 18th century there was a pedlar, furrier, weaver, millwright, maltster, and an apothecary.
One of the 18th century bylaws was ‘that no person corrupt the town beck by letting into it stinking or hurtful water or washing  unwholesome things in the same.’
The beck trickles into the main street in the Market Place.
Also the parish stocks stood in the Market Place.
In 1664 Thomas Burton was fined the sum of one shilling for letting his wife wash puddings in the town beck.
Not even the lord of the manor was exempt, L. U. Boldere Esq was fined one shilling for his beck being ‘undressed’.
Cave Castle
At one time there were nine ins in the village, now there are two.
The Fox and Coney was built in 1739.
When it was first recorded it was known as the Fox, named by its first owner who was a furrier.
The Bear inn, also 18th century, got its name from the crest of the Barnard family.
South Cave is divided into two distinct parts, separated since the 18th century by the grounds of the Barnard family house, now known as Cave Castle Golf Hotel.
A stone over the rear door bears the initials of Sir Thomas Danby, dated 1586.
It is said that tunnels once used by escapers from the castle still exist beneath the grounds.
The grounds were laid out in 1787.
The castle was built in the late 18th century then extensively restored and altered in  1872–1875.
It was reduced in size and modernised after its sale in 1937.
The castle was taken over by the Hull Brewery Company in 1961.
At one time it was a Country club, now it is an hotel and a very popular venue for wedding receptions and other festive occasions.
The castle ponds attract various species of ducks and geese, waterhens and coots.
A large amount of the surrounding land has recently been made into a golf course.
Wooded areas are being planted and new ponds created in the hope of attracting more wildlife to the area.
There are three churches in the village including All Saints, parts of which date back to the 15th century.
A large Family Centre being built next to the church will cater for various activities.
Many years ago opposite the church was the Bay Horse inn.
This inn was combined with a blacksmith's shop.
The blacksmith was a lady by the name of Rachael Levitt.
The United reformed church was founded in 1662 and rebuilt in 1873.
The Primitive Methodist chapel was built in 1837 and then rebuilt on the same site in 1877.
Near the chapel stands the church institute, a Gothic-style building built in 1844.
Years ago it housed all the village activities including lantern slides, then moving pictures when they came into being.
Now it is used by the local playgroup and various other events take place there too.
South Cave school was opened in 1967, further extensions including a sports hall were completed in 1978.
This hall caters for many sporting activities and social events.
The area round the school houses the library, tennis courts, a children's play area, and a bowling green.
At one time South Cave had a water mill, and a windmill.
The windmill was sited near the school, but it had disappeared by the second half of the 18th century.
The water mill was sited at Mill beck and it continued in use until the 1860s.
Like many other rural areas, South Cave is rapidly losing many acres of its lovely open spaces due to expansion, nevertheless it is still a very pleasant village to live in.
South Cave has 18th century houses, an ancient castle and churches, but amongst all this antiquity it is very much alive.
Its inhabitants have the future of the village very much at heart as well as the past.
Sproatley
The name Sproatley originated from two words and means a clearing in a forest.
A glacier stone in the churchyard is also mentioned in the Domesday Book and is believed to have come down during the Ice Age.
With Holderness being very flat land it was often swampy and wet, so people originally tended to build their homes somewhere on a hill.
Sproatley is between 74 and 85.7 ft above sea level, so was an ideal site.
The church stands on the highest point in the village.
On the north-west corner of the tower is an ordnance survey mark (approximately level with the key-hole) which is said to indicate the height of the tower of Holy Trinity church at Kingston-upon-Hull.
There were many wells in the area and almost all the houses had their own water pumps.
Over the years Sproatley passed into the hands of many people, until 1840 when the principal landowner was Sir Talbot Constable of Burton Constable Hall.
One of the late owners, one Mr Raines, planted about 1,000 trees and was a generous benefactor to the school.
On the 5th January 1733, Mrs Bridget Briggs in her will left certain properties in the vicinity of Sheffield, two thirds of the rent of which were to build a schoolhouse and school to educate ten poor boys and ten poor girls of Sproatley; other children were to be educated there, but to pay for their instruction.
Any surplus monies could be used to put the boys to an apprenticeship, or the girls into service.
Sometimes clothing was provided also for them to be suitably clad to take up their work.
About 1868 a new school was built but this has now been replaced by a modern and forward thinking school for five to eleven year olds.
The charity still continues but as well as maintaining and providing extras for the school, grants are given for further education or books.
The church in AD 837 was named St Swithin's after the Bishop of Winchester.
The old Norman church was taken down in 1819 and another built on the site.
In 1885 this church was taken down to the window sills and rebuilt.
There are two bells hung from a  stout beam, thought to be from the old church, and eight tubular bells given in 1888.
Hymn tunes were played on these to call people to worship; unfortunately these can no longer be used due to the weak state of the tower.
The organ is perhaps the main feature of the building.
It was built by Father Smith and brought from Temple Newsam, Leeds.
It is unique in that the keys are black, and black and white striped, and thought to be the only one still in use in the country.
The approach to the church is through a lychgate erected in 1889 to commemorate the long and successful reign of Queen Victoria.
In the churchyard stands the remains of the old village cross, also the graves of Joseph Rank and his wife (of the Rank Organisation family).
He was the great uncle of Joseph Rank, the miller.
Joseph Rank had his first mill in Sproatley and the house where he lived is still outwardly the same, but the mill foundation was removed about 20 years ago when a modern housing estate was built.
There is still a village shop with newsagency, and a post office.
The post office was started by David Pickering in 1838, two years before the penny post was introduced.
He had to walk about three miles to collect the mail and carry it back to the village, for which a charge of sixpence per missive was made.
He died in 1876 at the age of 93, and his son John took up the duties.
He also founded the Burton Constable lodge of the United Ancient Order of Druids.
After his death in 1896 his sister Edith became the sub-postmistress for 33 years.
A niece took over the post office when she married, and it was moved to the present premises.
Telegraph came to the village in 1901 and messages were sent by morse code.
The family connection was finally broken in 1974 on the retirement of the sub-postmistress, who was a great niece of the said Edith Pickering.
There are two public houses, a butcher's shop, a chapel, and a court house.
At one time there was a police inspector and a police constable at the police station.
It was complete with cells and used regularly.
Now it is used for the hearing of court cases only.
The village hall, built in 1912, is a busy and thriving place.
Land and some money was given by the family of Rev Howard-Hall, who was the rector at that time, for the erection of a building for the use of the people of Sproatley, of any denomination, for their education and recreation.
The WI hold their meetings there, as do many other organisations, and it is in use every day.
Rents are kept to a reasonable level to enable as many people as possible to benefit, and the maintenance is in the hands of a committee who hold regular fund-raising events.
Standing in front of the hall is a war memorial, which records the names of 13 men who served and/or lost their lives during the First World War.
Thankfully all men and women returned safely from the Second World War, so a sum of money was given to the hall and a brass plaque erected declaring it to be a memorial village hall.
There is a playing field with equipment for the younger members of the community, and a football and cricket pitch.
When the WI was formed in 1937, Sproatley was a village with about 100 houses and plenty of grass fields and open spaces.
There are now about 550 dwellings with a population in the region of 1,400.
Stamford Bridge
Stamford Bridge played an important part in the history of England.
In September 1066, King Harold defeated his brother Tostig, who was attempting to regain the earldom of Northumbria with the help of the King of Norway, in a fierce and bloody battle on the banks of the river Derwent.
Harold then heard of the landing of William of Normandy and had to force march a weary army to Hastings where he was defeated and William became King of England.
On a rise near the corn mill is a stone that commemorates the battle of Stamford Bridge with an inscription in English and Danish.
Up until 1878, the first Sunday after 19th September was ‘feast day’ in Stamford Bridge, commemorating ‘the battle’.
On this day boatshaped pies were made bearing the impression of the fatal spear, in memory of the Englishman in his boat who slew  the Norseman defending the bridge.
The day was called Spear Pie Feast.
These early times are commemorated in the names of some of the roads in the village: Haroldsway, Tostig Close, Danesway, Viking Road and Battleflats.
Though always an important crossing place, the village remained relatively small until the 19th century, when the population rose from 170 in 1801 to 417 in 1861.
The western half of the village over the river Derwent was the scene of the annual fair from about 1200 until the early 20th century.
Stamford Bridge, meaning a ‘stone-paved ford’ across the river Derwent, is now a conservation area and a thriving attractive village.
It is a popular stopping place for those en route to the Wolds and coast.
The river draws many visitors who delight in the beautiful scenery, the majestic old corn mill, now a restaurant, and the fierce and powerful weir.
The riverside has been landscaped and is home to many ducks and geese, a big attraction to children and adults alike, though sometimes a traffic hazard.
The closing of the railway line was regretted but the station has been made into a club and the old engine shed into a sports hall.
A room in the old station is available for meetings and classes, and the village holds many attractions for all age groups.
There is a well-used village hall, the usual sports clubs, and the school swimming pool is available for hire in the summer months.
The Church of England and Methodist church are active, with large Sunday schools and youth groups.
There is a council home for the elderly and three private homes as well.
A well-run caravan site beside the river brings holidaymakers to the village, which is well served by the shops, three public houses, two tea-rooms and two restaurants, and the best fish and chip shop in the area.
Stamford Bridge is an expanding village with much to offer, both to those living within its boundaries, or just passing through.
Sunk Island
The parish of Sunk Island lies in remote countryside east of Hull, where the great plain of South Holderness meets the north Humber foreshore.
Reminiscent of Canada, or the American mid-west, it is landscape drawn large; huge skies and wide river prospects, acre on acre of golden wheatlands dotted with ancient stone churches and large prosperous farmsteads of red brick and orange pantile.
Sunk Island itself pushes its great productive belly out into the Humber, protected from the North Sea by the encircling arm of the Spurn peninsula.
It is hard to believe that this 8,000 acre agricultural estate owned by the Crown was once a small mid-river sandbank often submerged by spring tides.
The Island's strange evocative name takes a little explaining.
In fact Sunk Island is a kind of water-logged ‘phoenix’ thrown up by the rides of the Humber, resting on the submerged remains of low-lying medieval farmlands  overflown by a series of great storms combined with exceptionally high tides that engulfed the area in 1399, the site of a number of drowned villages.
These lost lands are named on old charts as ‘Sunke Sands’ and it must have been a logical progression to name the risen sandbank ‘Sunk Sand Island’, eventually over the centuries to be shortened to today's Sunk Island.
The growth of Sunk Island is intimately linked with the Gylby family who, for almost 200 years leased it from the Crown, embanking it as it increased in size.
The Gylbys' story reads like a historical novel.
Col Anthony Gylby was the first lessee from 1668, he was Lieutenant of Hull Fort and an ardent Cavalier who died under something of a cloud accused of misappropriation of the fort's materials for use on his solitary island mansion.
Next comes grandson William Gylby, wealthy London lawyer who made great strides, increasing the size of the island to over 1,500 acres by his death in 1744, and having the dubious distinction of attempting to reduce the troublesome  rat population by having them killed, dressed and offered up to his tenants and workmen to eat.
The next lessee, for just one year, was to be Captain Lovelace Gylby, another flamboyant character credited with temporarily losing the island in a card game.
His widow Margaret held on for another 45 years, beset on all sides by warring local landowners who claimed parts of the island, as its boundaries grew ever-closer to the Holderness mainland.
When Margaret died in 1790, she bequeathed Sunk Island in the form of shares to a bewildering number of relatives, and as she died childless, here the name ‘Gylby’ dies out.
The main beneficiary became Rev John Lonsdale, whose great embankment of 1800 in effect joined ‘Sunk’ to Holderness creating a total of 4,389 acres of embanked productive farmland.
It was Rev Lonsdale's son, also John, eventually to become the Bishop of Lichfield, who relinquished the lease on the island in 1834, leaving the way open for his sub-tenants, the real Sunk Island farmers, to take up individual leases on their land.
The parish church of Holy Trinity was declared redundant in 1983 and now houses the Humber Bank Heritage Centre, that plots the island's history and places of interest, including Stone creek with its panoramic views across the busy Humber estuary, and Fisherman's channel, a wildlife sanctuary created by the South Holderness Countryside Society.
The Heritage Centre, a registered charity, plays host to small prearranged groups of visitors from June until September, and is happy to provide both a short guided tour of the island and excellent afternoon teas for the refreshment of the weary traveller in Sunk Island's village hall close by.
Today's Sunk Island is a fascinating spot unspoiled by modern development.
The farmhouses, many of them listed buildings, mostly date from 1855–7 and proudly bear on their outer walls plaques commemorating the year of their erection and the fact that their owner was Queen Victoria.
Sutton on Hull
The ancient village of Sutton in Holderness lies about three miles from the city of Kingston upon Hull.
Originally named Sudtone, or South town, it was a thriving community long before the city of Hull was in existence.
In very early times water and marshland covered much of the area.
Boats were able to sail from the river Humber into the village carrying fish and other commodities.
There are still wells in the area which were in use until recently.
A true story is told that the steeple of Hull's Holy Trinity church, is on a level with the road in Church Street, Sutton.
The church of St James, dedicated September 1349, and the daughter church of St Peter's, Wawne, played an important part in the life of the village.
The first building was a chapel of ease.
The clergy officiating at both Sutton and Wawne were drawn from the abbey at Meaux, which was close to both.
Relations between the two churches were often strained, partly because of the question of status of the various monks working in the area.
A serious controversy arose when the Wawne clergy decided that all the burials from Sutton should take place at Wawne.
This meant that the Sutton monks would lose a large part of their income, and the four mile trek carrying the coffin was arduous, especially in bad weather.
A stone which was used to rest the coffin on along the way is now in the Memorial gardens in Sutton.
Sutton people became so enraged about this, that the Pope eventually became involved.
Letters went to and fro from Wawne to Rome with no result, until eventually the Pope sent an indignant letter ordering the Wawne clergy to stop the practice or risk punishment.
This ended the controversy and at last the Sutton villagers were able to be buried in their own churchyard.
During the Middle Ages rich merchants came, and built large houses around and in Sutton, letting the land out for farming.
The village became surrounded by fields and pasture land.
During this time several charities were set up to help the poor.
Some of these are still in existence, and have resulted in flats being built for the elderly of the parish, and also housing for widows and daughters of clergymen.
Before the closing of the railway from Hull to the coastal town of Hornsea, Sutton was a station on the way.
Hornsea became a favourite resort for day and evening visits.
The track has been converted into a cycle and pedestrian walkway, and people with energy can walk the eleven miles to the coast.
In the early 1960s the Hull City Council purchased most of the farming land round the village, and it is surrounded by housing estates, one of which is Bransholme, one of the biggest in the country.
All the large houses have been pulled down, or taken over as nursing homes.
The many village shops have closed and reopened as video or betting shops, or estate agents.
There is still a post office.
Sutton has been designated a conservation area and the local committee are able to keep a check on the plans of any new building proposals.
The village atmosphere is kept alive by an annual May Day event and tree and bulb planting schemes.
Several organisations are active, and aim to keep the village character, which is still there despite the many changes, not always welcome ones, which have taken place in recent times.
Sutton upon Derwent
The village of Sutton upon Derwent is situated on the east bank of the river Derwent, which is now the county boundary.
The village lies on the B1228 and is an equal distance from York and Pocklington.
From York a bridge crosses into the village.
A bridge has been on this site from the 14th century.
Before then it was served with a ford, and a ferry when the tide was high.
Nowadays the river Derwent is non-tidal due to the flood barrier at Barmby marsh.
Also the first lockgates are at Sutton.
Originally The Ings behind the village was the natural flood basin of the river.
As the road, at this point, was frequently flooded a raised causeway or footpath was built to give access.
The old watermill was demolished a few years ago, but was active until 1960.
Across the river the remains of a salmon leap  can be seen.
When the lampreys were on the ‘run’ it was a very lucrative business for the local fishermen.
Today, two angling clubs share the fishing on the banks of the river Derwent.
There is not a public pathway along the river to the south, but if there was, the bridges built for the barge houses could be seen over the drainage dykes.
The church of St Michael and all Angels is on a ridge overlooking the river and the old water mill.
It is the fourth church to be built on the site.
Remains of the chancel are said to be of the 12th century, and the tower was rebuilt in the 15th century and has three bells.
Like many churches it is in need of restoration, but it is very pretty and well worth a visit.
In 1135, Robert de Percy is named as donor of the church, and the churchyard contains gravestones belonging to the Percy family, who originally owned the village and had Sutton Hall as a hunting lodge.
The village was much more wooded in those days.
The patronage of the living and estates passed from Robert de Percy to Whitby Abbey, then through the years to several different families, eventually being sold in 1947 to the Crown estates who are still the owners.
The manor house is a Grade II listed building and stands next to the church.
In the manor yard there was a chalybeate (impregnated with iron salts) spring called Monk's Well.
The Sutton rectory was sold and is now an hotel and restaurant.
On the corner of the road leading to Woodhouse, a hamlet within the parish, is the village hall.
Built by voluntary labour, under the direction and enthusiasm of its then rector, M. H. Pimm, it was completed in 1931.
It is a meeting room for the youth club and other sections within the community, such as the indoor bowls, and is also used as ‘the dining room’ for the local school.
There is also a tennis and badminton club.
Nearby are two public houses.
The Vincent Arms is an old building with pseudo black beams made from railway sleepers.
It is a popular meeting and eating place.
The other, Turpins Tavern, is a new building replacing the old Cross Keys, and provides accommodation, food and entertainment — especially at weekends.
The local school was established in 1824, rebuilt in 1844, added to in 1873 and enlarged in 1906.
Along the road, and opposite the  junction to Whynham lane was the Wesleyan chapel.
It was a temporary iron structure erected in 1882, and stood until 1937 within the gardens of Wheelwright House.
When it was sold it became the village hall at Bishop Wilton.
Down Whynham Lane is the village play area, in a safe place off the main road, well used and very well kept.
Nearby is the local shop/post office, a busy establishment with a very helpful owner.
Here day tickets can be bought for fishing in the river Derwent.
Opposite, unmarked, is the site of the pinfold of the village, in the garden of Blacksmith's Cottage.
The village continues for a further half mile to the turnoff for Sutton Hall, a small Georgian residence, now privately owned.
The boundary to the parish is Hagg Bridge, which spans the Pocklington Canal and Blackfoss beck.
The population of the village is around 360.
The housing has followed a linear type of development, which has made the village about one and a half miles long.
There are a few small estates, and a council estate was built in the 1950s.
At the present time some of the old Airey houses are being demolished and rebuilt.
In the past agriculture provided work for the inhabitants, but with its decline, and with modernisation, the mill, wheelwright, blacksmith and breweries have disappeared.
Small cottage industries, an hotel, the two public houses and the shop provide the only additional work to the farming industry now.
Small blocks of land and infilling have provided homes for commuters.
In spite of this the village remains a village.
It is an attractive, friendly, and appealing place in which to live.
Swanland
The village of Swanland, approximately seven miles west of the city of Kingston-upon-Hull, has since the 19th century been considered one of the most attractive areas in North Humberside, or East Yorkshire as many would prefer.
When the East coast enjoyed its mighty fishing fleets, many of the skippers had their  imposing homes built in the tranquillity of Swanland.
The village has changed somewhat now, being within easy reach of the M62 motorway and, nearby, having the added attraction of the largest single-span bridge in the world across the river Humber.
This impressive sight attracts the camera enthusiast to Swanland from where excellent photographs of the bridge can be taken.
Many of the larger houses have been demolished to make way for more modern houses and bungalows.
Agriculture was the main occupation for many years but now unhappily few farms remain, due to building development.
The centre of the village is still much as it has always been, with an attractive pond, complete with swans, surrounded by the school, chapel and public house (named appropriately the Swan and Cygnet).
It has only been there (altered from a house) since 1980 because Sir James Reckitt (of Reckitt and Colman fame) who bought Swanland manor in 1884, was a devout Quaker and would not allow a pub in the village.
It is now a popular meeting place.
Sir James Reckitt was a great benefactor though, providing money for the library, tennis courts and bowling green.
There are other organisations well supported in the village involving people of all ages, like the Wine Guild and Women's Institute.
Of the few remaining large houses, Mere House which faces the pond is possibly the oldest, thought to be Elizabethan and reputed to have been visited by the ghost of a monk.
The floors throughout the house are made of stone, including upstairs!
It is a house of character and adds beauty to the centre of the village.
Close by is the chapel, now known as Christ church (United Reformed), built in 1803 on the site of a previous one founded in 1693, then known as the Independent chapel.
Another place of worship was built in 1828 for the Methodists but as attendances dwindled in the 1970s it was decided to share with Christ church, a facility which made economic sense.
The last place of worship to be built, in 1899, and known as St Barnabas', was for the Church of England.
It does not hold such a prominent place in the village as Christ church near the pond, but nevertheless it is now too small for the congregation, so after years of  searching a place has at last been found to build a new larger church on the outskirts of the village.
The earliest place of worship would appear to have been the chantry, constructed, it is said, as early as 1332 and rumoured to have had a secret passage running to Mere House.
Sir James Reckitt did some amateur excavating when he lived at the manor and some stones, which could have formed church windows, can still be seen in the gardens of houses since built on the site.
Another interesting discovery was made in 1942 near the site of the chantry; a leaden bulla of Pope Clement III (1187–1191).
The bulla was a seal attached to Papal documents issued from the Vatican.
The oldest ‘object’ in the village stands outside the post office, which  incidentally has a date stone above its door inscribed 1721.
The ‘object’ is a lump of granite, with a plaque above stating that it was brought down on ice from Westmorland during the Ice Age 300,000 years ago.
Not so old is the village show, now held in the James Reckitt Memorial Hall every September.
It is on a much smaller scale than those held just after the Second World War when animals and livestock were included and a show ring was erected for the horse and pony events.
Very few horses are seen around the village these days but Swanland was a self-sufficient village, catering for all needs, with a blacksmith, shoemaker, tailor, wheelwright and undertaker.
The old craftsmen may have disappeared but in their place there is a bank, chemist, butcher, grocers, and many more essential services, trading in the same cottages built more than a hundred years ago, so not destroying the character and heritage of the village.
Swine
The village of Swine in Holderness is steeped in history, both ancient and modern.
The very name of this comely and quite small village which is situated to the east of Kingston upon Hull attracts attention.
When Kingston was a mere spot on the map, Swine was  a place of great importance, with a flourishing pig market.
The old cross is situated in the garden of one of the local cottages.
The ancient church of St Mary, with its beautiful east window, was at one time the parish church of Drypool.
The parish extended to Ellerby, Skirlaugh, Bilton, Burton Constable, Coniston, Thirtleby and Benninghome.
It was built in the 12th century (1150).
The church in those days was cruciform with a magnificent tower (now pulled down) in the centre.
The present church is the chancel of the original church with Norman-style pillars.
In 1154 a Cistercian nunnery existed in Swine; this was destroyed by Henry VIII when he gave orders to dissolve all monasteries.
The first listed vicar was Rev John Haitfield, dated 6th July 1323.
In more recent times Rev William Cobby was the vicar from August 1875 and died here in 1930 aged 83 years, after ministering to the parish for 55 years.
The tombs of the Hilton family, who were the lords of the manor, are dated 1393–1431 and can be seen in the church, where there is the Hilton chapel.
Until recent times cobbles ran down the main street.
There is evidence of a Roman settlement as quite a number of coins have been ploughed up relating to this period in history.
A feature of much interest is a large mound named Giants Hill, now planted with trees.
Some historians believe this to be the burial place of the Saxon king, Swaine, from whom the name of the village is reputed to have been derived.
At one time the village was owned by the Wilberforce family and during this period it was a thriving community.
There was a public house named the Black Bull, a butcher's, saddler's and a shoemaker's.
The present blacksmith's shop was built around 1840 and has a unique entrance in the shape of a horseshoe.
The village became the property of the Crown Commissioners around 1850.
The Hull and Hornsea Railway was opened around 1864 and closed in 1965.
A school was opened in 1868 and closed in 1968, after 100 years of use.
The school is now a private house.
Now sad to say all the little businesses have gone, leaving us with the beautiful church and small post office.
The post office was started in 1860; the first postmaster was Mr Robert Harker and it stayed in this family for 100 years.
The post office has a very  interesting sign in the shape of a black and white pig hanging at the entrance.
The Swine parish Council was formed in 1894 and the meetings are now held in the church vestry every four months.
Every year in August there is a Village Fayre down the main street, with a different theme each year.
This event is very well attended and all the local people run the stalls and dress in different attire to suit the theme.
The money raised at this event is put towards the running of the church and things needed for the village to keep it looking attractive.
Thorngumbald
Thorngumbald is situated on a busy main road, which is used by both industry and coast-line traffic.
It lies between the city of Hull and Withernsea and is built on the heavy clays of South Holderness.
First heard of in the Domesday Book, listed as Torne, eventually a Baron Gumald settled in the area, adding his title to the original, and thus emerged its present name.
What was a traditional farming and market garden community of some 290 population, has now developed into a large sprawling suburban area of over 3,000, the majority employed in the city of Hull.
This process swallowed land and buildings for four central farms, though one attractive farmhouse survived, converted into a public house.
Still serving the village well are the church and chapel, both modest buildings, yet well maintained despite depleted congregations.
An imposing large house stands back from the main road, known as Thorne Hall, dated 1881.
It is now divided for an old people's residential home and private residence, yet much the same in appearance as the original.
Central to Thorngumbald was the blacksmith's shop, hub of working activity for a large area, now rebuilt as a modern garage but still owned by the fourth generation of Willinghams.
Children are well catered for with new infant and primary schools, also a health clinic nearby and a play school.
A useful set  of shops supplying basic needs is central too, all within easy reach of the estates.
The old school serves as a village hall while the church institute, once a hive of activity, is little in demand.
A popular Darby and Joan Club was formed by the WI members in the 1970s, also an Entertainment Group.
Eventually this became independent; now it produces sought after family shows to entertain the elderly and to raise funds for charity.
Thorngumbald was once renowned for its Agriculture and Flower Show until costs and age overtook its original helpers.
A worthy successor has emerged with the Annual Gala, raising funds to help village projects and renovations.
Old and new have integrated quite well, though few of the true Thorngumbald villagers are left to recall the transformation.
Thornholme
The hamlet of Thornholme has been part of Burton Agnes parish since time immemorial.
Strung out along the Bridlington road, Thornholme is about half a mile from Burton Agnes.
Earthworks in the area suggest that the village was once larger than it is today.
For a long time the lords of the manor of Thornholme were the St Quintins of Harpham, an early St Quintin having married into the de Stuteville family.
The estate descended in the St Quintin family until the death of Violet St Quintin in 1943.
It then consisted of 1,174 acres.
It was sold by Violet's trustees to Marcus Wickham Boynton who in 1948 sold 154 acres to the Air Ministry for Carnaby airfield.
Most of the remainder was sold in separate lots in 1949.
Smaller portions of Thornholme land have been variously held over the years by members of the Griffith, Somerville and Boynton families, and changed hands within these families.
Court papers relating to the St Quintin manor at Thornholme show that two bylaw men, a pinder, and one or two constables were being appointed there in the 19th century.
A Primitive Methodist chapel was built at Thornholme in 1892.
This was demolished in the mid 1980s, the congregation attending the chapel at Haisthorpe.
Thwing
Opinions are divided as to the meaning of ‘Thwing’, but most historians agree that it is derived from the Scandinavian and could mean a ‘strip of high land’.
Thwing is a small village on the eastern end of the Wolds of East Yorkshire.
Together with its associated hamlet of Octon-cum-Octon Grange, it forms a parish four miles long covering 4,024 acres and situated between 300 and 500 ft above sea level.
The parish is aligned from the tumulus known as Willy Howe in the east to a prehistoric earthwork in the south-west, and bounded by the Gypsey Race valley in the north and a Roman road (the High Street) in the south.
Over recent years, the parish has been of great interest archaeologically and excavations have revealed signs of occupation from neolithic man to the Middle Ages.
The ‘dig’ carried out in 1984 brought to light what could have been the main centre of administration in Anglo-Saxon times and could well have been the site for the ancient ‘Dic Ring’from which Dickering got its name.
Some 130 skeletons removed for histological examination have been ceremoniously re-interred in the presence of the Archbishop of York.
Although reported as poor in the Domesday Book, Thwing could well have been an important place in medieval times, the prosperity of the village being a direct reflection of the influence and affluence of the Thwing baronial family, who were amongst the most distinguished and prosperous families in northern England.
One of the most illustrious members of the Thwing family was John de Thwenge, born at the manor in Thwing in 1320.
After education at Oxford, he became the greatest of all the priors at Bridlington.
Known as St John of Bridlington, he was the last English saint to be canonised in 1401 prior to the Reformation.
All Saints' church is a 12th century building which retains several features of the original Norman construction, notably the fine chancel arch and the south doorway with its carved tympanum of the Paschal Lamb.
One of its more unusual features is a  very long ‘squint’.
The communal plate of silver gilt was presented to the church by Thomas Lamplugh in 1689.
Lamplugh was born in Octon in 1615 and became Archbishop of York in 1688.
His name lives on today in the title of Lamplugh House, once the rectory of Thwing and opened as a Christian conference centre for young people in 1973.
Today, it continues its ministry of spiritual renewal of the church, attracting both clergy and laymen from home and abroad.
There is a listed monument to the north of the parish, an obelisk erected in 1799 to commemorate December 1795 when a huge meteorite, weighing approximately 56 lbs, fell on that spot near Wold Cottage Farm.
Thwing and Octon, with a total population of some 200 souls, is completely rural in character with no intrusive housing schemes to mar the landscape of rolling wold.
A century ago, there were some 400 to 500 people in the village, a fairly self-sufficient community with farmers, grocers, shoemakers, blacksmith and joiner.
Today, however, the village has gradually succumbed to the advent of the motorcar and modern day living.
Types of occupation have altered, although farming is the predominant industry, and more people are commuting from the parish.
With no village shop, bus service or school, the village church and public house are now the focus of activity in the parish, with little to mar the tranquillity of the quiet backwater.
Tibthorpe
Continuing north along the B1248 road from the Bainton roundabout, the road rises and falls as Tibthorpe (Tibetorp in the Domesday Book) is approached, flanked by avenues of trees.
High Wood and Low Wood, favourite walks for local people and visitors, are a haven for wildlife.
In recent years deer have arrived.
These shy creatures may sometimes be seen and have been known to stray onto the road, startling passing motorists.
Another surprise for passers-by at the entrance to High Wood may be the  ghostly figure of a woman!
She has caused motorists to slow down, only to disappear before their eyes.
Approximately 150 people make up the population of Tibthorpe; their homes with beautiful views over the surrounding countryside.
It is said that centuries ago monks from Watton Abbey roamed these pastures with their sheep and were able to rest in a chapel of ease which was situated in the village.
Butts Lane takes its name from the medieval archers who practised their skills close by.
The lane has also been known as Thornton Street, when an inn — Thornton's inn — was located there.
In present times Tibthorpe is a ‘dry’ village, with the nearest public house a couple of miles away.
Another point of interest is that a family of Huguenots (persecuted French Protestants, who escaped to north-east England in the 1680s) occupied a house in Butts Lane.
Many years ago several small businesses flourished, besides farming; a cobbler, fishmonger, fruiterer, village store and butcher.
Today a well stocked shop/post office and a market garden are the sole suppliers.
There is no church or chapel here, the Methodist chapel was demolished some years ago when road improvements were being carried out.
It is said that there is an ancient burial ground on one of the farms — supposedly haunted!
As there is no school for Tibthorpe children they had to walk to nearby Kirkburn, but today the school bus provides a more convenient form of transport.
Those wishing to attend church services also have to make their way to Kirkburn.
The water supply used to be drawn from an ancient well, remembered still by one or two of the older residents.
Its memory lives on by the lane in which it existed — Well Lane.
In 1990 a group of children took part in ‘Operation Lifestyle’— a scheme organised by the Humberside police to involve young people in worthwhile activities during the summer.
They chose for their project the task of landscaping an area of waste land, turning it into a very pleasant garden with flowers, trees and shrubs for the benefit of the village.
For their hard work these youngsters received an award.
Tickton
The village of Tickton in East Yorkshire is situated on the Beverley to Bridlington road about two and a half miles north-east of Beverley and separated from it by the river Hull.
It has historical connections going back many centuries, as early as the reign of Athelstan (AD 925–940); it was the property of the church of St John of Beverley.
Athelstan is known to have endowed the church with lands following his success against the Scots and Danes at the battle of Brunanburg consequent upon his pilgrimage to the shrine of St John.
At one time the village was known as Ticketone, said to be called after a bishop of that time.
Along with many other villages of later times, Ticketone was mentioned in the Domesday Book of 1086 and was still at this time the property of the church of St John.
The intervening years must have rolled away uneventfully and only much nearer our time do records appear of the development of village life.
In 1828 a Wesleyan chapel was built, followed in the early 1840s by a chapel of ease to Beverley Minster known as the church of St Paul.
Its influence on village life, along with marriages and other services performed by the church, can be demonstrated by an entry in the records of baptism; ‘November 25th 1880.
Joseph and Hannah Redshaw, shepherds, has their children baptised in Tickton church.
Their ages were one month, one year, two yrs, five, seven, eight, ten, twelve and 13 years’.
Around this time also Tickton got its first school.
In 1948 a group of volunteers from the village started to build a village hall.
It was opened in 1951, by which time the men had moved 400 tons of rubble, 154 tons of gravel and laid 44,000 bricks.
Village functions are mostly held in the hall and today it accommodates a play group, a Darby and Joan club and other social and recreational activities.
In recent years a bypass was built, considerably lessening the load of traffic which passed through the village, and a period of  comparative peace was enjoyed.
But development is going on apace and many new houses appear where once stood fields and open spaces.
The original school has been replaced by a modern one with spacious play areas, and the old one has been converted into a home for the elderly.
The population recorded in the late 19th century was 305 and today has grown to 2,370.
Tunstall
Tunstall is a hamlet rather than a village.
It has some 70 inhabitants and it has no shop and no public house.
Yet once it sported a blacksmith's, joiner's and a public house, all situated in the main street — Town Street.
By the 1980s these had all gone.
There are now six farmsteads and a few cottages together with a number of modern bungalows.
The only building of note is All Saints' church, standing on what is for Holderness an eminence.
This together with the oldest farmsteads and cottages is built in whole or part of cobbles.
The earliest mention of the church is in 1115 when the church and titles were given to the Abbey of St Martin in York.
There is no mention of the church in the Domesday Book.
Being situated within such a short distance of the coast (about half a mile) Tunstall suffers the threat of coastal erosion.
At a point on the coast called Sand-le-Mere is a small area of dune which has always been a danger point from incursion from the sea.
Sand-le-Mere now gives its name to a large caravan site which is nearby.
Tunstall does have a village hall where whist drives and an annual coffee evening are held.
Tunstall is also now a favourite venue for fishermen.