

THE RISE OF THE DINOSAURS
LIFE FROM SPACE?
THE 1980s have  sown radical new doubts about the nature of our solar system.
There has been a revival of catastrophe theory, a return to doctrines over 200 years old, to explain extinctions.
There has been much talk of comets, asteroids and exploding supernovae.
There has been a greater emphasis on cosmic perspectives generally — such as the ‘panspermia’ theory (the notion that the ‘seeds’of organic life drifted to Earth from outer space)— to explain both the origin of life on Earth and the frequent recurrence of plagues and viruses which have taken their toll of life in the past.
It is also now doubted that Pluto is really a planet at all, although, ironically, astronomers believe they have discovered a ‘tenth planet’ named Planet X. In addition some scientists believe the Sun, like many other stars in the galaxy, may be part of a binary system and have a twin.
But let us, for the moment, place these new theories within a longer historical timespan.
It is natural that our understanding of the solar system and our place in it be subject to periodic revision, continuing with a process of learning and discovery that began long before even the invention of the telescope.
Many of the theories may be taken as a kind of realignment of astronomical perspectives; a process of taxonomic refinement.
Panspermia, for example, is a more rigorously defined statement that precursors of organic molecules are to be found in space, which in itself is neither an original nor a controversial finding.
However, recent spacecraft voyages have dissuaded astronomers from being too ready to categorize objects as satellites, asteroids, comets or even failed suns; or to neatly itemize inter-planetary debris, with planets being bigger than moons, asteroids bigger than meteors, and so on.
In fact we now know that Jupiter, Uranus and Saturn have more satellites than  was once detectable from Earth-bound telescopes, and some of the moons in the solar system are bigger than planets.
Even some tiny red dwarf stars are hardly bigger than Uranus.
The idea that the planets were formed out of swirling discs of gaseous matter in space was first voiced by Emmanuel Kant more than two centuries ago.
At the centre of Kant's disc was the Sun, and the planets were assembled from material that surrounded it.
In the late eighteenth century the visionary French mathematical astronomer, the Marquis de Laplace, added some detail to Kant's vision by proposing that the planets emerged out of the rings of cosmic dust flung off by centrifugal force from the densest part of the cloud that was to become the Sun.
These views were remarkably prescient for their time, since astronomers now believe that newly spinning protosuns do shed their outer rings of material in this way.
Deriving his theory from Newton's laws of angular momentum, Laplace postulated that a vast disc-shaped pall of cold gas was rotating in space in the vicinity of our present solar system.
It gradually contracted to increase its rate of spin.
We know that angular momentum can be expressed as the combined product of a rotating body's mass, velocity and radius, generally denoted as: where L is the angular momentum, m is mass, v is velocity and r is radius.
L, v and r are the variable factors, with a change in one being counterbalanced by a change in the other.
Eventually, according to Laplace, v increased so much that centrifugal force at the edge of  the nebula overcame the gravitational force exerted by the mass, and a ring of material broke away.
Then, as the radius of remaining material shrank, other rings of material nearer the centre broke off.
Some of Laplace's rings were thicker than others, thus attracting by gravity more of the material, to ultimately solidify into planets.
The comets, meteors and other bodies were regarded as waste material.
The problem, however, was that not enough of the gaseous nebula could in fact have broken away from the embryonic sun, as later generations of astronomers were quick to point out.
In fact, the planets possessed barely one per cent of the solar system's mass, but had somehow acquired 98 per cent of its angular momentum.
The sun, in brief, spins some 100 times slower than it should do if the  equation is correct.
Out of this difficulty, according to astronomer John Macvey, was born the celebrated ‘other star’ theory, which was to dominate astronomical thinking for about four decades.
Only an external event could have interfered with Newton's laws of celestial motion.
Perhaps, it was surmised, another star had a near-miss with the sun, and supplied additional energy not accounted for in the angular momentum theory.
One famous theory was derived from the ideas of the popular astronomers Sir James Jeans in England, and T.C. Chamberlain in the United States.
The approaching star pulled out by gravity great elongated filaments of hot material into a curved configuration, which then condensed into the planets.
This had the effect of slowing the rate of rotation as the Sun was induced to emulate the filament around it.
Perhaps, however, it was the Sun's twin star that suffered the collision with another star, leaving a large tendril of ripped-off gaseous material in the vicinity of the Sun which again would have a retarding effect on the Sun.
Another theory suggests that a supernova explosion occurred, destroying the companion sun and scattering its material toward our Sun.
But it soon came to be realized that any breakaway  plasma would disperse into the void rather than condense into solid bodies.
Rather, according to Lyman Spitzer of Princeton University writing in 1939, it would spread out around the Sun as a tenuous cloud.
It could only have been relatively cool gases that could initiate accretion processes.
The long-standing idea that the Earth started out as a molten mass, gradually cooled and shrank to its present size (a theory that still had adherents well into the 1950s), had to be abandoned.
The problem of the slowed rate of spin of the Sun and its large mass was solved when post-war scientists looked beyond the dynamics of what would happen to purely solid bodies functioning according to Newtonian laws.
Once the central part of the nebula had undergone compression and nuclear reactions, the magnetic interaction between the hot, spinning mass of the plasma (the new sun) and a cloud of electrically charged particles would play an important role.
So important, in fact, that such a cloud would have had a braking effect on the Sun's spin over aeons of time.
Fred Hoyle, in 1961, also suggested that the protosun had originally contracted by shedding more of its outer web, but managed to spread to the outermost periphery of the Sun, carrying with it the Sun's angular momentum.
It was not until 1972 that the idea of star and planet systems forming from other stellar material came into vogue, when Wilbur Brown of Wyoming University said that such systems were formed from the ejected shells of supernovae.
A word ought here to be said about supernovae, since they play a crucial role in the creation of planets and of life itself.
Possibly, according to some scientists, they play a major role in destroying life (see Chapter 6).
A great deal of the heavier particles that make up our bodies and the Earth itself are blasted out from incredible nuclear reactions taking place in dying stars (dying stars, in fact, both explode and implode).
When most of the helium in a star is used up, the nuclei begin to fuse to become the heavier elements at the core, liberating new energy.
With  only 6000 years of life left the temperature rockets to 620 million degrees, to convert carbon into neon.
When the core temperature reaches 1.3 billion degrees neon reacts to form oxygen.
With just one year to go silicon is formed.
Once iron is formed the limit of fusion is reached — no further energy can be liberated from it.
The core grows massively dense and gravity causes it to collapse in on itself at 25 per cent the speed of light.
The core elements are smashed into sub-atomic particles, and huge quantities of neutrinos are blasted out by the shock wave at speeds of 11,000 miles per second, unleashing bright flares of light which astronomers can now, for the first time, observe.
The supernova then becomes a black dwarf, a neutron star, or, if big enough, a black hole.
The region where the new solar system is to be formed is fortified by the particulate remains of the supernova, now charged with cosmic and X-rays, and other energy waves.
Strong observational backing from scientists at the University of Arizona shows that a wave of gravitational energy sweeps through the gas clouds in the galaxy, with a mass at least one-thousand times that of our Sun.
This causes the material to become very dense in parts, to rotate rapidly, and finally to collapse into smaller, opaque spheres as large as our solar system.
Ultimately they contract further into molecular structures, into great dark swirling spheres that form the basis of young star-field systems.
The cloud becomes very dense at the centre, leaving behind a dusty envelope that ultimately becomes a retinue of planets — like being thrown out onto a potter's wheel.
And if our understanding of star formation is correct, then this means that most stars of the same size and density as our Sun will have planetary systems.
Soon the density becomes great enough for the spheres of gas and dust to collapse and start individual nuclear reactions.
How does this happen?
Gravitational forces alone, it seems, are not sufficient.
Frictional heat plays a larger part — another example of the heat-energy  theory at work.
The cloud's rising internal heat can no longer be radiated away into space, and the dust cloud — originally resembling a giant gaseous ball like Jupiter — becomes a warm gassy protostar .
Astronomers can observe this happening because of the emission of infra-red energy, with dense clouds collapsing in on themselves at a rate of half a mile per second.
The imploding discs of cosmic matter are rotating, and as the pressure increases the rotation speeds up like a flywheel, ultimately flinging matter out into space.
This is one explanation why stars are often to be found in groups of twos or threes.
Material from the rest of the cloud globule continually falls into the embryonic sun, building up further mass, pressure and temperature, soon reaching thousands of degrees centigrade and beginning to glow like the T Tauri stars (glowing clouds of dense cosmic dust), which astronomers now think are the typical intermediate link between the dark globules and fully formed stars.
As the sun shrinks it rotates faster, and flings off its outer, much cooler shell when it reaches escape velocity.
These materials then flatten out as a disc surrounding the young star — to ultimately condense into planets.
Some of them look and behave like the original gaseous protostar, but without the necessary mass to generate internal heat.
Astrophysicists are in dispute about the next stage.
As the star is incandescently hot plasma (i.e. ionised gases with the nuclei of particles being transformed into the nuclei of other atoms because of the immense pressure of convection heat) a great deal of electromagnetic energy is created as escaping electrons and other particles are ‘blown’ into space, curving along magnetic lines of force.
These particles rotate with the star and help to slow it, transferring the spin to the outer reaches of the globular dust cloud.
This helps explain why most of the mass of the solar system is concentrated in the Sun, with the rotation spread among the planets; i.e. they have been ‘disc-braked’.
The Creation of the Planets
In the 1940s Otto J. Schmidt said that the planets were not created out of spun-off solar material but were ‘captured’ by the Sun from clouds of space dust.
The theory, however, was weak, since it was unlikely such material could have solidified, in any manner that astronomers understand, into planets.
It was in the Fifties, however, that Gerard P. Kuiper said turbulence in various parts of the cloud was likely to make the cloud sufficiently dense to flatten it out into a disc-shaped mass, with a large mass at the centre orbited by smaller ones.
Nowadays ‘cold-welding’ seems to be the most popular current explanation.
The specks of dust consisting of heavier particles flung off by the Sun aggregate into larger lumps (a process which can be duplicated in a laboratory).
Then a snowballing effect takes over, with the larger lumps able to grow larger still because their own gravity would attract other particles as they sweep along in their own orbit.
Constantly colliding ‘supergrains’ would cohere increasingly under the redistributive influence of transferred angular momentum, aided by a gradually shrinking volume of space around the Sun.
Soon an object reaches meteorite size, and then finishes up as a planet-sized object, all within a few thousand years.
We have already come across our first clue as to why species become extinct, and many others will emerge as the evolutionary story unfolds; all of the solar planets were formed by catastrophic processes.
Earth not only grew by aggregation from a cloud of particles, but by collisions with other cosmic matter.
It was the random collisions melding the rocky substances, plus turbulent accretions, that were to make up the inner planets.
Some of the collisions were violent, but other planetesimals simply blended in with other collisions.
(A planetesimal is a small, solid celestial body that may have existed at an early stage of the development of the solar system.)
Eventually supergrains of matter coalesced until the rocky fragments became large enough to attract more  materials with gravity accreting at a faster and faster rate until they became full-sized planets.
It was then that the electromagnetic forces became important, as they governed and determined the chemical compounds on Earth and the way they reacted with other elements.
Radioactivity helped the solar wind to sift out the dense iron-nickel from the silicates, and was the main energy source in turning the inner cores of planets molten.
Iron-nickel, with the silicates and non-metallic substances in gaseous form, soon rose to form the outer mantle of the Earth.
Then the largest planets themselves would act like mini suns, able to attract their own system of orbiting satellites.
This reasoning alone casts doubt on the idea that the Earth's own moon was formed from its orbiting dust grains.
The moon must have been captured later, although there is an interesting contemporary theory stating that the moon is the end-product of a tremendous collision between Earth and a giant planetesimal which reduced the careening object to pulverized grains.
These then accreted into a moon by cold-welding techniques.
The matter of heat balances is important to the entire theme of this book (see Chapter 5).
The constancy of heat both on Earth and in animal species has a bearing on life and death cycles.
It was the level of heat which had a bearing on the chemical and gaseous make-up of the planets.
Temperature determines the rate of condensation of gaseous matter into solids.
In the early stages of cold-welding the planets must have been very similar in appearance, with massive outer gassy atmospheres.
But it was the piercing electromagnetic field forces and the solar wind that blew away most of the atmospheres consisting of the very lightest gases from the planets nearest to the sun, to leave them with dense cores of rock and metal, the outer gaseous planets being less affected in this way (now we can see why the innermost planets of the solar system are solid, metallic and rocky, while the outer ones are icy and gaseous).
The proof that the planets were actually formed in this way arises from the fact that all of them have the same    built-in mode of spin.
Those with moons (which is most of them) orbit in a sun-like mode, with identical axial momentum.
If the planets had simply been ‘collected’ by the Sun in its travels they would not all have similar orbital configurations.
In fact, recent spectroscopic measurements of meteorites suggest the Earth may contain more iron than was hitherto suspected, says Don Anderson of the Californian Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
The outer layers of the Sun seem to contain forty times more iron and calcium than carbonaceous chondrites.
Traditionally it has been thought that meteorites were formed at the same time as the solar planets, and the composition of them was used as a ‘fossil guide’ to the make-up of the planets.
Now, it seems, the meteorites may not have the same origins as the Earth.
Fig.2.
The formation of the planets.
After the Sun was formed, piercing heat and radioactivity drove out the icy particles which formed giant balls of gas further out.
The solid inner planets were formed from rocky grain cohering, and from collisions between planetesimals.
The formation of planetary systems and the size and chemical composition of each member are, then, remarkably regular: given a sun-sized star a computer generally comes up with a similar range of planets to that in the solar system, with small rocky planets closest to the star and the large gaseous ones further out (due to the effects of gravity, orbits would later space themselves out along the lines of our own solar system).
So the ordered structure of the Sun, with its retinue of planets, repeated what was occurring a million times around other similar stars of the same mass and density — what is known as ‘main sequence’ stars.
The Sun is such a star, creating enough warmth to make a planet like Earth habitable.
However, getting the temperature just right for life to arise on a planet is so unlikely that the chances of it occurring are billions to one against.
Both Mercury and Mars have gravitational fields too low to retain an atmosphere.
Mercury's distance from the Sun, varying from between 29 and 43 million miles, would make the Sun seem three times bigger in the Mercurian sky than it would on Earth.
This means that its surface temperatures must be literally scorching, frequently reaching 700°C.
Temperatures during the long Mercurian night would probably plummet to below zero.
Its axis rotation time is  equivalent to 58.5 Earth days, and there would be no atmosphere to retain the high ‘daytime’ temperature, nor shield the planet from harmful cosmic rays.
Venus, however, is afflicted with a lethally hot and corrosive atmosphere.
Although some 30 million miles further away from the Sun than Mercury, its heat-retaining surface gases of carbon, oxygen and sulphur make the surface temperatures some 80°C hotter.
Because it is closer to the Sun than Earth, Venus probably contained less water than Earth.
When the interior began to heat up as a result of radioactivity, volcanoes and  fumaroles erupted, pumping out vast quantities of carbon dioxide.
In addition, the fierce solar heat released further carbon from its surface rocks.
The heat was retained by the celebrated ‘greenhouse effect’, making the atmosphere hotter and very much denser, which in turn released further  CO 2  from the rocks — the classic vicious circle.
Mars, on the other hand, suffers from not having a ‘greenhouse’ problem.
Mars is too far away from the Sun, and is too small.
This means that any water vapour would turn to ice, because its low gravity would only retain a tenuous atmosphere with very little carbon dioxide to help trap the much-reduced solar warmth.
Not only that, but continuous 124 mph winds surging around the planet whip up the ochre soil high into the atmosphere, turning the sky pink, virtually obscuring the already wan sunlight.
Earth was lucky.
Its distance from the Sun was just right to sustain life, providing the right kind of equable temperatures and flowing water.
Earth's warmth, like Venus's, also came from its interior, as heat-producing radioactive minerals decayed at the mantle, reaching nearly 5000°C at the molten centre.
The core, indeed, was probably molten even at its protoplanet stage, and this formed an intensive magnetic field.
All biological life thus adapted its metabolism to the level of solar warmth, and became adjusted to the strength of solar radiation prevailing at the time.
We  must remember, too, how beneficial are Earth's seasons.
All of the planets circle around the Sun elliptically in the same direction as the Sun itself rotates.
But individually they orbit at different speeds depending on their distance from the Sun, the innermost rocky planets orbiting much faster than the outer balls of frozen gaseous vapour, such as Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus.
And they do not all rotate in the same mode.
Most of them are tilted in their orbits at an identical angle to Earth's (the exception being the inner and outer two planets), proving that they have all evolved together.
The planetary seasons greatly determine temperatures and climatic patterns.
The Venusian ‘year’, as determined by the Mariner 2 satellite probe launched in 1962, turned out to be some 225 terrestrial days, although its rotation was so slow (243 Earth days) that its ‘day’ is actually longer than its ‘year’.
The later Mariner 10 probe, launched in 1974, confirmed that the dense sulphuric clouds moved across the sky so rapidly as to create violent storms at the surface.
The Martian year is nearly twice as long as Earth's, although its ‘day’ is virtually the same.
The density of Earth is partly explained because of its metallic core which is responsible for the magnetic field.
This field, again, is important, since without it, as we shall see, great harm to living creatures could occur as a result of what goes on in outer space.
With a density of 5.52 grams per cubic centimetre, Earth is more solid, in a sense, than the other three terrestrial planets, as well as being the largest (its diameter is 8000 miles).
Many theorists believe that Jupiter could well be a ‘failed star’, not quite big enough to trigger nuclear reactions.
However, if Jupiter were slightly bigger or had a rather less regular orbit, scientists believe the other solar planets would follow far less predictable orbits.
The theory of planetary formation is not perfect, and possibly a part of the sequence is missing or misunderstood.
But it reflects the astronomical consensus of what probably did happen.
Kuiper's theory, though, implies  that the Sun and planets were created simultaneously, but modern theory says the star had at least reached its proto stage before being robbed of its momentum when filaments of hot gases were thrown out.
Even now the nebula theory is being challenged by a new book on the origin of the planets, by two British astronomers.
Michael Wolfson and John Dormond say, in effect, that Sir James Jeans' 'capture' theory may be the right one after all.
They say that a close encounter between the Sun and a more diffuse star-like object in the cluster tore off a hot filament of gases.
This cooled and condensed into the solar planets, which were later themselves subject to more distortion by the Sun.
The inner solid planets, it is claimed, were created by a catastrophic collision between two giant planets orbiting where Mars and the asteroid belt now reside.
The Creation of a Liveable World
In Britain in the late 1980s the idea of the Anthropic Principle, a hitherto obscure doctrine in physics, became the subject of conversation at cocktail parties, was probed exhaustively in a 700-page book and was summarized in popular science magazines and television documentaries.
The Anthropic Principle has stunning implications for virtually all branches of science.
It decrees that intelligent life in some way selects out its own actual universe from a variety of possible alternatives.
The biochemical evolution of the Earth, including the creation of the reptiles, dinosaurs and the mammals, has as its sole purpose the ultimate evolution of intelligent beings capable of under-standing the laws of physics, and thus able to speculate about the origin and density of the universe.
In its extreme form, as enunciated by Brandon Carter, a cosmologist now at the Paris Observatory, it says that the conditions we observe in the universe must include the various electrical and gravitational constants that hold all planetary matter together and thus give rise to intelligent terrestrial life.
If they did not, we would not be  here to observe them.
One curious conclusion is that the dinosaurs had to die to make way for humans: this is the starkest meaning of the Anthropic Principle.
Of course, the argument is highly teleological and incapable of scientific proof, but it has been rigorously defended by brilliant minds and cannot be lightly dismissed.
It received a new boost in 1990 when John Gribbin and Martin Rees published their The Stuff of the Universe , where it was asserted that the universe came into existence solely in order to create a carbon-based intelligent life-form on just one planet — Earth.
This is because the conditions needed for the Big Bang had to be so finely tuned — to an amazing one part in 10&sup60;(a big number even on a cosmic scale)— that the most minute variations would not have permitted any life at all to develop.
And according to physicist Tony Roth the Principle could well be true because many earlier broad cosmological theories have paved the way for later testable discoveries, as has the Copernican Principle, and even the Principle of Beauty which bore great fruit in the theory of electroweak interaction, which recently united the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces.
In any event, the theory of environmental selection by variant genotypes within an evolving species is quite common in biology.
There are, incidentally, several opposing theories to the Anthropic Principle.
Human logic says that if in fact we are all made from the ashes of long-dead stars, then everything which now is should be ultimately related to what first was .
There could also be parts of the universe   containing more anti-matter than matter.
It is possible that there is an undiscovered and unique set of equations that describes all the forces and particles in the universe in a kind of Theory of Everything that would do away with the Anthropic Principle.
But there is another way in which the Anthropic Principle, or more strictly a Biothropic Principle, could be indisputably self-evident, if it means that animal and biological life on just one planet has its genesis in cosmic forces.
Certainly Earth needs its Sun and moon, and neither could exist without the Milky Way first coming into being, and so on.
But even if the question of necessity is ruled out, the notion that events in outer space influence Earth and its atmosphere, as well as the nature and distribution of animal life, is now a substantive truth.
In every case only one well-known galactic force is involved — gravity.
Gravitational influences between and within bodies in space are detected as perturbations and periodicities which, over millions of years, can actually mould planetary surfaces.
Some years ago great controversy was stirred up when two astrophysicists published a book, based largely on Chinese research, suggesting that solar fluctuations triggered geophysical disturbances here on Earth.
Such a reaction was curious, as Santa Barbara biogeologist Preston Cloud reminds us, because the very rocks beneath our feet rise and fall like the ocean tides, but imperceptibly, in a twice-daily rhythm in response to the gravitational pull of the Sun and moon.
From time to time Earth suffers bombardment from meteors and comets, and meteoritic impact has been a major planet-shaper and climate-modeller.
Further, prolonged rain storms on Earth have been observed to occur in line with certain alignments of the moon, and perhaps of other objects in the solar system.
The important thing to remember is that climate is influenced by events above and below the Earth.
The Earth can generate much more internal heat than has hitherto been suspected.
For this reason the golfball  picture of the planet, with regular internal layers and smooth, uniform demarcation zones, has fallen out of favour as it has encouraged what are probably quite wrong estimates of temperatures at the core.
And it only partially explains how deep internal forces drive the movements of the Earth's crust, and why volcanoes and earthquakes occur.
The volume of the ocean basins has fluctuated over time and this has a great influence over virtually every other life-generating and sustaining force ever discovered.
It is now clear to Earth scientists that the extent of ocean water and its depth and shallowness, and the way it periodically invades the land and then retreats, has been a major climatic determinant.
The arrangement of the oceans in relation to the continents plays a decisive role in creating and sustaining life on Earth.
So it is not only Earth's distance from the Sun that is important for living things, but the way the solid parts of the Earth are spread across the globe.
From this geophysical fact other organic facts follow.
The main chemical ingredients for life are derived from combinations of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen, which we can abbreviate to CHON.
These atoms, as we have seen, are spewed out from dying stars; but it would take at least a billion years for a star to use up all its helium energy and explode, hence life could not exist in a universe consisting of the shortest-living stars, since the necessary elements such as carbon would not exist.
The fundamental CHON atoms would combine and recombine to form organic compounds of greater and greater complexity.
They formed gases and ultimately amino acids, the so-called building blocks of life.
Later the changing composition of atmospheric gases, as a result of new forms of microbial life emerging out of the amino acid stage, also affected the climate.
Biologists Lynn Margulis and Dorian Sagan are supporters of the well-known Gaian hypothesis (see over).
In a recent book they pointed out that the laws of physics dictate that the sun's luminosity must have increased by  30 per cent during the past four million years.
And yet, they say, Earth's temperature has remained stable, implying that life has been regulating the composition of gases, and the biota must have been controlling its own environment.
The great shake-out of particles at the beginning of the solar system's life, the way they can recombine to give altered secondary atmospheres, is a feature of great importance in explaining how life took hold.
The bonding of atoms via their electrons plus the temperature they function at, gives a clue as to how molecules form.
Another clue is tidal forces and the atmosphere.
All of the original planets had extensive atmospheres of hydrogen, carbon dioxide and helium which was swept away by the intense solar radiation.
In Earth's case it developed a secondary atmosphere through organic evolution, say supporters of the Gaian hypothesis.
The Gaian hypothesis was first promoted by the atmospheric chemist James Lovelock, and has stimulated a great debate about whether the fundamental controls on the Earth's warming gases are biological or abiotic (physical).
The Gaians suggest that the microorganisms such as plankton produce vast quantities of dimethyl sulphide (DMS).
When DMS interacts with atmospheric oxygen it can create clouds over the ocean and can determine how much solar heat reaches the surface.
More heating of the Earth either by solar or gaseous factors will increase the amount of plankton, which will in turn lower temperatures.
This is known as a ‘negative feedback’ response, where additional inputs into the equation have a regulatory effect.
(A ‘positive feedback’ is where a situation is exacerbated by the inputs.)
But the abiotic school of thought has equally persuasive arguments at its disposal.
Life on Earth, the biosphere and the hydrosphere, including the dynamics of climate, are a densely woven story of the carbon atom.
Without carbon there would be no organic chemistry, and no life.
Scientists interpreting the greenhouse effect today know that the oceans act as a massive ‘sink’ containing fifty  times as much carbon as the atmosphere, mostly dissolved in the form of bicarbonate.
Seafloor minerals and continental sediments contain some 100,000 times as much carbon as the atmosphere.
Whether carbon dioxide is regulated by organic life or the physical Earth itself is admittedly one of the central battlegrounds in the Gaia debate.
But it is worth remembering that early in Earth's history the continents were much smaller than they are now.
This fact alone explains the Sun/climate anomaly.
The Sun must have been considerably dimmer and cooler shortly after the Earth was formed because thermonuclear processes had not yet reached their peak.
So Earth should have been commensurately cooler.
But the geological record shows no trace of any cooling until much later.
One reason could be the fact that the absorption spectra of stars show the rare and chemically inactive gases such as krypton, neon and xenon to be much more common than here on Earth.
This probably means that Earth may initially have been hotter than some scientists suggest, since even these heavy noble gases were driven off when the hot gaseous molecules reached high escape velocities.
More probably it was the abundant presence of carbon.
According to geophysicist James Walker of the University of Michigan the continental carbon was divided up among the atmosphere, the primeval sea floor and the oceans themselves.
But as the continents grew they gleaned more of the carbon from the oceans and atmosphere.
As carbon dioxide retains infrared heat better than any other gas, and as the temperature began to fall, it follows that the early Earth must have had an atmosphere predominantly of  CO 2  , and that atmospheric  CO 2  must have diminished.
At this stage.
however, we can perceive a curious twist to the argument, with a blending of the Gaian and abiotic schools.
The world of four billion years ago was swathed in carbon dioxide, producing a massive Venus-like greenhouse effect.
Life, in fact, would have been impossible for most higher forms, with only the hardiest microbes      surviving.
But in a recent Nature article, David Schwartzman of Howard University, and Tyler Volk of New York University, maintain that primitive microbes staved off the greenhouse effect, so helping weathering (where more carbon gets buried in surface soil) by stabilizing the soil against erosion.
A stable soil soaks up water, and allows acid to break up bedrock and create more soil.
Rocks can also be broken up by microbes finding their way into cracks and crevices, exposing more surfaces which can then absorb more  CO 2  , and so forth.
Schwartzman and Volk reckon that weathering was helped along to such an extent that the Earth is 35°C cooler than it would have been on the lifeless Earth.
Fig.3.
The Gaian school of Earth temperature regulation.
Fig 4.
The abiotic school of Earth temperature regulation.
There is another way in which we can confirm the role played by climate and the carbon atom in the creation of organic life.
We know that shortly after creation a violent spate of seething geotectonic activity must have taken place as the interior of the Earth grew hotter, new out-gassing occurred and new islands appeared.
Continents began to drift apart as the molten basaltic lava welled up from cracks in the seabed (see Chapter 8).
But the scientific process of unravelling the exact sequence of events has not been easy.
Even now there are many gaps in our understanding of what happened.
It is believed, however, that some early igneous rocks, which had to solidify from a molten state, are proof that some atmospheric gases (such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen and water vapour) had to be present to turn them into something approaching earthlike rocks and clays by a primitive ‘weathering’ process.
Flowing water, evident from younger sediments of three billion years ago, shows that the temperature must have been above freezing, indicating the Sun was not as cool as some scientists suggest.
Sooner or later water must have acted as a transporter for dissolved materials.
Much of the water vapour would have been supplemented with ammonia and methane, and possibly, according to the evidence of rocks and the sedimentary record rich in silica, a little nitrogen and water vapour existed, but  oxides of carbon predominated.
The existence of silica suggests that ammonia was not an important gas, as it would have left much more limestone and dolomites.
The fact that our atmosphere and oceans are largely the product of outgassing by volcanoes is important.
Volcanoes bring both life and death to Earth.
They are erratically distributed around the planet, and the gases they emit vary in outgassed particular matter.
However, when scientists first tried to work out how life on Earth got started, they had to perfect their understanding of the original primeval gases, and whether and how such gases changed their nature.
One early assumption was that the first atmosphere on Earth consisted of gases rich in nitrogen and hydrogen, such as ammonia and methane.
What is crucial to Earth's history, however, was that, unlike any other member of the solar system, it became a wet planet.
One of the most important compounds is water, since water acts as the suspension medium for the vital chemical reactions which later sustained living systems.
The mobile and metamorphosing earthly environment was responsible for the nature of early life on Earth, allowing different mixes of chemicals and minerals to blend under changing conditions.
We can be reasonably sure that the first water vapours were the natural result of condensation of the outgassed products of volcanoes.
Most volcanoes emit around 60 per cent water vapour, 24 per cent  CO 2  and 10 per cent sulphur, with the rest a varied mix of chlorine, nitrogen and hydrogen.
The saturation resulted in rain, which fell for a very long time.
A shallow sea began to emerge.
Then the water vapour which condensed into oceans must have come from early volcanic activity and from the gaseous components of the solid Earth itself.
Whether the outgassing of vapour occurred continuously or episodically is still a matter of scientific dispute.
According to W.W. Rubey, formerly of the US Geological Survey, the rate of sea formation was probably faster at the beginning phase of volcanism and then tapered off.
Later scientists thought that a succession of ‘heat  waves’ arising from radioactive decay in subsurface materials, and by the gravitational collapse of the solid lithosphere, was responsible for sweating out most of the water vapour.
Later still the ‘heat waves’ were thought to be produced by catastrophism — recent calculations by Tokajumi Matsui and Yutaka Abe of the University of Tokyo suggest that billions of tons of meteorites crashed into Earth to drive off the volatile materials and to turn the surface into seas of magma.
Nowadays it is thought that not much new water is generated by volcanoes or by hot springs and vapours, which speeded up in time through land-ocean changes and continental drift; the vast majority of this is today believed to be recycled hydrospheric water.
Then, while the vapour condensed into oceans the high percentage of  CO 2  would have caused a runaway greenhouse effect.
After about 800 million years the mean surface temperature probably reached a maximum of 300°C, and the pressure half as much higher than today.
The Earth and the oceans absorb much of the carbon compounds, much of which combines with calcium and magnesium to become limestone, which holds much of the  CO 2  .
The Earth, in fact, has enormous ‘sinks’ for both oxygen and carbon, and it is when these become full that excesses accumulate in the atmosphere.
Occasionally, however, shortly after organic life got a toehold, Earth's surface water may have evaporated by frequent asteroid impacts, which had the effect of sterilizing large areas of the globe, according to a group of American geophysicists based in California.
This would explain why single-celled organisms appeared  3500 years ago, but complex creatures such as mammals and reptiles did not appear until 500 million years ago.
James Kasting, of the Pennsylvania State University, also told the American Association for the Advancement of Science in February 1990 that, judging from ancient craters on the moon, collisions with asteroids nearly 300 miles in diameter, hitting the Earth at more than 100,000 mph, were much more common in the early history of the  solar system than today.
A collision would vaporize the oceans and raise atmospheric temperatures to 3000°F.
It would take months for the rocks to cool off, and about a thousand years for the steam in the air to condense back into the seas.
Only primitive life-forms in deep ocean ridges would have survived, the descendants of which survive today as plants and huge worms that live around sulphurous vents in the ocean floor.
Life From a Chemical Soup?
But how did primitive life-forms first appear on Earth?
Scientists are still not certain about this in spite of what the reader might believe.
The more established theory is that the rise and fall of water levels, the advance and retreat of lakes and the resultant slimy muds, were also catalysts, or concentrators, bringing new chemicals within sediments into contact with other organic chemicals.
Land-based organisms carry their watery heritage with them, locked inside their cells.
It is possible, of course, to conceive of alternative biochemistries and other liquid states.
The Pioneer and Voyager probes of the 1970s hinted that Jupiter probably had no solid surface at all.
Its atmosphere takes up the outermost 600 miles of its 38,000 mile radius, and is mostly hydrogen, with some methane (CH 2 ), ethene (C 2 H 2 ) and ammonia (NH 3 ), plus water vapour (H 2 O) and phosphine ( Ph 3  ).
It is also possible that two of these constituents in their liquid form substitute for water as a suspension medium for organic compounds.
However, the evolution of complex living creatures (not just humans) would be based on a high information content greater than could be found, say, in the bacteria of the atmosphere of the Jovian planets.
Spontaneous natural selection requires an advanced level of organization at the micro-biological stage.
It also needs long periods of ecological stability during which evolutionary epochs can bring about the necessary organic synthesis.
But little is known about the chemical ‘soup’ of the  oceans, and therefore the type of life that first became selected and concentrated there and which would have been different from that occurring, say, in rivers or stagnant pools.
Such would have a tendency to dry out or cool according to changing climatic conditions.
Did the amino acids and nucleotide come about spontaneously in the warm shallow waters of a young Earth?
Was there a natural organic synthesis?
Possibly not.
For one of the most important discoveries of the twentieth century was the fact that some molecules in space actually appeared to be similar to those that make up amino acids.
This was suspected because when the particles collide they emit radio signals.
Each molecule has its own distinctive wavelength, enabling them to be identified.
In 1965 one cyanide (CN) was discovered in space in this way, as well as the hydroxyl molecule (a primitive water vapour element with one atom of hydrogen missing).
Later, ammonia was found in a cloud near the centre of our galaxy.
Formaldehyde molecules (consisting of four atoms: 2 of hydrogen, 1 of carbon, 1 of oxygen) were also found by scientists at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in West Virginia.
To date about one hundred organic molecules necessary for the evolution of life have been detected.
The veteran astrophysicist Sir Fred Hoyle, with his colleague Chandra Wickramasinghe, believes that these molecules were probably brought to the surface of the Earth via the tiny dust grains on meteorites and comets, or on interstellar winds, and succeeded in germinating life in the fertile conditions of Earth at the time.
Lynn Margulis and Dorian Sagan maintain, however, that neither the chemical soup explanation nor the ‘panspermia’ theory is necessary.
Because of the fact that organic life is built up from CHON (they mention others, phosphorus and sulphur), the natural energy and gravity cycles of the Earth can by themselves make the molecule bonding and the building blocks of life.
There are certain clues to what could have happened.
Water itself is, of course, a combined source of oxygen  just waiting to be liberated via the breakdown of water vapour through photosynthesis.
All this helps oxygen accumulate, and carbon compounds ‘sink’ into rocks where they can recombine with oxygen.
But there is the problem of oxygen ‘sinks’ existing as well, which could use up the oxygen produced by recombining with any of the CHON molecules.
Carbon atoms can form bonds not only with themselves but with the atoms of important atmospheric gases, oxygen and nitrogen.
The outer electron of the carbon atom can combine with four hydrogen atoms to form a carbohydrate; oxides would be produced, preventing free oxygen from accumulating.
One conventional understanding of Earth's primitive atmosphere, based on the famous Urey-Miller laboratory experiments of the 1950s, was that primitive gases such as hydrogen, ammonia, methane and water vapour, periodically energized by flashes of lightning, gave birth to the strange new combinations of CHON.
These then formed the molecules known as the amino acids and nucleotide.
The life-generating experiment has now, after varying the mix of gases, been repeated many times.
and each time the building blocks of life have been easily enough manufactured.
Moreover, the conditions have also been varied, with equal success.
The suggestion that catastrophic heating itself could be the prime mover gained in credibility.
Could shock-waves have brought about organic life?
Or, for that matter, meteoritic impacts?
The Urey-Miller experiment was repeated by Israeli researchers Askiba and Burit Bar-nun at Cornell University, by subjecting ammonia, ethane and water vapour to a shock wave.
This event momentarily raised the temperature inside the flask by several thousand degrees, leaving behind four new amino acids.
There is now an extensive literature reporting on the various life-generating experiments, backed with much speculation and theory.
The panspermia hypothesis does not deny that life started in a ‘primeval soup’, it merely shows that life can come together in a variety of different  ways.
One recent theory says that the common ancestor of all living things was a bacteria that consumed sulphur compounds, and lived in a volcanically hot environment that was hot enough to boil water.
James A. Lake, writing in Nature , says that similar bacteria survive in hot volcanic springs or around vents or fissures in the deep ocean floor.
What can be stated with some certainty is that Earth's unique combination of water and heat started the whole process off, as all the laboratory experiments would appear to confirm.
A consensus seems to have emerged that some kinds of blue-green algae started to extract hydrogen from the planet's richest resource, the oceans.
The H 2 O bonds were much stronger than for any other hydrogen compound, but yet the algae managed somehow to develop a secondary photolytic reaction centre for re-absorbing high-energy light that could split the water molecules up.
Because they had so much more energy available to them, cyanobacteria exploded into a vast array of different forms.
At last the road to more complex creatures — an amazing event in the history of the universe — began to reveal itself.
Soon amino acids linked together in groups and chains of ever-increasing complexity, when the small molecules became large ones, such as proteins, nucleic acids and enzymes (i.e. all those we regard as being the real precursors of living matter).
The new bacterial forms were versatile and energetic, and could engulf other bacteria.
Life therefore became a form of chemical interaction, with replicators able to change gradually through the mechanics of evolution.
Life, in a sense, spread across the globe by a form of networking.
Exactly how this happened is intriguing.
A process known as thermal polymerization probably linked amino acids to form proteins (the basis of the plastics industry is to use polymerization to assemble related molecules into chains called polymers).
Scientists at the Institute of Molecular Evolution at the University of Miami believe that the creation of life may have been  quite rapid by evolutionary standards, simplicity quite quickly becoming complexity.
A protocell probably came into being a few hours after the formation of proteins.
Likewise natural organisms can create polypeptides, which are small polymers made of amino acids.
As enzymes they speed up the chemical reactions of life.
These polypeptides in turn form into extremely long chains of proteins.
An experiment was once performed where the acids were heated in a dry state to 150°F, to be immersed in warm water later.
They then took on the appearance of microspheres, behaving and looking like living cells.
Early life on Earth may have had many false starts — as many as ten — with each based on a different biochemistry.
Scientists now believe life is based on an infinite variety of polypeptides, with a great potential for unrealized polypeptides that could be used in living systems.
Cells grouping together in colonies meant that they could be replaced when they died, with the group as a whole surviving intact should any membrane wall of any individual member be accidentally punctured.
Soon living colonies became the norm, and they began to proliferate.
The Importance of Light
Using the hydrogen atoms in ocean water with the aid of light energy was a remarkable evolutionary event, but there were still abundant geochemical problems to overcome.
One by-product of photolysis (photolysis is the dissociation of water vapour through ultraviolet radiation) was that once oxygen began to appear it soon combined with whatever ammonia or methane was then present, and built itself into rock structures.
Being very reactive it combined easily with minerals in the Earth's crust.
At this stage no green vegetation existed, so only photolysis could have created oxygen.
This occurs at great heights where atmospheric densities are very low, so that many of the liberated hydrogen atoms escape into space before colliding with oxygen atoms and becoming water molecules.
The remaining oxygen atoms simply accumulate in the atmosphere.
Furthermore the process of splitting H 2 O (and CO 2 , for that matter) is easily reversed.
Carbohydrates can recombine with oxygen to form CO 2 ; and hydrogen, once O 2 is present in the atmosphere, can recombine with oxygen to form water vapour.
It is also clear that the non-biological breakdown of water vapour in the outer atmosphere would not by itself be enough to get life started.
For until such time as oxygen in sufficient quantities could create an ozone shield, organisms subject to the lethal wavelengths of ultraviolet radiation could not exist on land except in the shade, or in shallow water within reach of suitable wavelengths of light for  photosynthesis to take place.
Let us look for a moment at the ozone shield.
Ultraviolet (W) radiation between 100 and 200  nanometres (that is, in the W-C range) is absorbed in our present atmosphere by O 2 in the upper layers.
This process splits the molecules into two single atoms, most of which recombine to form O 2 , especially at night in the absence of solar radiation.
Some, however, form a tri-atomic form of oxygen, O 3 , called ozone, which strongly absorbs W radiation at wavelengths between 200 nm (nanometre: a millionth part of a millimetre) and 300 nm in the W-B and UV-C region.
Then again, simply by doing this, it decomposes again into O 2 and O. Not only that, but oxygen can react with ozone to form two oxygen molecules (O and O 3 = 2O 2 ).
Ozone is also decomposed through other chemical reactions.
Through all these processes, then, ozone is continually being created and decomposed.
We know, in addition, that the ozone layer, between 15 and 35 km above the Earth's surface, removes all W radiation.
But the layer itself is astonishingly thin.
If forced down to form a layer near the Earth's surface it would only be five millimetres thick.
Nevertheless the existence of the ozone layer implies that it is almost inevitable that early organic life -algae — must have got started in murky waters, below  which the rays, especially W-C, with a powerful intensity overlapping with the X-ray region, could not penetrate.
However, ultraviolet radiation must also have aided evolution.
Although it caused mutations — frequently devastating and biocidic (causing the death of life, as in biocide)— on very rare occasions it spurred evolution.
Those early genera that survived had a built-in immunity to ultraviolet radiation, thus helping in the struggle for continued survival.
The evolution of the biosphere — indeed the very existence of the biosphere — came about by taming the worst excesses of incoming solar radiation by screening out the more harmful rays.
As the algae became more complex some form of repair mechanism probably occurred, especially for those existing in shallow watery environments (see Chapter 6).
In the meantime, oxygen could not have accumulated at this early stage (without biological help) because it would absorb the same ultraviolet rays.
So equilibrium would be maintained with oxygen recombination being continually counter-balanced by water splitting.
In any event oxygen-breathing organisms could soak up the excess gas as soon as it was produced.
We have also seen that there were ‘sinks’ in the form of sedimentary rocks.
So early oxygen levels would have been periodically depressed, in order to allow the first photosynthesizers to carry on evolving.
Nevertheless vegetation soon started to proliferate — because liverworts, mosses, ferns, coniferous plants and flowers appeared in quick succession, introducing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere in ever-increasing quantities.
This was achieved through photosynthesis: plants were    able, by converting sunlight into energy, to live solely on sunshine, air and water, combined with other simple elements gleaned from the soil.
They produce oxygen as a waste product, a normally lethal poison to the plant cell.
Light is converted into chemical energy which in turn is reconverted by combustion or decay into organic energy.
Fig.5.
How the threat to organic life from ultraviolet radiation has decreased over millions of years, as molecular and tri-atomic oxygen has increased.
(Adapted from New Scientist )
Photosynthesis depends on chlorophyll.
It exists in four slightly different forms, all based on a ring-like atomic structure formed by four chemical units known as pyrroles.
Chlorophyll depends naturally on light, CO 2 , humidity and warmth, although primary photoreaction proceeds at the same rate regardless of temperature.
Soon nitrogen, a trace gas that existed in the early Earth's atmosphere in minute quantities, accumulated to become the dominant gas, largely because it does not combine readily with the other basic four, so it is not ‘sunk’ so easily.
Once oxygen and nitrogen appeared, the groundwork was laid for the beginnings of vegetation.
Oxygen, too, began to increase faster than new ‘sinks’ could neutralize it, or before it could be buried in sediments.
Some 1800 million years ago atmospheric oxygen was fast approaching the present level of about 21 per cent of the total.
The Cell — Precursor of Animal Life
Now the Earth was becoming more complex, with the beginnings of two kinds of life-form emerging.
A crucial and obvious biological distinction is that between plants and animals, but a more important distinction is the way life is based on one type of cell or another.
Needless to say, plants had to evolve before animals: i.e. they had to become the food for which primitive animals had in turn to colonize the land to seek.
Vegetation indirectly created the protective ozone shield by pumping oxygen into the atmosphere.
More importantly, it held the soil in place, helped alleviate flooding and moderated the atmospheric temperature.
Evolution soon enabled some cells to take in, as food, highly organized matter, such as other life-forms.
Thus ready-formed vitamins and proteins could be absorbed without them having to be laboriously manufactured from gases, other minerals, or light energy.
Fig.6.
Evolution as a ladder of progression, where the tiny and simple aggregate together over time to become the large and complex.
(Adapted from Peter Russell:The Awakening Earth )
Both plants and animals are made up of eukaryotic cells, although the first simple cell was the procaryotic type.
Most procaryotes, using oxygen, depend on the simpler process of fermentation for their energy, where chemical food is broken down and burned inside the cell.
This cell, derived from the earliest life-form on Earth, although microscopically tiny (an earthworm, for example, contains more than a billion cells) is still a very complicated chemical factory.
Bacteria and blue-green algae are chemically very similar, both being of the procaryotic kind, and are often known as cyanobacteria.
Cyanobacteria still exist today, like the purple sulphur bacteria which glean hydrogen from hydrogen-sulphide to provide sulphur compounds as oxidation products.
Even higher organisms resort to fermentation as an auxiliary process when the oxygen supply is insufficient.
Throughout prehistory they have formed great carpet-like layers, the so called stromatolites, like those found in Zimbabwe nearly three billion years ago, slowly calcifying into limestone.
Nevertheless in the early days many of the other forms of bacteria died off in vast numbers.
Some, the precursors of fungi, could only survive in the dark.
Ultimately the demand for nutrients became more than could be supplied by the Sun.
The way out of this predicament was to alter their own environment through their own metabolism.
Some micro-organisms began to manufacture their own nourishment and at the same time provide a food-chain base for all other emerging creatures.
Soon a new strain of oxygen-mediating species arose, enabling evolution to proceed as fast as carbon could be buried in the sediment.
The procaryotic cell began to change its form somewhere between 1.3 and 2 billion years ago, when it evolved a kind of brain, developing a small nucleus at the centre that could control the entire  chemical manufacturing process.
It thus became the eukaryotic cell.
Food could be turned into energy via respiration, in which glucose is either derived from food or from photosynthesis.
The cell developed a new way of consuming oxygen to make carbon dioxide and water to release energy.
We know that the eukaryotic cell is much larger and more efficient than the procaryote, carrying more genetic material.
Both cells exhibit the same biochemical pathways in photosynthesis, hinting at a common origin.
Some scientists suggest that the procaryote is a degenerate eukaryote, one that has lost its unique features.
The new eukaryotic cell was porous, and surrounded by a membrane a few ten-millionths of a millimetre thick.
It trapped inside the cell the building blocks of raw materials such as amino acids which were converted into larger molecules.
The cell also housed a watery fluid known as the cytoplasm, which contains the organelles that control a sequence of chemical processes converting food to energy.
A certain type of organelle is the powerhouse, and is called the mitochondria, converting food into energy.
Another set of ingredients, known as the ribosomes, are responsible for making new protein molecules.
More importantly the larger molecules manufactured inside the cell were later to be called the dna.
Today every single living thing that has ever lived, from a bacterium to a plant or a fully formed animal, has been built according to specifications laid down in the molecules of the dna called chromosomes.
The specific components of chromosomes in turn are called genes, that familiar word describing how detailed information about the whole organism is passed on from generation to generation.
In fact, dna acts as the chemical basis for heredity, serving as a template for its own replication and for instructing the sequence of amino acids and proteins.
The dna molecule is composed of the string of compounds called nucleotide, having four bases attached to them: A C G T. What is surprising about dna is that A and T will cling together, and so will C and G. A single  dna chain, immersed in a pool of nucleotide, will latch on to its counterpart and thus be able to duplicate itself when the double chain is split apart.
The dna message is copied out onto the rna strand, which is almost identical to the dna (and which actually generates it).
This rna strand is called ribosome, and is somewhat like a computer tape which the rna can zip through to specify the correct amino acid.
The early eukaryotic cell soon evolved an efficient method of sustaining its own growth, for the properties of a particular cell (such as its shape and its abilities) are determined by the chemical processes that go on within it.
These chemical reactions would normally proceed very slowly were it not for Nature's invention of complex molecules called enzymes, which we have also met before in this chapter.
Enzymes are a form of protein made out of a very precise order of amino acids.
Particular molecules will attach themselves to the enzyme surface so that atoms can be transferred rapidly.
The enzymes, in effect, determine the function of all multicellular organisms.
Possibly the chromosomes carry a ‘blueprint’ of all the enzymes in the cell, guiding their manufactures.
In a human being one cell contains 23 pairs of chromosomes.
Each time a cell divides, the chromosomes also divide.
A word of caution.
The concept of an advantageous mutation spurring evolution is the standard model with which evolutionists still work.
But this view has been challenged in a recent issue of Genetics by Barry Hall of Rochester University, following on from research done in 1988 by John Cairns, a respected molecular biologist.
Hall says that mutations in the genetic code of some bacteria occur more often when they are useful than when they are not.
Both types of mutation — harmful or useful — may arise at different rates depending on stresses inherent in the environment.
When, for example, colonies of bacterial species in a laboratory were deprived of a certain kind of amino acid needed for growth, they produced mutant strains capable of producing their own amino acids.
The implication from Hall's research is  that organisms can adapt their genes to suit their environment, and that the production of genetic mutations is not necessarily separate from natural selection.
In turn it means that adaptive evolution may be faster than biologists had thought.
It is with this startling new perspective in mind that we view the eukaryotic cell's rapid multiplication as it spread throughout the world's oceans, finally replacing all the free-floating molecule strands that preceded it.
One great improvement involved the outer membrane of the cell.
Some became sticky and could clump together in colonies.
In this way the individual cells could protect themselves from danger.
Different cells took on different functions.
A division of labour of newly forming sense organs arose.
Some cells, for instance, became more efficient at assimilating food, and became the gut of new organisms.
Others acquired a harder outer membrane to later become skin-like materials.
Other cells especially sensitive to light became vestigial eyes, and those susceptible to vibrations became hearing organs, and so on.
These new improved organisms were much better able to survive and avoid danger, to find food and to reproduce, multiplying ever more rapidly.
They became yet more complex, true progenitors of real plants and animals.
But by now even more fundamental differences were beginning to appear.
In the case of plants the organic energy is derived from a primary source, and in the case of animals and carnivores, consuming both plants and meat, it is secondary.
In other words mammals and living creatures generate kinetic energy and heat when food is burnt in respiration.
Even the bacteria that feed on animal and plant wastes derive their energy from the Sun.
The ecosystem as a result is shaped and controlled through the action of absorbed light energy.
Furthermore, plants utilize carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that animals eject, and animals Bean yet more energy from the environment by utilizing the oxygen that plants eject by converting it into new combinations of chemicals.
It is this complicated self-regulatory process that has  made such a profound impression on the Gaianists; i.e. the notion that living matter itself both defines and maintains the conditions necessary for survival, and that the chief physical features of the Earth are biologically controlled.
Furthermore this ‘biothropic’ principle, as we referred to it earlier, implies that Man is the ultimate beneficiary of this chain of events.
With his imagination stirred Man could consciously ‘terraform’ other planets to bring about similar Earth-like conditions.
Carl Sagan, the distinguished astrophysicist, suggested in 1961 that Venus could be made habitable to earthlings if it were seeded with blue-green algae, which would split up the carbon and oxygen molecules to glean the carbon necessary for the glucose and carbohydrate diets they would need.
Similarly Michael Allaby and James Lovelock suggest that living organisms could.be introduced into the sterile environment of Mars to warm up the atmosphere.
The carbon thus liberated would stimulate a mini greenhouse effect very quickly indeed (owing to the incredible speed at which micro-organisms multiply) and bring the temperature up to around 80°F in the northern hemisphere.
In the meantime, on Earth, we have reached the stage in our narrative where simple unicellular creatures have become multicellular creatures, the earliest known of which would have been the jellyfish.
Jellyfish-remains dating from the Archaeozoic/Cambrian boundary have been found, for example, in Australia.
Many of the other early multicelled creatures were similar to jellyfish and, like sea anemones, circular in appearance.
They were simple creatures, made of two layers of cells, one on the outside and one on the inside, with every part of the body within reach of the outside for the efficient transport of nutrients and wastes.
Flatworms and tapeworms succeeded in inventing a third layer of cells in between the other two.
Blood vessels in this new middle layer gave genuine and unique scope for developing internal complexity by lining up inner and outer layers.
Most of the main animal groups appeared quite suddenly  600 million years ago in what has become known as the ‘Cambrian explosion’.
According to Peter Cook and John Shergold, of the Bureau of Mineral Resources in Canberra, this event probably occurred through a sudden release of phosphates from the deep ocean brought up by a change in ocean currents or crustal movements.
Contrasting designs in worms occurred.
Many could successfully survive in a harsh environment, and their bodies enabled them to evolve into larger and more diverse creatures.
Ultimately they turned into giant flies, octopuses and tadpole-like animals.
Others, like sponges, consisted of a colony of cells with a porous skeleton.
However, James Valentine of the University of California suggests worms may have evolved from arthropods (jointed-legged creatures) rather than the other way around, because they had cavities in their middle layer (known as coeloms) which they used as skeletons to support themselves when burrowing.
These coeloms have since atrophied in insects.
The earlier unicellular species were by now well adapted to their environment, and only changed their biochemical functions because of the genetic ‘errors’, the mutations, that periodically occurred.
But all the while these mutations, as well as the natural hazards of the environment — the temperature variations, the strength of solar radiation, the salt concentrations in ocean water, for example— all acted to diversify populations.
They grew in numbers and complexity.
Soon complex life-forms emerged, based upon chemical arrangements that differed from each other.
Then other living organisms provided them with further opportunities, and through symbiosis (a mutually-dependent state of living together) they created, finally, animals.
THE FIRST CREATURES
THE FIRST creatures emerged on Earth as a result of biological processes becoming ever more complex and, some would argue, ever more mysterious.
Fortunately in trying to fathom out what happened next we have the advantage of the known laws of science.
For example, we know that a biological system of animals should function like any other system.
There must be some flow of energy and information, and some dynamic mechanism to use this information.
The system must also have a structure such as an ordered set of channels through which the energy can be directed.
What the neo-Darwinists have in their favour is almost irrefutable evidence arising from recent advances in the techniques of molecular biology and genetic engineering which virtually prove that modern species did evolve from common ancestors.
However, for a variety of reasons animals become less similar as the evolutionary process continues and molecule patterns begin to differ.
Populations that belong to a specific group with common ancestry are known to have a single genetic system.
The dna determines the activities of the cell and thus the organism's shape, form and function.
Together the sum of all genes possessed by the individuals in a population is known as the gene pool , and copies of the genes survive in other bodies to be replicated.
Furthermore the information flows can be changed over time as a result of mutation in the genetic code or by the individual's own  genetic system, and some information might thus be eliminated.
These changes in genetic information are passed on to offspring, a process responsible for what the neo-Darwinists call natural selection.
Hence the individual soon knows, from this genetic information, what its form and structure is (its morphology), and it begins to acquire behavioural characteristics.
The blueprint for the adult creature, derived from both parents of any species, is the phenotype .
and it is the phenotype which most biologists think is the genetic mechanism for evolution.
This does not mean that a ‘blueprint’ in the engineering sense exists.
The idea that acquired characteristics or congenital injuries (or calluses on the knees of camels, for example) are passed on from father to offspring, was once taught by the Lamarckian school and is now discredited.
The genetic code, in fact, merely ‘tells’ the organisms how to assemble their particular haemoglobin and bodily chemistry.
Organisms throughout history have become increasingly efficient, with ‘selection’ driving this genetic process forward.
Once self-replication had got under way molecules could pile on other more complex molecules in a loose association.
If the less successful variants were not multiplying quickly enough an element of competition would also mean that poor replicators will be less efficient at acquiring the means of survival to keep the new species going.
Eventually they reached a stage where they became integrated units.
One theory says biochemical mechanisms to control the regulation of growth of some part of the organisms, say hormones or fur, may themselves become fault, or the conveyed messages over aeons may change, or the genes may suddenly switch off to inhibit the growth of winter fur of an animal used to northern climes.
If this is so, it could very likely be the scenario for extinction as a result of genetic errors or failures.
In other words, it was when replication went wrong, when random errors occurred in the copying process, that the process of evolution and extinction forged ahead, to populate the world with offspring slightly  different from their progenitors while other genera died out.
Here we ought to stress that evolution is not spurred simplistically on by ‘random mutation’, as the Oxford zoologist Richard Dawkins points out in his book The Blind Watchmaker .
He is in particular concerned to rebut the argument of anti-Darwinists who claim that if mutations are merely ‘random’ they cannot be biased towards improvement.
This is not to deny that random changes are not automatically beneficial, but the direction towards improvement comes from natural selection; i.e. from genetic changes that were an aid to survival.
This is where biogeology comes more clearly into the picture.
For instance, Dawkins refers to other kinds of non-random influences, such as the ‘mutagens’ that can cause cancers: for example , X-rays, cosmic rays, various chemical and radioactive substances.
Some part of an organism's chromosomes have a high rate of turnover of genes, and are called ‘hot spots’ which locally have a very high mutation rate.
If mutagens like cosmic rays are present then all normal mutation rates are boosted.
Darwinism implies that some species must triumph over others not because they are fitter in some genetic or athletic sense, but because they are better able to survive in a competitive ambiance.
In other words, they are ‘better designed’ not simply by chance (which would be the case if a large single-step mutation occurred), but by the accumulation of myriads of single-step mutations aided, over long periods of time, by the natural weeding-out process of those species less successfully adapted for long-term survival.
The idea of fitness is a subtle one, and depends greatly on genetic make-up rather than morphology.
Definite physical events in the universe and on Earth act as a non-random thrust towards improvement.
Amelioration occurs in some groups, but most organic change centres around a ‘set of basic designs’ then reflecting a saga of accumulating excellence.
Our view is that competition between species drives  life onward, with one form gaining space in the crowded ecology of the Earth only by forcing out others.
However, it is probably true to say that Darwin's theory does not dominate biological thought as much as it used to.
Natural selection is important, but may not apply universally.
As we have seen, some genetic change may not take place at random, or events may occur more quickly than Darwin believed.
Another view holds that evolution depends heavily on environmental change, so the struggle is often more with the wider world than with other species.
Evolution requires very many difficult and coordinated genetic modifications, which clearly are coterminous with, or causally related to, geophysical changes.
How Animal Groups are Sub-divided
As time passed, scientists felt they had to organize and categorize the growing number of different phenotypes and their evolving descendants.
They came up with a taxonomic hierarchy: phyla, class, order, sub-orders, genus (or genera) and species.
Phyla can be divided into orders, orders into families, families into genera, which in turn are sub-divided into species.
Genera, sub-species, etc., can succeed each other temporarily or permanently, and if permanently either abruptly or gradually by transformation.
The lion and tiger species are to be found within the genus Felis .
Humans are members of the phylum vertebrata,class mammalia,order primates,sub-order Anthropoidai,genus Homo, and species sapiens.
However, no new phyla have appeared since the Cambrian period, some 500 million years ago, hinting, as Gordon Rattray Taylor once pointed out, that perhaps evolution has actually come to a halt.
It is interesting to note that there have, so far as we know, only been thirty-one phyla in all of pre-history; nine have become totally extinct.
Up to twenty vanished basic phyla of soft-bodied creatures have been identified  from the fossil record of 520 million years ago — all utterly different from anything known today.
Recent discoveries by Cambridge University paleontologists have revealed that the prehistoric creatures that roamed the primeval oceans were even stranger and more varied than we can imagine.
Some had five eyes and mouths like elephants' trunks, and yet others appeared to be walking on stilt-like appendages, and had heads with no features at all, not even mouths.
Curiously, one pre eminent group of creatures that included not only the dinosaurs but birds and humans — a group that has lasted to the present day — was the bipedal or two-legged walking variety that had a group of sense organs at one end.
An even larger phyla would be the vertebrates, to include not only all animals but every-thing with a skeleton, articulated limbs or a shell, such as crabs or insects.
It is clear that these larger groups or  phyla have arisen because of what can only be called co-evolution : the changes to take place in their body types have been more or less continuously in tune with evolutionary changes in their habitat or environment.
For example, the running animals with long legs abide in areas with no thick vegetative cover in which to hide.
It has been pointed out that the modern ostrich and the Cretaceous Struthiomimus lived in the same sort of exposed habitat, and thus evolved similar bipedal running gaits.
Likewise a long neck gives a good vantage point to warn of advancing predators.
In other words genetic and geographic forces operate in tandem, as a form of biogeology or biogeography.
A further example is the modern Australian lungfish, of the genus dipnoi , which has a substance in its brain that lowers its metabolism when rivers seasonally dry up, as if it were hibernating, so it could survive while others died off.
But this also means that as the morphology of species matured over great periods of historic time, other forms became more adapted to life on land, while yet others returned to the water to escape the increasing  competition.
It would be a mistake to make too many sweeping generalizations.
It is still not easy to come to terms with the inexplicably uneven impact of the environment on changing animal morphology.
For this reason some scientists argue that changes in the environment are not a satisfactory explanation because they are not sufficiently unique, and whatever phenotypic modifications occurred might just as easily be renewed or reversed.
The eminent evolutionary biologist from Harvard, Stephen Jay Gould, points to the weird ocean-going creatures mentioned above, where entire communities of soft-bodied organisms were preserved intact in a freak mudslide.
The Burgess Shales, as they have become known, is proof to Gould that chance is more important than natural selection, since they all died off without issue whereas some minor offshoots of the extinct phenotypes, like the Crustaceans, went on to become important stepping-stones on the evolutionary ladder from which mammals finally emerged.
This suggests that human beings arrived on Earth more or less by accident, since no special feature marked off the Crustaceans as being ‘fitter’ in a Darwinian sense.
But even a random mudslide extinction serves to reinforce the fact that evolution involves the survival of individuals via the interchange of energy among contemporaneous plants and animal organisms, and between the Earth itself.
Furthermore each living thing, plant and animal reacts and competes with other members of its species.
The first-order consumers (the herbivores) ate the plants, and the second-order consumers (the carnivores or meat-eaters) ate the herbivores.
Populations divided into predators and prey, or hosts and parasites.
This inter-relatedness was akin to a web rather than a chain — with complicating overlapping functions — since a great many organisms were parasites on all sorts of organic and biological life.
But evolution ploughed on remorselessly, enabling only the most adaptable to go on to the next stage.
This relationship, for very long periods, was in  equilibrium.
It was when it was disturbed — when the predator-prey ratio, or climatic changes, occurred — that events were set in train which would lead to inevitable extinction.
A major difficulty arises when fossil species disappear for good as the physical environment, over millions of years, inevitably changes.
Herein lies an important clue, but also a further puzzle.
When we try to ascertain whether climate and geophysical turbulence could have affected evolution, we have to ask whether the changes in environment killed off species or whether there was simply a gap in the record.
Was there a sudden appearance of a new species, or were there cases of gradual succession?
The way ahead for paleontologists trying to build up a knowledge of evolution has been spurred on by the revolution in plate tectonics, which has provided a better understanding of the stratigraphic record and fossilized data.
For example, the presence of fossil salt lakes suggests hot and arid conditions; dune sand and soils cemented with minerals indicate deserts.
The stratigraphic record can at best link these two important phenomena — the emergence of species and the long-term atmospheric temperature changes.
In other words, the stress forces of the Earth, in particular stresses brought about by severe changes in climate, and the changing chemical nature of the surface, may have contributed to the great expansion, and occasional contraction, of species within narrow phyla that evolved from the recognizable solid life in the oceans (oceanic life started, probably, in the Algonkian period, somewhere between 670 million and 600 million years ago).
Stress can manifest itself in more than one way.
For example, Conway Morris of Cambridge University's Earth Science Department believes that the comparative emptiness of the early oceans indicates minimal inter-group rivalry, but that 520 million years ago the competition began to hot up, and the basic animal groups, evidenced from parts of the fossil record of Northern America and Australia, were reduced from 55 to around 35.
Another kind of stress is of a more abstract nature.
Physicist Paul Davies talks about the progression to more complex organisms via the evolutionary ladder, and the steady accumulation of complexity which is time-  asymmetric ; it defines an arrow of time from past to future.
The geophysical is also time-  asymmetric , of course.
For example, the Variscan orogenic cycles started in the Paleozoic era were said to be responsible for the mountain chains of North America, Europe and Africa.
This period of geophysical upheaval lasted until the late Carboniferous and early Permian times and was responsible for modifying Earth temperatures in the process.
Time-  asymmetry thus implies that while the terrain was undergoing upheaval new types of animal arose through a feedback process, because they needed the land for further food, and because the waxing and waning ice-ages together with (or as a result of) the early breakup and reformation of the continents often had major and fatal consequences for marine and land faunas.
Old ecological niches were destroyed in the process and new ones opened up.
Seas receded and new land surfaces arose and joined up with others, inviting colonization of a whole ecological community.
From Sea to Land
But let us look again at the quirky, fortuitous way in which evolution favours particular phenotypes.
It appears that the precocious young of some invertebrates could reproduce without achieving adulthood.
They were called the chordates, and started a momentous chain of evolutionary events.
They had rudimentary spinal columns and became the forerunners of fish.
Original vertebrate material was probably of the softer cartilage type, rather than hard bone, plus a brain-case housing an elaborate nervous system.
Even today some creatures, such as modern sharks, still have a solid gelatinous backbone, probably exemplifying an embryonic structure midway between the cartilaginous and  bony vertebra of more developed classes.
However, the chordates were not quite fish, since they were without jaws or fins and fed by sucking in water and whatever nutrients it contained.
Another important staging post in animal evolution in the seas was a change from the soft-bodied creatures to those with a hard protective exterior, as predatory species became more numerous.
They were the first molluscs (such as clams, snails and octopuses) and arthropods (insects and crabs), and were halfway between being single-celled organisms and a complete colony of cells.
This change occurred at the beginning of the Paleozoic era starting with the Cambrian period, about 570 to 700 million years ago.
Later they evolved into large insects, and fed on the smaller creepy crawly species then becoming abundant, and on plants and other shallow marine life.
From the primitive algae of the Archaeozoic era, which ultimately would continue as mosses and fungi right up to the present day, there was a branching off of the lycopodiates, early ferns, cycladals and filicales.
Once more we are obliged to take notice of biogeographic factors.
Rising levels of oxygen would benefit the slowly evolving vertebrates, with mutations involving stiffening through the growth of external coverings, which ordinarily would have been lethal since they would inhibit the diffusion of oxygen.
They had a flexible backbone, composed largely of calcium phosphate, with hinges able to support the muscles and other soft parts.
They became strong and agile swimmers, still vulnerable to attack but much less so than the invertebrates.
These new streamlined creatures became the first fish and soon underwent a further important change when they began to develop a movable jaw, paving the way for the Devonian period — the ‘Age of Fishes’.
So far this has taken nearly three billion years of slow evolution, occasionally fuelled by a flurry of faster change.
All the while important geophysical events were unrelenting.
On the whole the climate of prehistoric times was warmer and more uniform than it is now.
The  history of the Earth before about 2.5 billion years ago was one of a high rate of heat-loss mainly through vertical tectonic motions.
All this implies greater volcanicity because the Earth was attempting to outgas radioactive heat at the spreading ridges, and so massive ‘hot spots’ appeared.
From Cambrian times onwards temperatures had been alternating between warm, moderate and glacial.
As time passed there was a possible lowering of local temperatures in the succeeding Ordovician period.
This may have had something to do with the start of the Variscan orogeny.
And yet, according to fossilized coral reefs, when the period of orogenis ended the Silurian climate became warmer.
Life by that time had appeared on land above sea level, and there were the first plants and terrestrial invertebrates.
Ocean levels were not constant, being dependent on a complex interchange of geophysical events requiring an understanding of the way in which sea and land change place with each other(see Chapter 9).
Plate tectonic movements and internal melting, gravitational segregation responsible for the distinctive differences of rock type, and contrasting local characteristics all played their part.
Spreading ridges can decrease the total volume of the world's oceans, but a prolonged period of volcanism may also have increased the total volume of water.
Some 360 million years ago the beginnings of dense forests showed up in the fossil record, with tall, looming foliage.
It was shortly after, during the Carboniferous period when the first reptiles appeared, that really massive tree-growth was achieved.
In the meantime the Devonian temperature increased and desert areas expanded.
The fish and amphibians had the sea to keep them cool, and the neo-reptiles, ‘designed’ to cope with drying-up ponds, hibernated in the mud.
By the middle of the succeeding Triassic, which was warm and equable, all major fish groups had evolved.
Fig.7.
Osteolepsis was a lobe-finned fish from the Devonian period that was the likely ancestor of the amphibians.
The Beginning Reptiles
Then another line developed from the main line of succession of bony-jawed ray-fin fish, which had a tougher fin structure useful for sifting through seabed mud.
Some, the lobefins, developed armour but in the process became considerably less agile than their softer compatriots.
The rays, more flexible and better equipped for swimming, became the most successful: the lobefins much less so.
But it was the latter who paved the way for the evolution of vestigial limbs that enabled them to crawl onto the land.
The transition from aquatic to terrestrial eco-systems probably occurred when the climate became increasingly warm.
During the Paleozoic there were warmer oceans and the thermal stresses were probably rigorous.
It was with the onset of a more variable temperature, and the beginning of climatic zones, in the late Paleozoic, that gave rise to vertebrates attempting to employ primitive temperature-control strategies.
By this time much of the swamp forest of northern America had vanished.
Shrinking seas caused widespread epidemics and eutrophication, thus hastening the continuing need to get oxygen from the air.
In such situations the survivors in the evolutionary race are invariably the gleaners of oxygen from both water and air.
This means they must have been capable  of crawling onto the land, like the sole survivors today of such creatures, called the dipnoans, a type of fish with lungs which live in Africa, Australia and South America.
They can bury themselves in mud during droughts and live in a cocoon made out of mucus from their skin.
By the middle of the Devonian the lobe-finned fish had acquired a suitable set of bones and muscles, and a stumpy fin arrangement that could easily be adapted to a four-footed locomotion.
They lived in drying-out river beds, thus getting used to deoxygenating environs.
At the same time it is likely that the insects developed tracheal breathing through perforations in their surface tissue which conducted oxygen directly into their bodies.
Tracheal breathing in the open air limits the size to which creatures can grow, and most today have wingspans no wider than 6 cm (see Chapter 3).
By the late Carboniferous a vertebrate amphibian with weak stumpy legs had arrived, probably descended from the ichthyostegids.
They had a fish tail, jaws with teeth about three inches long, and were the forerunners of reptiles and salamanders.
The ichthyostegids in turn came from a group known as the rhipidistias, and radiated (migrated outwards) across the Paleozoic land masses in the moist coal forests with club mosses and giant seed ferns.
It is not clear what happened next, and there is some dispute about how the first amphibians actually breathed.
Did the rhipidistias evolve into a creature with an internal bladder, or into one which possessed a diaphragm-type of breathing mechanism?
There is an important distinction between the two.
Some types of air-breathing fish known as polypterids breathed air not by sucking it in through the mouth and forcing the lung-sac to expand, but by a reptilian-like muscular movement (which is also how mammals breathe).
The key to the polypterid method of breathing is the elastic skin of interlocking scales, like body armour, which they used as a kind of diaphragm.
As the first land-based creatures would need a tougher, armoured skin to protect them from their new environment, it is likely that these were the first amphibians.
If this is so, it renders rather arcane the controversy about whether the dipnois were the true air-sucking lungfish, or the crossopterygii as is recorded in most textbooks.
The view of the American Museum of Natural History, led by the late Don Rosen, is that the dipnois should have evolved into the first tetrapods, or four-legged land-based animals.
It does seem however, from the evidence of the Australian National University concerning the Gogo lungfish, that a complicated scenario arose where other techniques of air-breathing occurred accidentally, and that air-sac creatures invaded freshwater habitats while the diaphragm-breathers became the first land inhabitants.
In any event, one kind of fish adapted its fishlike backbones and tougher, firmer fins for crawling with.
They became eusthenopteron, a more advanced genus which survived in the fossil record until Triassic times.
This further improved their efficiency in the search for more food.
They could catch and eat more of their staple diet — worms and insects — surviving in accordance with the laws of natural selection.
They were able to make forays onto the land and back for longer periods into the water, to keep their skin damp and to reproduce.
By this time limbs and improved lungs were becoming essential.
Massive structural changes were necessary to   facilitate a move onto the land; legs were needed — or at least became handy — to relieve the pressure of the amphibious bodies hitherto capable only of slithering along the ground.
And a strong pelvic girdle with links was essential for transmitting the support of the fin/legs to a gradually strengthening spine.
Furthermore, those species that accidentally forged some connecting suspension for the front legs independent of the skull would be among the first to walk, otherwise the head would have to turn constantly from side to side as it did so.
Fig.8.
Eusthenopteron, one of the first of the crossopterygii to grow stumpy fins, which later became legs.
The early amphibians spanned the late Devonian right up to the end of the Triassic, some 345 to 195 million years ago, as ‘lords of the coal swamps’.
The amphibians diffused during the Upper Paleozoic into a number of groups.
The last of them, before becoming extinct between the Permian and Triassic periods, were extremely large members of the labyrinthodont group.
Most of them had cartilaginous vertebrae, like modern toads.
Fossil remains of giant frogs that were coterminous with the labyrinthodonts have been found in the Spanish Tertiary.
But they survived long enough for the continents to regroup and to radically alter the atmosphere.
They were vertebrates that learned to live out of water paradoxically so that they could also continue to live in water.
But more importantly they were the forerunners of a new species that were survivors in a harshly changing Earth.
In the meantime, snail-like creatures grew stronger carapaces for protection against drying out.
They also developed primitive lungs, as did some lobe-finned fish.
Paleontologists are now certain that vertebrate bone started as a form of armour, and may not have been ‘designed’ to enable sea creatures to walk on land.
Such are the oddities of evolution to which Gordon Rattray Taylor was referring.
Bone, in fact, started on the surface of the head, rather than in the early backbones.
The other rib and limb bones eventually hardened from their vestigial origins in the cartilage of fishes.
Land animals need to protect themselves from drying out, so scales were exchanged for an impervious skin (although some  amphibians can control the admission of water through their skin with the aid of hormones).
In addition the conquest of the land required a stronger skeleton once the buoyant support of the sea was finally abandoned.
Such embryonic creatures needed stronger muscles, too, and a skin that was resistant to drying out.
What undoubtedly stimulated great evolutionary changes in vertebrate history was the emergence of the first amniote egg.
Hitherto the ichthyostegids risked the  desiccation of the unshielded eggs in a dry environment until they had perfected a method of laying them in a slimy, tapioca-like substance.
But the amphibians could go one step further, around 395 million years ago, by producing a jelly-like fluid contained within a thin but tough shell, like a miniaturized aquatic environment.
It retained water and yet had subtle membranes which permitted air to penetrate and facilitated waste disposal of the embryo.
Thus equipped, these new animals were able to grow bigger and move about freely.
In turn the later reptiles could diversify on land when they could lay eggs away from a watery environment.
Reptiles differ from amphibians in that, because of the development of the amniote egg, they are able to breed on land as well as live there most of the time.
And yet the amniote egg is a curious phenomenon since it arrived, as in other examples, before the environmental need for it arose.
In the meantime, ecological stress continued to make its mark felt, and an interrelationship between climatic change and physiological temperature regulation became even more apparent.
For example, during the Carboniferous a more bizarre and highly specialized strain of reptile/amphibian emerged — the pelycosaurs.
They were large animals that lived at the same time as the forerunners of the dinosaurs, the petrolacosaurs.
Their skin was stretched out between long spines, which seems to have acted as a cooling radiator.
This is probably the fist example of creatures regulating their body heat.
Indeed, although such characteristics are commonly thought to be the domain of animals and birds, the evidence shows  that thermogenic regulation first occurred in the reptiles.
(A pelycosaur sub-order like the Dimetrodon , with its great cooling crest, was three and a half metres long.)
The Evolving Reptiles
The pelycosaurs tended to develop rudimentary teeth.
Most flesh-eating reptiles have simple spikes that prevent them from chewing their prey; they have to gulp it down whole and then remain in a torpor for days or weeks to digest the meal.
With specialized teeth the meat can be sliced into smaller chunks before swallowing it, thus enabling the stomach acids to more quickly penetrate the meal.
The evolutionary advantage of this is that the animal need not lie around in a torpid state, vulnerable to attack.
And as important as the invention of teeth was, reproduction out of water via the amniote egg was an even more eventful turning point, and in more ways than one.
This biologic fact was intricately connected with other climatic and geophysical events that set the mould for future cycles of evolution and extinction.
Indeed, by the late Silurian, colonization of the changing land with its newly emerging continents was well under way.
The past was beginning to accelerate, drawing upon what had already been accomplished in its continued drive towards greater complexity, as land surfaces similarly underwent transformation.
Both animals and plants were diversifying and were dependent on the increasing amounts of oxygen in the atmosphere.
By now reptile/amphibian morphological distinctions were becoming blurred, and there was a lot of overlap of body shape and biology.
The seymouriamorphs were a major phylum on the evolutionary ladder with a skeleton featuring characteristics of both reptiles and amphibians, and probably were descendants of a missing link of transitional animals.
The seymouriamorphs appeared in the Upper Carboniferous and developed rapidly and spectacularly into groups of more advanced reptiles, some feeding on plants.
Again there was a trend to increasing  size, and they ultimately became the predominant land animal, expanding territorially during the last 70 million years of Paleozoic history and preying on the abundance of insects.
Meanwhile important changes were taking place on the land.
The climate was turning warm and humid and beginning to dry out the swamplands.
Large tropical forests and extensive marshes covered most of the continents.
Ferns, club mosses and gymnosperms continued the tree-like growth of the Devonian period, when a moderate climate became warmer, and this dense foliage locked up the carbon as our present coal deposits, thus increasing even further the oxygen content of the atmosphere.
In the succeeding Mesozoic era there was an initial radiation of the reptile class at the start of the first period, the Triassic, with a few more radiations in the following Jurassic.
These were all forms which failed towards the end of the Cretaceous, except for the crocodilian which still live on, virtually unchanged, today.
In the Triassic there were reptiles that could be classified as either pseudo-lizards or pseudo-crocodiles.
The remaining reptiles were probably left-over from the Permian and some were the ancestors of the dinosaurs and other reptiles of later Mesozoic times.
Two groups of animals can appear to be distantly related because of their size and body shape, and begin to diverge and then become   similar in form much later because both share the same way of life.
Fig.9.
An ichthyostegid, a descendant of the crossopterygii from the late Carboniferous, where stumpy fins became stumpy legs.
By this time species failure was becoming as apparent, from the fossil record, as species survival and progress.
Death en masse was becoming part of the natural order of things.
By the close of the Permian, 75 per cent of all amphibian families and more than 50 per cent of reptile families had vanished from the fossil record.
This was certainly more dramatic than the more publicized event that finished off the dinosaurs.
One group that disappeared was the fusulinids, complex protozoa that ranged from the microscopic to two or three inches in size.
Their shells created thick deposits of limestone.
The tiny brachiopods vanished, too.
Most of the amphibians had been replaced from the land by about 345 million years ago, and from the water by 195 million years ago, and only the frogs, newts and salamanders now survive.
Episodes of extinction during the past 450 million years seemed to be ecological substitutes and regrouping of better adapted species, but again as a result of retreating seas, by shifting plates and changes in climate.
During the Permian period, about 280 million years ago, and until the start of the Mesozoic era, the continents came together in a single mass.
Inevitably many marine creatures became extinct when their habitats were literally squeezed out of existence.
Species diversity also became limited, thus heightening intra-species competition, with the ‘fittest’ surviving.
These appeared, in the end, to be the dinosaurs.
So ‘fit’ and so well adapted were they, and so successfully did they dominate their terrestrial environment, that they survived for 140 million years.
Fig.10.
A seymouriamorph, an important transitional animal in the evolutionary story; halfway between an amphibian and a reptile.
DINOSAURS ON EARTH
THE DINOSAURS were the product of the now known laws of evolution.
Like other  genera and families they continued to change in structure, size and shape during the entire 140 million-year period of their existence.
Indeed, so long was their duration on Earth that those species which became extinct at the end were quite unlike those evolving from the reptiles in the early Triassic.
The Cretaceous period, in which they thrived but which was also marked by accelerated evolutionary trends that would ultimately make them extinct, is long even on the scale geologists use to measure history — 70 million years.
Indeed, the beginning of the period is as far removed from the end of it as we human beings are removed from it in history.
In other words, the later dinosaurs were nearer to us in time than their own earliest members.
Dinosaurs probably lived individually for one hundred years.
Assuming a generational period of, say, twenty-five years, they would have gone through 5½ million generations — more than fifty times the prehistory of Man.
It was inevitable that great changes would take place during the 140 million years, including extinctions of  genera and sub-orders, if not entire orders.
The fossil record shows that each new generation of dinosaur evinced marked evolutionary changes in body types which set them apart, and which fitted the ecological changes occurring coterminously around them.
These changes were mostly in size, gait, metabolism, chewing  and digestive mechanisms.
In the process, they played a key role in shaping the world as we know it; determining, in fact, the entire course of evolution.
Of course, animals constantly change their form over aeons.
If we were to travel back in a time-machine some five million years the physical differences would be quite discernible, even though most species such as monkeys, lions, horses and eagles would still exist.
However, 50 million years ago creatures would look much less like they do today: for example horses would have been the size of wolves and have had only three toes.
One hundred million years ago was the Age of Dinosaurs: many would look grotesquely large, leathery and fearsome, and be recognizable as dinosaurs to us only because of our clever reconstructions from the fossil record undertaken since the early nineteenth century.
From Crawling to Walking
Our evolutionary story takes us now beyond the proto-reptiles, the lizard-like ancestors of both reptiles and dinosaurs.
Some Permian reptiles thrived in a fresh-water environment, preying on more vulnerable victims in shallow waters, such as fish and smaller reptilian types.
All the earlier amphibians from the late Carboniferous and the Permian had died out in the Triassic, including the cotylosaurs.
Many mammal-like reptiles also died out.
Others, however, probably burrowed underground, surviving long enough to become the first true mammals.
We can now discern two major lines: the lizards and the archosaurs, which included the crocodiles as well as the dinosaurs.
The archosaurs took over from the mammal-like reptiles about two-thirds through the Triassic.
The mammals also existed at this time, starting a little later in the mid-Triassic, but in very insignificant numbers and they were tiny until after the death of the dinosaurs, after which they had more fully evolved from the pelycosaurs and therapsids.
The archosaurs stemmed from the thecodonts, an  order with teeth set in sockets rather than being welded to the jaw as with modern-day lizards.
This meant that all the teeth were being continually replaced.
As it turned out, socket-teeth were a highly successful innovation, permitting a great improvement in chewing techniques; one of many functional physiological adaptations that would prove to be of enormous survival value.
True crocodilian did not appear until the mid-Triassic, although they probably did not differ much from their late Permian ancestors.
In fact, modern crocodiles still have a strong resemblance to their long-lost thecodont ancestors, particularly the 230 million-year-old Chasmatosaurus , possessing the same pattern of bony scutes or plates — like armour — beneath the skin.
This illustrates yet again the somewhat uneven pattern of evolution, since crocodiles have in a sense regressed by returning to the water.
There were three distinctive characteristics about the archosaurs that paleontologists discovered marked them off from their antecedents.
The first was the shape and form of the skull.
Living reptiles have a skull like a rigid box, with a simple arrangement of jaw muscles.
They are classified according to the number of openings in the skull.
The most primitive reptile skull has no openings in the side behind the eye socket (like those in the tortoise and turtles).
These were the anapsids .
In later species there appeared an additional opening behind the eye socket to allow for an attachment of the various jaw muscles; these were the synapsids .
These applied to the scale-backed pelycosaurs and the mammal-like reptiles.
In the parapsid condition there is a single opening high up on the skull.
Dinosaurs like the ichthyosaurs and the plesiosaurs, based in swamplands, were parapsids.
The largest group of reptiles were diapsids .
These included all the archosaurs, many types of dinosaur, pterosaurs and crocodilian.
Present-day snakes and lizards have them.
They have two openings on each side of the skull which made it more like a scaffolding, and accounts for the unusually high number of archosaur   skulls broken into small fragments.
One theory about these openings is that they were Nature's way of lightening the head to make it more flexible and manoeuvrable: shattered archosaur skulls might be proof of this.
Fig.11.
One type of classification of reptiles is based on the number of holes in the skull.
The largest opening in the archosaur skull was the orbit, housing the eyes; behind this were two temporal openings which allowed for the bulging of the jaw muscles and might even serve to make the skull lighter, since with increasing body size every feature that could reduce weight helped.
Euparkeria appeared 225 million years ago at the beginning of the Triassic — a small archosaur.
In addition to the other openings it had a curious window-like aperture on the side of the snout with sloping sides, rather like a basin.
This was common to archosaurs, but not to crocodilian, and probably housed a large gland.
Lizards have a similar opening, between the nostrils and the eyes, for a gland that apparently helps get rid of excess salts which they tend to pick up from their dry and salty environments.
The second distinctive feature was the archosaur's evolving skeleton.
The familiar sprawling gait of the reptile is described by the Latin verb repere (to crawl or creep).
Sprawlers rest with the belly on the ground.
The main stride is from the elbow or knee, with the  humerus (upper arm or femur) or thigh projecting outwards.
Modern crocodiles do sometimes straighten themselves out when running at speed, thus the movement from shoulder and hips is longer and there is a more effective stride, but it is not their normal posture.
The archosaurs, however, gradually began to raise themselves permanently off the ground.
At first the change in bodily configurations was probably an aid to efficient swimming.
Protosuchus — about 1.5 metres long with a long head and powerful teeth — was the earliest crocodile.
It lived in freshwater lakes in southern Pangaea in the later Permian, and became less of a sprawler, swinging its limbs from the shoulders to the hips, thus lengthening its stride.
Ultimately the hind legs became strengthened at the expense of the front ones.
This was a great evolutionary turning point.
The tail became long and strong enough for sculling quickly through the water, and the hind legs could give powerful kicks to the river bottom.
Here environmental influences again became important, as the early Triassic experienced a drying-out trend that remorselessly began to reduce greatly the number of swamps.
The archosaurs had thus acquired an intermediate position, what has been referred to as ‘semi-erect’, particularly in those immediately ancestral to the dinosaur.
By  the middle of the Triassic, thecodonts were diversifying: many by now were able to rear up on hind legs, perhaps to catch insects.
Soon the archosaurs became distinctly superior to the reptiles, paving the way for bipedal loco-motion and, later, for similarly structured mammals with a more efficient heart and metabolism to come into existence.
Some 230 million years ago a new archosaur,Ornithosuchus , was alive.
Three metres long and heavy, almost as tall as a horse, it had a menacing array of sharp teeth.
The skull was proportionately bigger, narrowing at the front, almost beak-like.
It had bony armour along its back, and was able to run in rapid spurts on long legs.
Euparkeria, with more pronounced legs balanced by a long tail, was probably a more direct forerunner of dinosaurs than Ornithosuchus , but it was smaller and more agile.
The next step, in the late Triassic, was for very many of the archosaurs to become true dinosaurs.
Some became known as theropods, or beast-footed, because they walked in an upright (or mammalian) stance, usually on just two feet.
This meant that they had now gained a tremendous advantage over the reptiles, even causing the extinction of many of them.
They could successfully compete with the true mammals who also evolved in the late Triassic (and who also acquired the upright gait shortly after the archosaurs).
Dinosaurs, too, walked on tip-toe (i.e. they are known by paleontologists as being digitigrade) whereas sprawlers pad along on their soles.
The anatomical exception was that in the upper region of the dinosaur's femur a hinged joint occurred in the cotyloid cavity, implying that the leg could be moved forwards and backwards.
There was also an opening in the three adjoining hip bones, and the upper bone fused to the sacrum had a lateral bony ridge to prevent the femur from slipping out of joint.
The simplified distinction, from then on, between all dinosaurs is that some were bipedal (two-legged), and some were quadrupeds (four-legged).
The interesting fact    to note is that dinosaurs soon benefited from bipedality in the same way humans later did — better vision.
That is why smell is so important to quadrupeds; erect animals with good eyesight can detect danger from far off.
But later, from the end of the Triassic onwards, certain species within the genus began to drop down on all fours, although this does not mean that the quadrupedal forms descended from bipedal forms — or merely got tired of walking on two legs.
These new four-legged types were called prosauropods, and preceded the true sauropods (‘reptile feet’) who lived later in Jurassic and Cretaceous times.
Not only that, but where bipeds like coelurosaurs and carnosaurs increasingly had only vestigial front legs, the sauropods like Brachiosaurus ) instead began to grow their front legs longer than their hind ones.
Fig. 12.
Shown here are the reptiles from which the two groups of dinosaurs probably originated.
(Source: Purnell's Prehistoric Atlas )
Other curious evolutionary changes were occurring that finally distanced the dinosaurs from the thecodonts.
Modern lizards and crocodiles have saddle-shaped shoulder joints, concave from the bottom to the top and convex from the inside out.
This lets the upper arm swing out and twist; but it is only applicable to sprawlers.
Dinosaur shoulder blades had concave sockets facing downwards and backwards.
The upper edge of the shoulder pocket overhung the lower edge, more appropriate for an upright stance.
The dinosaur hip socket also had a large hole in the bottom of the basin, unlike the sprawlers.
Fig.13.
It is the shape of the hip bones, rather than other anatomical differences, that  are used to classify dinosaurs.
The ‘lizard-hipped’ types were the saurischians, and the ‘bird-hipped’types were the ornithischians.
Both types were capable of bipedal walking.
This meant that not only were there now considerable differences between reptile and dinosaur bones, but there were also emerging differences among the burgeoning dinosaurs.
The thigh was straight and had an inturned head, compared (favourably) with that of the reptile which is slightly S-shaped and without a head.
The entire body of the dinosaur would have been pivoted around the hip girdle.
And it was the configuration of the hip bones, rather than other more obvious anatomical differences, that scientists decided, early on, to use as a classification for dinosaur ‘orders’.
Many dinosaurs, those known as ‘lizard-hipped’, hence became known as saurischians.
Like other reptiles the saurischians had three bones in the hip: the one above the hip socket is called the ilium, and the one below — pointing forwards and down — is called the pubis.
The other bone — pointing backwards and down — is called the ischium.
But the anterior of many other dinosaurs was aligned alongside and parallel to the posterior bone (the ischium), instead of pointing forwards as with the saurischians.
This bone configuration is today found only in birds, hence the origin of the ornithischians.
One simpler, broad definition is to distinguish between bowl-shaped and fork-shaped hips.
It is important to stress that both lizard-hipped and bird-hipped dinosaurs were capable of bipedal walking.
In fact, soon the majority of fossil types were either slimmed-down bipedal carnivores (coelurosaurs) or larger sauropods, tending both towards herbivory and occasional bipedality.
The late Triassic ornithischians were all small bipedal herbivores.
Bipedal ornithischians are grouped together as ornithopods, or bird-footed, because of the three-toed feet.
It could be argued that the ornithischians were a more varied group.
They usually had a thick, armoured skin, as well as possessing advanced features such as predentary bone, and sometimes a complex set of teeth set in a horny mouth.
Theropods  usually had teeth in the front jaws, and sometimes they extended far back into the mouth.
The sauropods instead had teeth in the front with only a few at the sides.
The ornithischia often had bony beaks at the front with teeth at the sides and back of the jaws.
The third distinctive feature of the dinosaurs was that many species grew enormously in size.
Indeed, this fact is more firmly registered in the layman's mind than any other, and if he or she were asked to give a name to some species, it would probably be either Tyrannosaurus Rex (wrongly believed to be the known largest),Brontosaurus or Diplodocus , the three most often mentioned.
Diplodocus , in fact, reached 28 metres in length and had an extraordinarily long neck and whip-like tail.
Brontosaurus was 25 metres long and weighed 30 tons, while Brachiosaurus was a long-necked, lizard-hipped creature weighing 80 tons (or more than the weight of sixteen elephants).
T. Rex was a terrible-looking carnivore, some 15 metres long and 5 metres high, as tall as a giraffe and weighing over 8 tons fully grown.
It inhabited plateaux and lowlands of the Cretaceous and preyed on duckbilled dinosaurs such as the giant sauropodomorphs.
In 1989, paleontologists from the University of Colorado discovered, in Colorado, the remains of an even more ferocious predator than T. Rex .
Going extinct some 30 million years before T. Rex , it was about 16 metres long, weighed about 4 tons and walked crouched forward on three-toed back legs.
It had a long, powerful tail like a giant version of Allosaurus , the common carnivorous dinosaur whose fossils have been regularly discovered from the Jurassic strata.
Supersaurus was probably the biggest creature ever to walk on Earth.
It was an extraordinary 32 metres long, weighing possibly up to 100 tons.
Supersaurus is not to be confused with Megalosaurus ('giant reptile'), a lizard-hipped carnosaur living in the Jurassic and the very first dinosaur to be named and described, looking like a smaller Tyrannosaurus .
Indeed, in many cases some species were even bigger  than we can possibly imagine.
Often we have only fragments of bones to build up a mental picture of the final complete skeleton.
It is only the natural caution of paleontologists that prevents them from jumping to startling conclusions.
For example, Alan Charig and Brenda Horsfield point to the shoulder-girdle and fore-limbs of a likely theropod unearthed on a 1965 expedition to the Gobi Desert in Mongolia.
The fore-arm alone was 2.5 metres long, but it was suggested that the creature had disproportionately long fore-limbs, possibly resembling a dinosaurian sloth.
This would tie in with the kind of creature that could take advantage of the first abundance of flowering plants and special insects emerging in the late Cretaceous.
Even bigger claws half-a-metre long have been found.
And in 1972 the matching shoulder blades, vertebrae and pelvis of a sauropod even bigger than Brachiosaurus was dragged from the clay in Colorado: the largest vertebra was about 1.5 metres long, suggesting the animal was more than 16 metres tall, weighing over 80 tons and may have been 3 metres in length.
On the other hand, the smallest dinosaur known — of the type that were probably the immediate ancestors of modern birds — was no bigger than a mistlethrush weighing only a few grammes.
Many dinosaurs had strange carapaces, like the ankylosaurs and iguanodons and the pachycephalosaurs.
The African version of the stegosaur had long spikes all the way down to its tail, with spikes even on its back legs.
The short front legs in many such dinosaurs — like the Diplodocus and the Brontosaurus — reduced the forward weight of the creature.
The tail bones were huge, supple and weighty, The base of the tail had large bony flanges which were the anchor-point for immensely strong tail muscles.
The Limitations to Body Size
Curiously, the reason why some species of dinosaur became very large is seldom addressed in either the   popular or academic literature, and yet as an anatomical fact it can hardly be side-stepped.
Dinosaur size is a vitally important subject, bearing as it does on the controversy concerning metabolism and the generation and conduction of heat, and hence on the susceptibility or otherwise to changes in climate.
Even Robert Bakker, a paleontologist now at Colorado University and one of the most original and interesting of dinosaur academics, has not, I suggest, given the subject of dinosaur size as much attention as it deserves, and consequently many of his arguments concerning metabolism, which we will examine in the next chapter, remain fatally flawed.
Fig.14.
Styracosaurus , a ceratopsian from the late Cretaceous.
In reflecting on the subject of very large animals, some questions concerning evolution and thermoregulation arise.
Why, amongst all the different classes and orders is there such a surprising array of forms, shapes and sizes?
What kept insects extremely small over millions of years of evolution, and why have only a few mammals ever approached the size of dinosaurs?
Could dinosaurs themselves have grown any bigger?
We ought first to remind ourselves that for every type of animal throughout time there has always been a most convenient size that has fitted it neatly into its own niche.
Although evolution decrees that species of plant and animal which survive for long periods are shaped to the advantages determined by natural selection, progress over time to larger size might be a law of nature independent of environmental factors.
Richard Dawkins, the zoologist, points out that large size does not imply bigger creatures were intrinsically more successful than species of a small size.
There were simply a succession of species of bigger dimensions.
Such species, says Dawkins, were less likely to go extinct than smaller species, or were more likely to split off new, larger species like themselves.
The fossil trend towards giganticism was due to a succession of species following the same pattern of progressive development.
This would show up in the sedimentary and stratigraphic evidence.
So the selection of species could favour a minority of species in which larger individuals increasingly began to interbreed.
As we will see, there seems to be a natural trend towards selecting out larger body-size over time, leading to some disturbing conclusions about the likely size of future mammals in millions of years hence.
Meanwhile we should note that one of the important discoveries of zoologists in recent times, one that has tended to blunt warm and cold-blooded distinctions, is the fact that very large creatures, whether animals or reptiles, show much fewer temperature differentials, especially at weights greater than 100 kg.
It is a law of  nature that metabolic requirements for all largish animals decrease as they grow larger.
Large body-size would, in fact, isolate them from their thermal environment because they would exchange heat at lower rates.
Many reptiles have a preferred temperature range within internally regulated diurnal rhythms.
In other words, they have become instinctively aware of changes in daily and seasonal variations in temperature.
Dinosaurs would have inhabited both daytime and night-time niches determined by regular modes of activity under the control of biological clocks; i.e. the circadian rhythm.
One argument says that mammals only began to grow larger when they no longer needed to lead furtive, skulking lives, hiding in crannies to avoid the fearsome dinosaurs.
When the dinosaurs at last died off they could, for the first time, roam about increasingly in the daylight hours.
Their circadian rhythm became modified accordingly.
and they developed a sense of distance that would lead ultimately to a complete transformation of the brain.
There are other natural evolutionary advantages concerning diet and physiological peculiarities, akin to that pertaining to the giraffe and its unique ability to reach the highest-growing leaves.
We have seen how the interaction of environment and genes has had a feedback effect, and how the fossils of primitive horses show they were little more than the size of large dogs.
Man himself has grown considerably taller during the quarter-million years he has been on Earth.
One visionary speaker at the British Association (science) meeting in 1984 spoke of the likelihood of rats the size of wolves inheriting the Earth in 50 million years time, when Man — in all probability — is no longer on the scene.
The wolf-rats would prey on large rabbits, which themselves would grow to the size of deer, to become ‘rabbucks’.
There could be sabre-toothed prairie dogs, mice the size of foxes, and new species such as the ‘gigantelope’, and there would be killer baboons.
It would be clear, without needing to elaborate the point, that if bio-evolutionary changes mean some species  are excessively small or large beyond or below the optimum, the extinction of that species is likely to occur.
This does not mean that, as a survival technique, individual species cannot vary their body size to suit circumstances.
The evidence shows that animals can vary their size extremely rapidly in a short space of time when they become, for example, geographically isolated from the main herd.
Islands around the world have often hosted odd dwarf forms of mainland creatures: pony-sized elephants once lived on Malta; and it was reported by Adrian Lester of Cambridge University, in a recent Nature article, that red deer from the last Ice Age evolved into a dwarf form in less than 6000 years after being marooned on the island of Jersey.
Even in normal situations animals can get smaller rather than bigger: the modern tiger, descended from the genus of the sabre-toothed tiger, is now much smaller.
It is at this stage of our discussion that a little physics comes in useful.
We know that kinetic energy increases as length raised to the fifth power.
A creature twice the size and height of another will have not just twice the muscular energy but 32 times.
Many giant dinosaurs, therefore, would have been very successful in battle, having an important bearing on natural selection.
Physics also tells us that there is a logical answer to the seeming conundrum of the diversity of species.
The smallest insect alive during the Age of Dinosaurs must have been more than a million times smaller than Brontosaurus .
Insects number countless millions, and perform vital ecological functions.
Yet they can only survive in warm or temperate climes, and it would be to their advantage to grow bigger.
Even so, it would have been impossible for an insect to grow much larger, say to have a girth more than a quarter of an inch in diameter.
If insects were as large as small mammals they would be killed by their own weight.
Their legs would need to be proportionately stronger, more like a reptile's or a mammal's, in which case they would need to have the metabolism of either a reptile or a mammal.
One major difficulty for insects is that they do not have a circulatory blood system.
This means that they ingest oxygen from the air via fine hollow tubes, known as tracheae.
Oxygen travels by means of billions of collisions of gas particles, a process that would be too slow if the molecules had to travel more than a fraction of an inch.
For this reason insects are tiny, otherwise they would suffocate.
To grow bigger, the invaginations in their surfaces must necessarily become more complex; they would take up more internal space and leave less room for vital internal parts.
The only solution to increasing size would be to have oxygen pumped through the body via a circulatory system.
This brings us to the subject of heat convection and heat loss.
The smaller the animal the more heat proportionately it loses from its skin because of the increased area:volume ratio.
Small mammals therefore do not live in cold countries, and birds migrate south in winter.
The shape and size of creatures is determined by the many fundamental forces of Nature.
Small animals are dominated by surface forces other than gravity in ways unknown and unknowable to us.
For larger animals gravity becomes much more relevant.
That is why the surface to weight and volume ratio, so often neglected in discussions of animal biology, is important.
If one were to multiply an animal's breadth, height and length by ten, its surface area would be increased by 100, but its weight by 1000.
It would hence require 1000 times as much food and would excrete 1000 times as much waste products, as we are reminded by the distinguished early twentieth-century biologist J.B.S. Haldane in his famous work On Being the Right Size .
It follows also that gravity has a negligible effect on small animals, because their surface to volume ratio is so large: if, for example, a mouse was to be dropped down a 30-metre well-shaft it would be stunned, but would scamper away relatively intact because wind resistance acting on its relatively larger surface would counteract the pull of gravity.
A creature any larger, however, would likely be  severely injured or killed outright.
Similarly an insect walking on the surface of a pond would have gravity counteracted by the surface tension of the water.
But once it gets wet the weight of the water may well kill it.
Gravity, in fact, keeps invertebrate creatures relatively tiny.
As creatures evolve into larger forms they need strong internal structures to prevent them collapsing into a formless mass.
Gravity would soon yield more disbenefits than benefits.
If Brontosaurus was any taller, a fall could bring about severe head injuries.
As it was, the extremely small head of some dinosaurs no doubt reduced the dangers of falling from a great height.
Large dimensions would make it progressively more difficult to stand and move about.
For one thing, there is a limit to how strong a leg bone can be in order to withstand great mass.
Simply by growing larger, creatures suffer a continual decrease in relative surface area.
In other words, volume grows more rapidly than surface.
Therefore, although the strength of a bone depends on the area of its cross section, the legs must hold up a body increasing in weight by the cube of its length.
So bones of giant humans, 6 metres tall (to give a fictional example), would need to be disproportionately thick to such an extent that mobility and agility would be virtually nonexistent.
Even with bone cross-sections only 100 times bigger than normal they would have reached breaking point, which is induced by stresses of a factor of ten or above.
There have long been stories of human giants in legend and mythology.
They may have had some basis in reality because bones of a large primate 3.5 metres tall and weighing 800 pounds, found in caves in southern China, date back to over 300,000 years ago at the time Homo Erectus was still alive.
Heavy bones, incidentally, also require a stronger kind of ankle-bone arrangement, to replace the mammalian rows of small bones that slide past each other.
Interestingly, many large dinosaurs had a simple, strong ball-and-socket joint between the ankle bones.
More interesting still, recent fossil discoveries show that the hip  bones of some giant dinosaurs were almost hollow.
In the summer of 1988 paleontologists in western Colorado uncovered the 135-million-year-old pelvis and vertebrae of Supersaurus .
The pelvis alone measured 2 × 1.5 metres in width, and the specimen was not even full grown.
The adult animal would have stood 12.5 metres tall and stretched 40 metres from head to tail.
But when being prepared in the laboratory, cavities were found in the bones with tiny corrugated bone formations running at right angles.
If it were not for the hollow bones the 30-ton creature would have required inordinate amounts of energy, and thus more food, to move around.
Finally, great size also presents problems for the softer parts of any creature.
There is, for instance, the problem of what kind of heart would be needed to propel a large body, and the question would arise as to whether, in the case of very tall animals, a higher blood pressure would be required, with commensurately tougher blood vessels, in order to pump blood from the heart to the brain.
The internal organs would become more complicated: they cannot simply increase in size because surface area will not increase proportionately, so more intestinal loops and skin tufts may have arisen and, as with the Dimetrodon , bony neck frills may become heat-dissipating devices.
How Mobile Were the Dinosaurs?
The traditional image of a dinosaur as a slow, lumbering creature is logically derived from what we understand about great body size and weight.
Often this conclusion is backed up by scientists' discoveries of fossilized dinosaur footprints.
Most are washed away by rainstorms or floods, but thousands have survived and become preserved in ossified rock, to reappear when the ground has been split open by paleontologists or the weather.
R. McNeill Alexander, a zoologist at the University of Leeds, has spent much of his professional life  analysing the movement dynamics of animals.
He reminds us that it is easy to make mistakes with footprints: a few years ago, he said  when reviewing a recent book on dinosaur tracks for an educational journal, a track appearing to show long, very fast strides consisted in reality of left footprints only, so the real stride length was only half the apparent one.
There is no clear consensus about how fast or slowly dinosaurs moved.
As a general rule they appeared to be slowish, considering most of them were large animals, but there seems to be a considerable variation between species of greatly differing body sizes.
Beverly Halstead, a distinguished paleontologist at Reading University who tragically died in April 1991, said footprint fossils showed that the carnosaurs usually moved around in packs at about two-and-three-quarters mph.
The coelurosaurs, he said, normally walked at 5 mph but could run at up to 8 mph.
Although this would hardly seem fast enough to catch prey, the smaller reptilian and amphibious animals would also have run at similarly slower speeds.
Only the paramammals would have run faster.
The larger dinosaurs were hardly quicker, size for size.
Big sauropods, for example, show painfully slow speeds of about 4 kph, equivalent to a human's strolling gait.
This, said McNeill Alexander, is surprising in view of the fact that some of these animals had hind legs some three metres long.
Of course, the dinosaur specialist has long recognized that some of the smaller species were fairly agile, and could have reached considerably higher speeds than the larger carnosaurs.
A good example would have been Saltosuchus , the so-called ‘leaping crocodile’.
Footprint evidence, as in the case of a well-known assembly found in Queensland, Australia, shows a herd of small dinosaurs, some no larger than chickens, ‘stampeding’(to use Alexander's description) to escape a predatory giant.
Other dinosaur track evidence reveals a medium-sized biped weighing about half a ton, seeming to run at 43kph, which is faster than a man but still considerably slower than a racehorse.
Soon, however, a new controversy arose when it seemed to some zoologists and paleontologists that even  the large dinosaurs could very well have had a high running speed, at least as high as an equivalent sized modern mammal.
Such conclusions were arrived at by studying the fossilized limb proportions and limb-joint morphology of dinosaurs rather than footprint tracks, although some of these tracks, as we shall see, show speeds a lot faster than those Beverly Halstead was talking about.
Many dinosaurs varied in weight because their mass was distributed differently.
Their bone density, as we have seen, may have varied greatly.
Diplodocus was remarkably lithe, weighing only 10 tons in spite of being some 28 metres long.
Brontosaurus was a more massive version of Diplodocus , with not such a long tail (because of the extremely small head of the Brontosaurus in comparison with their huge bodies, the name was recently changed — unnecessarily — to Apatosaurus .
Greek for ‘headless reptile’).
Brachiosaurus was even heavier than Brontosaurus and had front legs longer than its rear ones, the opposite of Brontosaurus .
Most of the sauropods (like Brontosaurus ) had graviportal (weight-carrying) feet with thick elastic soles, with the foot expanding on tread-impact with the ground, similar to a modern elephant, to keep the animal from getting stuck in soft ground.
For many years paleontologists were obliged to work with the swamp-dweller model of the sauropods.
The obvious lightness of the skeleton meant that this kind of existence for an air-breathing semi-aquatic animal would have been particularly inappropriate, because of the buoyancy of their air-filled bodies.
It is for this reason whales and hippopotami actually increase their mass to prevent floating.
There is also evidence, as we have mentioned before and shall see in the next chapter, of the extensive use of air sacs in sauropods as cooling devices and for reducing mass.
Many sauropods, in spite of their ever-growing height spurred on by the need to reach the foliage of trees growing ever higher, had hollowed out, weight-saving  vertebrae and a pelvic girdle described by one writer as being like a suspension bridge, with the massive erect hind legs acting as the down-pillar, and the long torso and rigid tail acting as the cross-span.
Indeed, the six-metre long sauropod neck has been likened to a living crane for lifting the head to feed, with up to fifteen vertebrae possessing unique extra articulations in the neck to combine strength with agility.
In addition each had a U-shaped bracket in the top of each vertebra which housed a stout cable-like ligament running the length of the neck.
The theropods were carnivores with a lightweight skeleton varying in strength and size.
In addition in the Jurassic there were some truly great coelurosaur types with fearsome talons.
The eleven-metre long Allosaurus — the ‘leaping lizard’— weighing up to two tons, as big as a bus, was able to take strides two metres long.
Allosaurus was assumed from its long hind legs to be a kangaroo-type reptile that actually bounced on its prey.
New French findings hint that the tetrapods probably hopped like kangaroos, as their tracks show left and right hind footprints in parallel, rather than alternating, some reaching up to two-metre intervals.
The leaping deinonychosaurs were a sub-order of the coelurosaurs.
They hunted in packs, and were individually from two to three metres long.
The extra speed and stride that the longer hind legs could attain was hampered by the slow speed of the shorter front ones.
So it was more convenient to raise the body up off the ground and sprint for short lengths on the rear legs with the tail, now much thicker and longer, acting as a counter-weight.
The evidence, then, from reconstructions of many paleontologists, is that many dinosaurs were far from being sluggish.
In fact they were periodically sprightly in the way reptilian orders are.
Robert Bakker, however, said they were more mammal-like in movement and stance, and is credited with the ‘galloping dinosaur’ thesis.
Bakker believed that dinosaur speed could, reasonably  accurately enough, be worked out from the angle of the limb joints.
Rhinos, for example, have more flexure at their joints than do elephants.
But horned dinosaurs had more bends in each joint, and were more rhino-like.
As time passed, the collarbone also shrank in size, hinting at the development of a free-swinging shoulder.
Bakker also argued that the brontosaur footprints found in the 1930s in the Cretaceous Texas limestone showed left and right footprints close to the trackway centreline, hinting that they walked upright.
He also points out that legs used to regular running have muscles concentrated at the top, with a system of tendons working the leg attached to the bone.
The muscle power of the knee can be gauged from a bony ridge, called the cnemial crest, marking the point of attachment for knee tendons.
Big gallopers like rhinos have big cnemial crests, and so do  buffaloes , giraffes and bison.
But Tyrannosaurus also had massive cnemial crests.
Critics, however, point out that dinosaur joint surfaces were not usually smooth and polished like those of mammals.
The sockets holding the cartilages were roughened, implying that excessive gristle existed in the knees, which would inhibit fast movement.
But Bakker in reply says cartilage is in fact better for absorbing shocks and for building up hydrostatic pressure.
Many fast animals have long shanks or calves, compared with thighs, like gazelles and horses.
Relatively speaking, says Bakker, dinosaurs had quite long shanks, but not as long as modern-day runners.
McNeill Alexander adopted a different analytical technique, and came up with a much slower dinosaur than Bakker's.
He regularly dissects the bones, muscles, tendons and ligaments around the ankle and knees of quadrupeds in order to gain an understanding of the   whole animal's performance.
He is in particular interested in what stresses the leg and foot can take.
He found that he could calculate, using a fixed relative stride length divided by leg length, the running speed of any animal, past or present.
He assumed that all animal bones would be broken by similar stresses, so he took into account the ‘peak forces’ as approximating to the body weight.
These peak forces increase as speed increases, and demand a commensurately stronger skeleton.
In 1990 he came up with a middling conclusion: brontosaurs had bones as strong as those of modern elephants in terms of comparative scale.
He believed, like Robert Bakker, that as elephants cannot gallop, then neither could the brontosaurs.
On the other hand, recent fossil discoveries hint that dinosaurs occasionally acted extremely violently towards each other, somewhat belying a sedate, lethargic lifestyle.
It was in 1989 that Gordon Bell Jr, of the University of Texas in Austin, noticed that around half of the fifty giant aquatic lizards known as mosasaurs showed the remains of healed gashes in their jaws and skulls.
Bell and his colleagues now believe these were caused by head-on fights with opponents, who appeared to lunge at each other in much the same way that present-day crocodiles do, but with more apparent gusto, using strong jaws to tear at each other 's snouts.
The wounds suggest that these dinosaurs were much more territorially inclined than had been thought.
Other dinosaurs, namely the duckbilled hadrosaurs — herbivorous versions of T. Rex — were found with fossilized ribs that frequently revealed healed breaks, hinting that they may have been involved in fights or in ritualized trials of strength in which their massive hind feet were used.
One thing becomes clear about large animal size: such creatures must have an abundant supply of food.
It had become obvious early on to paleontologists that the dinosaurs, living in a moist and warm environment, in a sparsely populated animal kingdom, had succeeded in     evolving into the first vegetation-eaters with no competitors.
Soon we see further extraordinary co-evolution factors at work.
They bestowed upon the dinosaurs tremendous advantages of both large body mass and upright stance suited, perhaps uniquely, to an early unsullied ecosystem of lush vegetation and wide open spaces, a situation on Earth that was never to recur.
Fig.15.
Above Elephants have little flexure in their joints, so cannot gallop; neither could the brontosaurs.
Below The horned dinosaurs had much more bend in each joint, and must have been rhino-like in gait.
(Source: Robert Bakker)
The dinosaurs were successful in maintaining a mechanically harmonious relationship between their very long tail and the rest of their bodies.
The tail of iguanodon was artificially curved, and this explains why it had a more upright stance than, say, the tiny Leosothosaurus .
With a straight tail the front part of the body of Leosothosaurus has to be lowered, and this levels out the back-bone and balances the body around the hips.
Iguanodon's curved tail is instead a continuation of its back, with tendons acting as powerful hawsers to counterbalance the front end of the body.
This kind of mechanically efficient cantilevered design is more suited to the larger dinosaurs and seems to apply to all the heavyweight bipedal species.
This is not to imply, as has been done with Tyrannosaurus Rex , that many large bipedals were little more than lumbering tripods.
For the evolving herbivores the advantage of an upright stance was soon complemented by the ability to rear up on hind legs to reach higher-growing plants.
Stegosaurus , for example, could stand up against the trees to reach upper branches.
In this sense (and probably in this stance only) it was tripedal, with the tail acting as an additional balancing limb.
Plateosaurus was a well-known herbivore, occasionally rearing up and sprinting in short bursts on its hind legs, its momentum aided by its long tail.
T. Rex and his relatives also had large, curved tails that never touched the ground when the animal was in motion.
This interesting stance has been seen in more recent dinosaur fossil discoveries.
John Ostrom of Yale University discovered in 1964 in the Lower Cretaceous of Montana, what he called Deinonychus (‘terrible claw’).
This  was a medium-sized theropod, a lightly built, fast-running biped about 3 metres long, with a grasping hand.
What Ostrom found, incidentally, was that the second toe of the hind foot did not reach the ground but ended in a large and vicious claw.
However, the long tail seemed to be encased in bundles of bony rods which could, like a conjuror's segmented wand held erect by the pressure of the conjuror's fingers at one end, lock it almost rigid.
Hence, when the animal was running the tail could have stretched back horizontally and acted as a balancing organ.
The Changing Plant-eaters
The existence of vegetation, and its changing nature, explains much of the evolutionary success of dinosaurs as they adapted to their environment.
But it also offers a clue as to their ultimate demise.
The first plants on Earth were a kind of fern, the pteriodophytes, a member of a super-order known as gymnosperms .
They were of modest size with an underground stem, but without spreading roots.
These ferns began to slowly change shape and structure during the Devonian, and some became tall and tree-like.
They included conifers much like today's pines, cypresses and sequoias.
Other plants were called psilophytes; small, about half-an-inch in diameter, with rhizomes and branched roots.
In the Upper Devonian, club mosses and horsetails grew to great heights.
Nowadays angiosperms , another super-order, more commonly known as the flowering plants, dominate the world's ecology.
Most broad-leafed trees, for example, are angiosperms, as well as grasses, beans, cereals, vegetables and fruit and root crops.
Only conifers, cycads, ferns and horsetails today are gymnosperms.
Angiosperms grow from ovules (seeds) protected in their own case, where gymnosperms grow only from seeds without the protective case.
Botanists now think the angiosperms arose in the Cretaceous, or possibly in the early Mesozoic  era, say about 200 million years ago, although possibly much earlier.
Both super-orders throughout time have provided a virtually inexhaustible supply of nutrients for living creatures, which then became prey for the carnivores.
The distribution between herbivores and carnivores in nature is often finely balanced.
Plant-eaters normally constitute the majority of any population, so the threat of extinction comes when the carnivores start to gain upon the herbivores.
Was the destiny, then, of the dinosaurs determined by the herbivores?
Did any carnivores die out when their prey had become extinct?
The reason why carnivores exist at all is because they arrived on Earth first.
It was probably the archosaurs that started the division between herbivores and carnivores, since all primitive animals were scavengers, or killed prey that killed other prey.
The first dinosaurs were also flesh eaters, stalking and killing paramammals and crocodilian.
As the dinosaur population began to enlarge, new species of plant-eaters arrived to balance things out.
The order of saurischians includes both carnivores and plant eaters.
But ornithischians, judging from their fossilized teeth, were invariably herbivores.
Today mammals are either herbivores or carnivores, but most plant-eating vertebrates are mammals.
By contrast only a few reptiles, like tortoises and iguanas, are herbivores.
In nature there is constant pressure to make the herbivores the predominant sub-order.
And it is ecologically unlikely that vegetarian dinosaurs arrived because of growing predatory competition among reptiles, paramammals and mammals for live prey.
Things moved more dramatically among descendants of the coelurosaurs.
They grew, like the deinonychosaurs, extremely ferocious.
They were a sub-order with sharp claws and a prominent second toe looking like a huge sickle.
Evidence of fossil tracks shows Allosaurus stalked large herbivores, and that it was accustomed to killing and eating animals far larger than itself.
This implies that many carnosaurs hunted in herds or packs  like wolves, weeding out the old, infirm and unprotected young, since solitary predators like lions tend to kill prey their own size or smaller.
A larger lineage evolved from the small Triassic bipedal herbivores.
It emerged as Camptosaurus and iguanodon.
A study of the skulls of both types showed they probably possessed mammal-like muscular cheeks, and the teeth fossils show they ground grain-like food.
There was by now a continual branching off of sub-orders, and more easily acquired food enabled basic structure changes to get under way.
Even the danger from predators was not constant until the very end of the Mesozoic.
As Ornithischosus increased in size its scaly skin replaced the bony armour as the danger from predators lessened.
Even so the struggle between the plant eaters and their predators was frequently finely balanced.
Often the height and fast bipedalism of the carnosaurs enabled them to tower over the extremely well-protected horned ceratopsians, and simply seize them from above with a powerfully armed mouth.
Nevertheless, a combination of structural and morphological modifications, including growing yet bigger and rearing up, mammal-like, to reach higher growing leaves, were great evolutionary advances, integrating important ecological changes.
The die was cast for great species longevity.
Indeed, the vastness of the vegetation enabled the plant-eaters to expand, both irradiationally and physically, so that the meat-eaters were seldom deprived.
By focusing on the herbivores and their relationship to changing plant life, we can gain a better idea of what happened next to the dinosaurs.
Robert Bakker stresses the complete interplay involved here, with sharper teeth to match increasingly ‘tougher’ plants, and improvements in digestive tracts, playing an interconnected role.
A typical pattern began to emerge.
By the mid Triassic there were a few groups of large herbivore reptiles, called rhynchosaurs, who were distant relatives of the lizards.
Among the herbivores there were also dramatic  changes amongst the bipedal ornithopods, weighing from 30 to 200 kilograms, and ranging from 1.5 to 12 metres in length.
These were the bird-footed types.
The duckbilled hadrosaurs were an offspring of the larger ornithopods, and started to grow enormous grinding teeth for tough plant materials.
Bakker refers to the Age of Anchisaurs in his book The Dinosaur Heresies .
Dinosaurs, as well as growing taller, developed a more pronounced downflex to lower their heads closer to the ground for better cropping techniques.
Lizards, too, have small, leaf-shaped teeth with edges coarsely serrated; good for shredding but not for chewing.
Similarly anchisaurs were long-necked creatures with simple iguana-like teeth, suitable for cropping soft leaves.
The cynodonts, with their cheek teeth and incisors typical of carnivores, no doubt preyed on them.
Brontosaurs had spatulate (spoon-shaped) teeth for eating coarser leaves, largely from the ferns and horsetail plants.
The Diplodocus had the longest neck of all the dinosaurs.
It could reach both upwards and downwards to pluck vegetation from all directions on a vast scale, and so lost little time (or energy) moving about.
It had peg-like teeth that were usually found in fossils to be heavily worn from perpetually stripping branches of foliage.
Bakker calls the reign of Diplodocus ,Brontosaurus and Brachiosaurus the ‘Age of High Feeders’.
Changing Jaws and Stomachs
There were, however, many extinctions at the Jurassic/Cretaceous boundary, which eliminated most of the high croppers.
Only a few of the diplodocuses survived.
The fossil evidence seems to support the theory that mammals began to exceed reptiles during the Mesozoic, giving rise to a belief in more efficient eating habits.
Some big plant-eaters, like the beaked dinosaurs, did seem to illustrate how creatures often took the wrong evolutionary path; their teeth were too small and less tightly  packed in the mouth than the earlier species of beaked dinosaurs.
On the other hand, the soft parts of most dinosaurs took the right evolutionary path.
Despite the fact that plants also apparently survived massive quantities of consumption, they counter-attacked well.
Many had protective foils like thorns and spines, with much of the plant tissue containing rock-hard phytoliths or tough fibrous cellulose.
The ‘toughness’ of plants is not necessarily a characteristic of either angiosperms or gymnosperms. as it seems that plants struggling to make themselves ever more unpalatable, grew ‘tougher’as time passed.
Nevertheless dinosaurs, remarkably, were frequently able to stay ahead in the game.
Those that became extinct were replaced by better adapted ones.
They probably had very effective digestive systems with detoxifying enzymes to cope with the tougher diets.
In animals, digestive systems can either be of the forward or rearward types.
Ruminants like deer and cattle have a forward site for fermentation in a complex multi-chambered rumen where the food is soaked and softened by enzymes in the stomach.
It is then passed back into the mouth, chewed again, and returned to the rearward locations for further digestion.
Other creatures, like some lizards and giant birds such as ostriches, only have rearward fermentation systems in long intestines.
They often have tiny heads and no teeth, because the powerful fermentation tracts can obviate the need for more thorough chewing.
This would often be accompanied with gastroliths, or ‘gizzard-stones’.
The gizzard was adjacent to the stomach and lined with hard plates and sandpaper-like surfaces.
Anchisaur species, including modern crocodiles, use gizzard-stones to aid internal ‘chewing’, to enhance the grinding action of the gizzard.
Paleontologists often find a scattered collection of worn pebbles in the vicinity of the fossilized abdominal region.
Dinosaurs also had a larger digestive tract that seemed to have co-evolved with the changes in Earth's flora and fauna.
The evidence that  some dinosaurs had larger, rearward tracts comes from the structure of the abdominal rib-cage.
This, incidentally, is another reason why the dinosaurs had to be big.
The gizzard-stone treatment meant that food took a long time to digest.
As a result much of it had to be stored in a continuously digesting system, so a large torso was needed.
According to Bakker,Brontosaurus had short, crowded gastric tracts, with ribs covering the belly-like barrel staves.
This may in turn have caused the forelegs of prosauropods (the Triassic forerunners of sauropods) to become more massive, stimulated as they were by the repeated dropping onto all fours when moving slowly.
Brachiosaurus was a rare specimen, in that it was a much longer four-footed creature, able to consume more vegetation from tall trees with-giant forelegs supporting more mass in its digestive equipment.
One problem was that shorter torsos made for better balance when running, but longer torsos could enable longer intestines to become a more efficient non-ruminant digestive system.
Bipeds evolved larger digestive tracts which one would normally expect to find in a longer, heavier stomach cavity in front of the hips, which would present anatomical problems in balancing.
Dinosaurs overcame this problem by pushing the lower end of the pubic bones behind the hip socket, and so the coils of intestines were thrust backwards from the belly.
In the process this helped to balance the forward weight of the rib-cage housing the creature's vital organs.
The evolutionary stage was now set for the third and final phase of dinosaur existence: the ‘Age of Low Feeders’.
This era was characterized by a marked change in the nature of the Earth's vegetation.
The angiosperms started to flourish; ‘Coal Age’ flora abounded.
These new plants could regenerate quickly, so they took over the ecosystem.
And they survived the extinction at the end of the Cretaceous, whereas dinosaurs did not.
But this latter phase would have been when the dinosaurs' jaw mechanism was much closer to those of  modern mammals, or at least very dissimilar to modern reptiles.
The secondary plate, enabling the creatures to chew and breathe at the same time, is also a mammalian characteristic.
When dinosaurs' eating habits and teeth and jaw mechanisms are examined more fully, one wonders why only the terminal Cretaceous/Tertiary extinctions are the subject of endless debate rather than any of the preceding extinctions.
We must again remind ourselves that there was more than one episode of dinosaur extinction when food and dietary factors have had equal relevance, although each succeeding (and changed) species seemed to be better fitted to an ecologically evolved environment.
Indeed, the jaws of the low-feeding dinosaurs compared favourably with those of modern herbivore mammals.
In a horse the bony plate separates food and air passages, the secondary plate reinforces the skull.
The horse can move its lower jaw from side to side when eating, and the jaw muscles drag the lower teeth inward in a grinding motion.
The muscles operating the system form a complex sling that cradles each side of the lower jaw.
This means horses can break up and digest plant food more quickly.
Each of the lower feeders had their own cropping techniques, and a general assumption can be made that such techniques had themselves a co-evolutionary impact on plants.
The dinosaurs also developed thick bone where the stresses continually were greater, and holes appeared covered by tough membranes like a baby's skull (known as the ‘temporal fenestrae’), where stresses were minimal.
In fact Pachycephalosaurus had a 10-inch thick skull, and probably used it as a battering ram in ritual contests.
But some creatures, notably the American Allosaurus , had several bones in its skull loosely joined together so that the entire skull could yield to pressures of various sorts.
This enabled it to gulp down large chunks of meat that would have been too large to swallow.
Triceratops is the most famous of the large ceratopsians, and in fact the last to survive.
It lived mainly in the  savannahs of North America at the end of the Cretaceous.
It was more than nine metres long and three metres tall.
Its skull — two metres long — was well developed, with three strong pointed horns useful for defence and for stripping some of the remaining shorter fronds, resembling the cycads used in Florida as indoor pot-plants.
Its horny beak could also dig up roots.
The rear rim of the hole in Triceratops ’ skull grew back into a bony frill on which the membrane was attached (although this may also have been a display structure), so that the muscles could enlarge.
Triceratops maximised its biting strength by evolving high bony cranks on its lower jaws to move the line of muscle pull-up, and thus increase the leverage.
Most of the horned dinosaurs evolved even stronger jaw and biting muscles behind eye sockets.
The big bony collar could protect vulnerable-parts of its body, and could provide a useful broad anchor for muscles which supported the heavy head.
Ornithopods like iguanodon had teeth arranged in interlocking ‘magazines’ with rasp-like grinding surfaces, lying parallel to one another in the jaw.
They could move both upper and lower jaws, unlike mammals or reptiles.
Muscles stretching from the brain-case controlled a sideways-moving hinge, which meant that each side of the upper jaw could rotate outwards as the jaws closed.
Thus opposing teeth would move away from one another as the jaws closed.
The jaw movements of some dinosaurs could have a grinding motion like mammals, but most of the mobility came from the upper jaw as it virtually expanded over the lower one.
The last serial dinosaurs were therefore mainly the big beaked ones who fed close to the ground like modern cattle (or more particularly like bison, with their downflexed spinal curvature).
Nearly all the Cretaceous herbivores, like the spike-shouldered nodosaurs, were low croppers.
Later came the ‘parrot’ dinosaurs and domeheads, also with curved downflexed backbones.
There were also ankylosaurs, and large and small-horned creatures, and  duckbills.
In fact the duckbills were traditionally regarded as semi-aquatic creatures, feeding off soft aquatic plants.
This belief was due to the alleged webbing of the hands, combined with the horizontal flatness of their tail, supposedly used for sculling.
They also seemed to have what could only be snorkeling devices on the tops of their heads.
John Ostrom once pointed to the teeth of duckbills that seemed to be specialized for the grinding of coarse plant foods.
He observed that the fossils were found in areas populated by both deciduous and coniferous forests, and their beaks seemed to be suited to browsing on trees and shrubs.
This theory is supported by the mummified remains of a duckbill which revealed conifer needles, twigs, seeds and fruit of other land plants.
The change in the nature of the Mesozoic vegetation has inevitably spurred questions about a possible link between the success of the angiosperms and the demise of the dinosaurs (see Chapter 10).
However, the difficulty in deciding cause and effect is illustrated by the fact that the angiosperms appeared after the extinction of the Second Age and coincided with the Age of Low Feeders.
There was, of course, a considerable overlap between the gymnosperms and angiosperms.
The Cretaceous has also been referred to, for example, as the Age of Cycads.
It has been postulated that it was either the dinosaurs that opened up the way for the angiosperms, or instead it was the changing nature of the flora itself that was in some way the prime mover of evolutionary trends; that, in spite of all the advances in jaw structure discussed above, they somehow speeded up trends towards extinction.
The zoologist David Norman points out that the Cretaceous does show a decrease in sauropods, and a rather dramatic increase in ornithopods.
He attributes this to the unique chewing methods of the ornithopods, and suggests perhaps it was the flowering plants that promoted the decline of the sauropods and their gizzard-stone type of digestion.
At the very end of the Cretaceous there was a spurt of competition among other herbivores to grow protective    bony armour and to lengthen increasingly heavy and muscular tails.
A lot of them, like the horned and armoured dinosaurs (represented by ceratopsians and ankylosaurs) appeared towards the end of the dinosaur era just when the stegosaurs were passing away.
Since a primitive ankylosaur looks somewhat like a primitive stegosaur, it has been suggested that the two sub-orders were really one which split apart later on in the evolutionary story.
This contrasts with a later theory which says that the split took place much earlier, say in the earliest Jurassic, if the two sub-orders did not evolve separately from primitive ornithischian stock.
The morphology and size of dinosaurs appeared to change along with the vegetation.
The brontosaurs had long necks (lower picture) that enabled them to reach the high-growing conifers prevalent in the Jurassic.
Three of the brontosaurs, and a stegosaur, could rear up and feed tripodally.
By the time of the Late Cretaceous, only one kind of brontosaur — the Alamosaurus — existed.
(Source: Robert Bakker,The Dinosaur Heresies )
It used to be thought by many scientists that the armoured plates stuck outwards, as in Stegosaurus , in order to hit enemies approaching from the side.
Others thought they may have been blood-cooling devices, similar to the large ears of African elephants.
They were certainly made hideous by the way their fossilized bones, complete with jutting frills, were reassembled in museums.
Re-examination of their fossils by Bakker and others show that the thick frills of a Triceratops , like the bony scutes of the early Chasmatosaurus , was beneath the skin to probably serve as an attachment for the massive cheek muscles and to hold up its heavy head.
Possibly dinosaurs living in the latter phase had developed complex social structures, as today occurs in some reptilian genera.
This is likely to have been the case with the final dinosaur group evolving from the small types such as Psittacosaurus , or the parrot-type reptiles such as the heavily built quadruped ceratopsians.
In fact more than a million tracks made by iguanodontids, uncovered recently in the Rocky Mountains and dubbed a ‘dinosaur motorway’, have thrown a new light on dinosaur life-cycles.
Marvin Lockley, of the University of Colorado, says the tracks show dinosaurs following migration paths similar to the great movements of wildebeest across the Serengeti Plain in Africa.
It seems that the herds instinctively followed food sources as the seasons changed in Mesozoic America.
The implications  were that the dinosaurs were not stupid, slow, cold-blooded animals, said Angela Milner of London's Natural History Museum.
There is evidence of a stampede as meat-eating theropods attacked a herd of herbivorous hypsilophodontids browsing in a region of Australia, and some paleontologists have managed to work out the method of attack of the predators and the defensive posture of the herds.
By now, however, in the twilight of their existence on Earth, problems of climate were becoming more important, having finally a crucial bearing on whether they would continue to live on as a species, or succumb.
In spite of all their adaptive abilities in regard to diet, armoured defence, body size, chewing and digestive mechanisms, it seems that the ‘thermal niche’ was the factor that ultimately became seriously disturbed.
But this is curious: we are, after all, dealing with 140 million years of almost perfect adaptive survival.
Dinosaurs were without doubt cleverly adapted: among the family were insectivores, herbivores and carnivores, generalists and specialists of many varying habitats.
In fact they were everything, as Kenneth Hsu of the Geological Institute of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology at Zurich says: ‘from wood chewers to grasshopper catchers, conifer browsers to possum hunters.
Each succeeding threat to each separate family or species was successfully overcome.
Dinosaurs could not have been moribund because they were still diversifying into new orders.
We have seen how the findings of Barry Hall and John Cairns have suggested that some genetic codes occur more often when they are useful than when they are not.
So the dinosaurs could in theory have continued to pile on genetic advantages.
Hitherto it was thought that natural selection is standing still, or merely weeding out the more harmful defects.
These new findings might be called Lamarckism.
They could eventually contradict the ‘central dogma’ that changes in dna flow into the protein molecules they code for, but never the other way round.
Some critics point out that it is difficult to see how it   could benefit larger multi-celled animals, because of the problem of passing on good genes via sperm cells, or the egg.
In spite of this one likes to think that the dinosaurs could have engineered their own continuing survival, building upon the immense advantages that large brain and body size confer.
Fig.17.
The permanently curved backbone of the American buffalo is similar to that of the duckbill species of dinosaur, confirming that they were a browsing animal that had adapted to the changing growth pattern of vegetation.
(Source: Robert Bakker)
It could possibly have happened before.
Indeed, about a million years ago some species of primate — the forerunners of human beings — seemed to select out larger brains in one of the most explosive periods of evolutionary change ever to occur on Earth.
The stark conclusion is that environmental forces, as this book will continue to make plain, ultimately defeated the dinosaurs in the race to become intelligent bipeds.
There are important clues to support this conclusion.
Largeness, whether as an un-eliminated pituitary defect or as a self-coded dna attempt at prolonging the dinosaurian bloodline, may not have worked to their advantage in the end.
The bigger the creature the larger the surface  area needed to absorb yet more nourishment.
An intelligent brain must possess a minimum mass, although other factors, such as the form and internal neural connections of the brain, must also play a part.
Earth's gravity must, in the end, have been just too powerful.
A planet with a small mass, midway between Earth and Mars, would have had a low gravity and a thin atmosphere.
Already we could say that tall creatures like diplodocuses had unnecessarily large chests, housing appropriately large lungs needed to inhale an atmosphere that should, in theory, have been thinner than it probably was.
Certainly dinosaur bulkiness, dictated by biogeographical and ancestral factors, would have been a continuing dangerous handicap on a planet with Earth-like gravity.
We have seen already that the small heads of some dinosaurs with elongated torsos were no doubt a built-in safety factor against crippling head injuries, while naturally restricting at the same time the development of intelligence.
One can only assume that the later, powerfully muscled and squatter ankylosaurs were more finely tuned to Earth's gravity.
But by this time most of the bipeds — the only creatures able to develop stereo vision, a large braincase, together with forelimbs and an opposable thumb (like Stenonychosaurus inequalis )— were already becoming extinct.
Also, in an abundant world, there was probably insufficient stimulus to develop intelligence.
Highly intelligent humans, of course, are warm-blooded.
Here, perhaps, is the most important clue to the demise of the dinosaurs.
Cold-blooded creatures would need very even temperatures if their intelligence was not to switch on and off with variations in the weather.
But can we assume they were permanently — that is, intergenerationally — cold-blooded?
We cannot, since over 140 million years it is likely that the threat of extinction due to climatic change may have been continually postponed.
Dinosaurs were, in fact, a serial species, dying off in relays, sometimes even with ‘new, improved’ versions emerging from time to time.
It is probable that their  thermo-regulatory techniques actually went through prolonged periods of metamorphoses.
In the end even that was not enough for continued survival.
The dinosaurs probably lost the race against time, having already lost bipedality and vestigial hands at the time when mammalian-type warm-bloodedness would almost certainly have guaranteed their survival into perpetuity.
In order to understand why this happened we must now turn, in this final chapter of this section.
to the question of how the dinosaurs regulated, or failed to regulate, their body heat.
WERE THE DINOSAURS WARM-BLOODED?
ROBERT BAKKER brought the subject of dinosaur physiology and phylogeny to the fore of debate in the 1970s.
This was partly through his articles, in which he placed as much emphasis on the soft parts as on the hard parts of the anatomy, although the former, for obvious reasons, must be the subject of much more speculation than the latter.
Bakker was firmly of the opinion that most, if not all, of the dinosaurs were warm-blooded: i.e. they were endothermic.
Perhaps at this stage it should be pointed out that Bakker has incurred much criticism from his academic peers.
He has been accused of indulging in fallacious argument, l of selecting data and omitting sources, and he has allegedly ignored the great accumulation of new studies in the 1970s and 1980s that might have refuted some of his arguments.
Nevertheless, Bakker has contributed enormously to our understanding of dinosaur biology.
Hitherto many specialists opted out of the controversy by saying we have no way of knowing the internal temperature of dinosaurs because of the reasons mentioned above.
Bakker has, instead, been ready to use thought and reason to fill in the gaps in our knowledge.
He was, in fact, responsible (albeit inadvertently) for goading the American Association for the Advancement of Science into conducting an important symposium on the subject, and his name today continually recurs in most of the dinosaur literature.
Robert Bakker and the AAAS report notwithstanding, animal metabolism is a rather complicated subject, depending greatly for clarity on the precise definition of terms.
The metabolism controversy may not have been aided by the somewhat liberal use of generic terms by Bakker and even by his critics, in popular books and articles.
So before we examine the debate in more detail let us define our terms.
Briefly, ‘warm-blooded’ means a thermal state of a creature's core temperature being higher than the low ambient temperature.
‘Cold-blooded’ means that the core temperature remains close to the ambient temperature ‘as it rises and falls’.
Here is the scientist's lexicon of formal terms to describe different types of thermoregulation of living creatures, including all living insects, reptiles, amphibians, birds and animals:
Poikilothermic
A scientific name for cold-bloodedness.
Ectothermy
Where the body temperature depends on the behaviour and heat from the surrounding environment.
Heliothermy
The regulation of core temperatures of ectotherms via solar radiation.
Endothermy
Where the body temperature depends on high tachymetabolism.
Tachymetabolism
A high rate of internal heat production.
Bradymetabolism
A low metabolic rate of heat production.
 Homeothermy or Homoiothermy
Temperature regulation in tachymetabolic species in which core temperatures remain roughly steady despite ambient temperature changes.
Heterothermy
Tachymetabolic temperature regulation exceeding that defined by homeothermy, either daily or seasonally.
If they do little else, these terms show that there is a great risk of over-simplifying the subject when the bald expressions ‘cold-blooded’ or ‘warm-blooded’are used.
It is unfortunate, then, that Bakker treats endothermy and ectothermy as if they were mutually exclusive, even suggesting that endotherms have a distinct competitive advantage over the others.
As a simple rule of thumb we could say that major differences in thermoregulation are determined by whether heat is derived solely from the environment, or is entirely internally generated, or is somewhere between the two.
It should be clear from our list of terms above that there is quite a pronounced divide between ectotherms and endotherms, with the latter having a more varied range of thermoregulatory techniques.
Some physiologists insist on making a distinction between temperature regulation and heat production.
In one sense, of course, all creatures, ‘hot’ and ‘cold’blooded, maintain constant temperatures within a certain bearable range, and this means in turn that they must be able to conduct heat away from their bodies.
We saw how, in Chapter 2, a biological system of animals functions like any other mechanistic system.
An animal must similarly collect ‘free’ energy and continue to search for new energy sources which must at least repay the costs of the search.
One reason why endothermy is not as common in the animal kingdom as one might expect is that the energy costs of endothermy are high.
The resting metabolic rate for a mammal is five to ten times higher than for ectotherms with an equally high body temperature.
Living things are always integrated into their thermal environment, and thermoregulation exemplifies stages in progressive adaptation to the rigours of terrestrial life.
We could even insist that there is an evolutionary transition not only of skeletal structures, but an evolution from less to more efficient body morphologies.
This is because creatures are subject to a range of ambient temperatures within which they can exist at the lowest, and hence most cost-effective, level of metabolic activity, known as  their thermoneutral zone.
Below and beyond this zone behavioural responses must become the major controlling mechanism, but this becomes metabolically expensive, and must lead to exhaustion if it cannot be made good by an increased intake of food and rest.
Nature requires some compensating feature in any ecological setting for the expenditure and consumption of so much energy.
This is why different thermoregulatory devices exist such as skin, fur, feather and scales, all of which play differing roles.
Panting, shivering, moulting, all play their part.
One clue is that under stress of excessive heat or pursuit by predators, the amount of energy needed or dissipated can be very high.
Indeed, food requirements can rise anywhere from five to ten times that needed for a similar ectotherm.
We would actually prefer ectothermy in the design of very large animals in tropical climes.
Thermoregulation in Modern-day Creatures
A lot of Earth's creatures, of course, are neither large nor live in tropical climes, and the energy costs of endothermy are not necessarily so high.
Let us look first at insects, which are particularly vulnerable to extremes of temperature.
When the weather is very cold they cannot fly at all, but can warm themselves by deflecting their wings at right angles to the Sun (as do, for example , locusts).
Such would be a behavioural response.
And at temperatures of 40°C plus, the insect can orient itself parallel to the Sun's rays to reduce the amount of body surface facing the Sun.
It can also lever its legs further off the ground, or it can climb vegetation to reduce thermal ground conductivity.
At the same time it can exploit the low thermal conductivity of the air; i.e. the way the temperature of the air itself is neither as hot nor as cool as the land surface.
Insects can also lose heat by evaporation from their spiracles, but this may lead to  desiccation .
Rapid flying can soon lead to heat loss by convection, and at night  nocturnal insects like moths protect themselves against heat loss with hairs on their thorax which maintain a stable air layer around the body surface.
Let us next look at reptiles.
First we must remind ourselves that much of the physiological regulation of warm and cold-blooded animals is determined by the manner in which blood is trapped and channelled to various depths of the body.
Reptiles live largely in tropical environments, and the techniques they use for cooling themselves are probably even more important than warming techniques, as we have seen.
Most reptiles utilize the buffering aquatic environment to lower body heat.
They have a largely impermeable skin which prevents them from drying out too quickly under a hot sun, although evaporation does take place.
Crocodiles can lose water at a rate of up to half of that of amphibians (which have a much more permeable skin, and would greatly suffer from  desiccation on land were it not for the safety valve of a reduced urine flow, which passes much of its water content back into the body).
But the desert lizard,Sauromaulus , loses only 5 per cent of that of crocodilians through the skin.
Respiration in lizards also plays a part.
Like insects, reptiles are essentially heliothermic, but also have other physiological responses appropriate to ectotherms.
The earless lizards of the southwestern United States have a large, blood-filled sinus in their heads which, when they pop their heads out of a cave, becomes heated by the Sun and can be distributed throughout the body.
The lizards can then rest on the warm substrate, and seek shelter for the rest of the day.
Reptilian blood systems go through a period of self-adjustment permitting the conservation of heat as required, and allowing the creatures to distribute it when needed.
Reptiles become progressively more efficient, just waiting for improvements which only increasing size facilitates, eventually anticipating full homeothermy.
Certainly the desert-dwelling species have a surprisingly high and constant body temperature, belying their  description as poikilothermics.
Let us now turn our attention to the bird kingdom.
We know that birds are warm-blooded: in fact they are fully tachymetabolic, as expressed in the resting rate of oxygen consumption per unit of weight and time.
But their feathers also act as insulators.
Feathers and (in the case of mammals) hair trap a layer of air which has a low thermal rate of conductivity.
Cold-blooded creatures, on the other hand, have fat deposits deeper within the body where they do not interfere with the uptake of heat from the Sun.
Birds, also to some extent like mammals, have involuntary nervous controls to regulate heat; for instance, shivering.
Nervous controls are not the same as behavioural responses of the kind we have seen in the case of reptiles, which situate themselves at angles to gain the maximum benefit from, or to avoid the worst excesses of, solar radiation.
Most mammals are fully tachymetabolic.
They exert themselves to produce internal heat.
There is another technique known as metabolic thermogenesis, which is a non-shivering method of producing adrenalin done with the aid of food, in what is known as calorigenic action.
This process can speed up metabolism when digestion products are absorbed into the bloodstream.
Blood vessels at the surface are constricted in cold conditions so that blood is confined to the deeper vessels, which has the effect of conserving blood heat.
Similarly when it is hot the superficial vessels expand, so drawing heat away from the interior towards the surface, where it can be cooled by the conduction away from the skin surface.
Biologists talk of ‘sensible’ and ‘insensible’water loss.
The former occurs via evaporation and expiration, and the latter through panting and sweating.
But sweating depends on the humidity of the air; the higher the humidity the less effective is the evaporation.
Heat loss can also be achieved simply enough by immersion in cold water, which has the effect of displacing the insulating layer of heat.
Heat loss occurs through convection, due to the low specific heat content of the air  rapidly warmed by contact with the body surface.
Warm air rises and is replaced by cooler and denser air, and the cooling effect, of course, is enhanced by winds and draughts.
Loss of heat in solid bodies, then, is a function of the difference between the inner core temperature and the surface temperature (i.e. the skin), and can amount to as much as 50 per cent.
Inevitably some creatures, as time passed, endeavoured to find a finely-tuned compromise between the high costs and the regulative benefits of endothermy (the major disbenefit being over-heating).
One solution was to periodically suspend thermoregulation; i.e. some creatures became homeothermic or, depending on body mass, became heterothermic.
In fact, the ability to hibernate bestowed an ingenious advantage on many creatures.
Small homeotherms, like many.in the rodent family, do not have the advantage of large size nor of metabolic generation of heat.
Most are vulnerable to the cold, since they cannot grow long hair and a thick insulating coat.
Homeotherms also shiver.
Unlike the head-jutting ectothermic desert lizard, who warms his head first, the hibernating homeotherms would shiver and warm the heart first, then pass warm blood outwards to the body and brain.
The hibernating brown bear is probably heterothermic, with a higher rate of internal heat production than smaller creatures.
Hibernation in the marmot, hamster and hedgehog depends on more complex physiological adaptations, and some can drop their basal metabolic rate to as low as one per cent of their most active level.
Assessing Thermoregulation Techniques in Dinosaurs
That dinosaurs, as a sub-order of the archosaurs, are traditionally thought of as reptiles is the legacy of the great nineteenth-century anatomist Richard Owen.
He was the man who first coined the term ‘Dinosauria’, from the Greek word deinos (‘terrible’) and sauros (‘lizard’ or perhaps ‘reptile’).
Owen delivered a famous paper to  the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1841, in which his brilliant insights into the nature of these fearful elephantine creatures and their relationship to the known animal kingdom had a profound impact on the educated classes of his day.
Owen was an early anti-evolutionist.
He asserted that dinosaurs, created by God, stood at the apex of the reptilian kingdom, with ail descendants of them being vastly smaller and inferior orders.
Unlike other giant saurians, he said, dinosaurs were terrestrial rather than aquatic creatures.
They differed from reptiles in having five vertebrae fused to the pelvic girdle, with a mammalian-type trunk and a ‘thoracic structure’ hinting at a four-chambered heart.
He was the first scientist to suggest that they may have led a more vigorous life than the reptiles, and even proffered an atmospheric reason as to why they became extinct.
A century and a half later, of course, many new fossil discoveries and much critical analysis have greatly advanced our understanding of dinosaurs, although not to the extent that the controversy and emotion first stirred up by Owen has entirely abated.
Argument still centres around their metabolism rather than their physiology, although the latter is frequently invoked to prove some of the assertions made about warm and cold-bloodedness.
For example, the paleontologist Loris Russell points out that the skeletal anatomy of dinosaurs appears to be halfway between that of crocodilians and birds.
He speculates whether their physiology, and hence their metabolism, might also have been an intermediate one.
The fact that saurischians and ornithischians have different anatomies shows that their relationship to each other is as distant as other reptilian sub-orders, like crocodiles and pterosaurs.
But Russell believes that the skeletons of dinosaurs are yet more like birds than reptiles; i.e. he is an Owenite and believes dinosaurs to be more ‘advanced’ than reptiles.
From this Russell concludes that dinosaurs were more like birds in their soft anatomy and physiology.
Nevertheless controversy still centres around the interpretation of dinosaur structure.
Bones grow by accumulating crystals of minerals.
Dinosaurs did have — and mammals still have — minute channels for blood vessels known as Haversian canals.
These tiny grooves, over time, redeposit accumulated bone minerals in concentric layers to release them in a fluid state into the bloodstream when needed in a hurry, say when a violent spurt of activity is needed.
Paleontological and zoological evidence shows that ectothermic bones contain few primary vascular channels.
On the other hand, as John Ostrom, the Yale geologist points out, Haversian bone in modern creatures is both present and absent in both ectotherms and endotherms.
For example, it is present in turtles and crocodiles, and absent in small mammals and some birds.
One argument against dinosaur endothermy is the fact that bones have growth rings in them, somewhat similar to tree rings, especially those found in regions indicative of a strongly seasoned climate.
Such rings are hardly ever present in endotherms nor in dinosaurs.
So the correlation is weak.
Beverly Halstead, the late Reading paleontologist, says that studies by Robin Reid have ‘utterly demolished the notion that bone could be classified into either ectothermy or endothermic categories.
Yet an argument could be made out for Haversian bone being linked with large body-size rather than thermoregulation techniques.
There are still other hints at warm-bloodedness, derived from recent analysis of fragments of dinosaur eggshells.
Scientists excavating the fossilized remains of about twenty nests containing from 1 to 24 eggs each, in southern Alberta near the border between Canada and the United States in 1987, suggest that dinosaurs were more socially complex than was first thought.
The baby dinosaurs were an unknown species of hadrosaur of the duckbilled variety.
Because the nests are in such orderly rows, scientists at the Museum of Paleontology at Drumheller, Alberta, believe that the same species of dinosaur  returned to the site to give birth each year for many hundreds of years.
They also appeared to incubate the eggs, and probably guarded the young; both are characteristics of bird-like activity.
Furthermore, comparison with the size of the eggs with the known adult size hinted that the hadrosaurs grew by as much as 280 cm. in their first year after birth.
This suggested that they were endothermic, something also pointed out by Robert Bakker, who showed that growth from a ceratopsian egg to a one-ton creature could take just five years.
Adult hadrosaurs were up to 13 metres in length and weighed from 4 to 6 tons, about the same as a large elephant.
It has also been pointed out that dinosaur fossils have been found at quite high latitudes, hinting again at endothermy, since no reptile can survive in the cooler climates beyond the equatorial regions.
This assertion loses considerable credibility when continental drift is taken into account (see Chapters 9 and 10).
Nearly all dinosaur localities were situated in what scientists can now work out as being within 40 to 50 degrees of the paleo-equator, where the mean annual temperature was 15°C higher than today.
The other argument concerns the predator/prey ratio.
Warm-blooded creatures need more prey; i.e. there is a low predator-to-prey ratio.
First, the energy budget of predators is said to decrease with increasing weight, so that lions require ten times their own weight, whereas shrews require 100 times their own weight.
Such abio-energetic scaling systems, says Bakker, can cancel out, making body size a constant factor in the predator/prey ratio.
He says that dinosaur specimens from late Cretaceous rocks reveal low predator/prey ratios of from 3 to 5 per cent.
A herd of zebras, hence, produces about a quarter to a third of its weight in prey carcases per year.
A population of mice may yield up to six times its weight because of rapid turnover and high metabolism.
The consumption rate of ectotherm predators is equal to its own body weight every sixty days, and this contrasts  with the mammalian rate of its own body-weight every 6.6 days for wild dogs, 8.0 for lions, and 10 days for cheetahs.
However, the evidence for this is unreliable, and filtering processes are capable of all kinds of indeterminate errors.
Often the burial site is destroyed, or there is a differential representation of habitats.
Furthermore, any bias in regard to fossil collectors going for the more interesting and rare predators would actually slant the bias in favour of ectothermy, rather than endothermy.
The zoologist Cloudsley-Thompson suggests the enormous size of herbivores ‘would be bound to distort the ratio even if the vagaries of fossilization are ignored.
Alan Charig, of London University, also says that no allowance has been made for differing life-spans or even the palatability of the different dead animals, nor for the robustness of fossilized skeletons, nor the latitude at which fossils have been found.
On balance, however, the predator/prey theory of dinosaur endothermy does seem to be one of Bakker's stronger points.
Does Bipedalism Prove Warm-bloodedness?
Other issues of controversy focus interestingly on dinosaur stance.
Belief in increasing archosaur homeothermy stems from the earlier discussion of the apparent change in posture.
It is now commonly held that it was when the upright walkers replaced the sprawlers that the way was paved for homeothermic dinosaurs.
The hind legs became stronger and gradually swung in beneath the body to support more of its mass.
Would this also require a change in metabolism?
A ‘fixed pillar’ stance, it is thought, inevitably obliges an animal's system to produce heat even at rest.
One writer on dinosaurs suggests that raising the body off the ground requires more energy, and hence a more efficient heart that could supply commensurately more oxygen Bipedal walking and standing, runs the argument, requires the muscles to tense to straighten the legs.
The further the animal's centre of gravity is off the ground, the more work is demanded of the muscles around the joints and girdles, and like all metabolic activity this must release heat.
Hence improved leg performance enabled early archosaurs to be more agile and speedy than other contemporary reptiles, a theory that Richard Owen first articulated.
The thecodonts, from this perspective, were one group that improved its locomotion and utilized its energy more effectively, and survived better.
Bakker, however, is at pains to point out that dinosaurs were not necessarily built for sustained speed any more than mammals are.
The cheetah can attain speeds of 97  kph for about 18 seconds, but soon slows down if his prey eludes him.
Unfortunately bipedality does not prove high activity or endothermy.
True, some mammals do sprawl (aquatic kinds such as seals, walruses, dugongs and whales), while no living ectotherm can achieve truly erect gait.
Ectothermy does not cause slowness; rather, ectotherms simply do not need endothermy.
Many are quick and agile in escaping from danger.
Even so, reptiles accumulate an oxygen debt if active for long periods, as well as suffering from fatigue and slow rates of repayment.
So all lines of enquiry in regard to body stance are amenable to alternative explanations, perhaps because the issue is looked at from the wrong perspective.
It can be maintained, for instance, that erect posture is needed to support a large size rather than represent progress to an endothermic regime.
Further, new theories suggest there is some considerable thermoregulatory advantage in being bipedal.
Anthropologists, in tracing the evolution of Homo sapiens from more primitive quadruped simian species, assumed that bipedalism facilitated the free use of hands from their role in locomotion.
Homo habilis , using his hands in a variety of building, trapping and tool-making adventures, became rapidly more intelligent.
Unfortunately, evidence of either using tools or eating meat does not appear among the fossils until almost two million years later than that indicated when the first  upright hominid skeleton was discovered in fossil form.
Neither does the idea of Mary Leakey and her team — that walking upright helped to scavenge dead carcases left behind by carnivore predators — survive close scrutiny, because it appears from hominid fossils that they ate probably more grain than meat.
It was only when attention suddenly focused upon how the earliest hominids kept their large and delicate brains cool in tropical zones that insights occurred.
Savanna animals cool off with a kind of organic radiator by evaporating water from the moist linings of the nasal chambers.
Panting increases the flow of air through the muzzle and enhances evaporation.
This in turn removes heat from the blood flowing beneath the nasal membranes, and this pool of relatively cool blood helps keep the brain from overheating.
At high temperatures a powerful pumping movement of the mouth and neck takes place in the large monitor lizard Varanus .
and is similar to panting in mammals.
Varanus can also increase its metabolic rate, like mammals but often more effectively.
Similarly, many scientists argue that dinosaurs developed extensive nasal passages with membranes to cool their skin surfaces.
John Ostrom points out that most dinosaur nasal passages bypassed the mouth cavity, so chewing could be done without breathing, very typical of creatures with high respiratory rates; i.e. endotherms.
The early dimetrodon, as we have seen, did appear to have a cooling device on its back, with the spines helping to increase the creature's surface-to-mass ratio.
Other species had radiator-type cranial frills and horns through which blood vessels could dilate and cool, rather like the blood vessels in mammalian horns (such as in stags, antelopes, etc.).
These would allow blood temperatures to be moderated with cooler blood from the horn passing into the brain.
Many other dinosaurs, it is suggested, submerged themselves in cooling swamp water, and raked plants  with their front teeth, like Diplodocus .
Archosaurs, the forerunners of dinosaurs, also probably lost heat through their surface skin, or perhaps they had air sacs beneath the skin to effect further cooling, and which also may have made them lighter on their feet.
Fig.18.
The large dorsal plates of the Stegosaurus (above) and the horn-cores of the Triceratops (below) could have acted as blood-cooling devices.
Some archosaur fossils showed that one species, the longisquamata (‘long-scales’), possessed heat-insulating scales that possibly also trapped air-pockets and may well have been the forerunners of feathers.
Many of the bone-headed ceratopsians could swim with their front feet pawing the lake bed like hippos, both buoyed up and cooled by the water.
Allosaurus was about 11 metres long and could walk at 5 mph (8 kph), double the speed of the giant herbivores, who could retreat into deep water.
Incidentally, the argument that dinosaurs would have needed to keep their brains cool neither proves nor disproves endothermy.
Mammals and birds both have large brains relative to reptiles, and exhibit ‘intelligent’ behaviour.
But they need constant supplies of food and even temperatures.
Ectothermic reptiles have a body temperature that tends to vary over a 24-hour period, and hence seem unable to support a large brain.
Dinosaurs, traditionally thought to have a small brain, have similarly been analogized with reptiles.
However, scientists from the University of Chicago believe that theropods and ornithopods seem to have had brains relatively larger (body mass for body mass) than reptiles, hinting at mammalian-like complex behaviour.
The foregoing discussion of mammalian cooling techniques and their relation to the human species is rather academic.
Peter Wheeler, a vertebrates physiologist, reminds us that humans do not have the nasal cooling radiator of mammals.
Instead, there are other advantages of bipedalism.
Standing upright, he says, naturally reduces the amount of body mass exposed to the Sun's rays in an equatorial landscape.
Wheeler did experiments which proved that an animal absorbs 60 per cent less heat at noon in the upright mode than if it was on all fours.
A further advantage is that bipedalism raised the body further off the ground, putting more of the skin area in a situation to aid heat loss.
Such behavioural modes are not greatly at odds with the thermoregulative techniques of reptilian heliotherms which vary their body stance according to the angle of the Sun's rays.
What Kind of Dinosaur Heart?
Over hundreds of millions of years, as species evolved, they developed better designed hearts with extra chambers which succeeded in separating blood-borne oxygen on its way to the muscles or fins, and back again.
Fish have only a two-chambered heart, consisting of an atrium and a ventricle through which the blood passes on its way to the gills and back to the heart.
Reptiles and amphibians use a three-chambered heart, where blood goes into a separate part of the atrium on its way to the muscles, but the blood on its way back empties into the same ventricle.
This means that in the case of fish some of the blood must make two or three trips around the lung circuit, and some carbon-dioxide-bearing blood makes several trips round the body before returning to the heart.
In the reptilian heart most of the blood gets round the body on the first circuit, but with the four-chambered heart — in mammals, birds and (imperfectly) in crocodiles — the blood from the two circuits is not mixed at all.
It is as if the body had two hearts — one providing power to the lung circuit, and the other for the body circuit.
This system gives the animal much more speed and stamina.
Several commentators theorize that dinosaurs may have had hearts like crocodilians, perhaps because they are the closest living relatives to the archosaur.
But modern crocodiles possess the imperfect four-chambered heart in which freshly oxygenated blood from the lungs is separated from the used blood returning from the body.
This enables oxygen to be stored for several minutes, and during prolonged periods of submersion an accessor valve between the heart ventricles can be opened to bypass the function of the lungs.
This is supposed to have greater survival value in regard to social functions like nest-egg guarding, and to aid some kinds of brain activity.
Such a heart is good, but, say some scientists who believe dinosaurs were more active than hitherto supposed, not good enough.
It is interesting to note that birds and mammals can be    grouped together in evolution terms, as both evolved from two distinct reptilian stocks along independent lines; but both can be treated as similar from a thermoregulatory point of view.
This itself hints that if birds are descended from dinosaurs, it is likely that the dinosaurs had a system that was different from both birds and mammals.
For example, the Ornithosuchus is the most important transitional species of the infra-order carnosauria.
They were speedy, fast metabolizing, and probably insulated.
If the argument is accepted that dinosaurs were on their way to possessing a non-reptilian or bird-like heart, then as soon as the separation of the heart valves was complete it enabled the thecodonts, probably in the Triassic.
now with extremely short forelegs, to become lightweight and full bipedal ‘bird crocodiles’.
Fig.19.
Dinosaurs may have had a four-chambered heart; if so they were probably warm-blooded.
(Source: Sprague de Camp,Day of the Dinosaur )
Later changes in the heart mechanism, according to the argument, and increasing size completed the job of further adjustments to their changing environment.
But there was soon a limit to this process of adjustment: once perfection had been reached they were vulnerable to changes in habitat.
Curiously these metabolic processes seem to anticipate the homeothermic organisation of mammals, thus hinting that dinosaurs carried on where the reptiles left off.
In other words there was an ever-increasing trend, with growing mass, towards homeothermy.
And once homeothermy had been accepted as a good working hypothesis, then other arguments relating to non-metabolic methods of heat control began to have more relevance.
It is instructive to note that relative newcomers to the dinosaur scene, the mosasaurs (the violent giant aquatic lizards referred to in Chapter 3, who appeared in the last 25 million years of the Cretaceous), showed evidence of mammalian-like illnesses.
Mosasaurs, when not head-butting each other, were deep-diving sea hunters, and evidence of avascular necrosis in their bone structure hinted that they suffered in the same way as did human divers — they had frequent spells of the ‘bends’.
This happens when nitrogen, dissolved in the blood under the  high pressure of deep water, returns to its gaseous form, causing bubbles that can block blood vessels and destroy the cells' soft tissue.
This never seemed to happen to other diving reptiles such as the ichthyosaurs.
Certainly, according to John Ostrom, dinosaurs themselves showed fossil evidence of mammalian or bird-like behavioural patterns, especially, as we have seen, from footprints suggesting group activity.
On the other hand, this view must be balanced by the knowledge that herding and other complex communal activities are also engaged in by a variety of ectotherms.
Yet there could be a hindrance to analogizing birds with large dinosaurs because of the question of size (the smaller dinosaurs present an intractable problem).
Comparing dinosaurs with birds provides interesting insights.
Birds have a better breathing system than that of mammals or lizards.
The left systemic arch has disappeared and the right ventricle empties only into the pulmonary artery, capable of producing large pressure differentials between pulmonary and systemic tracts.
It is possible that, over time, the simple loss of the left systemic arch in the crocodilian heart could have resulted in an avian double-pump which would have left the dinosaur ‘free to evolve’ tachymetabolism.
Birds also have a complex system of air sacs through which the air passes before entering the lungs proper.
This enables the air to flow in just one direction in an improved exchange of gases between air and blood.
In mammals the blood flows in the opposite direction to the Now of air.
The evolutionary and thermoregulatory relationship between birds and dinosaurs was seen to be strengthened in 1989 after an examination of the best preserved fossils of a pterosaur's wings.
David Martill of the Open University, and David Unwin of Reading University, discovered the fossilized tissue of the wing of a Sandactylus alive 100 million years ago, which had more in common with bat wings than the skin of modern reptiles.
Martill and Unpin also found structures that they identified as blood vessels, similar to those found in bats.
This enables the  bat to cool down as it flies, so if pterosaurs needed to cool down they must have worked their wings as they flew, and probably were endothermic.
The Problem of Body Size
At this stage body mass — or size — looms ever larger in importance.
It is worth giving it a detailed treatment.
If we say that dinosaurs grew large because they were in pursuit of the advantage of heat conservation, we are not implying that species engineered their own destiny, with the effect predetermining the cause.
The thecodonts started off small, so their surface areas were large in comparison with their volume; they could have felt the cold more, and a heat-transmitting skin was a liability.
Also an enlargement of the pituitary gland is clearly correlated with large size, almost as if some kind of hormonal imbalance occurred.
If this was a genetic accident, then it had tremendous significance in regard to unintentional evolution to homeothermy and great species longevity.
This in turn has led commentators to assume that such imbalances and other genetic errors such as endocrine deficiency, led also to their demise (see Chapter 10).
Whatever the driving force, heat conservation has many advantages.
A study done by Edwin Colbert and his colleagues showed that a tiny 50 gramme (1.76 oz) alligator heated up 1 °C every minute and a half from the Sun, while a large alligator some 260 times bigger took seven and a half minutes.
Extrapolating this knowledge to a 10-ton dinosaur, they calculated that a one-degree rise in body temperature would take some 86 hours.
Halstead says that a 30-ton Brontosaurus would take about three days to change its temperature by 1°C.
On the other hand, many scientists are certain that gigantism must preclude elevated rates of metabolism.
We must also return here to the issue of dinosaur diet.
As the size of a non-ectothermic herbivore increases it has the additional problem of finding enough food (so  there is, incidentally, a selective advantage for any plant to become unpalatable).
And this is paralleled with the problem, if they were endotherms, of their burning food up too quickly.
Indeed, Halstead reminds us that herbivorous dinosaurs would have to eat for more than 24 hours a day.
Even if they were ectotherms, a 20-ton creature would need to produce 557 kilocalories per hour.
Its surface area would dissipate heat continually at the same rate at which it exceeded ambient temperature, and it would need 8100 kilocalories of solar radiation in addition to its metabolic increment.
Undoubtedly, then, tachymetabolic dinosaurs would have needed plenty of food, and there is some evidence for this.
On the other hand, large size for carnivores would not necessarily have meant a remorseless and continued struggle to find food.
A single 30-ton sauropod corpse would have lasted Tyrannosaurus for three years, leading the Halsteads to surmise that among other anatomical reasons T. Rex was a slow-moving scavenger, incapable of moving faster than 2 mph (4 kph).
Sprague de Camp also says that the sharpness of the Tyrannosaurus ’ teeth hints that they may have eaten meat softened by decomposition.
All cold-blooded creatures move at a leisurely pace, but are capable, as we have seen, of sudden flights of speed when necessary.
Remember that, with a very large carnosaur, even a strolling gait would enable it to cover a lot of ground fast and catch fleeing small paramammals without in the least needing to gallop.
If the prey were large the carnosaur could not have eaten it all at once.
After gorging itself it would lie down and go into a digestive torpor, and could alternately eat and doze over a period of several weeks.
Nevertheless the trend of our argument so far is that evolution seemed to have proceeded towards a faster-moving creature with a different metabolism.
There is a revealing Darwinian relationship between size and weight in regard to herbivores and carnivores; one which seemed perfectly balanced to keep the ratio in harmony.
But diet complicates an already complex issue.
The plant-eaters  grew bulkier and heavier as a kind of protection, and in a few instances the flesh-eaters also grew commensurately bigger.
Again it depends on how many large carnivores there were in relation to the herbivores.
Some plant-eaters were as much as 40 times the weight of Allosaurus .
Our ability to gain a better insight into the predatory relationship is made difficult because saurischians could be either herbivores or carnivores.
The Brontosaurus , for example, was big as well as being a herbivore, and T. Rex was big but a carnivore.
And yet a similar bipedal dinosaur in size and appearance to T. Rex was Trachodon , but it was an ornithischian and therefore a herbivore.
As a consequence the dinosaurs that preyed on them must also have grown bigger.
One persuasive argument says that many dinosaurs probably needed a high metabolic rate when they were not fully grown, since they had to grow, as we have seen, at a great pace.
Halstead implies that dinosaur metabolic rates must actually have changed while they were growing, to convert to the other method completely when maturation was reached.
Terrestrial vertebrates with low resting metabolic rates and complete double-pump high-pressure hearts do not exist today.
And yet these would be better able to be active and grow quickly on a limited food supply, particularly in a stable equable climate.
The other important point about body size returns us once more to some simple physics.
Ectotherms have a very short heart-brain separation.
And it is known that the greater the heart-brain distance the greater is the systemic pressure of the blood circulation needed.
Crocodiles have low systemic blood pressure, even lower than that of the iguana which has a three-chambered heart.
In the case of Brachiosaurus , the vertical heart-brain distance was some 6 metres.
thus requiring a very high systemic systolic pressure.
This possibly explains the small size of the head of sauropods.
We have seen that a small skull for a very tall animal is a protection against severe head injuries.
But it  has also been suggested that the animal's heart could not have pumped enough blood to nourish a head any larger, or one that was in fact more solid than the light, airy structure of the skull of many known species.
If we now turn our attention to the carnosaurs, like the Dilophosaurus , and the dome-headed creatures, like the grotesque Pachycephalosaurus , we can see that they had very bony skulls.
The ceratopsians also had bony heads, seen at its maximum in Triceratops enrycephalus , where the brow horns reached extraordinary proportions.
This has led to the speculation that these overweighted skulls led to the animal's extinction, as a kind of anti-evolutionary regression.
Fig.20.
Comparisons of average blood-pressures of modern creatures and dinosaurs.
Dinosaur estimates are derived from the distance blood must travel between the heart and the brain, as measured from various mounted skeletons.
Even so, the size-and-weight-of-head argument is a rather specious one.
As David Norman has pointed out, the high blood pressure needed in the body and head circuit of the Brachiosaurus , with blood being pumped all the way up to its brain along a long neck, would have caused massive bleeding in the thin blood vessels of modern reptilian lungs.
Only with the aid of a fully divided heart, with the blood pressure in the lung circuit being lower than in the body-and-head circuit, could Brachiosaurus have existed and functioned.
Hence it may have been endothermic.
It is possible that during the later Mesozoic small mammals began to co-exist with the much larger dinosaurs because the ecological roles had become separated.
This could explain the extinctions: changing metabolism and the emergence of new niches, and competition from mammals better able to survive.
In the meantime the dinosaurs' lineage probably reached their optimum size for metabolic efficiency.
In fact, it was probably decreasing size in those creatures evolving from the therapsids that spurred the need for mammalian endothermy when the problems of overheating became the reverse — when they needed later to maintain temperatures.
Some dinosaurs that evolved during the Permian/Triassic reduced their body mass by around 35 per cent or more, and may have had their dimensions reduced by 50 per cent.
One conclusion must be that there are probably more similarities between large ectotherms and endothermic homeotherms than between large endotherms and small endothermic homeotherms like rabbits and mice.
But homeotherms are not so well structured to accommodate chronic changes in temperature.
This is why to account for their longevity it is now believed that they were a qualified kind of ectothermic homeotherm continually striving to become endothermic homeotherms.
One theory suggests that as the non-endothermic therapsids diminished the food base changed, and this in turn obliged the sub-orders like the cynodonts to switch from being passive to active homeotherms.
The zoologist J.  Cloudsley-Thompson concludes that dinosaurs ‘must almost certainly have been homeothermic.’
Bakker, then, in spite of all the criticism levelled at him, was partly right even if he was a little too loose with his terminology.
The problem, as this chapter has made all too clear, is that there are many fine distinctions between homeothermy and full endothermy.
Nevertheless, we have seen earlier that homeothermy is a form of temperature regulation in tachymetabolic creatures, and imprecision in terminology has not been the prerogative solely of Bakker.
For example, in Halstead's remarkable attack on Bakker in New Scientist , he relegated Bakker to an outdated minority of one.
‘When the debate [referring to the exhaustive symposium probe by the AAAS]was over, the dinosaurs had lost their high metabolic rate: they were, it turned out,passively warm-blooded, inertial  homoiotherms .’
David Norman used his words more precisely when he said they were ectothermic reptiles which were able to keep their bodies at a constant temperature ‘by being very large and living in a warm, mild climate.’
Without in any way contradicting himself he continues: ‘They could have been warm-blooded, highly active creatures (with a fully divided heart), without any of the costs associated with being an endotherm.’
In conclusion we could say that, as finding the correct thermal niche is the hallmark of natural selection, the likely midway position of dinosaurs seems a logical outcome.
Extinction hence may have occurred because the thermal niche disappeared.
This is where intellectual quandaries arise, complicated by piecemeal evidence leading paleontologists to assume a variety of combinations of thermoregulation.
These quandaries can only be overcome, I believe, by remembering how the dinosaur species emerged, and how it died off in relays, and that there was a great diversity of size.
Their heads, jaws and teeth evolved with the changing flora.
Furthermore, thermoregulation techniques are more flexible than has hitherto been supposed.
Natural selection, says environmental physiologist E. Carol Roth, can meet the specific  demands of both ectothermy and endothermy in circumstances which are unique to each other.’
Roth now believes that animals select what he calls ‘optimum thermal surroundings’.
They adopt different types of strategies but, as one might suspect, size would require a strategy distinct from other factors.
For example, James Spotila says that some lizards are behaviour specialists, flying insects are metabolism specialists, and dinosaurs and elephants are body-size specialists.
In co-evolution terms it means that herbivorous dinosaurs may have grown large as a means of attaining thermal stability.
Two intriguing points concern the passage of time.
We have seen that perhaps the growing and adolescent dinosaur had a metabolism that actually converted from some form of endothermy to homeothermic or heterothermic metabolism.
Nature cares nothing for human definitions, after all, as Sprague de Camp points out.
Creatures that bestride the dividing line between amphibians and reptiles and between mammals and protomammals, are constantly turning up in the fossil record.
And animal skull fossils sometimes yield tantalizing evidence of transitional metabolic natures.
Recently Michel Laurin, a young graduate student in paleontology at the University of Toronto, announced that the lizard-like Tetraceratops was an ancient relative of mammals.
This conclusion was based on temporal fenestra (or hole-behind-the-eye cavities) that were more like those of the early therapsids.
Therapsids were notable mammalian forerunners, and were different from the pelycosaurs in having their jaw muscles attached directly to the skull, rather than to tendons.
This gives a more powerful bite, and thus represents an important evolutionary advantage.
Laurin concluded that the Tetraceratops , as a species, lay between the pelycosaurs and therapsids, and that it must have been on the way to becoming a mammal.
The fenestral discovery, incidentally, also filled in a missing link to provide a 300 million year sequence of fossils showing a smooth evolution from reptiles to mammals.
Skin colour, another feature of dinosaurs often neglected, is also of relevance.
Spotila, of the State University of New York, reminds us that a white ectothermic dinosaur with a diameter of one metre in a subtropical habitat would have a body temperature ranging from 30.4 to 30.7°C, whereas a black dinosaur's temperature would rise as high as 38.4°C.
Spotila cites the findings of researchers who report that the komodo dragon, the largest living lizard, has a body temperature of 36 to 40°C while active.
Scaled to size.
dinosaurs would have temperatures reaching from 38.5 to 40.6°C. which would imply severe heat stress.
Presumably they would be unable to burrow or hide from the Sun like small mammals.
So if a dinosaur changed its skin colour from white to black it would cause a 7 or 8°C increase in body temperature (so perhaps colour varied with size?).
With air temperatures fluctuating between 22 and 32°C for a reptile one metre in diameter, the body temperature would fluctuate between 28.5 and 29.5°C.
Stephen Czerkas is an amateur American paleontologist who has made a name for himself by reconstructing lifelike models of dinosaurs.
Having unearthed the fossilized skin of an entire length of a 10-metre carnotaur (a smaller version of T. Rex ), he believes he could solve the problem of dinosaur colour and thermoregulation.
The carnotaur skin was very ornamental in pattern, with large protruding clusters all over the body, especially along the sides.
Czerkas suspected they may not have been, as generally assumed, muddy brown or bivouac green, but daubed with patches of colour around their bodies at strategic spots.
They may even have been able to change their colours as do chameleons, to help them attract mates or regulate their temperature.
He passed his skin samples to Karl Hirsch, a Denver-based researcher who specializes in fossil eggshells.
Hirsch may be able to determine microscopically, as Soviet scientists have in experiments on small mammal-reptiles pre-dating dinosaurs, whether the skin contains tiny gland-like impressions.
If the glands secreted sweat rather than scent, that  hints at thermoregulation, or warm-bloodedness.
When the results of these tests are finally known we may at last know for sure whether dinosaurs were warm-blooded or not.