

THE CONCEPT OF TRUTH
The concept of Truth (Satya) is fundamental to the thought of Gandhi.
It is not without significance that the sub-title of his autobiography is ‘The Story of my experiments with Truth’, and his whole life might well a interpreted as an attempt to live in accordance with or an existential quest for Truth.
Followers of Gandhi explicitly maintain that he was essentially a practical man with no concern for metaphysics or philosophical speculation, yet it is clear that whenever he attempted to explain what he meant by Truth he was involved in metaphysical speculation whether he or his followers realized it or not.
My contention is that the unity of Gandhi's thought and the interrelatedness of the various aspects of his teaching spring from firmly-held metaphysical beliefs and that the nature of these beliefs  become very much apparent when he expounds what he means by Truth.
I am not suggesting that he arrives at the meaning of Truth as the result of philosophical or metaphysical speculation in a vacuum.
He is not a neutral observer who first learns to define Truth and then applies it to different aspects of life.
Rather he is a participant in a form of life and the meaning of Truth for him is made apparent from the way in which it is used in that form of life.
Gandhi is faithful to the traditions of Hinduism when he affirms the isomorphism of Truth (Satya) and Reality (Sat).
He refers to reality as Truth and by the use of the term he preserves the metaphysical and ethical connotation of such traditional Hindu terms as dharma, universal law or duty, and  ta, the cosmic moral law.
For him nothing is, or nothing exists, except Truth, and where Truth is there also is true knowledge,(cit), and where true knowledge is, there also is bliss,(ānanda).
Truth then is Saccidānanda, being, consciousness, bliss.
This may be one of the reasons why Gandhi has no difficulty in describing himself as an Advaitin or non-Dualist, though to what extent it is accurate to regard Gandhi as  an Advaitin is another matter.
It is evident that he has no difficulty either in describing himself as a Dvaitin or Dualist, or as a follower of Viśi   ādvaita or qualified non-Dualism, namely, non-Dualism with distinctions.
But his claim to be able to represent the three major philosophical schools of the Vedānta does not prevent him from regarding Truth (Satya) as the most correct and most fully significant term that could be used for God.
On the face of it the statement ‘God is Truth’ seems to imply that Truth is an attribute or description of God, and in the first instance Gandhi was content to allow the phrase to be used in this way although it did not accurately reflect his position.
Later, however, he came to realize that it was more accurate for him to say Truth is God than it was to say God is Truth.
That is, he considered the term God to be an appellation for Truth rather than the term Truth to be a description or attribute of God.
The statement ‘Truth is God’, which Gandhi instinctively felt to be a more accurate expression of his basic position, is not inconsistent with his description of Truth as Being itself, as eternal, or with his reference to Truth as that which alone is, all else being momentary.
While in his view Truth need not assume shape or form at any time, yet when it is made to do so in order to meet specific human needs it is called Iśvara or God and assumes a personal connotation.
For Gandhi, however, the primary connotation of the term ‘God’ is not personal.
He describes God as a force, as the essence of life, as pure, undefiled consciousness, as truth, goodness, light and love, and as the atheism of the atheist since the latter also seeks truth.
He rejects the suggestion that Buddhism can be considered atheistic on the grounds that God is really the dharma or teaching of the Buddhists.
He sees God as the unseen power pervading all things, the sum-total of life, the indefinable, the formless, the nameless.
What these descriptions present us with is the concept of an impersonal Absolute or Ultimate and this is exactly what Gandhi wishes to convey for he has no hesitation in expressing a preference for the idea of God as formless Truth.
Yet his expressed preference for the worship of the formless does not prevent him from recognizing that God is personal to those  who need to feel his presence and embodied to those who desire to experience his touch.
In his view it makes no difference whether the devotee conceives of God in personal or in impersonal terms since the one class of devotee is not inferior to the other.
His readiness to acknowledge that God is all things to all men enables him to support the Dvaitin or Dualist, and Viśi   ādvaitin or qualified non-Dualist positions as well as maintaining his own preference for Advaita or non-Dualism.
His acceptance of what he calls ‘the doctrine of the manyness of reality’, by which he probably means that reality can be conceived of in many different ways, makes it possible for him to approve of the non-creative aspect of God as propounded by the Jains, and the creative aspect of God as propounded by Rāmānuja the foremost exponent of the Viśi   ādvaita position.
That this tolerant attitude should have resulted in his being called an Anekāntavādin, or a believer in many  doctrines , is not surprising, but it did not disturb him in the least.
His position is such, however, that it does produce the paradox that God is described in the same context as an impersonal force and the essence of life, and also as omniscient, omnipotent, and benevolent.
Gandhi moves from impersonal to personal descriptions of God without difficulty and while he expresses preference for an impersonal God he is not averse to describing God in personal terms.
This might be interpreted as an indication that it is not his purpose or intention to present a systematic, coherent and consistent Advaitin account of the concept of Truth or God after the fashion of Śankara, the principal exponent of non-dualism, and that what could be said concerning the metaphysical basis of his thought is that although it purports to be Advaitin it does not preclude the possibility of Dvaita, or Dualist, and Viśi   ādvaita, or qualified non-Dualist interpretations of the nature of reality.
On the other hand, it might he argued that when he moves from the concept of impersonal truth to the concept of a personal God, he is distinguishing, in traditional Advaitin fashion, between higher and lower levels of truth or reality.
But acceptance of this argument involves acceptance of the superiority of the higher, impersonal level of truth over the lower personal level of truth and the acknowledgment  of two levels of knowledge.
Gandhi, as we have seen, sees no superiority in conceiving of God in impersonal rather than personal terms so it is difficult to see how the traditional distinction between higher and lower levels of truth can be applied to him.
The fact that he uses both personal and impersonal descriptions of God supports this point.
If the question is asked whether Gandhi is not aware of the dangers of contradiction in his use of personal and impersonal terms to describe God, the answer might be that it would depend whether the personal use of the term God refers to an entity, or being, in the form of an extra-mundane person, whether or not a contradiction is involved.
Gandhi, however, does not conceive of God in this way even when he uses the term in a personal sense.
He insists that ‘you labour under a limitation when you think of a being or entity who is beyond the power of a man to grasp’, so it can be maintained that he is aware of the problems involved in his personal-impersonal uses of the term God.
It might also be maintained that the elasticity of the concept of Satya in Indian philosophical thought may well account for these apparent contradictions.
The foregoing argument may be supported by what Gandhi says about the names and forms of God.
He is able to refer to God by such names as Rāma and K    a, which are specifically Hindu names, and as Ahuramazda, which is the Zoroastrian name for the God of light.
These names have a personal connotation and, according to Gandhi, are simply man's attempt to define the mysterious, invincible force that pervades all things.
In his youth he was taught, in accordance with Hindu custom, to repeat the thousand names of God, but he realized that the thousand names of God were not exhaustive and that while God has many names and many forms he is also nameless and formless.
In fact the power that is called God is beyond definition; it is, as is stated of Brahman, ‘neti, neti,— not this, not this’, and in our attempts to define it we are seeking to describe the indescribable.
According to Gandhi, if it is at all possible for man to describe this power then it ought to be called Truth (Satya), which is a derivative of Sat, which literally means that which is or exists.
All the names and forms  attributed to this indefinable power are, in Gandhi's view, symbols, and attempts to personalize God.
Some clearly feel the need for the Ultimate to be expressed in symbolic, personalized form, and image worship can be regarded as part of the desire of human nature for symbols.
Personifications of the Ultimate in such forms as Rāma and Kr   a have to be regarded as symbols which manifest man's craving for the Unseen for what suits one man does not necessarily meet the needs of another.
‘I have accepted all the names and forms attributed to God, as symbols connoting one formless omnipresent Rama.
To me, therefore, Rama…is the all-powerful essence whose name, inscribed in the heart, removes all suffering, mental, moral and physical.’
When it was suggested to Gandhi on one occasion by a Roman Catholic priest that if Hinduism became monotheistic Christianity and Hinduism could serve India in co-operation, Gandhi's reply was that Hindus were not polytheistic.
While it is undoubtedly true that Hindus say there are many gods they also declare that there is but one God, Iśwara, Devādhideva, who is God of gods.
Gandhi himself professed to be a thorough Hindu yet not a believer in many gods.
If it is insisted that image worship is nothing but a form of idol worship, Gandhi's response to this accusation is that image worship is simply indicative of man's need for symbols.
Hindus do not worship their images of stone or metal.
They worship rather God as symbolized or personified in those forms.
If a worshipper were to make a fetish of his stone or metal image, however, then that might correctly be construed as idolatry, but such an attitude has to be distinguished from the element of sacredness that worshippers often attribute to temples, churches and mosques or to books such as the Bible, the Koran or the Gītā.
Gandhi illustrates his rejection of the charge of idolatry by stating: ‘Every Hindu child knows that the stone in the famous temple in Banaras is not Kashi Vishwanath.
But he believes that the Lord of the Universe does reside specially in that stone.’
The stone referred to here is clearly a symbol of God rather than an embodiment of God, but at the same time it has an element  of sacredness, which is what Gandhi may be implying when he maintains that God resides in the stone in a special way.
Or to put it in another way, for Gandhi the stone partakes of the nature of that which it represents.
By the use of the last phrase I have indicated a comparison that may possibly be drawn between Gandhi and Paul Tillich.
Gandhi's teaching concerning the symbolic nature of personifications of Truth in a variety of different forms seems on the face of it to correspond to what Tillich has to say about the symbolic nature of Christian terminology.
Both maintain that there are symbolic representations of the Ultimate whether the Ultimate be depicted as Truth or as the Holy.
For Gandhi, symbols manifest man's craving for the unseen and intangible; for Tillich they are necessary because the Ultimate or Holy could not maintain its unconditional character without them.
The difference between the practical approach of Gandhi and the more systematic, theological approach of Tillich is evident from these descriptions.
Tillich holds that symbols in themselves cannot be equated with the Ultimate nor can they be regarded as fully expressing the Ultimate.
He refers to symbols as pointing beyond themselves to the Ultimate while at the same time partaking of the nature of that to which they point.
By this he means that they possess a certain sacred connotation or depth dimension.
They open up levels of reality not easily accessible to the more literal approach and relate to elements within the depth of man's soul.
Symbols, for Tillich, do not wholly contain the Ultimate and, in his view, there can be no finite particularization of the Ultimate or Holy.
To maintain that the Ultimate can be fully expressed in finite particulars can only result in what Tillich calls the demonization of the Holy.
Symbols, according to Gandhi, are a necessity for the religious life of some people but he insists that there is nothing inferior in conceiving of God in personalized terms.
Furthermore, different religions may need different symbols, and it is only when they are treated as fetishes, or when they become the means whereby one religion claims superiority over another, that they cease to be of value and are fit only to be discarded.
In other words, while Tillich maintains that when finite particulars are given the status  of ultimacy it is detrimental to true religion and a form of demonization, Gandhi insists that symbols which become fetishes are idolatrous and fit only to be discarded.
Presumably what he means is that at that point they will have lost their representative character and become embodiments of the divine.
Tillich would call this practice demonization, or the elevation of a finite particular to the status of ultimacy.
Gandhi would regard it as a failure to preserve or maintain the function of symbols and a degeneration of their purpose.
Tillich's tendency to hypostasize the Ultimate in the concept of Ground of Being does not appear to be shared by Gandhi.
True he expresses a preference for the impersonal concept of Truth (Satya), which etymologically is a derivative of Being (Sat), in contemplating the Ultimate, but this does not preclude other more personal concepts of God.
The reason he gives for adopting this standpoint is that reality can be conceived of in many different ways all of which are equally valid.
It follows that Gandhi's view of symbols differs somewhat from that of Tillich in the sense that they do not point to a hypostasized Ultimate.
For the latter, the term God is the main religious symbol for the Ground of Being while, for the former, God is the name we give to the mysterious power that pervades the universe and not a symbol in the Tillichian sense.
The manifestation of God in the Indian tradition would take such forms as Brahma, Vi   u and Śiva, the trimūrti of the Hindu way of life, and innumerable other gods and goddesses, the veneration of which, in Gandhi's view, is sometimes inaccurately and insensitively described as idol worship.
According to Tillich, the way in which God is filled out with concrete symbols in the Christian tradition is by the use of certain aspects of man's finite experience.
For example, he is referred to as Father, as Person, as One who acts and who shows love, power and justice.
The essence of idolatry for Tillich is when these concrete, finite symbols are accorded the status of the Holy or Ultimate Concern; this is the demonization of religion.
According to Gandhi, it is when symbols become fetishes and embodiments of the divine, that they might be construed as idols.
At that point they cease to serve their purpose and then are fit only to be discarded.
Gandhi claims to be simply a seeker after Truth, ceaselessly searching for it, occasionally having glimpses of it, yet not finding it.
It is as if he glimpses absolute Truth in and through particular instances of truth.
He does not equate absolute Truth with particular instances of truth but that does not prevent him from recognizing that particular instances of truth, while not embodying absolute Truth, are nevertheless necessary to convey the meaning of absolute Truth.
His existential quest for Truth is in fact the key to his understanding and interpretation of the Bhagavad-Gītā.
He sees the main aim of the Gītā as a call to action.
But since, according to Hindu teaching, actions of themselves bind man to the empirical, sa  sāric world, the endless cycle of birth, death and rebirth, there is need of disciplined action or desireless action, that is, action where there is no hankering after the fruits of action, if liberation is to be achieved.
Gandhi would describe such action as selfless, detached, sacrificial and non-violent.
It is, in his view, action on behalf of others or action in the service of others.
This is the kind of action, he maintains, that results from devotion to Truth, but it is also the means whereby one is enabled to see Truth more clearly.
This two-way movement is illustrated by the relation Gandhi envisages between ahi  sā, or non-violence, and Truth.
‘Ahimsa is my God, and Truth is my God.
When I look for Ahimsa, Truth says, ‘Find it through me'’.
When I look for Truth, Ahimsa says ‘Find it through me'’.'
It is Gandhi's contention that the only inevitable means for the attainment of Truth is ahi  sā.
Ahi  sā is the means and Truth the end.
But since ends and means are convertible terms for Gandhi, Truth and ahi  sā are intertwined.
The practice of ahi  sā inevitably leads to Truth.
Conversely, the practice of hi  sā can never lead to Truth.
What Gandhi may be indicating by this reference to the convertibility of the terms means and ends in his thought is that our religious and ethical ideals not only inform the ends we aim at and endeavour to attain, but also the means we employ to reach them.
What could be said is that the same moral demands apply to the means as to the ends in the quest for Truth, and that often difficulties arise  because of these demands.
That is, ethical or moral considerations ‘impose a limit on our purposes and their execution which the distinction between means and ends cannot account for, since means and ends alike come under moral scrutiny’.
I will deal with the problems involved in regarding the way of non-violence as an absolute rule, or infallible guide to conduct, or as the right way in all circumstances without exception, in a later chapter on ahi  sā.
It is sufficient at this stage to point out that there are difficulties in making the categorical statement that the practice of hi  sā can never lead to Truth.
It takes no account of the moral dilemmas of human life.
The social and political implications of Gandhi's quest for Truth will also be dealt with in later chapters and for the moment we shall confine ourselves to such questions as how he goes about acquiring glimpses of absolute Truth and how he knows that it is absolute Truth he has actually caught a glimpse of.
When asked on one occasion what he considered Truth to be, it would seem that Gandhi interpreted the question as a request for information as to how he came to know Truth.
In his reply he defines Truth as ‘What the voice within tells you’.
It is tempting to interpret this statement as a self-authenticating, subjective principle which Gandhi is able to resort to, namely, the voice of his conscience.
But the point is that the inner voice, or the voice of conscience, is not self-authenticating.
There are criteria which determine the way in which a man thinks and acts, and in Gandhi's case they are the religious and ethical ideals of his own form of life.
And to attribute knowledge of Truth to the voice of conscience in this way, or to the religious and ethical criteria of a particular form of life, inevitably brings Gandhi face to face with the problem of the relativity of truth and with the question whether under the circumstances one is justified in talking about absolute Truth at all.
That is, there are criteria which determine the way in which others also think and act which may be completely contrary to those of Gandhi.
Gandhi actually recognizes the problem of relativity and acknowledges that what may be truth for one may be untruth for another.
His proposed solution to this problem  is that before one claims to speak of his inner voice, or the voice of conscience, he should recognize his limitations, and discipline himself to cultivate truthfulness, humility, purity and non-violence and embrace the twin ideals of poverty and non-possession.
Put in another way the proposal is that a man should seek to know and fully understand the criteria which determine his thoughts and actions.
Gandhi speaks also of the need for abhyāsa, or single-minded devotion, and vairāgya, or indifference to worldly life.
He maintains that: ‘If you would swim on the bosom of the ocean of Truth you must reduce yourself to a zero’.
The question is whether this can really be regarded as a solution to the problem of the relativity of truth.
Does not a human cypher or zero have to be capable of hearing the inner voice and, to the extent that he does hear it, is he not then a human being with the defects and failings that one normally associates with a human being?
If so, it follows that his apprehension of Truth will of necessity be partial and relative and that absolute Truth will be forever beyond his grasp.
Gandhi actually acknowledges this fact; he is above all a practical idealist.
He accepts that it is impossible for mortal man to lay claim to attain, or to possess, perfect Truth.
Similarly, it is not possible for him either to give a hard-and-fast definition of Truth.
As Gandhi points out: ‘We can only visualize it in our imagination.
We cannot, through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body, see face to face Truth which is eternal.
That is why in the last resort one must depend on faith.’
His reference to faith may explain how it is that he is able to conceive of the notion of absolute Truth which he calls God.
It is an affirmation of faith.
When he says Truth is God he is really making a confession of faith rather than a statement in the indicative mood.
Such a confession of faith requires no external verification in the same way as statements of fact.
So when he maintains that because we are, Truth or God is, or that God is the sum total of life, it could be argued that he is not presenting us with some kind of cosmological argument for the existence of God and that it is not his purpose to argue from the world to  God.
It is his contention rather that there can be no proofs for God's existence which are acceptable to human reason since God is beyond reason.
He admits that it may be possible to use reason to a limited extent, but he insists that ultimately the existence of God defies all proof and has to be based on faith which transcends reason..
In the tradition of Advaita or non-Dualism he refers to the soul,(Ātman), and God,(Brahman), as knowers rather than objects of knowledge and claims that it is not possible for mortal beings by the use of reason alone to know the knower of knowing.
Perfect or absolute Truth, which is known by faith, is beyond our empirical grasp which means that we must act in the knowledge that we are holding on to such truth as we are able to apprehend in this world.
‘That relative truth must, meanwhile, be my beacon, my shield and buckler…
Even my Himalayan blunders have seemed trifling to me because I have kept strictly to this path…
I have gone forward according to my light.
Often in my progress I have had faint glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and daily the conviction is growing on me that He alone is real and all else is unreal.’
Without relative truth to hold on to it could be argued that absolute Truth, which is a matter of faith, would be nothing but empty utopianism.
The point is that since we have here no abiding city the particular instance of truth cannot be identified with absolute Truth.
Yet it is only through particular instances of truth that we can come to understand what it might mean to speak of absolute Truth.
So relative truth is necessary to convey the meaning of absolute Truth which we affirm in faith.
Relative truth, as Gandhi states, is our ‘beacon’ in the sphere of the empirical.
So when he claims to have had glimpses of absolute Truth, it may be reasonable to assume, not that he has caught a glimpse of some kind of hypostasized Ultimate or extra-mundane entity, but rather that through his participation in a particular form of life he is made aware of the need to live and act in accordance with certain religious and ethical criteria and is informed by the spirit of what might be called dharma (law), or  ta (moral law), or tao (way) but which he prefers to call Truth (Satya) or God.
In addition to the need for humility, discipline and singleminded devotion in the quest for Truth Gandhi lays stress on prayer.
His concept of prayer, however, requires analysis and clarification in view of his expressed preference for an impersonal and formless Absolute.
It could be said that to understand what he means by prayer is to understand what he means by talking to God.
If we were to insist that prayer involves some form of dialogue then it would presuppose that we already know what is meant by the concept of God.
To adopt this kind of approach would be to make the meaningfulness of prayer contingent on the acceptance of a particular concept of God.
Such an approach would preclude an understanding of what Gandhi means by talking to God.
Prayer for Gandhi is the essence of religion and the core of a man's life.
It requires no words; it is not the repetition of an empty formula.
While it can be petitional, in its widest sense it is inward communion, and in both cases it cleanses the heart of passion and produces peace, orderliness, and repose in daily life.
It would appear that for Gandhi prayer is a form of meditation, which has as its aim self-purification and knowledge of the Truth.
The form of prayer is unimportant; whatever the form its aim is to bring us into communion with the divine.
It may be interpreted as a spiritual discipline necessary to preserve our humanity and to promote the service of others.
Basically, however, it is a means of self-purification and a call to inward searching.
As Gandhi understands it, by means of petitionary prayer man invokes the divinity within himself; he petitions the real, higher Self.
But the petitionary aspect of prayer is not as important to Gandhi as the communion aspect.
He calls prayer ‘a longing of the soul’ and ‘an admission of one's weakness’.
As he explains: ‘The Deity does not need my supplication, but I, a very imperfect human being, do need his protection as a child that of its father.’
This exceedingly personalistic reference to God is paralleled by an impersonal description of the Deity as Truth when Gandhi states: ‘This God whom we seek to realize is Truth.
Or to put it in another way Truth is God.
This Truth is not merely the truth we are expected to speak.
It is That which alone is, which constitutes the stuff of which all  things are made, which subsists by virtue of its own power, which is not supported by anything else but supports everything that exists.’
Plato draws a distinction between telling the truth and being a truthful man.
The man who tells the truth is not the same as the truthful man.
Gandhi distinguishes between speaking the truth and Truth.
The Truth, which presumably Plato's truthful man, like Gandhi himself, feels the need to live in accordance with, to abide by, to hold fast to, and to uphold, is that which determines the way in which he lives and the spirit in which he travels.
The personal-impersonal nature of Gandhi's descriptions of God is clearly illustrated here but the point already made earlier can be reiterated, namely, that it is not important to him whether God is conceived of in personal or impersonal terms since neither superiority nor inferiority of expression is implied in either case.
When Gandhi maintains that by means of prayer he invokes the divinity within himself it is evident that he draws no hard-and-fast distinction between the Self or Ātman within and God or Truth.
This could be considered consistent with Advaitin teaching concerning the Brahman-Ātman identity, namely, that the Soul within is at one with the essence of the universe.
Gandhi in fact does conceive the purpose of life to be to know the Self, which for him is equivalent to realizing God or knowing the Truth.
The Self or Ātman, released from the bonds of darkness and ignorance or avidyā, is at one with God, and when this unity is realized by means of prayer, bhakti or devotion is transformed into jñāna or knowledge.
According to Ācārya Kripalani the Rāma invoked by Gandhi with his dying breath was not the historical Rāma or the mythological Rāma, but rather the highest Self.
Gandhi himself refers to Rāma as the all powerful essence whose name is inscribed in the heart.
Hence the formless, omnipresent Rāma in Gandhi's thought is at one with the highest Self which in turn is identical with Truth.
Gandhi's quest for Truth or God involves not only bhakti yoga, that is the discipline of prayer and devotion, but also karma yoga, that is, the discipline of action.
This is evidenced not only by his  insistence on self-discipline but also by his insistence on the realization of Truth through the service of others, and by means of ahi  sā.
We have already noted that he interprets the Gītā as a call to action and it is not without significance that he has been described as one of the foremost activist theoreticians and as a karmayogin.
We can leave for the time being, however, the implications of his activist approach to Truth in order to look again at his concept of Truth as hitherto elucidated.
As we have seen, he claims to have had glimpses only of absolute Truth and we have interpreted this to mean that he is often made aware of the need to live and act in accordance with certain ethical and religious principles and to travel in a certain spirit.
But there have been other claims to knowledge of absolute Truth.
The majority of Christians, for example, would claim that Jesus Christ is the only begotten Son of God and the fullness of Truth.
Muslims on the other hand would consider Truth to be the revelation vouchsafed by Allah to his prophet Muhammad.
When divergent truth claims of this kind confront us the question that arises is what independent criterion of truth can be produced to determine which claim to truth is the right one?
How do we distinguish between divergent truth claims?
An appeal to the Bible could be countered with an appeal to the Koran, and an appeal to the verification of the Christian claim in the lives of believing Christians could be countered with an appeal to the verification of the Muslim claim in the lives of believing Muslims.
If it is maintained that there has to be an independent criterion of truth, then the difficulty we are confronted with is determining precisely what that criterion might be.
Gandhi's tolerant attitude to religions, which will be dealt with in the following chapter, is an indication that he does not consider any religion to have a monopoly of Truth and that includes Hinduism.
Yet it has to be acknowledged that his glimpses of absolute Truth came to him through his understanding of, and his faith in, the specific content or the essential teaching of his own religious tradition despite its imperfections.
It was within his own mode of religious discourse that he was made aware of the need to travel in a certain spirit and to think and act  in accordance with specific religious and ethical criteria to which he gave the name Truth.
That is, he acquired his understanding of Truth as a participant in the Hindu way of life.
TRUTH AND RELIGION
Gandhi's concept of Religion corresponds to his concept of Truth.
truth transcends all concrete or particular instances of truth yet particular instances of truth are necessary in order to understand what it means to speak of absolute Truth.
As Gandhi has glimpses of absolute Truth through instances of relative truth so, it might be said, he has glimpses of Religion through particular historical religions.
For what he means by Religion, as he points out, is that which underlies all religions.
Religion is not equatable with particular religions: it transcends Hinduism, Christianity, Islam, and all other religions, yet it harmonizes them and gives them reality.
It is that which binds man indissolubly to Truth.
It is belief in an ordered moral government of the universe.
It is that permanent element in human nature which causes the soul to be restless until it realizes itself to be at one with Truth or God.
I have suggested that Truth for Gandhi is that which determines the spirit in which he lives, or the religious and ethical criteria which govern the way in which he thinks and acts.
His life-story relates his experiments with Truth, or his attempt to live in accordance with certain religious beliefs which were a part of his Hindu heritage.
It is because of the inherited beliefs and practices of the Hindu way of life that he is able to claim to be bound indissolubly to Truth.
He learns what it means to talk of Truth through its use in the religious context of Hindu tradition and culture.
Similarly, it is as a participant in the Hindu way of life that he understands what it means to talk of Religion; he understands the meaning of the term Religion from its use in his own form of life.
The one, true and perfect Religion Gandhi refers to is beyond predication and not capable of being realized within finite existence.
No particular religion can ever embody the perfection of Religion or lay claim to a monopoly of Truth.
Yet particular religions, it might be said, are necessary to convey the meaning of Religion  in the same way as particular truths are necessary to convey the meaning of Truth.
But as particular truths do not embody the fullness of Truth so particular religions do not embody the fullness of Religion.
Gandhi describes religions as human constructs or expressions of that which underlies them and gives them reality.
All religions possess truth, but all are to some extent erroneous.
The heart of one particular religion is identical with the heart of another religion.
‘Even as a tree has a single trunk, but many branches and leaves, so there is one true and perfect Religion, but it becomes many.
as it passes through the human medium.
The one Religion is beyond all speech.’
The question that arises here is whether Gandhi is referring to an ‘essence’ or ‘primordial element’when he speaks of the heart of one religion being identical with the heart of another religion.
If that is the case, then it is possible to draw a comparison between Gandhi's teaching and the teaching of such Western thinkers as Schleiermacher and Tillich.
Schleiermacher conceives of religion as pre-existing particular historical manifestations which are grounded in the fundamental unity of religion, an a priori condition.
The transcendental unity of religion is necessary for the existence of positive, historical religions, which are the concrete, historical expressions of the primordial form, the immediate religious consciousness or ‘the sense and taste for the Infinite’.
No limited, finite positive form of religion can encapsulate the universality or infinitude of religion.
The idea that a single, finite form of religion can be universally valid is inappropriate.
But it does not follow that finite forms are superfluous because religion has to find expression in concrete forms, and the plurality of particular religions is necessary for the complete manifestation of religion.
According to Schleiermacher, each positive religion contains something of the true nature of religion, and the ‘primordial form’, the ‘essence’, or ‘transcendental unity’ of religion, is comprehended not by deducing it from the common elements of particular religions as a kind of abstraction, but in and through the language and traditions of particular religions.
Particular religions are true  in so far as they succeed in expressing the primordial form of religion which in turn is comprehended only in the depths of particular religions.
As we have seen, Gandhi recognizes that no single religion can embody the whole truth, and that all particular religions contain errors since they are human constructs or formulations, but does it follow necessarily that when he speaks of Religion underlying all human constructs, or at the heart of all religions, he is referring to an ‘essence’ of an ‘entity’or a ‘primordial form’of religion after the fashion of Schleiermacher?
To speak of religion as if it is a ‘primordial form’ or an ‘entity’is to hypostasize it.
But if religion is beyond speech or predication as Gandhi affirms, can it be hypostasized, or referred to as if it is a referent?
The same point applies to Tillich's definition of religion as Ultimate Concern which refers not simply to man's subjective concern, that is, the expression of his Ultimate Concern, but what he is ultimately concerned about, or that which is the source of his concern.
The referential nature of Ultimate Concern in Tillich's thought is indicative of his tendency to hypostasize the Ultimate.
The similarity between Tillich's position and that of Schleiermacher's is illustrated by the fact that his concept of Ultimate Concern is not far removed from Schleiermacher's ‘feeling of absolute dependence’ which has both a subjective and objective connotation.
The problem with maintaining the existence of a ‘primordial element’ is determining how to go about isolating such an element and how to determine the relative truth of particular religions by means of this ‘primordial element’once it is isolated.
There may be some truth in the claim that there are problems in seeking to postulate ‘a transcendental ideal of which the historical actualities are a succession of mundane and therefore imperfect, compromised manifestations’, and that the term religion is not something ‘that can be formulated and externalized into an observable pattern theoretically  abstractible from the persons who live it’.
It is possible that when Gandhi speaks of Religion, what he may be referring to is not an ‘essence’ or a ‘primordial element’or a transcendental unity', but the faith of men which expresses itself  in a variety of different forms.
It is the way in which Truth or God impinges on or finds expression in the lives of people and as far as Gandhi is concerned it is through the beliefs and traditions of the Hindu way of life that lie finds himself indissolubly bound to Truth.
All religions, according to Gandhi, are different roads to the same goal and it is his contention that there will always be a variety of religions corresponding to different human temperaments and environments.
He echoes the teaching of the Hind to reformer Vivekānanda when he maintains that there are as many religions as there are individuals, and that even within particular, historical religions there will be different viewpoints manifesting different facets of the truth.
When he suggests that it is of no consequence or importance which road one takes provided the goal is attained ultimately, he would seem to be implying that the end justifies the means.
Since this is contrary to his teaching concerning the convertibility of means and ends, it is hardly likely that he would be unconcerned with the kind of religion a person might profess to follow.
It might well be of concern to him, for example, if the content of a particular religion proved to be at odds with the ethical criteria he would associate himself with the concept of Truth.
He considers religion without morality to be inconceivable, and if it denies any of the virtues we normally associate with morality, such as, truth, mercy and goodness, it does not deserve to be called religion.
To lose our basis in morality is to cease to be religious, for religion and morality are inescapably bound up with one another.
Gandhi's emphasis on Sarvodaya, the welfare of ill, as both an expression of Truth and a means of realizing Truth bears out this point.
He recognizes the theonomous nature of humanitarian activity.
Through the service of humanity, and by action in the cause of brotherhood, we are brought to a better understanding of Truth.
To help the helpless and feed the hungry is to see God.
Sarvodaya and Truth are so interrelated in Gandhi's thought that they are like two sides of a coin.
What Gandhi may be suggesting by the statement that the road one takes is unimportant provided the goal is achieved is that too much importance can be attached  to particular religions, especially when it might result in exclusivist claims being made on behalf of those religions.
Gandhi rejects outright claims made concerning the superior or inferior status of religions.
Different religions may have different symbols but no symbol should become a fetish in order to enable one religion to claim superiority over another.
Gandhi is unable to harbour the thought, even secretly, that another man's faith is inferior to his own because of his belief that different faiths are God's creation and thereby equally holy.
On these grounds he is able to advocate the open and sincere study of religions other than one's own.
He enjoins an attitude of respect and reverence towards all religions since they all contain an element of truth.
He rejects as mistaken the notion that the study of other religions might undermine or weaken a believer's faith in his own religion.
On the contrary, he maintains that such a study might well lead to the extension of one's regard for one's own religion to other religions, and at the same time, provide a better understanding of one's own faith.
The openness Gandhi shows to the plurality of religious traditions is commendable.
It indicates that he is not content to confine himself to the small island of his own tradition and culture and consequently not recognize the significance of the spiritual insights of other religious traditions.
His rejection of the right of a religion to claim superiority for itself over other religions underlines his claim that no particular religion can embody what he calls the one, true and perfect Religion.
In this respect Gandhi propounds, views about particular religions similar to those of Tillich.
It is the latter's contention that Ultimate Concern, the holy or unconditional, expresses itself in a variety of forms: in painting, which may have no religious content in the traditional sense; in philosophy, when attempts are made to understand the nature of ultimate reality; in ideologies which might normally be regarded as secular, such as, nationalism, socialism and humanism; and in traditional religions.
When Ultimate Concern expresses itself in particular religions, and adherents of those religions regard them as embodiments of the Ultimate then, in Tillich's view, the particular  has been elevated to the status of ultimacy.
This is referred to as a form of idolatry; it is the particularization or objectification of the Ultimate and consequently a form of demonization.
Gandhi, as we have seen, uses different terminology when he speaks of the symbols of religion becoming fetishes which, in his view, are idolatrous and fit only to be discarded.
Differences in terminology do not disguise-the similarity of views expressed by Tillich and Gandhi on the question of the status of particular religions.
Where they might differ, as I have already indicated, is on the meaning they would give to the concept of Religion.
For Gandhi, particular religions are necessary to convey what it might mean to speak of the one, true and perfect Religion which is beyond predication and not realized within finite existence.
Religion is that ideal by which we live and act which, though not embodied in particular religions since all religions are necessarily imperfect, is nevertheless communicated to us through those particular religions.
What is questionable is whether Gandhi hypostasizes Religion or gives it a referential connotation in the same way as Tillich does by his use of the term Ultimate Concern.
A second consequence of Gandhi's insistence on the imperfect nature of particular religions is his antipathy to certain forms of missionary activity and the methods of conversion employed.
What comes to the fore through Gandhi's strictures on the attitudes and methods of certain Christian missionaries is that it is possible for religious zeal and enthusiasm to lead to activities inconsistent with the religious and ethical ideals or values one might be seeking to promote.
For example, Christians may regard it as an expression of Christian love to convert others to Christ, and they may consider it their moral duty to urge men to follow Christ.
But the question may be asked whether there would be any justification for the use of force in order to lead men to the love of God in Christ.
Would this not indicate a greater love of dogma than a love of man?
If the desired end of conversion involves the use of inquisitorial means is not the concept of love distorted?
Do not means come under the same moral scrutiny as ends?
What Gandhi objects to is the presupposition of superiority that accompanies much missionary  activity and the implicit if not explicit assumption that the end justifies the means.
It would be wrong to conclude from this that Gandhi is opposed to conversion from one religion to another.
On the contrary, he defends the right of those who wished to change their religious allegiance to follow their inclinations in this matter.
It is, in his view, a personal matter between an individual and his God.
The right of conversion is not questioned.
What is questioned is the kind of methods that might be employed to bring about conversions.
Gandhi's reference to people being allowed to follow their own desires, provided they were old enough to know what they were doing and were not subjected to force or material inducements, is an indication of the dubious conversion methods employed by some missionaries.
He approved of the humanitarian work of Christian missionaries in the field of medicine and in the alleviation of the condition of the poor.
He approved also of their work in the field of education.
But he strongly disapproved of the proselytizing that went on under the cloak of humanitarianism.
A patient, he maintains, should not be expected to change his basic beliefs because the doctor who cured him happened to be an adherent of the Christian religion.
Healing should be its own reward and not the means of converting patients.
When a missionary report estimated how much it cost per capita to convert people to Christianity, and presented a budget for the next harvest of souls, then conversion had become a business venture.
While this might well be regarded as an extreme example of questionable missionary methods, there may be an element of justification in Gandhi's injunction to those who would convert India by such dubious means, namely, ‘Physician, heal thyself’.
Gandhi's insistence that real conversion is a matter of the heart, and something between an individual and his God, makes him view with suspicion the authenticity of many so-called conversions.
It would be a misnomer, he claims, to describe something as conversion which was effected by fear or prompted by material gain.
He tended to regard the conversion of his son Harilal to Islam as something that was prompted by monetary considerations, and  in the case of such converts, he maintains that they should be readmitted to Hinduism without hesitation if they so desired and truly repented of their erroneous actions.
The unacceptability of certain conversion methods is accentuated for Gandhi by his belief that all religions have elements of truth and error and that no particular religion can lay claim to a monopoly of the truth.
His respect for other faiths is as strong as it is for his own faith.
All faiths, he claims, are necessary for the people to whom they are revealed.
The Scriptures of all faiths are equally inspired, though none can be regarded as literally inspired.
His response to a Christian who might approach him with the request to convert to Hinduism would be to urge him to try to be a good Christian since the Gītā could offer him no more than the Bible.
Gandhi's antipathy to preaching, which was characteristic of the Christian missionary activity he was acquainted with, may have derived from his attitude to mission work in general, but it is more likely that he considered a man's life to be a more effective testimony to the truth of his religion that his words.
He expresses his view almost poetically: ‘A rose does not need to preach.
It simply spreads its fragrance.
The fragrance is its own sermon…
The fragrance of religious and spiritual life is much finer and subtler than that of the rose’.
It is possible that the silent witness of a man's life was more in accordance with the tradition of meditation and contemplation that Gandhi was accustomed to than the more vocal and prophetic approach of the Christian tradition.
But his objection to preaching goes deeper than that.
He speaks of predication as a limitation of truth.
For him language circumscribes and limits truth which is best represented by the way a man lives.
What we have here is an affirmation of the effectiveness of silence in the communication of absolute Truth, a fact fully understood by the Buddha and his followers.
Should a man's life succeed in influencing and converting others then that might be regarded as a true and valid form of evangelism.
There is a clear suggestion in Gandhi's writings that he considered Christians to be lacking in receptiveness.
By this he means that they were not prepared to open their minds and hearts to receive  whatever good India might be able to offer then?.
He urged them to recognize that by not understanding the thought of India they were depriving themselves of the opportunity of serving India.
This mild rebuke of the attitude of some missionaries to Indian thought and tradition corresponds to his criticism of orthodox Christianity, which he believed had distorted the message of Jesus.
It had taken hold of Jesus and turned his spirit into a system.
While it was true that all religions were imperfect and that Hinduism was no different from Christianity in this respect, it did not follow that the Christian claim ‘Jesus is the only son of God’ could be universally accepted.
Gandhi explicitly rejects this claim: ‘I, therefore, do not take as literally true that text that Jesus is the only begotten son of God.
God cannot be the exclusive Father and I cannot ascribe exclusive divinity to Jesus.
He is as divine as Krishna or Rama or Mohammed or Zoroaster.’
In Gandhi's view, the statement ‘son of God’ could only be used in a figurative sense and not in a literal sense so that anyone ‘who stands in the position of Jesus is a begotten son of God’.
Similarly, he rejects the claim made by some that Christianity is the only true religion.
While it was doubtless a noble religion it still had a greater contribution to make to humanity.
Gandhi's implicit suggestion here is that it had yet to support non-violence for, as he says, bishops still felt able to support slaughter in the name of Christianity.
Gandhi's attitude to mission and conversion finds an echo in Tillich's rejection of missionwissenschaft , an approach to religions which sees the purpose of religious dialogue as a means of conversion from one religion to another in accordance with certain theological presuppositions.
It is also reflected in Tillich's rejection of the superficial approach to religion which sees value in every religious tradition apart from one's own, and in his rejection of the kind of approach that aims at the complete synthesis of all particular religions into one all-embracing whole.
Like Gandhi, Tillich does not attempt to underestimate or detract from the significance and importance of particular religions.
He recognizes that every religion has within its depth a clue to the meaning of ultimate reality.
The point that might be made in this connection is that without the  particular there could be no way of understanding what might be meant by the ultimate.
That is, the depth of particular religions not only contains a clue to the meaning of ultimate reality, as Tillich maintains, but is the only means open to man to understand what is meant by ultimate reality, for the concept itself acquires its meaning from its use in a particular mode of discourse.
It would not be possible to conceive of Ultimate Concern apart from particular modes of religious discourse.
Particular religions, while not embodying the fullness of Truth are necessary to convey what it means to speak of absolute Truth or Ultimate Concern.
Similar views concerning conversion are expressed by Simone Weil who maintains that much missionary activity is both mistaken and dangerous.
Her position is that the person who calls on Osiris or Krishna or Buddha with a pure heart receives the Holy Spirit within his own tradition and not by abandoning it for another.
This is analogous to the claim Gandhi makes in an address he gave to Christian missionaries, namely, that ‘many men who have never heard the name of Jesus Christ or have even rejected the official interpretation of Christianity would probably, if Jesus came into our midst today…be owned by him more than many of us…’
A third consequence of Gandhi's insistence on the imperfect nature of particular forms of religions is his plea for the spirit of toleration between religions on the grounds that it increases spiritual insight and gives a better understanding of one's own faith.
Not that he approves of the term tolerance itself.
He recognizes that it might be regarded in a pejorative sense as indicating a readiness to compromise and to accept something inferior, but he uses the term, nevertheless, for the want of a better word and tries to give it a different connotation.
He endeavours to endow the tolerance he proposes with an element of respect.
He accepts as a basic premise the truth of all world religions, and he acknowledges the benefit that could be derived from a sympathetic study of the Scriptures of different faiths.
But since all faiths are imperfect, the question of the comparative merit of different religions does not arise.
What tolerance does is to impart spiritual insight to a man and it breaks down barriers that might exist between one faith and another.
It  also enables a man to acquire a better understanding of his own faith.
‘My respectful study of other religions has not abated my reverence for or my faith in the Hindu scriptures.
They have indeed left their deep mark upon my understanding of the Hindu scriptures.
They have broadened my view of life’.
Tolerance does not blind a man to the imperfections or faults of a religion, nor does it blur the distinction between religion and irreligion, but it does deliver a man from fanaticism with regard to his own faith.
‘The golden rule of conduct, therefore, is mutual toleration seeing that we will never all think alike and that we shall always see Truth in fragment (sic) and from different angles of vision’.
The goal of tolerance and mutual respect is not one, all-embracing religion, but rather unity in diversity.
Gandhi claims to be a Sanātani Hindu himself, but as he points out, his religion is not exclusive nor is it missionary in the ordinary sense of the term.
On the contrary, ‘Hinduism tells everyone to worship God according to his own faith or Dharma, and so it lives at peace with all the religions’.
As we have seen, tolerance, as Gandhi understand; it, does not blind a man to the faults of a religion including his own.
Hinduism may be non-dogmatic and non-exclusive but that does not mean it is free from imperfections and weaknesses.
In Gandhi's view, its cardinal sin is the way it tolerates untouchability.
This practice is a sin against God and man and stunts the growth of forty million people.
It is an ulcer; a poison that pervades the whole Hindu way of life creating unnatural distinctions.
‘When untouchability is rooted out, these distinctions will vanish and no one will consider himself superior to any other.
Naturally, exploitation too will cease and co-operation will be the order of the day’.
If untouchability were to be regarded as an integral part of the Hindu way of life, Gandhi feels that he would have to cease calling himself a Hindu, but he firmly believes that as an institution it has no sanction within Hinduism.
His attitude towards untouchability is related to the social implications of his quest for Truth and we shall have occasion to comment on it again in that connection.
At this stage it is sufficient to  note his readiness to refer to the weakness and failings of his own religion which is a human construct and an expression of that which underlines all religions.
TRUTH AND AHIMSĀ
In his existential quest for Truth Gandhi stresses the importance of ahi  sā, non-violence.
As we have seen, he maintains that there is an inextricable relation between ahi  sā and Truth.
They are so closely interrelated that it is difficult to separate them.
‘They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather a smooth unstamped metallic disc.
Who can say, which is the obverse, and which the reverse?’.
Ahi  sā could be described as the means leading to the realization of Truth as the end or goal, but since means and ends are convertible terms in Gandhi's philosophy of life, to practise ahi  sā is to realize Truth and to realize Truth is to practise ahi  sā.
That is, as far as Gandhi is concerned, the attainment of one involves also the realization of the other.
I have suggested that what Gandhi may be trying to point out by referring to the convertibility of the terms means and ends in his teaching is that our ideals not only inform the ends we aim at but also the means we employ to reach them.
If this is the case, then means and ends amount to the same thing since the same moral demands apply to both in the quest for Truth.
This would seed to be borne out by Gandhi's remark: ‘I would say ‘means are after all everything'’.
As the means so the end.
There is no wall of separation between means and end…
Realization of the goal is in exact proportion to that of the means.’
But in order for means to be classified as means in the first place they have to be something that we can utilize.
The end may be beyond us, but the means are within our grasp, and Gandhi's view is, that to the degree we use the means to that degree we realize the end.
Acceptance of this position involves rejection of the view that the end justifies the means.
Gandhi makes this point clear in his examination and criticism of some of the methods employed by Christian missionaries to convert Hindus.
So the argument put forward by Machiavelli that a leader ‘must not mind incurring  the scandal of those vices without which it would be difficult to save the state’ on the grounds ‘that some things which seem virtues would, if followed, lead to one's ruin and that some others which appear vices result in one's greater security and well-being’, is completely contrary to Gandhi's views.
The separation of politics and morality implicit in Machiavelli's argument would be unacceptable to Gandhi.
Whenever attempts were made to distinguish between means and ends, he could point to the crimes committed in the name of religion on the grounds that the end justified the means.
Given the suffering and misery that has been incurred by holy wars, crusades against infidels, inquisitions and the like, the strength of Gandhi's position becomes clearer.
‘Your reasoning’, he says, ‘is the same as saying that we can get a rose through planting a noxious weed…
The means may be likened to a seed, the end to a tree; and there is just the same inviolable connexion between the means and the end as there is between the seed and the tree…
We reap exactly as we sow.’
Aldous Huxley may well have been echoing Gandhi when he maintained that the means whereby we attain something are as important as the end if not more important.
‘For the means employed inevitably determine the nature of the results achieved; whereas, however good the end aimed at may be, its goodness is powerless to counteract the effects of the bad means we use to reach it.’
If we ask why Gandhi lays so much stress on the relation between Truth and ahi  s, we have to look again at his view of the Self.
As we have indicated he makes no distinction between the Self or Ātman and Truth or God.
Self-realization is Truth-realization or the realization of God.
He maintains what he claims is the Advaita or non-Dualist position when he says that the Self within man is at one with the essence of reality, which is Truth or God.
But if the kernel of an individual, the higher Self, is the Ātman which is at one with Truth or God, then to inflict deliberate violence on another is to injure God or undermine Truth, and to cause suffering to another is to violate one's higher Self or Ātman.
The basic presupposition here is the indivisibility of Truth and the essential unity of life, a presupposition Gandhi maintains when he  says: ‘I believe in Advaita, I believe in the essential unity of man and, for that matter, of all that lives.’
But is it not necessary sometimes to inflict violence and is not killing the only course open to a man in certain circumstances?
Does it necessarily follow from this that Truth is impaired?
Gandhi recognizes the dangers of making a fetish of ahi  sā and I shall return to these questions.
Here we might look at the question why Gandhi should lay so much stress on the interrelation of Truth and ahi  sā.
In his interpretation of the Gītā Gandhi refers to the battlefield of Kurukshetra as the heart of man in which the two natures of selfishness and unselfishness are engaged in combat.
The great need, in his view, is to cultivate selfless or detached action to the exclusion of egocentric activity.
This is made possible for us by means of sacrifice, devotion and the service of others.
Through the discipline of such action, that is, through karma yoga, which involves ahi  sā, we come to the realization of Truth or God, for to realize God is to see Him in all that lives, and to recognize our oneness with all creation.
While Gandhi's understanding of the relation between Truth and ahi  sā springs from his own cultural and religious tradition it was strengthened and corroborated by his reading of Tolstoy's work The Kingdom of God Within You .
He acknowledges his indebtedness to Tolstoy and maintains that at the time of reading the book he was passing through a period of doubt and scepticism.
We can assume that his scepticism extended to his belief in the efficacy of non-violence because he notes that reading Tolstoy influenced him greatly and cured him of his scepticism making him a believer again in ahi  sā.
It is hardly correct, however, to suggest on the basis of this comment that it was partly from a sense of humility, and partly from a reluctance to accept all the credit for himself, that Gandhi acknowledged his indebtedness to Tolstoy's ideas.
Tolstoy clearly appealed to him as a great apostle of non-violence, and one who enabled all votaries of ahi  sā to realize and understand that non-violence involved not only the negative attitude of freedom from anger and hate but  also the positive attitude of love for all men.
Tolstoy's influence cannot be over-estimated as Gandhi's ready acknowledgment shows: ‘For inculcating this true and higher type of Ahimsa amongst us, Tolstoy's life with its ocean-like love should serve as a beacon light and a never-failing source of inspiration…’
This reference to the positive and negative connotations of ahi  sā requires further clarification.
According to Gandhi, ahi  sā in its negative form involves doing no injury to any living being either physically or mentally.
This means that not only must I refrain from doing a person bodily harm, but I must also refrain from bearing him any ill-will which might cause him mental suffering.
It also means that I must do no injury in any form to the sub-human species.
Ahi  sā in its positive form means love or charity in the New Testament sense of the term and in I Corinthians 13 charity is referred to as suffering long, kind, believing all things, hoping all things, enduring all things and never failing.
Ahi  sā means, therefore, loving those who hate you and not simply those who love you.
Gandhi speaks of loving enemies and reacting to their wrongdoings in the same way as you would react to the wrong-doings of friends and relatives.
Ahi  sā, in its positive form, reflects a great deal of the teaching of the New Testament on love and it is not really surprising that Jesus should be referred to as one who manifested ahi  sā in its perfect form.
‘He who when being killed bears no anger against his murderer and even asks God to forgive him is truly non-violent.
History relates this of Jesus Christ.
With his dying breath on the Cross, he is reported to have said: ‘Father, forgive them for they know not what they do'’.'
Gandhi refers to ahi  sā as his eternal creed for every activity, and as the law of the human species.
Nature, he says, may be red in tooth and claw and full of hi  sā but man is superior to nature.
He has a mission to declare and practise ahi  sā in a world where hi  sā abounds.
Man's essential Self or Ātman, is the imperishable and eternal soul, and ahi  sā is the power of the soul; it is the soul force which is capable of being practised by everyone and not simply by the cloistered few.
Non-violence is not meant for the  saints and Rishis or seers alone: ‘it is meant for the common people as well.
Non-violence is the law of our Species, as violence is the Law of the Brute.’
The fact that ahi  sā is regarded as the law of the human species does not mean that it is an easy matter to practise it.
The contrary is in fact the case, as Gandhi shows.
Man may be distinguished from the animal by his capacity for non-violence, but it does not mean that he has shed all vestiges of the animal in him.
He is still a child of nature as well as being a child of the spirit, and the practice of non-violence requires a great deal of discipline and courage.
It is an activity of the brave and strong and not of the cowardly, for ‘Cowardice and Ahimsā do not go together any more than water and fire.’
It is impossible to be truly non-violent without being utterly fearless, and for that reason non-violence and cowardice go ill together because the coward is fearful at heart.
This explains Gandhi's consternation on hearing that the people of a village near Bettiah had run away while the police raided their houses looting property and assaulting women.
The people explained their action as an attempt on their part to adhere to the principle of non-violence, but, as Gandhi pointed out, such action could more easily be interpreted as cowardice than non-violence.
His antipathy to cowardice was such that given the choice between cowardice and violence he would choose violence.
‘I would rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honour than that she should, in a cowardly manner, become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour.’
While a man should never consciously prepare for violence, the latter is always preferable to cowardice or emasculation.
Ahi  sā and cowardice are contradictory terms, the former emanating from a feeling of love and the latter from a feeling of fear.
In addition to courage the practice of ahi  sā also requires faith together with discipline and humility.
The need for faith is evident from the relation Gandhi conceives to exist between ahi  sā and Truth, and from his belief in the essential unity of all life.
Acceptance of these presuppositions would seem to be possible only on the basis of faith, and this point is made by Gandhi when he says 
of ahi  sā that ‘In the last resort it does not avail to those who do not possess a living faith in the God of Love.’
Ahi  sā, like Truth, requires an affirmation of faith.
It will be seen that the concept of ahi  sā poses problems for Gandhi.
He regards it as the greatest force at man's disposal.
and in the end mightier thin any of the destructive forces devised by man, yet there would appear to be circumstances when violence is inevitable and unavoidable as in the case of the choice between violence and cowardice.
He recognizes also that whether we like it or not we are ‘caught up in the conflagration of Hi  sā.’
By this he means that by our very existence, by the very fact that we live on earth, we are involved in the destruction of life.
It may be true that the life we destroy is in the main of the lower orders or minute forms, but it is none the less destruction of life for all that, and since ahi  sā involves doing no injury to any form of life, it follows that no matter how careful and compassionate and self-restrained a person may be he cannot entirely escape committing hi  sā.
Gandhi recognizes this fact.
‘It is impossible to sustain one's body without the destruction of other bodies to some extent.’
We destroy as much life as we think necessary for our own sustenance and preservation.
We destroy plant and may be animal life for food.
and we destroy pests for the sake of our health and, as Gandhi admits.
we do not regard this as irreligious in any way.
Individual existence then seems to require some form of hi  sā and the same can be said of our existence as social beings or as members of society.
Since no man is an island it is impossible for him not to ‘participate in the Hi  sā that the very existence of society involves.’
Gandhi cites the example of a man who in a fit of madness goes about with a sword in his hand killing indiscriminately.
To destroy such a man may be necessary and unavoidable in order to protect other members of society.
Killing then might be regarded as a moral duty in certain circumstances in spite of the instinctive horror we might feel about the destruction of living beings.
It would be a mistake, in Gandhi's view, to allow ahi  sā to become a fetish, and not to kill in certain circumstances  could be regarded as a form of hi  sā rather than ahi  sā.
For example, if his son was suffering from rabies, Gandhi would consider it his duty to take his son's life in order to relieve him of his agony.
Similarly, if his daughter was threatened with violation, and there was no way open to save her, he would consider it his duty and the purest form of ahi  sā, to take her life.
He justifies his action on the grounds that as a surgeon severs limbs to save life, so he, Gandhi, severs the body from the soul in order to save the soul.
The problems posed by this view could be related to the question whether non-violence must always be the right way.
If so it would seem to suggest that we have an absolute rule of conduct or an agreed blue-print of morality to which there can be no exceptions.
It has been suggested that it is tempting to conceive of morality as a guide to human conduct.
Peter Winch refers to Mill's acceptance of the axiom, the greatest happiness of the greatest number, as the main principle of morality.
But as Winch points out, Mill's assumption separates the person who acts from the world in which he acts, hence, in order for a person to act morally, he has to be shown that it is worthwhile for him to act morally.
This implies that there is a principle apart from morality on which morality itself can be founded.
It is as if one is seeking to give an answer to the question: What advantage does morality bring?
If the principle on which morality is based is referred to as ‘acting for the sake of duty’(Kant), then that would be a way of explaining the reason a man might have for acting morally.
Winch's contention is that to conceive of the relation of an act to the person who acts in terms of the Kantian maxim ‘acting for the sake of duty’ is mistaken since ‘there is no general kind of behaviour of which we have to say that it is good without qualification’.
w
The example Winch cites is from the film Violent Saturday in which a gang of bank robbers hide from the police on a farm belonging to a strict religious community which upheld the principle of non-violence.
‘At the climax of the film one of the gangsters is about to shoot a young girl member of the community in the presence of the community's elder.
With horror and doubt on his  face, the elder seizes a pitchfork and hurls it into the gangster's back’ It could be argued from the Kantian standpoint that the elder had failed in his duty by not upholding the sect's fundamental principle of non-violence.
But Winch's argument is that the elder knows he has done wrong in killing the gangster.
‘It is not that he had abandoned or qualified his commitment to the principle of non-violence’.
It is just that in that particular situation he had to act as he did, and to have acted differently would have meant that he would have been in the wrong though not for the same reason.
He acted out of moral considerations yet they could not be regarded as principles in the Kantian sense because they were principles or considerations involved in what Winch calls ‘‘the perspective'’ of the action'.
What emerges from this example is that there can be situations of moral dilemma which impose limits on what it is possible for someone to do.
He may be forced to act in a certain way out of moral considerations which still involves him in feelings of guilt and remorse.
That is, what must be done in certain circumstances cannot be said to be good without qualification and might involve evil and suffering.
Those who would insist on an agreed blueprint of morality, or a set of moral values, to which all our aims and actions must be subject, would not accept that there are moral dilemmas.
Yet cannot the elder referred to in the example be said to have acted morally even though he did not adhere to the sect's fundamental principle of non-violence?
The same argument applies to the example Gandhi cites of the madman who kills indiscriminately.
One may affirm the fundamental principle of non-violence and yet feel morally bound to kill the madman given the circumstances.
The principle of non-violence is still absolute in the sense that it informs the spirit and the circumstances in which violence is done and can produce feelings of remorse or instinctive horror as Gandhi calls it.
Yet it is not absolute in the sense that it is principle apart from morality on which morality itself is founded or a blueprint for conduct which allows for no exceptions.
Gandhi might well regard that as making a fetish of the principle of ahi  sā.
In the hypothetical case of his son and daughter Gandhi would consider that he was acting out of moral considerations in taking his son's life in order to save him from unnecessary suffering, and his daughter's life in order to save her from the threat of violation.
He would not regard these acts as a rejection of the fundamental principle of ahi  sā.
In situations of moral dilemma he does what he considers must be done, even though it involves him in distress and suffering.
On the other hand, in the case of his daughter and the justification offered for taking her life, it might be argued that, similar acts of violence could be justified on the grounds that the ultimate goal is the redemption of souls.
Inquisitorial methods, for example, might be justified on those grounds.
But the attitudes and actions of those who do not believe in the immortality of the soul might differ from those who do believe.
Non-believers and doubtless some believers might regard the threat of violation of the daughter's person as preferable to the daughter's death.
Different moral considerations might apply for different people in the face of similar moral dilemmas.
This does not change the fact that, as far as Gandhi is concerned, ahi  sā informs the spirit and the circumstances in which violence is done by him.
He knows he is doing wrong but it is just that, in certain situations of moral dilemma he has to act in ways that involve violence.
He has to do what it is morally possible for him to do in the circumstances.
He makes the point clear when he says: ‘Perfect non-violence is impossible as long as we exist physically…
Perfect non-violence whilst you are inhabiting the body is only a theory like Euclid's point or straight line, but we have to endeavour every moment of our lives.’
I have suggested that for different people different moral considerations might apply in similar circumstances.
It follows from this that what is necessary hi  sā for one may well be considered unnecessary hi  sā by another.
This applies to the different attitudes taken to war, to which Gandhi himself was implacably opposed.
When it is suggested to him that it may be necessary and unavoidable to kill those who oppress mankind in the same way as it is necessary and unavoidable to hill a homicidal lunatic who threatens society, his reply is that no man is so evil as to be beyond  redemption, and no man so perfect as to be justified in killing these whom he considers to be evil.
If it is argued on the basis of this reply that even a maniac is not beyond redemption and that given the right kind of treatment he might be able to take his place again within society, the argument only serves to show the different moral considerations that can be brought to bear on situations of moral dilemma.
Gandhi's attitude to war is unequivocal; he considers it to be wholly wrong.
In his view it degrades, demoralizes, and brutalizes men trained for it.
With its tendency to glorify brute force it outrages moral standards and inflames the passions.
It is totally opposed to the qualities of gentleness, patience and self-restraint.
His opposition and resistance to war as a means of solving problems is total and yet his adherence to the principle of ahi  sā does not mean a failure to recognize that there might be situations of moral dilemma in which different moral considerations apply for different people.
His repugnance, for example, does not take him to the point of seeking to prevent those who wished to take part in war from doing so.
He prefers simply to place the issues before them, and allow them to make their own moral decisions and to choose what they might want to do.
In many ways this is an understandable attitude to adopt, because it means that one is not forcing one's moral decisions on someone else.
But Gandhi goes one step further than this.
When those who believe in war refuse to do their duty, that is, when they refuse to fight for some reason or other, Gandhi feels it to be his moral duty to enlighten them as to their responsibilities as soldiers, while at the same time presenting them with the alternative path of ahi  sā.
That is, he maintains that while they are soldiers it is their duty to fight, but should they choose the way of non-violence then it would be their duty to refuse to fight.
Here Gandhi is indicating his adherence to one of the fundamental principles of the Hindu tradition, namely, that one is morally obliged to fulfil the functions of the order to which one belongs.
He feels that the choice is really between hi  sā and ahi  sā, and not between doing one's duty or not doing one's duty.
Should the reason for refusing to do one's duty as a soldier be loss of belief in  the efficacy of war then that could well be interpreted as a choice of ahi  sā.
By relating belief to duty in this fashion, Gandhi is able to claim that he would have no compunction under Swarāj, self-governing India, in recommending those who had no objection to talking up arms, to fight for their country.
Yet at the same time.
he is able to maintain that the person who participates in war should strive to free both himself and the world from war.
He justifies this attitude by claiming that ‘one's life is not a single straight line; it is a bundle of duties very often conflicting.
And one is called upon continually to make one's choice between one duty and another.’
If we were to argue that, as a firm believer in the way of ahi  sā and an unequivocal opponent of war with its brutalizing tendencies and degrading effects, Gandhi's moral responsibility could hardly be regarded as extending to recommending people to fight for their country, it might seem difficult at first sight to know what his response would be other than that if a man is unable to choose the higher path of ahi  sā, he should be encouraged to fulfil the obligations of the choice of the lower path of duty to his country.
Why he should be so encouraged might not be immediately clear in view of the demoralizing effect of training for war.
If we were to seek an explanation in the fact that Gandhi, as we have seen, does not equate ahi  sā with non-killing and notes the distinction between ahi  sā and hi  sā by indicating that hi  sā means killing from motives of anger or selfishness and ahi  sā means refraining from so doing, then it might be possible to be a believer in ahi  sā and yet kill, provided the killing is not prompted by angry or selfish motives and is performed with detachment as one's duty.
Gandhi could certainly quote the teaching of the Gītā in support of this view, but it would still not detract from what he says about the demoralizing, degrading, and brutalizing effects of war.
A more satisfactory explanation might be that different moral considerations apply for different people in similar situations.
One person might consider it his moral duty to fight and another to desist from fighting.
Yet even when a person maintains the principle of non-violence, as Gandhi does, it is absolute only in the sense that it informs the spirit and circumstances in which acts of violence are done, and not in the sense that it constitutes a rule which permits no exceptions.
This does not mean that Gandhi is not aware of the wrong that is being done when acts of violence are committed or tolerated, or that he does not share in the feelings of guilt that result from so acting.
What it means is that as life ‘is not a single straight line’ he does what he thinks must be done and what it is morally possible for him to do in situations of moral dilemma.
Referring to his actions in recruiting men for ambulance work during war he states:
There is no defence for my conduct weighed only in the scales of ahi  sā .
I draw no distinction between those who wield the weapons of destruction and those who do red-cross work.
Both participate in war and advance its cause.
Both are guilty of the crime of war…
Life is governed by a multitude of forces.
It would be smooth sailing, if one could determine the course of one's actions only by one general principle whose application at a given moment was too obvious to need even a moment's reflection.
But I cannot recall a single act which could be so easily determined.
This remark emphasizes again the point previously made that moral considerations, which cannot be regarded as principles in the Kantian sense, are involved in situations of moral dilemma or in what Winch calls ‘‘the perspective'’ of the action'.
Gandhi recognizes that in the ordinary circumstances of life we are confronted by situations that make clear-cut decisions or a choice between black and white sometimes impossible.
But this does not mean that he abandons his commitment to ahi  sā.
He still maintains that non-violence is the nobler way, and that the prevention of the brutalization of human nature is preferable even to the prevention of his own suffering or the suffering of his own people.
He also considers ahi  sā to be a more effective means of liberation than revolution, because, in his view, the self-sacrifice of one innocent man is a more potent force than the sacrifice of a million men who might die 
Some of the arguments Gandhi puts forward in favour of ahi  sā on occasions are strangely unimpressive.
One such argument was in response to a question posed by Margaret Bourke-White, just prior to his assassination, as to how he would meet the atom bomb with non-violence.
He replied that he would let the pilot see that he had no ill-will against him.
Not, he admits, that the pilot would be able literally to see anything but ‘the longing in our hearts — that he would not come to harm — would reach up to him and his eyes would be opened.’
The response is a naive one; but perhaps what Gandhi wanted to convey in answer to this question was that his faith in the principle of non-violence and truth had not been shattered by the use of the atom bomb.
Rather it had served to convince him that the choice now open to mankind was between the principle of non-violence and racial suicide.
The bomb, he believed, could not be destroyed by counter bombs any more than violence could be countered by violence.
Another dubious argument Gandhi presents in support of ahi  sā is that the course of history can be interpreted as a movement from hi  sā to ahi  sā.
That is, it is a progression from nomadic cannibalism towards a more civilized and stable form of social life.
The question that arises is whether such a view of history is justified and whether or not it simply reflects an evolutionary view of history prevalent at the time.
Does it not presuppose man's progress from primitive to sophisticated ways of life, and does it not suggest on the basis of a progressive increase of ahi  sā a movement from a less good to a better form of life?
The term primitive, however, no longer has the pejorative connotation in anthropological, and socio-philosophical writings, that it once had when the evolutionary theory prevailed.
To understand the primitive way of life, or the way of life of a society far removed from our own, it is necessary for us to extend our way of life into the orbit of the form of life of that society, rather than bring the form of life of that society into the orbit of our own.
The onus is on us to extend our understanding of that society, rather than to insist on seeing everything in terms of our ready-made distinctions.
The multitude of forces governing life within that society has to be taken into consideration before  the actions of the members of that society can be assessed.
It would be too simplistic an approach to such a society to say that hi  sā dominated.
Further, to argue, as Gandhi does, that progress towards ahi  sā must have taken place otherwise the human race would have become extinct by now, in the same way as lower species of animal life have become extinct, is to ignore the principle of natural selection, and the fact that more sophisticated weapons of hi  sā are now at man's disposal making the possibility of his self-destruction and extinction more real today than at any time in the past.
The argument also ignores the type of considerations that might determine the present non-use of these sophisticated weapons, such as the fear of complete destruction and total annihilation, rather than a greater degree of ahi  sā, or love and concern for others.
It is difficult to accept Gandhi's argument, based as it is on an evolutionary view of history, that mankind is continually moving in the direction of an utopia where ahi  sā will prevail.
The unimpressiveness of some of Gandhi's arguments in favour of ahi  sā, however, should not be allowed to detract from the strength of other arguments, or cause us to lose sight of his basic position.
One of the implications of the interrelation of Truth and ahi  sā in Gandhi's thought is that it involves the welfare of all men.
We shall have occasion to discuss sarvodaya, as it is called, in greater detail at a later stage.
Here it is necessary to look at it briefly as a corollary of ahi  sā.
Gandhi was sufficiently aware of the utilitarian formula of the greatest happiness of the greatest number to realize that he was completely at odds with it as an interpretation of the aim anti purpose of life and as a principle of morality.
The votary of ahi  sā strives for the greatest good of all, which means that he goes beyond utilitarianism.
He who seeks the welfare of all cannot be satisfied with the greatest good of the greatest number.
Furthermore, the methods employed by the utilitarian would always he justified if they succeeded in procuring the desired end.
The same cannot be the case with those who seek the welfare of all.
Sarvodaya is inextricably bound up with ahi  sā, since an injury inflicted on one man can have an adverse effect on all men because of the essential unity of mankind.
The welfare of all cannot  be promoted by dubious means because means and ends are convertible terms.
The utilitarian approach, if it had been applied to the political life of India, would have led to the forcible ejection of the British on the grounds that the greatest happiness or good of the greatest number in India, namely the Indians themselves, would have resulted from it.
Gandhi could not countenance such an approach because it involved rejecting ahi  sā and relinquishing sarvodaya.
It was his passionate conviction that sarvodaya, which might be regarded as a practical expression of Truth, could only be effected by means of ahi  sā, and the votary of ahi  sā would be prepared to sacrifice himself in order to realize this ideal.
It has been suggested that morality cannot really be understood in terms of the means-end relationship since morality may demand that we relinquish a specific end ‘including the end of one's own moral perfection .’
This may point to the fundamental difference between Gandhi's ideal of sarvodaya, the welfare of all, and Mill's utilitarian axiom.
the greatest happiness of the greatest number, as the main principle of morality in spite of Gandhi's use of the notion of means and ends.
The utilitarian axiom distinguishes the person who acts from the world in which he acts.
It can be regarded as a principle apart from morality on which morality can be based since it provides a reason why it might be worthwhile for a man to act morally.
Gandhi's ideal of sarvodaya, which, as I have shown, is inextricably bound up with ahi  sā, cannot be so conceived.
It is not a blueprint of morality to which all our purposes and actions must be subject.
The ideal of sarvodaya as a corollary of ahi  sā is not an absolute principle on which morality itself is founded.
It is not absolute in the sense that it is a rule which allows no exceptions.
Yet it is absolute in the sense that it informs the spirit and the circumstances of our actions, which means that acts of violence would still be wrong although they might result from moral considerations and moral decisions, and in the sense that the attainment of desired ends could never justify the means used to attain them.
Gandhi claims to have practised ahi  sā throughout most of his life and to have applied it successfully in all walks of life.
It was undoubtedly his basic creed and was bound up with his quest for  Truth.
He expresses his fervent belief in ahi  sā when he says:.
‘My love for non-violence is superior to every other thing mundane or supramundane.
It is equalled only by my love for truth which is to me synonymous with non-violence through which…alone I can see and reach Truth.’
SATYĀGRAHA
As Truth and ahi  sā are closely intertwined like two sides of a coin so are ahi  sā and satyāgraha interrelated.
The interconnection of these three concepts in Gandhi's thought is such that it is difficult to treat them separately.
To analyse one is necessarily to involve the other two.
Satyāgraha is a direct corollary of Truth and non-violence.
It is the way in which ahi  sā is implemented or put in action; it is the technique of non-violence.
The principle of satyāgraha existed before the term was coined, and it was because Gandhi was dissatisfied with the phrase ‘passive resistance’ that he felt the need for a more suitable and more accurate term to designate and describe the principle he was propounding.
The term that was first suggested by one of his followers in South Africa was sadāgraha, which literally means holding firm to reality or truth firmness, i. e. firmness in a good cause or in the cause of truth.
It was a term which indicated the desire to be firm or to hold firm (āgraha) to Truth (Satya) or Reality (Sat).
The change effected by Gandhi by the use of satyāgraha, however, makes his principle more explicit and at the same time links it more closely with his concept of Truth (Satya), and non-violence (ahi  sā).
What might be said is that the ethical connotation of the method of action he proposed was being made clear by the choice of satyāgraha rather than sadāgraha.
As Gandhi explains concerning sadāgraha: ‘I liked the word, but it did not fully represent the whole idea I wished it to connote.
I therefore corrected it to ‘Satyagraha’.
Truth (Satya ) implies love, and firmness (agraha ) engenders and therefore serves as a synonym for force.
I thus began to call the Indian movement ‘Satyagraha’, that is to say, the Force which is born of Truth and Love or Non-violence…’
The concept of satyāgraha gave practical expression to the religious and ethical ideals of Truth and non-violence.
As the technique  of ahi  sā, it put the ideal of non-violence into practice and was informed by the spirit of Truth, that is, the religious and ethical criteria that determine the way a man thinks and acts.
Prior to this term being coined Gandhi had used the term ‘passive resistance’ to describe his principle of non-violent action.
As the struggle progressed he came to see the inadequacies of the term and realized that it was too constricted in its meaning and gave rise to confusion and misunderstanding.
Furthermore, it did not seem to him right that a specifically Indian movement should be known by an English name.
Apart from the fact that a foreign name would not acquire popularity or general use in the Indian community, passive resistance was primarily associated with European movements such as the movement of the suffragettes.
Two misunderstandings at least were caused by the initial use of ‘passive resistance’ to describe the principle f non-violent action, and both arose from the way in which the phrase was associated with the actions of the suffragettes. the first misunderstanding was that non-violent action was regarded as a weapon of the weak.
The suffragettes were weak physically and numerically, without franchise, and had resorted to passive resistance as the only weapon at their disposal.
The second misunderstanding arose from the fact that the suffragettes were not averse to the use o force or violence when the occasion demanded it.
So when the Indians used the phrase ‘passive resistance’ in South Africa they were immediately considered to be a threat to person and property in the same way as the suffragettes were a threat.
By the choice of the term satyāgraha, Gandhi distinguished the non-violent actions of the Indian movement from the passive resistance of the European movements thereby removing the cause of confusion and a the same time preparing the way for a better understanding of Indian aspirations in South Africa.
But his choice of the term satyāgraha did more than that: it forged a bond between his actions and his basic beliefs concerning the nature of man and the nature of reality.
His religious and metaphysical beliefs concerning Truth or God, the Soul or Ātman, and the essential unity of all existence, were given existential expression through  the principle of satyāgraha.
Hence the reason why it is referred to as Truth force, or Soul force.
Satyāgraha has been described in a variety of ways.
It has been referred to as the weapon of the strong and not of the weak.
It is not possible for those who are weak to apply this soul force for it makes great demands on those who would use it.
It ‘excludes the use of violence in any shape of form, whether in thought, speech, or deed.’
It resists the will of a tyrant wholeheartedly but never by resorting to hatred or violence.
It involves self-sacrifice and the readiness to bear endless suffering bravely.
It is open, voluntary, not embarked upon lightly or without adequate preparation.
It is not to be abused; it has to be exercised by well-qualified, well-prepared people, who are devoted to truth, non-violence, and the welfare of all, and who are capable of exercising great patience and forbearance.
Such qualities as these minimize the risk of violence.
It is rooted and grounded in faith in the efficacy of innocent suffering.
Gandhi describes it as gentle, non-wounding and never associated with anger or malice: ‘It is never fussy, never impatient, never vociferous.
It is the direct opposite of compulsion.
It was conceived as a complete substitute for violence.’
Satyāgraha is further described as an unending, relentless, dialectical quest for truth; it is holding on to truth come what may.
It requires no physical assistance or material aid, and is capable of being exercised by men, women and children.
It  is universally applicable and it ‘is to violence, and therefore, to all tyranny, all injustice, what light is to darkness’.
Gandhi claims that it cannot be used in an unjust cause but what he might mean is that it should not be used in an unjust cause.
He is sufficiently aware of his own failings to know that satyāgrahis are capable of making erroneous decisions.
Did he not himself confess to a Himalayan miscalculation?
But he points out that if satyāgraha is used in an unjust cause then only the person who uses it suffers.
Since no violence is involved, others do not suffer from the satyāgrahi's mistakes, only the satyāgrahi himself.
The purpose of satyāgraha, it is maintained, is conversion and never coercion.
It is a dialectical quest for truth.
It aims at winning  over a man by the power of love and gentle persuasion and by arousing in him a sense of justice rather than forcing him to submit out of fear and embarrassment.
It distinguishes between people and systems.
Systems may be evil but people are never beyond redemption.
Satyāgrahis may hate the systems but not the people who are involved with the system.
The satyāgrahi must empathize with the people he opposes and try to see things from their point of view.
At no time must he impute unworthy motives to them.
This creates charitable understanding and opens up the way to conversion through ‘a constant appeal to the head and the heart.’
Gandhi recognizes the weakness of an appeal to reason alone as a way of arousing a person's sense of justice.
It is through patient persuasive reasoning together with voluntary suffering that the satyāgrahi must seek to melt the heart of his opponent and open his eyes to the truth.
‘I have found that mere appeal to reason does not answer where prejudices are agelong and based on supposed religious authority.
Reason has to be strengthened by suffering and suffering opens the eyes of the understanding’.
It would not be quite accurate to equate satyāgraha with either civil disobedience or non-cooperation although both are related to satyāgraha.
The former phrase was coined by Thoreau to indicate his resistance to the laws of the state, and it was the title of an essay by him which Gandhi read after he had started to resist the South African authorities.
The idea of civil disobedience had occurred to Gandhi prior to reading Thoreau's essay, nevertheless he used Thoreau's phrase to describe his struggle against the African authorities to English readers.
This led some people to maintain that he had derived the idea of civil disobedience from Thoreau, a fact which Gandhi himself denied.a In due course he substituted the phrase ‘civil resistance’ for ‘civil disobedience’on the grounds that it conveyed the notion of non-violence better, but he continued to regard civil disobedience as a branch of satyāgraha.
The same applied to the notion of non-cooperation: ‘Non-cooperation and civil disobedience are but different branches of the same tree called Satyagraha .’
Non-cooperation, as Gandhi understands it, does not always have to be an act of love in the same way as satyāgraha has to be, but it is in act of love and consequently a branch of satyāgraha when it seeks to promote the good of a wrongdoer.
Both non-cooperation and civil disobedience imply some form of resistance to unjust laws, and could result in imprisonment for those involved.
Should this occur then imprisonment should be accepted willingly.
Of course, to court imprisonment, and to submit voluntarily to the penalties imposed by the state could be construed as in implicit recognition of the right of the state to impose those penalties and, therefore, to play into the hands of an unjust regime.
The force of this argument is substantially weakened, however, if injustices are removed as a result of the sufferings of the satyāgrahis during their period of imprisonment.
In any case, it is Gandhi's view that every citizen, since lie sustains a government in power, is responsible for the actions of that government.
There is a kind of corporate responsibility, and as long as a government is just it is a citizen's duty to support it, but when the actions or a government hurt the individual and harm the nation it is the duty of a citizen to withdraw his support.
He may consider it his duty to practise non-cooperation and civil disobedience, but he must always be on his guard against acts of violence which only serve to militate against the success of his actions.
We may inquire at this point whether non-cooperation and civil disobedience do not involve an element of coercion.
Are we not by the use of the methods of non-cooperation and civil disobedience, forcing a government to act contrary to its wishes?
Gandhi's reply to this would be that coercion implies violence, and no coercion in that sense at least is being exercised against the government.
The point has been well put by Vinit Haksar: ‘Civil disobedience and non-cooperation, when conducted according to Gandhian principles, do not constitute a threat or coercion in any evil sense .
Rather they involve a refusal to co-operate with or assist in evil policy, and an offer to co-operate on honourable and just terms…
Haksar's argument is that a coercive threat implies either a violation of, or a readiness to violate, moral duty  on the part of the proposer of the threat.
It can also, in another sense, be regarded as taking advantage of the vulnerability of the recipient of the threat.
Non-cooperation and civil disobedience, as Gandhi understands them, cannot be construed as a coercive threat in this sense.
The satyāgrahi does not violate moral duty, nor does he take advantage of the weakness or vulnerability of his opponent who is the recipient of his actions.
The purpose of satyāgraha is to convert not to coerce.
There may well be an element of compulsion involved in civil disobedience, but it differs from coercion in that it is aimed at securing mutual co-operation and understanding in accordance with a dialectical quest for truth.
No violation of moral duty is involved.
If it is argued that a man has a moral duty to obey the law and that to break the law of the land is a violation of one's duty to one's country, then one has only to point to instances of government policy where it would clearly be immoral to obey the law of the land.
Genocide is one such example.
That there are risks associated with civil disobedience no one would deny, and among them is the risk of anarchy.
But, according to Haksar, what has also to be taken into consideration is the risk of violence that might result from not allowing people to express their feeling and here civil disobedience might be regarded as a safety valve.
Haksar's argument that no violation of moral duty is involved in the practice of satyāgraha as distinct from the threat of coercion, however, fails to take into consideration the difficulties involved in regarding morality as an infallible guide to conduct or an absolute rule.
The problems cited in the previous chapter in relation to ahi  sā apply equally to satyāgraha.
If there are difficulties in claiming that ahi  sā is the right way in all circumstances and that the way of violence can never lead to Truth, there are similar difficulties in assuming that no violation of moral duty is involved in the practice of satyāgraha, or that it is only through the practice of satyāgraha that we show ourselves to be informed by the spirit of Truth and non-violence.
The problems lie in the presupposition that moral duty is an absolute rule in the sense of a rule for which there can be no exceptions.
Winch's claim, already referred to, ‘that there is no general kind of behaviour of which we have to say  that it is good without qualification’, is relevant here.
As we have seen, acts of violence may be considered necessary in situations of moral dilemma even though they are known to be wrong.
This does not mean that the person who commits acts of violence in such situations has abandoned his commitment to the principle of non-violence.
He does what he has to do in situations of moral dilemma, though he knows it to be wrong, because to act differently would have been wrong also though not in the same way.
Certain moral considerations are involved in his actions, yet they are not absolute in the sense that they are an infallible guide to conduct, or constitute a rule for which there can be no exception.
They are absolute in the sense that they inform the spirit in which he acts or, as Winch says, they involve the ‘perspective’ of the action.
These considerations apply to satyāgraha also.
Gandhi admits that satyāgrahis are capable of making erroneous decisions and that he himself made a Himalayan miscalculation in instituting mass satyāgraha in Ahmedabad without teaching the people involved in the movement the strict conditions and necessary limitations of satyāgraha.
It is Gandhi's contention, however, that when satyāgraha is wrongly used only the satyāgrahis suffer since no coercion or violence to others is involved.
We might agree that coercion ‘in any evil sense ’ is not involved in the practice of satyāgraha, and it could be argued that what the phrase implies is that no abandonment of the principle of non-violence is involved.
But it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that satyāgraha does involve some coercion or compulsion when practised in certain circumstances.
When fasting, for example, was first used by Gandhi as a form of satyāgraha in a dispute between textile mill-owners and labourers in Ahmedabad the intention was to rally the flagging spirit and resolve of the workers, but it had the added effect of forcing the mill owners into negotiation.
It was not Gandhi's intention when he originally decided to fast to exert moral coercion on the mill-owners, since coercion in any form was contrary to the aims of satyāgraha, yet despite the unexpected result of his fast Gandhi still felt that he had acted correctly in the circumstances.m The experience did not prevent him either from using fasts as a form of  satyāgraha on other occasions with similar results.
It could be argued that this was a violation of the satyāgrahi's moral duty not to coerce his opponent or to take advantage of his weakness and vulnerability.
On the other hand, it could be claimed with some justification that moral considerations were involved in Gandhi's decision to fast and that he did what he thought he had to do in those situations.
His decision did not mean that he had abandoned his commitment to persuasion and conversion; it was the principle of non-violence and not coercion which informed the spirit of his actions.
Yet some form of coercion or compulsion still resulted from what he considered it right for him to do in certain circumstances.
Gandhi recognizes that satyāgraha requires self-discipline and dedication hence his insistence on high moral standards and adequate training for prospective satyāgrahis.
It corresponds to what Gandhi conceives to be necessary in the quest for Truth.
No monastic or holy order within the Christian tradition demands greater dedication and discipline, and the basic requirements of a satyāgrahi correspond to the vows of poverty, chastity and obedience, that are expected of certain Christian orders of monks and priests.
The vow of poverty within the Indian tradition takes the form of non-possession (aparigraha).
The satyāgrahi must not desire anything that is beyond the reach of the most unfortunate of human beings.
He should take no thought for the morrow, and should bear in mind that possessions imply making provision for the future.
No seeker after truth should doubt that his daily bread will be provided.
From the absolute standpoint, even a man's body has to be regarded as a possession, so dedicated use of the body in the service of others is the highest ideal and the most effective means of happiness.
It is not possible to reconcile love and possessions.
So theoretically ‘a man can only exercise perfect love, and be completely dispossessed, if he is prepared to embrace death and renounce his body for the sake of human service’.
From a practical point of view, however, since man never attains the ideal of perfect love, he will retain possession of his body while striving continually  for that perfection of love which does not shrink from making the ultimate sacrifice.
What this implies is that perfect love is impossible within the realm of empirical existence in the same way as absolute Truth and absolute ahi  sā are impossible.
Yet the ideal of perfect love still informs the spirit in which we live directing our thoughts and actions.
It will be seen that much Christian teaching on love is reflected in what has been outlined above, and that Gandhi's teaching concerning non-possession goes beyond what is normally considered to be involved in the vow of poverty in certain Christian orders.
The vow of chastity within the Indian tradition takes the form of brahmacārya, which means literally, conduct conducive to the attainment of Brahman or Truth, or the way of life which leads to God.
The kind of disciplined life envisaged by brahmacārya involves control of all the senses and is not confined to sexual control, although Gandhi did deal in detail with that aspect of brahmacārya.
It may be better understood if it is set in the context of Hindu teaching concerning the different orders or āśramas of society corresponding to the different stages of life.
According to the classical Hindu tradition, Hindu life consists of four main stages.
First, Brahmacārya, the student stage, which involves the study of the Vedas in accordance with the requirements of caste.
Second, G  hastha, the householder stage, which involves marriage, raising a family, and fulfilling social obligations within the caste structure.
Third, Vanaprastha, the forest-dwelling stage, which involves withdrawal from the normal requirements of social and family life, after the fulfilment of all necessary obligations, to a place of solitude for study and meditation.
Fourth, Sa  nyāsa, the ascetic stage, which involves abandoning all attachment to worldly things.
The majority of people never progress beyond the householder stage.
The third stage is for the disciplined few, and the final stage is for the select few who desire the bliss and blessedness of complete union with God.
The Laws of Manu, an ancient law book of the Hindu way of life, which discusses the customs, conventions and  laws, that should operate at each stage of life and govern the relation of the different orders with one another, regards the four āśramas as the best means of attaining co-operation For the common good.
It gives pride of place, however to the householder, whose order supports the other three.
‘As all living creatures subsist by receiving support from air, even so(the members of) all orders subsist by receiving support from the householder.’
It is the one order that allows full scope for realizing the three main aims of life, kāma (love), artha (wealth), and dharma (duty or righteousness).
It is evident that the classical Hindu tradition, in which Gandhi was nurtured, recognized the importance of family life as providing the cohesive force required for the well-being of society as a whole.
Gandhi acknowledged this and what he has to say about brahmacārya has to be taken as applying in the main to those who are able to accept the discipline involved in resolving to enter the third stage of life.
According to the Laws of Manu, a vānaprasthin must control his senses, keep his organs in subjection, abandon his belongings, commit his wife to his sons or allow her to accompany him, be chaste, patient, friendly, and compassionate towards all creatures.
When Gandhi, with the consent of his wife, took the brahmacārya vow, he regarded himself as having advanced to the vanaprastha stage of life.
The brahmacārya vow evidently differs from the brahmacārya stage of life since different obligations and observances are involved.
The literal meaning of brahmacārya is the same in both cases, but the discipline required of one who resolves to become a vānaprasthin, differs from that required of the student.
The reason Gandhi gives for choosing to become a vānaprasthin is that he wanted to devote himself to the service of the community.
This means that he did not consider that by taking the brahmacārya vow he was necessarily withdrawing from the life of society, which was one reason why he resented being called an ascetic.
The sa  nyāsin after all, adopts a negative attitude to empirical existence while the vānaprasthin is more positive in his approach to the empirical.
The sa  nyasin seeks release from sa  sāra, the endless round of birth, death and rebirth: he  renounces the world in favour of mystical union with God.
The vānaprasthin on the other hand, seeks to realize Truth existentially in and through the service of others.
Gandhi interprets his progression to the third stage of life as an extension of his social obligations.
As family obligations recede to some extent, so his commitment to Truth and ahi  sā increases through the service of his fellow men.
Commenting on his sexual abstinence Erik Erikson writes: ‘It is of importance here that he gave up sexual intimacy for a wider communal intimacy and not just because sexuality seemed immoral in any Calvinistic sense.
The sexual life (at least for him) seemed to becloud the sense of unerring  craftsmanship needed for the creation of the new instrument of peace, Satyagraha.’
This assessment is borne out in part by what Gandhi himself says about the need for sexual renunciation in order to realize God.
From the description of the requirements of the vanaprastha āśrama contained in the Laws of Manu, we see that it involves abandoning possession, a fact we noted in connection with the requirements of a satyāgrahi.
It also involves control of the senses, including sexual control, which Gandhi regards as another requirement of the true satyāgrahi.
‘The man, who is wedded to Truth and worships Truth alone, proves unfaithful to her, if he applies his talents to anything else.
How then can he minister to the senses?…
Realization of Truth through self-gratification should…appear a contradiction in terms.’
Chastity is referred to as one of the greatest disciplines.
It gives stamina and firmness of purpose by conserving vital energy.
But physical control is of no value without mental control, for whoever lusts in thought remains permanently unsatiated.
The brahmacārin, however, is unaffected by temptation, in the same way as the marble statue of a man is unaffected by the presence of a beautiful woman.
At no time should a true satyāgrahi or a brahmacārin seek to avoid the company of women, but whether this justifies him in openly seeking the company of women in order to prove the strength of his brahmacārya vow, as Gandhi  himself occasionally did, is a highly debatable point.
On the other hand, to magnify this incident in the life of Gandhi out of all proportion to its significance is also a questionable enterprise.
The question that arises is whether Gandhi's emphasis on brahmacārya, in the sense of sexual control, meant that married men were excluded from taking the vow.
The fact that Gandhi remained a married man despite taking the brahmacārya vow indicates that this is not the case.
Gandhi's injunction is that a married couple should act as if they are unmarried, and treat each other as brother and sister.
By this he means that they should refrain from sexual intercourse, for no satyāgrahi should desire progeny, which, in Gandhi's view, is the only legitimate reason for sexual intercourse.
‘Realization of God’, he claims, ‘is impossible without complete renunciation of the sexual desire.’
So a married man who wishes to become a satyāgrahi requires the consent of his wife since her rights have to be taken into consideration in this matter.
It needs to be reiterated that the brahmacārya vow is what is required of those men who choose to become satyāgrahis and not something that is required of all men.
Gandhi has no aversion to sex and refers to it as ‘a fine and noble thing’, but he insists that ‘it is meant only for the act of creation’.
In fact, when the sex act takes place only when progeny is desired then it can be referred to as married brahmacārya.
For this reason, he is unable to support birth control by means of contraceptives, but he would have no hesitation in recommending self-control.
This seems to indicate that, despite his reference to sex as a fine and noble thing, he still regards it with a certain amount of misgiving, and as something that should be kept under strict control.
He clearly has a highly unrealistic view of human nature if he assumes that sexual activity will only take place when progeny is desired.
It is also difficult to see the consistency between his reference to sex as fine and noble and his claim that only complete renunciation of sex leads to the realization of God.
Among the aids for the observance of  brahmachārya Gandhi mentions the importance of diet, and the avoidance of over-indulgence.
Fasting and abstention from intoxicating drink and drugs is also invaluable since the senses can only be kept under control when they are contained.
The vow of obedience characteristic of the Christian orders can be equated within the Indian tradition with the obedience required to abide by the rules governing non-violent action.
The satyāgrahi, for example, is required to harbour no anger, never retaliate, voluntarily submit to arrest, never resort to insults, behave courteously, obey orders, respect religious beliefs of others, be prepared to suffer and be scrupulously honest.
The man who wishes to realize Truth ‘must be completely free from anger and lust, greed and attachment, pride and fear.
He must reduce himself to zero and have perfect control over all senses…’.
He is also expected to have complete trust in his opponent in spite of all indications to the contrary.
Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the Satyagrahi is ready to trust him the twenty-first time, for an implicit trust in human nature is the very essence of the creed.
What sustains him constantly is belief in god or Truth, for the strength of a satyāgrahi is firmly rooted in faith and prayer.
Only thus can he overcome evil by good, anger by love, untruth by truth and hi  sā by ahi  sā.
The importance of the ideal is evident here.
although it may prove unattainable it still informs the spirit in which we live.
The technique of satyāgrahi was applied successfully by Gandhi on may occasions.
It was applied against the discriminatory laws of the Transvaal Government, one of which required Indians to procure a certificate of registration from the Registrar of Asiatics or else face the threat of deportation.
Another law declared Hindu, Muslim and Parsee marriages to be illegal.
On this occasion, satyāgraha involved imprisonment of thousands of Indians, much to the embarrassment of the Union Government of South Africa.
Satyāgraha was applied against the British indigo planters at Champaran in Bihar, where peasant cultivators, or ryots, were being unfairly treated.
It was also brought to bear on the disputes  between the textile mill-owners and labourers in Ahmedabad, and involved a strike by the workers.
It was on this occasion, as we have seen, that Gandhi for the first time resorted to fasting as a form of satyāgraha.
The coercive aspect of fasting has already been referred to.
Gandhi himself claimed that his purpose in fasting was to take upon himself the burden of the workers; he was identifying himself with them and sharing their despair, frustration and suffering.
His understanding of fasting is that it should be regarded as a form of self-imposed suffering.
If it is directed against an opponent it ceases to be self-suffering and becomes instead a form of coercion, which is an aspect of violence, and as such unacceptable.
No fast should be undertaken against an opponent; it should be undertaken rather for the good of those near and dear to the person who fasts.
‘Fasting can be resorted to only against a lover, not to extort rights but to reform him, is when a son fasts for a father who drinks…
I fasted to reform those who loved me.’
Whenever a fast is undertaken for selfish ends it must be resisted.
The dividing line between altruistic and selfish ends is often thin, but any person who considers the aim of a fast to be selfish should not yield to its pressure, even though the person engaged in the fast might die as a result.
The kind of occasion when this injunction might apply would be when a prisoner deliberately fasts to bring about a change in his status, or else to cause the maximum amount of embarrassment to the authorities.
It is interesting to note that it is the present policy of some authorities to allow such a prisoner to die rather than to submit him to the indignity of forcible feeding.
In this respect, they may be regarded as following Gandhi's suggestions and advice.
Satyāgraha was resorted to in the case of the peasant cultivators of Kheda, who sought suspension of the payment of an annual revenue assessment because of the failure of crops and an impending famine.
It resulted in a Government compromise which, though not entirely satisfactory, enabled the peasant to realize the benefit of joint action in a just cause and forced Government employees to understand the conditions of the peasants,
The technique of satyāgraha was implemented also on behalf of the untouchables who were forbidden to use the roads in the vicinity of the Vykom temple in Travancore, South India.
The immediate aim was to open the roads to and from the temple to untouchables, but it proved to be a symbol of the movement to eliminate discrimination against untouchables in all spheres of life and a pointer to the need to abolish the caste system.
In this respect it showed concern for the welfare of all men, and consequently it can be said that satyāgraha whenever it is implemented involves sarvodaya.
SARVODAYA
My analysis hitherto has shown the interrelation of three concepts in Gandhi's thought, namely, Truth, ahi  sā and satyāgraha.
I have shown that his quest for Truth is the quest for Reality or God, and the attempt to live in accordance with the religious and ethical ideals of the Hindu way of life.
But no distinction can be drawn in Advaitin thought between Reality and the highest Self or Ātman, so the quest for Truth involves knowing the Self which also involves ahi  sā for to injure or inflict deliberate violence on another is to violate the ātman which all men share.
The basic presuppositions that present themselves here are the indivisibility of Truth, the identity of the Self (Ātman) and Truth or God, and the essential unity of all existence.
The implications of these presuppositions are far-reaching and affect every conceivable aspect of man's life.
They clearly have social, economic and political ramifications and affect man's relationship with his fellow man: all men are brothers because they partake of the same reality and share the same Ātman.
‘I believe’, says Gandhi, ‘in the absolute oneness of God and therefore of humanity.
What though we have many bodies?
We have but one soul.
The rays of the sun are many through refraction.
But they have the same source.
I cannot, therefore, detach myself from the wickedest soul nor may I be denied identity with the most virtuous.’
Man's relationship with the animal kingdom and with the natural world as a whole is also affected by this belief in the essential unity of all that exists.
No violence to animals and no insensitive, deliberate exploitation of nature can be permitted or tolerated.
‘To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of Truth face to face one must be able to love the meanest of creation as oneself.’
It is this belief in the essential unity of life that underlies Gandhi's  feeling of affinity with the animal kingdom and his support for cow-worship.
For him the cow epitomises the sub-human world; it is, by its very existence, a plea for justice on behalf of the animal world.
It is ‘a poem of pity’.
A sign of spiritual progress would be the cessation of killing animals for food and the acceptance of a vegetarian diet, and Gandhi quotes Goldsmith in support of his views:
No flocks that range the valley free
To slaughter I condemn,
Taught by the Power that pities me
I learn to pity them.
To be completely consistent perhaps Gandhi would not only have to be opposed to the killing of animals for food, but also to the killing of disease-carrying rats, mosquitoes, and venomous snakes, and those forms of plant life that are essential to a vegetarian diet.
He recognizes this, and indicates the contradiction that must exist between a man's ideals and his practice, or between his beliefs and his actions.
He attempts to resolve the problem by affirming his belief in the ideal on the grounds that man's life is an aspiration or a striving for, perfection, yet at the same time recognizing that in an imperfect world one has to make concessions to, or to cater for, human weakness.
This does not mean that the ideal has been compromised in any way, or that Gandhi's fundamental principle of non-violence has been qualified in order to take account of man's weaknesses and imperfections.
It is possible for a man's commitment to his fundamental principles to remain firm even though he may act in certain circumstances in a way contrary to those principles.
A rejection of an ideal or principle is involved only if, when considering the relation of a man to his acts, his principle or ideal is regarded as absolute in the sense that it constitutes an infallible guide to human conduct, or if it is conceived of as a maxim in the Kantian sense and provides the reason a man might have for thinking it worthwhile for him to act morally.
But moral considerations are involved in situations when rats, fleas and snakes are destroyed, and robbers  and murderers are killed, in order to protect the lives of others.
It might be argued that in such situations it is the only course of action open to a man and that he would be at fault if he acted differently.
This would explain Gandhi's claim that one should not make a fetish of non-violence.
In situations of moral dilemma a man must do what he thinks he has to do and moral decisions are involved in his action.
He knows he is acting contrary to his fundamental principle or ideal, but the standard of the ideal is not lowered or compromised on that account.
What this argument suggests in Gandhi's case is that he does not abandon his commitment to the principle of non-violence or qualify it in any way when he approves the destruction of life.
He endeavours to make this point clear when he says: ‘Though…
I endorsed the destruction of rats and fleas, my own kith and kin, I preached…without adulteration the grand doctrine of the eternal Law of Love of all Life.
Though I may fail to carry it out to the full in this life, my faith in it shall abide.’
He accepts then the necessity to permit the destruction of some forms of life, while at the same time holding on to a firm belief in the essential unity of all life and the principle of non-violence.
He insists that in the last analysis there is a fundamental difference between believing in ahi  sā, even though it is not possible to behave non-violently in all life's circumstances, and believing in hi  sā.
The former promotes love and lessens the amount of destruction in the world; the latter promotes hate and increases destruction.
The sympathetic or empathetic attitude to the natural world that characterizes Gandhi's teaching, and the sense of identity that he has with it, contrasts strongly with the approach that one normally associates with the highly technological society of the Western world.
The desacralization of nature that has taken place in the West may be attributed to the influence of Christianity.
The technological control of nature characteristic of the West has been interpreted as the fulfilment of God's command to Adam to exercise dominion over all the earth and over every living thing.
And the process of secularization, which has as one of its  fruits the growth of technology, has similarly been referred to as the product of Western Christian civilization and the spirit of Christianity ‘incognito’.
Whether these interpretations of the influence of Christianity are correct or not, it is evident that the growth of technology has been most rapid and most prevalent in those countries where Christianity has been the dominant religion.
Tillich refers to Western man's control over nature when he discusses the relation between Christianity and Buddhism.
He maintains that the main principles of these religions are symbolized by the terms Kingdom of God in Christianity and Nirvā  a in Buddhism.
What characterizes the Kingdom of God, he claims, is the notion of ‘participation’, while Nirvā  a is best depicted by the notion of identity’.
That is: ‘One participates, as an individual being, in the Kingdom of God.
One is identical with everything that is in Nirvana’.
The implications of these principles for man's relation to nature are, in Tillich's view, profound.
On the basis of the principle of participation, for example, it is possible for man to justify controlling nature and using it for his own ends.
On the basis of the principle of identity on the other hand, no subjection of nature can take place, since man identifies himself with the processes of nature.
Where Buddhist influence predominates, the principle of identity finds expression.
And, as Tillich points out, the same principle of identity is to be found in Hinduism, which is what one would naturally expect, given that Buddhism had its origin in the soil of Hinduism.
The principle of identity in Hinduism, Tillich maintains, finds expression in the prohibition of the killing of animals, which he relates also to the belief that in order to fulfil his karma a man may find himself reincarnated in animal form.
The implication here is, that a man desists from killing animals out of fear that he may be killing a reincarnated soul, but while it may be possible to draw that conclusion, the principle of identity clearly goes much deeper than that, and in fact it could be said to contradict Tillich's suggestion since that is no more than enlightened self-interest.
Tillich would undoubtedly agree with Gandhi, however, that what the principle of identity  really implies is the essential unity of all that exists.
It is this that prompts a deep feeling of compassion for the sub-human world and for all our fellow men.
Tillich distinguishes between the Buddhist concept of compassion on the one hand, and the Christian concept of love in the sense of agape on the other.
He claims that agape, as understood in the Christian context, accepts the unacceptable and attempts to change or transform both man and society thereby exemplifying the principle of participation.
Compassion, as understood in the Buddhist context, shows no impetus or desire to transform man directly, or to change him indirectly by effecting a change in his social environment.
Tillich concludes from this that even the most profound expression of compassion within Buddhism cannot be compared with agape because it lacks the power to accept the unacceptable and the desire to change man and his society.
‘It differs in that it lacks the double characteristic of agape — the acceptance of the unacceptable, or the movement form the highest to the lowest, and, at the same time, the will to transform individual as well as social structures.’
It is doubtful whether Tillich's analysis of the Buddhist concept of compassion is accurate.
Transformation of individual structures, as he puts it, does take place directly through participation in the communal life of the sangha, and transformation of social structures takes place as a result of the interaction of the life of the sangha with the life of the community surrounding it.
If what Tillich says of the Buddhist concept of compassion were taken to apply also to the Hindu concept of compassion, then his assessment is equally inaccurate in that context.
As Gandhi shows clearly, the purpose of satyāgraha, which is the technique of ahi  sā, which in turn in its positive connotation means the love that endures all things and never fails, is to convert and not to coerce those against which it is directed.
It aims, as we have shown, at winning a man over by the power of love and gentle persuasion and by arousing in him a sense of justice rather than by forcing him to submit out of fear and embarrassment.
Satyāgraha also effects a transformation in social structures as the  examples I have given of its application in South Africa and India clearly show.
Tillich speaks further about the significance of agape when he refers to man's relation to himself.
He maintains that man's sense of alienation from his fellow men is an expression of his alienation from himself.
The feeling of self-contempt that follows from his alienation from himself, together with a sense of meaninglessness and anxiety, indicates the depth of his estrangement from the Ground of Being.
The answer to the problem of anxiety and meaninglessness which is derived from this sense of estrangement, is to be found through love.
When love comes to a man in the form of grace he has the assurance that he is accepted, and is thereby enabled to experience self-integration once more, and the feeling of being reunited with others.
That is, he is no longer alienated from himself and others.
It is the ability of love to transform in this way that, in Tillich's view, distinguishes it from the Buddhist concept of compassion.
I have already suggested that Tillich's assessment of the compassionate Buddha may well be erroneous, and that his assessment is equally inaccurate in the Hindu context.
If we look at Gandhi's teaching in this connection we see that self-alienation for him would involve ignorance (avidyā) of the true nature of the Self (Ātman).
What follows from this is alienation from our fellow men because of our lack of knowledge of the nature of the true Self in others.
Self-alienation and alienation from others also means alienation from Truth or God, or from what Tillich calls the Ground of Being.
The answer to the problem of alienation for Gandhi as for Tillich, is ahi  sā, non-violence and love.
Truth and ahi  sā are two sides of the same coin.
We find Truth through ahi  sā, and we find ahi  sā through Truth.
Ahi  sā, non-violence or love, removes our sense of self-alienation; it binds us closely to our fellow men so that we are no longer alienated from them: and since self-realization is God-realization, we are no longer estranged from Reality, and we are re-united with Truth.
Clearly there are dangers involved in drawing a hard-and-fast line between the two principles of participation and identity.
While  it may be true to say that the one predominates in Christianity and the other in such Eastern religions as Buddhism and Hinduism, it would be a mistake to assume that Christianity is devoid of the principle of identity or that Buddhism and Hinduism are devoid of the principle of participation.
Tillich recognizes the former point, when he refers to the mystical approach to nature, which is to be found in the works of St Francis of Assisi, Protestant mystics and German Romantics, and states that they illustrate an attitude almost indistinguishable from the principle of identity.
He admits also that Buddhism displayed a tendency to participation as it spread out from India into other countries, though he fails to recognize the examples of participation which might be said to derive from the communal life of the sangha and so insists that it is the principle of identity that predominates.
As a further illustration of an attitude almost indistinguishable from the principle of identity in Western thought, we might refer to the mystical approach to nature of the poet Wordsworth, who claims to have felt in nature:
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Or elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is in the light of setting suns.
And the round ocean and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:
A motion and a spirit, that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thoughts
And rolls through all things.
The principle of identity is even more vividly expressed in his poem ‘Nutting’.
Having discovered a shady nook of hazel trees as a boy, he entered it:
And dragged to earth both branch and bough
with crash
And merciless ravage: and the shady nook
Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower,
Deformed and sullied, patiently gave up


Their quiet being: and unless I now
Confound my present feelings with the past,
Ere from the mutilated bower I turned
Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings.
I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
The silent trees, and saw the intruding sky.
Examples of the principle of participation in Hinduism abound in the life, work and teaching of Gandhi.
In fact, what might be said is, that the principles of identity and participation are so closely interrelated and intertwined in his thought that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish between them.
His sense of identity with his fellow men may be interpreted as one of the reasons for his participation in social, political and economic affairs.
On the other hand, it is equally true that it is through participation in the service of others that he comes to realize his true Self and his identity with all that lives.
Identity and participation in his teaching we might say, are like two sides of a coin or a smooth metallic disc; it is difficult to say which is the obverse and which the reverse.
If we were to adopt Gandhi's style of expression we might say: seek identity, and participation says, ‘find it through me’; seek participation, and identity says, ‘find it through me’.
If we were to express the interrelation of identity and participation in classical Hindu terminology we might say that while knowledge, jñāna, leads to action, karma, it is equally true that action leads to knowledge.
Gandhi, as a true karma yogin, would insist that detached, selfless action, which derives from a true knowledge of the Self, is action in the service of humanity, and also that to seek the welfare of all men both springs from, and leads to, the realization of one's identity with all that lives and to the realization of Truth or God.
The interrelation of the principles of identity and participation is very well illustrated in Gandhi's emphasis on sarvodaya, the welfare of all.
He recognizes his kinship and identity with all men and with all forms of animal life.
But this does not mean that he is able to shed his fear of some forms of animal life, or that he would be able to practise ahi  sā if confronted by a snake for example.
He is aware that to live at all requires some measure of hi  sā, but  that, he says, should not prevent a man from trying to practise the ideals of ahi  sā.
That is, one does not abandon one's ideals or principles when in certain situations one has to act contrary to them.
According to Gandhi the unity of life is such that ‘if one man gains spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if one man falls, the whole world falls to that extent.’
This belief in the interrelationship of life in all its forms may find corroboration from St. Paul who speaks of the whole creation groaning in pain and awaiting deliverance from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
Do we have here an expression of the belief that the redemption of nature is integrally bound up with man's redemption?
Is the concept of unity of life in the New Testament such that the salvation of man involves the liberation of nature?
Or are we simply being made aware of the interrelatedness of life and the fact that when one form of life suffers other forms of life suffer in some degree?
As Gandhi says: ‘whether an individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but really the concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole world.’
By the concept of sarvodaya Gandhi really means universal uplift or the welfare of all men and not just the welfare, or greatest happiness, of the greatest number.
I have already noted his rejection of utilitarianism as an interpretation of the aim and purpose of life.
In addition to the objections already raised, such as the promotion of the goal of utilitarianism by questionable means, we can point to the fact that as compared with sarvodaya it shows a lack of humanity.
It would be in order, for example, as Gandhi shows, to sacrifice the happiness of 49 per cent of mankind in order that the good of 51 per cent might be promoted.
In the light of facts like these, if one were to judge the issue on purely practical grounds alone, sarvodaya would appear to be a more dignified and humane doctrine.
If it is argued that sarvodaya is an unattainable ideal, and that in the end one may have to settle for the happiness or good of 51 per cent, it could be stated in reply, that it is infinitely better to strive for sarvodaya and fail to realize it, than to start out with a limited objective and attain it at the expense of an unfortunate  minority.
That is, better an unattainable ideal than a limited attainable goal when it comes to the welfare of our fellow men.
At least it can be said that the former shows a more commendable motivation.
A vigorous critique of utilitarianism has been offered by Bernard Williams who refers to it as ‘distinctive way of looking at human action and morality.’
Utilitarianism, he maintains, is consequentialist and eudaemonistic.
By consequentialist he means that the moral value or justification of any action is to be found in its consequences, and by eudaemonistic he means that actions are justified when, as a consequence of those actions, people get what they want or what they prefer.
So when he uses the term utilitarianism he takes it to mean eudaemonistic consequentialism.
His basic criticism of the system is that it makes little sense on the level of integrity because it makes only superficial sense of human desire and action and, therefore, only poor sense of human happiness.
Another criticism he makes is that it has an uneasy relationship with such values as justice which some people should consider to be important in human life.
Winch's criticism of this way of looking at morality, as we have shown, is that it separates the person who acts from the world in which he acts, and a man has to be shown that it is worthwhile for him to act morally.
The utilitarian, according to Williams, would consider a right action to the that action which, of all available actions, produces the greatest degree of happiness.
Thus a peculiar feature of utilitarianism in general is that it emphasizes the comparability of situations.
Here the consequentialist differs from the non-consequentialist in that some of the latter would stress the importance of people keeping their promises and would consider it better if they did.
That is, they would consider an action to be right for reasons other than consequential.
What makes some people happy for example, is that they are committed to a cause or to a person; their happiness derives from something other than the pursuit of happiness.
Williams argues that the utilitarian, given his empirical approach, should recognize this fact and be prepared to investigate what it is that gives these people happiness.
If as a result of his investigations  he finds that committed people display a greater degree of happiness than others then it would be an important piece of empirical information for him to consider.
He might also inquire how a man can come to regard that which is the main purpose of his life as dispensable just in order to fit into the utilitarian formula.
Is it not an attack upon the integrity of a man to alienate him from those actions which spring from his deep convictions in order that he might fit in with utilitarian calculations?
Williams maintains that utilitarianism is ‘A system of social decision which is indifferent to issues of justice or equity.’
It may be simpler for utilitarianism to neglect or ignore the demands of justice and equity, but that is no argument for maintaining that there should not be justice and equity.
If utilitarianism has no way of making equity matter, it does not follow that equity is unimportant or insignificant.
The utilitarian may argue that everything is imperfect and that half a loaf is better than no bread.
But, according to Williams, this argument gives utilitarian methods greater prestige and a greater role in decision-making than they actually deserve.
This critique of utilitarianism would seem to support Gandhi's contention that in comparison with sarvodaya utilitarianism shows a lack of dignity and humanity.
Gandhi used the term sarvodaya as the title of a Gujarati translation of Ruskin's Unto This Last which greatly influenced him.
He summarized the teaching of that work under three headings:
First.
The good of the individual is contained in the good of all.
Second.
A lawyer's work has the same value as that of a barber in that all men have the same right to cam a living from their labour.
Third.
A life of labour where one works with one's hands is the life worth living.
The first point reflects Gandhi's teaching concerning the unity of all existence.
The second and third points were taken up by him and expressed in different ways in his pronouncements on political and economic issues.
These points will be dealt with at a later stage when we come to look at the social, political and economic implications of Gandhi's teaching.
Here we can examine further some  of the moral implications of belief in the interrelation of life in all its forms.
Gandhi's understanding of Truth and the essential unity of all that exists means that he has not only to realize his highest Self or Ātman but also recognize his oneness with all his fellow men and with all sub-human forms of life.
What can be deduced from this is that religion as he understands it involves belief in an ordered moral government of the whole universe and in the fact that religious and ethical ideals should inform all our actions.
Religion is not an individualistic affair; it is not something that concerns a man in isolation from his fellow men; it is not simply a matter for the individual soul seeking release, or mok  a, from the endless cycle of birth, death and rebirth, or sa  sāra.
Rather it is bound up with all life's activities whether they be social, political or economic, and it cannot be divorced from morality.
As Gandhi says: ‘I am endeavouring to see God through the service of humanity, for I know that God is neither in heaven nor down below, but in every one.’
Here Gandhi is reinterpreting the traditional notion of mok  a or liberation which is the pursuit of individual salvation or mok  a by the practice of austerities (tapas) and the renunciation of all involvement in the affairs of the empirical realm.
As a self-styled vānaprasthin, or forest-dweller, he eschews the full-blown renunciatory way of the sa  nyāsin, or ascetic, and in accordance with his religious and ethical ideals advocates the way of renunciation in action, karma yoga, rather than renunciation of action.
In this respect he was faithful to the specific teaching of the Gītā on the need for detached or selfless action, and he may well be reflecting the stress on dharma, or duty, characteristic of the Hindu tradition and which received particular emphasis in the Buddhist tradition.
For Gandhi, religion is equivalent to helping the helpless, and given the choice between ‘counting beads or turning the wheel’, he would choose the wheel if it meant alleviating poverty and starvation.
His passion to serve the underprivileged is such that he claims to find God in the hearts of the poor.
In a stark and poignant phrase, he refers to God as the belly of the starving man and claims that to give food to such a man is to give a gift to God.
To talk about  God to starving men is simply a waste of time for to them God is bread; he can only appear to them as the bread of life.
‘I may is well place before the dog over there the message of God as before those hungry millions who have no lustre in their eyes and whose only God is their bread.’
Our unity with our fellow men, in  Gandhi's view, presents us with an inescapable moral obligation towards them.
We have no right to possess anything while millions remain unclothed and unfed.
We must adjust our wants, and undergo voluntary privation in order that they may he cared for.
Gandhi regards it as both inhuman and immoral to maintain that the naked, poor, and starving millions are fulfilling their karma, or reaping the consequences of evil deeds sown in previous existences.
Such an interpretation of the law of karma which may have satisfied orthodox Hindus is rejected by Gandhi out of hand, for he finds it inconceivable to divorce morality from religion.
To do nothing on behalf of the socially deprived is to him basically irreligious.
The interrelation of morality and religion in his thought is such that he regards them as convertible terms in the same way as Truth and ahi  sā are convertible terms.
In a sense morality for him is an extension of ahi  sā and ahi  sā is a form of morality.
Likewise religion corresponds to Truth; it is what binds us to the Truth.
Religion cannot be divorced from morality in his view for it is belief in an ordered moral government of the universe and when we lose our basis in morality we cease to be religious.
Morality without religion is unthinkable for religion is to morality as water is to seeds in the soil.
‘A moral life without reference to religion is like a house built on sand.
And religion divorced from morality is like ‘sounding brass'’ good only making a noise and breaking heads.’
But the question that arises is whether it can be said of any morality that it cannot be divorced from religion.
One difference between a moral sacrifice and a religious sacrifice, for example, is that the former is what morality may require on a specific occasion.
Moral sacrifice is an occasion; the moral man may be ready to sacrifice on specific occasions.
But if the essence of the spiritual life is dying to the self then  the religious man must sacrifice.
 Sacrificial actions follow from the religious and ethical ideals and criteria that determine the way he thinks and acts and inform the spirit in which he lives his life.
So we may well ask: can there be morality without religion?
Are there not many moralists who would not wish to be considered religious?
Gandhi's reply to these kind of questions would probably indicate that for him morality has to be related to what he conceives religion to be.
We have seen that for him religion corresponds to his concept of Truth; it is what binds man to Truth.
So wherever Truth finds expression, there we have religion.
When it finds expression in atheism then we have religion there also, for Truth is the atheism of the atheist.
Truth cannot be confined to traditional religions, nor can any particular religion claim to have a monopoly of Truth, for where that kind of particularization of the Ultimate takes place, we are face to face with what Tillich calls demonization.
Can it be, that when Gandhi refers to morality without religion as being similar to a house built on sand he is simply expressing in a different way his belief in the convertibility of these terms rather than suggesting that morality has to be related to a particular religion?
This might well be the case, but it still does not answer the question whether it can be said that there is no morality without religion.
We might pursue the matter further and inquire whether there are not different moralities in the same way as there are different religions grounded in different forms of life.
Is not utilitarianism, for example, a form of morality, and does it not differ from the kind of morality that one might associate with a religious form of life?
The morality of utilitarianism would certainly differ from the morality of sarvodaya, which in Gandhian thought is related to ahi  sā and Truth.
Gandhi would reject the eudaemonistic consequentialism of utilitarianism as limited in its objective and lacking in humanity.
On the face of it, therefore, it would not seem possible to maintain the view that morality without religion is unthinkable, or like a house built on sand.
The same does not apply to the view that religion can not be divorced from a form of morality.
A religious man may not always succeed in living in accordance with his ideal but that does not mean that he has abandoned his ideal.
Religion without morality is inconceivable for Gandhi.
If religion countenances cruelty and untruthfulness it is ‘sounding brass’ and cannot claim to have God on its side.
Should it be unconcerned with the practical affairs of men and take no action to solve men's problems it does not deserve to be called religion.
A true Hindu, according to Gandhi, is one ‘who believes in God, immortality of the soul, transmigration, the law of Karma and Moksha, and who tries to practise Truth and Ahimsa in daily life…’
The main value of Hinduism is its belief that all life is one, and it is not possible to hold fast to this belief without accepting that man is the servant and not the lord of creation, and that all men are brothers.
It is not possible to accept the belief that ‘God pervades everything that is to be found in this universe down to the tiniest atom’, and not at the same time accept the idea of universal brotherhood and the essential unity and equality of all earthly creatures.
Sarvodaya embodies and seeks to implement just this belief.