

STOP THINNING YOUR SHOTS STEVE RICHARDSON IMPROVE YOUR COURSE TACTICS PAUL BROADHURST PITCH IT CLOSE SEVE WHERE I WENT WRONG
Where does Seve go from here?
Pilgrimage to the Home of Golf.
Paul Broadhurst shows you how to knock shots off your score.
Put more power into your game with Bob Torrance.
TALKING GOLF
WITH COLIN CALLANDER
Norman Makes It Hard For Himself
GREG NORMAN brought his much publicised slump to an end when he captured the Canadian Open at Glen Abbey.
But he did little to silence those doubters who believe that the blond Australian's best form is behind him.
Few will doubt that the Great White Shark's win in Canada is good for the game, but the manner in which he won his first tournament in almost 28 months did little to dispel those nagging doubts that his temperament is susceptible to pressure.
Norman must have been desperate to win after such a long absence from the winner's circle, but that doesn't account for his alarming collapse over the closing stretch in Canada.
He was some three shots clear of the field standing on the 14th tee, but then lost this advantage after he recorded a double-bogey and two bogeys in the last six holes.
Indeed, he had to hole from 12 feet on the 72nd to get into a sudden-death play-off with Bruce Lietzke.
If the truth be told, it was Norman's putter which kept him in the hunt down the stretch.
A good deal has been said about his struggles on the greens in the last 28 months, but in Canada the situation was altogether different.
Watching the event on TV it was clear that it wasn't his putter that was the problem.
Instead, it seemed that it was the Australian's almost suicidal desire to attack the course which almost cost him the title.
There is no doubt Norman's aggressive form of golf is one of the reasons why he appeals to galleries so much, but he might have to contain himself a bit more if he hopes to win on a more regular basis in the future.
Said With A Smile
MARK ROE might well have been behind the TV cameras at the GA European Open, but at the Lancome Trophy he was back in his rightful place — on our screens.
For a long time Roe has harboured a desire to do some commentating so when he had the chance at the European he took it with both hands.
Nor surprisingly the popular pro from Sheffield turned out to be a natural in his latest role as a BBC roving reporter, but any thoughts he might have had about changing career were dispelled when, seven days later, he climbed onto the winner's rostrum at the Lancome after a closing round of 65.
It was a win which brought him a prize of £79,000 and a place in the lucrative Johnnie Walker World Championship in Jamaica in December.
But more important than that it was also a triumph which brought to an end his struggle to win a second Tour title.
When Roe won for the first time at the Catalan Open in 1989, it was predicted that he would become a regular winner on Tour.
Unfortunately, it wasn't to be.
Or, at least, until now.
Roe admits that in his quieter moments he sometimes wondered if he would ever win a second tournament and those doubts were intensified earlier this season when he saw both the Jersey Open and the Murphy's English Open wrested from his grasp.
That said, not once during his long wait did he let himself get too downhearted.
He seldom stopped smiling and never lost his innate sense of fun.
Indeed, when he did finally win, it came as no surprise that he should accept the applause with the same self-mocking sense of humour that he showed when times were good.
‘It probably is,’ he responded when asked if the Lancome was his biggest success to date.
‘I've won a couple of Sheffield and District Alliances, but this is a bit bigger than that…‘
We predict that Mark will take nothing like as long to win his third Tour event.
And what's even more sure is that he will do it in some style.
Change The Rules
It is a sad fact that the last two matches between US professionals and their counterparts on this side of the Atlantic have ended in controversial circumstances.
Less than 12 months after Steve Pate was pulled out of the Ryder Cup singles on medical grounds much the same thing happened at the recent PGA Cup match at Kildare.
The match in Ireland ended under something of a cloud when the reigning American Club Professional Champion Larry Gilbert (right) was withdrawn from the singles on medical grounds.
Gilbert, who had lost both of his previous encounters and was also reputed to have damaged a locker room wall after one of those defeats, was said to have woken at 4am on the morning of the singles feeling nauseous.
The American camp withdrew him and under the same rule that is used in Ryder Cup matches his match was declared to be halved.
PROFILE
TREADING WATER
Seve Ballesteros is going through one of the worst slumps of his career.
Mitchell Platts finds out why.
Let's get one thing straight from the start.
Severiano Ballesteros might have endured a long summer of discontent, pointing to both mental and physical problems for his loss of form, but his absence from the leaderboards, conspicuous though it might have been, is consistent with the capricious nature of the sport.
The Spaniard has been down before, but he has never been counted out.
Ballesteros underwent a severe examination two years ago.
He struggled in Europe, he struggled everywhere.
David Leadbetter stated that Ballesteros was brooding, that it had all become quite a grind for him.
Gary Player insisted that Ballesteros was suffering from paralysis by analysis, that he was no longer sure of his fundamentals.
Johnny Miller pointed out that Ballesteros was still a young man, but was older than his age as far as the game is concerned.
Peter Alliss reckoned it was probably the end for Ballesteros if he hadn't come roaring back by 1992.
The Spaniard confounded his critics.
He did come roaring back.
In 1991, he finished number one in the Order of Merit for the sixth time in his career.
He won the Volvo PGA Championship, the Dunhill British Masters and the Toyota World Match Play Championship, the latter for a record-equalling fifth time.
He also won the Chunichi Crowns Open in Japan.
Then    he launched his 1992 campaign by winning the Dubal Desert Classic and the Turespana Open de Baleares.
Ballesteros appeared on the threshold of challenging once again for Major honours.
There seemed to be very little wrong with his competitive edge, or his nerve.
He had, after all, surpassed himself once more in the 1991 Ryder Cup by winning 4½ points out of 5.
Yet he opened his challenge for The Masters with a 75 and closed it with an 81.
He finished out of the top-20 in the US Open after a final round of 79.
He missed the halfway cut in The Open.
Then he withdrew from the US PGA Championship without hitting a shot.
Ballesteros is honest about his current slump.
‘The truth is I knew throughout the summer that my game was not as sharp and I was not enjoying myself on the course as I did in 1991.
Last year was a great year, but I still feel I was very lucky to do what I did.
The most important thing for me in 1991 was to enjoy the game, which I did.
In 1992 that has not been the case, and I can't really tell you why.
The frustration shows as Steve struggles to find his winning form.
‘It might be because I felt tired.
I gained a lot out of 1991, but I gave a lot to it.
It could be a reason because I have at times felt a little down this year.
It is as if my body has not reacted as it is supposed to do, and that my mind is not as strong as it was in 1991.
Why?
I don't know.
I only know I did not have much fun this summer.’
Ballesteros, of course, has had other things on his mind.
His charming wife Carmen gave birth to their second son in September.
Ballesteros has always found it difficult to leave his home in Pedrena.
It became more difficult with the birth of his first son in 1990.
And he admits: ‘It is not normal for the Spanish people to leave the place where you were born for long spells.
The philosophy in Spain is to stay close to the family.
‘The biggest influence on my life, my career, was probably the atmosphere in which I grew up.
The golf course and family home was right there in Pedrena.
My father was caddying.
My uncle, Ramon Sota, was playing professional golf and so were all my brothers.
I was lucky, too, because I was the fourth child of four.
I was spoiled a little and I was happy.
We have always been a happy family.
It was tough, of course, as well , but that also helped me.
‘One thing I still find hard to take in is how hard my mother worked for all of us.
She would go to the supermarket to buy the food, she would cook, she would clean the house and then she would help my father with the cows.
She never seemed to stop working.
There were no holidays.
It teaches you that you must work hard to achieve all that you want from life.’
Ballesteros rarely allows himself time away from the game.
He remains convinced that it is imperative to work hard on his swing.
He believes it is important that he not only satisfies himself, but also others.
‘There are many times when it is tough,’ he says.
‘Times when it is hard to take yourself to the 1st tee.
It is hard, too, when you are at home, to go to the practice range.
There are many  times when I leave the house and go up to the range when I really don't want to.
But as a professional, I feel I have to go because if I stayed indoors I would feel guilty.’
What Seve really finds quite heart-wrenching is leaving home to sit in another plane for two or ten hours.
‘You don't know how much you love your children until you have your own.
It is something very special.
And it is difficult to leave them.
You don't want to miss anything.
It is wonderful how quickly they learn and how smart they are.
Then they cry when you leave for the airport.
It gets harder and harder to go.’
Ballesteros is not the first person to be challenged by the complexities of life.
Yet, as he has been living out of a suitcase now for 20 years, he can be forgiven for feeling battle weary.
His quest for glory has caused him to stretch his energies to the absolute limit.
And he accepts that he set out on the lonely road to stardom too early in life.
‘The biggest mistake I made was to start playing professional golf so early,’ he explains.
‘I turned professional when I was only 16.
It was my decision, mainly because I had nothing else to do.
I thought I was ready to play and I was.
But for me, I think it was a mistake.
In one way it was good to have success so quickly, but in another way it meant I was facing things for which I wasn't really prepared.
And it took a lot for me to face some of those things.
‘I lost my growing-up years.
I haven't lived a normal life.
In one way I regret it, which is a reason why I think I should have started playing professionally later on.
If I could go back I think I would have come out on the Tour three years later.’
Ballesteros first played on the European Tour in 1974.
He has won no fewer than 50 European titles and 17 others around the world.
His appearance in the Toyota World Match Play at Wentworth in October was his 17th in succession and it gave him the chance of winning the title for a record sixth time.
His love affair with the Championship is such that he has not once been beaten in the final.
Yet the capricious nature of golf has seen even the mighty Ballesteros humbled in the Championship.
He lost 8 and 6 to Ronan Rafferty in the first round in 1990, 6 and 5 to Nick Faldo in the semi-final in 1989, 7 and 6 to Sandy Lyle in the semi-final 1988 and 7 and 6 to Rodger Davis in the second round in 1986.
Ballesteros worries about such heavy defeats because he finds it incomprehensible that he has been unable to repel the thrusts of those opponents.
His competitive streak has always come to the fore in head-to-head situations, such as the World Match Play and the Ryder Cup.
Ballesteros enjoys those moments of high drama when his nerve is put to the test and his resilience examined to the very end.
His has digested well his disappointments this summer because he draws confidence from the knowledge that he has enjoyed so many wonderful moments that he is quite capable of flowering again.
‘I have taken things very well,’ he says.
‘The hardest thing for me is knowing I had so many good years, so many great moments, because it means you always think it is going to be like that.
I have to be honest and say that the last few years have not been as good as I would have expected.
I have to educate my mind to accept that.
It is very hard to fight like I have been doing these last few months.
It is incredible that my challenge in tournaments so often during this time had been to make the cut.
‘It is difficult to accept, but that is the challenge.
You have to take things as they come.
When you tee-up, you might be trying to shoot a 67.
Then you make a double-bogey on the 1st, so you set par as a target.
You must set your targets according to the situation.
‘I think I have time enough to win another Major.
In fact I don't worry about time.
The only thing I worry about is losing the touch, losing my enjoyment for the game.
Ray Floyd, Tom Kite and Hale Irwin have shown that you can still win the big titles even when you are over 40.
‘But one thing I don't want to happen as time goes by is to sit down and say that I didn't do as well as I might have done in another tournament because I didn't put in enough effort.
I have always worked hard, I will continue to do so.
If I don't do well, then it will be because on the day I was not capable of doing so.
I will continue to put all I can into this game for the moment.
I am a little lost.
But the mind plays a big part in this game.
I need to be positive.
I have to feel right inside.
I will know when that is the case.’
MITCHELL PLATTS is golf correspondent for The Times .
INSTRUCTION
HALF MEASURES
Paul Broadhurst shows you how to play the 50-yard pitch shoot consistently.
When you are around 50 yards from the green, there is often a dilemma for the golfer in deciding whether to pitch or chip and run.
Even when there are no bunkers between the ball and the green, I often opt for the pitch, therefore eliminating the chance of a bad bounce.
The trouble with playing from this distance, however, is that you do not require a full swing.
Many amateurs scared of overhitting the shot, therefore decelerate their swing and mishit.
One way to cure this is to play the ball further back in the stance to the centre or just right of centre (photo 1).
This ha, es you feel like you are coming down into the ball, which is a more positive feeling.
Far too many amateurs place the ball forward in their stance when pitching, therefore increasing their chance of digging into the ground before the back of the ball.
Keep your stance within the width of your shoulders.
You want to produce a high-flying soft-landing shot, so open your stance slightly and open the clubface (photo 2).
The open clubface compensates for your body aiming slight left of target.
It also keep the club more lofted, therefore producing more backspin for added control.
Even though you are trying to make positive stroke, don't try to hit it hard.
Make sure you swing with an even pace throughout.
Even though the ball is further back in your stance, try not to chop down into the ball.
Still try to feel that you are swinging down and through and your follow-through should travel roughly the same distance as your backswing (photos 3–6).
From around 50 yards out you will not need to produce a full swing.
A half swing with a pitching wedge or a sand wedge should get the ball onto the green (photo 7).
Even though you are not swinging fully, you want the action to feel positive, so eliminate any hand action.
Keep the wrists fairly firm and try to feel that you are swinging from the shoulders down the line to the target (photos 8 & 9).
Try to get the feeling of holding the clubface open through impact (photo 10), but don't imitate what you do with a greenside bunker shot.
The action of the hands is much more subtle than this.
Achieving the correct action will take some practice because the hand action will feel different from other iron shots you play.
However, it will produce results as it stops the club rolling over and generating topspin — something you definitely don't want when you are trying to play a shot which places a premium on accuracy.
PILGRIMAGE TO GOD'S COURSE
The Old Course at St Andrews is the world's most famous public course.
It's the Home of Golf.
It's golf's equivalent of Mecca with an atmosphere all of its own, as Dudley Doust finds out.
Dawn rose out of St Andrews Bay, touching the rooftop of the Royal and Ancient clubhouse and casting a long shadow towards the 18th green and the Valley of Sin.
It was another autumn morning at the Old Course and the caddies, some tidy, some red-eyed and rough-shaven, loitered round their shack.
At the starter's box, beside the 1st tee, ‘casual’ golfers began to gather in hope of a game.
‘If you're here by 6 o'clock, you're sure to get off, said one, from Arizona.
‘But you have got to be alone.
I send my wife out shopping.’
Another, a San Diego lawyer, praised the British bed-and-breakfast.
‘You're offered bacon and fried eggs.
No choice,’ he said.
‘I like that.
We're spoiled in America.’
Others quietly practised on the putting green or, half-asleep, gazed out at the distant sweep of the Est Sands as though the jogging figure of Eric Liddell and his dog might materialise from ‘Chariots of Fire’.
St Andrews golfers divide into three basic categories: townsfolk and local university students who, for £70 annually, take up daily block bookings; R & A members who also enjoy allocated times and, not least, holiday visitors.
These visitors, about 42 per cent from overseas, also divide into three categories: those who book far in advance, whose who gain starting times in the daily ballot and the ‘casuals’ who haphazardly turn up on the off-chance of being asked to make up a foursome.
Such a ‘casual’ on this chill Scottish morning was the Japanese Tetsuichi Fujiwara, aged 19, handicap 9 and a commercial science student at Keio University in Yokohama.
Slim and fit, he wore a grey sweater and cap, each bearing a ‘St Andrews’ emblem.
‘When I left Japan it was very, very hot, maybe 37°C,’ he explained with an engaging grin.
‘But when I got here it was very cold.’
He tugged the cap straight across his brow, proud of the figure he cut.
He spelled out his forename.
‘Just call me Tetsu,’ he said.
Apart from his own studies, Tetsu teaches English and mathematics to children; he had taught eight hours a week over the past year to finance this, his first trip outside his homeland.
‘Golf is a religion to me,’ he said in careful English.
‘Ever since I was a boy I have dreamed of playing at St Andrews in God's country.’
He had made the pilgrimage alone.
‘It was something that I had to experience all by myself.’
‘My Fujiwara,’ broke in the microphone voice.
‘Please come to the starter's box?’
There was a place for Tetsu with a party on the 1st tee: Mike Peasley and his wife Kaori, from Hong Kong, and Mike's father, Fred, from Swansea.
The Peasleys, like Tetsu, were on a pilgrimage to St Andrews, and like most visitors, their first impressions were ambiguous.
‘The Old Course looks even  flatter than it does on TV,’ was Mike's initial response.
‘But there is certainly an air about the place.’
There was indeed, an air about the place: it was moving out of the west and by the late afternoon, gusting in winds up to 40 miles per hour, would turn over benches.
High-handicap Kaori, however, foresaw a weightier problem: her bag.
Caddies at St Andrews are expensive.
Their official fee, £17 a round, is expected to reach £25 or more with tips.
Still, their local knowledge is invaluable: the club selection, for example, and the line one takes off the distance church steeple on holes coming home.
St Andrews' most celebrated caddie.
Tip Anderson of Arnold Palmer fame, once told me he never learnt the precise yardages on the Old Course for such details are useless in a capricious links wind.
He said he could ‘club’ a golfer, hacker or scratch player by the second shot into the 3rd hole.
The estimable Anderson spoke half-truths as his friend and fellow bag-carrier, Billy Gunn, now explained as he sat on a green caddies' bench and waited for the call to duty.
‘You have to know the yardages on all of the courses,’ he said, referring to the New, Jubilee and Eden courses which, together with the Old, are operated and maintained by the St Andrews Links Trust.
‘It's not that you need them.
The golfers, especially Americans,demand them.
They've got no confidence without knowing  the distances to the greens and the pins.’
Left: Billy Gunn is St Andrews' top caddie, logging in over 200 rounds per year.
Right: Hell Bunker is not longer the challenge it once was.
Right Inset: The divots of St Andrews are filled by a team of old age pensioners.
Below: Rabbits pose no problem for Davie Anderson, St Andrews' full-time rabbit exterminator.
Gunn stands out, not only because of the colour of his three pairs of work trousers, burnt-Sienna, but because of his industry.
He's the hardest working of St Andrews' 98 registered caddies, 67 of whom would report for duty that day.
Gunn annually tops the St Andrews work-load list: 240 rounds in 1989, 210 in 1990, 338 in 1991 and, at last count, well over 200 in 1992.
Gunn is something of an oddity — at least to some viewers of the local scene.
He's semi-abstemious.
St Andrews caddies are reputedly such notorious drinkers that the Rules and Advice for Caddies , a five-page document issued to them by the Links Trust, begins with a stark injunction: ‘Caddies must be sober…
’ Apart from that, and a general knowledge of the links and the game, what does make a good St Andrews caddie?
‘Comradeship,’ Gunn shot back straightaway.
‘Visitors are in awe of this place.
They want to be put at ease.
The first thing they ask me on the 1st tee is, ‘Billy, tell me all about your family.'’
He chuckled, rubbing his hands together, anxious to get a bag on his shoulder.
Gunn was in splendid form: it was just past 7 o'clock, he was the 19th caddie to get his name down for the day and, almost certainly, he would work two jobs before nightfall.
In high summer, he can get in three.
On the 1st tee, Kaori Peasley meanwhile was resolved to her fate.
A caddie was out of the question and a golf cart, her usual helpmate, would not be allowed on the coarse until later on.
‘Nothing like Royal Hong Kong or Discovery Bay,’ she said, happy enough.
‘This is the first time I've had to carry my clubs in my life.’
Of their immediate task, all members of the Far Eastern foursome were agreed: the Old Course's opening drive, as if designed to put all golfers at ease, is not demanding.
The landing area, 140 yards across is claimed to be ‘the widest fairway in Christendom’.
Still, teeing-up, giving a practice swish of his driver, Tetsu was nervous.
Naturally gifted as he was, the Japanese boy had never taken a golf lesson.
His instructions had come from a book by Seve Ballesteros called Natural Golf .
St Andrews by then was all-go.
The Golf Information Centre telephonists, recently trained in passable French, had been taking advanced bookings from around the world.
‘The Japanese start phoning about now,’ said Margaret Smith, manager of the offices in the stand of trees beside the Eden course.
‘The Americans come on in the afternoon.’
Would-be pilgrims, locked into specific and busy holiday dates, are  often disappointed in their life-long dreams of a round on the Old Course.
‘It's quite heart-breaking, but all we can say is ‘Come and take your chances’,’ she said.
‘I wish there were five Old Courses at St Andrews.’
On the famed Old Course itself, Greens Superintendent Walter Woods' staff had been in action for an hour.
Two men, guiding power mowers, were cutting the gigantic surface of the joint 5th and 13th green which, at 5,550 square yards, might well be the biggest putting surface in the world.
This double-green is so huge that two men walking seven miles each, up and down, take 1½ hours to mow it.
‘During Nick Faldo's Open in 1990, we mowed it three times a day,’ Woods would tell me later, touring the course in his Land Rover.
‘That's 42 mowing-miles in a day —on one green .’
We moved on as, behind us, Tetsu and partners reached the 5th.
The Japanese boy was playing the long hole with quite masterful wisdom.
‘The initial one is to the left, avoiding the whims and cluster of seven bunkers on the right,’ advised the player's guide he had bought for 25p, ‘after which shots should be aimed directly at the flagstick.’
Tetsu didn't aim directly at the flagstick.
Instead, he aimed a touch left, to accommodate the rising cross-breeze, and his mightily struck fairway wood reached the green.
Minutes later his heart leapt.
Then it fell: his long eagle putt stopped three inches short of the hole.
Tetsu tapped it in for his birdie and now, having three-putted the 3rd green, he was level par.
‘I was very excited,’ he said later.
‘But I knew the Old Course was difficult.
I had watched much on television.’
At Tetsu continued on his outward journey, he hardly noticed the old men toiling along the fairways, stooping and bobbling, rather like Japanese reaping a rice paddy.
These were some of the nine old age pensioners, dressed in building-site hard hats, who roam the Old Course.
They carry plastic bags of peat, seen and sand across their chests and, bending, deposit the mixture into the thousands of divot holes a day.
With a long broom handle, a kitchen fork fixed on its end, they spike away the loose, dry divots.
I spoke with them.
‘There's nae use replacing divots at St Andrews,’ explained one, a retired newsagent.
‘The crows carry them away.’
You could tell a St Andrews' native, he said, because he doesn't bother replacing these thin wafers of turf.
He went on to discuss the finer points of his work: Americans take the deepest divots, he said, the Japanese no divots at all.
‘Maybe this is because the Japanese are so courteous,’ he speculated.
‘Or because they're built so close to the ground.’
Maybe, in fact, it's because they hit so many balls off the hard, unyielding floors of a driving range.
Bucketing on ahead in his Land Rover, White continued his Old Course discourse.
We paused at his favourite green, the 6th/12th, where he bent to stroke the surface: ‘Feel that, pure velvet’.
Then we paced off its longest possible putt on the green: 120 yards.
We drove on and saw from afar the short 11th hole, a stern test with the wind coming up.
Woods pointed to its enormous Strath Bunker.
Ravaged by sea-winds, Strath needed 24 tons of replacement sand in a year.
Woods grinned.
‘I came by here once, with the wind wet and howling, and I found three Japanese huddled under the lip of the bunker.’
Did he save them?
‘No,’ he chuckled.
‘They didn't want saving.’
By the time Tetsu reached the Loop — the stretch of holes between the 7th and the 12th — the wind was up and the scene unsettling.
In the distance, the Grampians rose dark and quiet, while overhead a Tornado jet from RAF Leuchars dragged its hollow roar through the sky.
Standing on the 9th tee, with the chopping Eden estuary at his back, the Japanese felt weird and alien.
‘Everything seemed so bleak,’ he recalled later, ‘…and empty.’
Still, he was cheerful.
He was on his way to an outward 38, two strokes over par and, in the following wind, he dreamed of a good score coming home.
Disaster, alas, struck on the short 11th.
Prudently aiming 45 degrees off target —‘Yes, that's true, 45 degrees’— his tee shot fought the wind and faded, and faded.
It dropped beyond Strath Bunker, once the haven of his storm-tossed countrymen, but speared the accompanying Hill Bunker.
His partners all joined him in sand.
The hole became a jointly waged battle and three times  Fred Peasley's ball was to blow off the green.
‘The wind was so strong.’
Peasley said, ‘you couldn't even spot the ball.’
Woods and I, meanwhile, had reached Long Hole — the 567-yard, bunker-pocked 14th.
We stopped at the Beardies, those innocent-looking, though steep-faced, cluster of pot bunkers.
One Beardie needed raking and Woods raked it.
Moments later he drew up at Hell Bunker, a deep, sprawling dune that once was the most famous bunker in all of St Andrews.
‘At one time, maybe 67 years ago,’ began Woods, his guide-like voice snatched away in the wind, ‘Hell Bunker was allowed to ramble.
No banks, no faces — look at the old photographs — just an unkempt hole in the ground, probably made by sheep.
Over the years, though, it's been made smaller and also shallower.
More sand has been put in to cover the high water table.’
Hell, indeed, was a handsome bunker, Woods agreed.
But in recent years it has lost its fury.
It no longer beckoned an ambitious second shot.
‘It is no longer regarded a hazard by the pros,’ he concluded.
‘The balls fly so far these days that Hell's been taken out of play.
Even bloody amateurs can carry the thing.’
He gazed down at the bunker, head bent and quiet, as though paying his respects.
On we went.
At the edge of the 15th fairway, over the whin bushes and the Eden course, you often find one of the great characters in Woods' staff.
He makes himself known with a tiny, metallic clink-clink-clink from within the bushes.
This is Davy Anderson.
He's scaring rabbits down their holes by tapping his shovel against the metal toe of his shoe.
Anderson is unique to the world of golf.
He's a full-time rabbit-killer.
Anderson is a scholar in his field.
He explained that a couple of centuries ago the course was leased out as a rabbit farm and, well, ever since, the creatures have been hopping wild across the four courses.
‘This clump here has always been one of the worst,’ Anderson said, indicating a spot near where he stood.
‘There must be tons of rabbit bones under those bushes.’
Anderson waded in, parting the whins, and found a hole.
He opened his cyanide powder and with a long spoon, fashioned from a elegant old walking cane, tipped powder down the hole.
With his spade, he covered the hole.
He never killed foxes, he said, for they were his friends: they, too, preyed on the dreaded rabbits.
He never killed hares, either, he said, for they neither scraped nor burrowed into the turf.
Sunset on God's course.
Still, it was only a hare that had hurt him.
Once, years ago, he had come upon a hare struggling in an illegal snare.
As Anderson attempted to free it, the animal lashed out with its powerful hind legs.
Anderson lifted the back of his right hand.
It was cross-hatched with scars.
Has Anderson ever been hit by a golf ball?
No, not in 20 years, he replied.
But only days after he took over the job, he'd got the fright of his life.
‘A flying ball hit my cyanide spoon, full pitch,’ he said, ‘and threw the powder in my face.’
Anderson chuckled goodbye and crashed on through the bushes,clink-clink-clinking in search of another rabbit hole.
‘This,’ Woods was saying several minutes later, ‘I suspect has taken over from Hell as the most famous bunker in the world.’
We were standing beside the Road Bunker on the 17th hole, itself probably the most famous in the world.
‘I once went to Japan to advise on a course,’ he continued, ‘and they wanted this bunker reproduced exactly as it is on the Old Course.’
The Road Bunker's fame burgeoned, no doubt, in 1978 when the luckless Japanese Tsuneyuki (Tommy) Nakajima dropped out of contention in The Open Championship when he took four shots to get out of the bunker.
He ultimately too a 9.
Woods remembers this vividly.
He was elsewhere on the course at the time, but since then he has seen it replayed many times on film.
His custodial view of the bunker brooks no criticism and, in this light, he hold Nakajima in the highest esteem.
He explained, ‘As I watched, I thought, ‘I hope he doesn't blame the bunker’, because when the cameras are on them, nine out of ten pros will blame the bunker when they leave their ball in the sand.
They'll kick the sand.’
Woods wagging his head.
‘Not Nakajima.
He never complained.
He got on with the job.
He was a gentleman.’
It was much later, perhaps an hour, wind belting, when Tetsu came along to the 17th.
His experience there may beg credulity.
But it's true: his fairway shot, as though drawn by a magnet, fell into Road Bunker or, as Tetsu himself called it, ‘Nakajima's Bunker’.
Speaking of it later, he grinned, as though proud of a national disaster foretold.
‘Ah, but there was a difference,’ he said, holding up one finger.
‘I got out in one shot.’
To prove this, or at least to prove he was in the Road Bunker, he has a photograph, obligingly taken by his partners from Hong Kong.
His first round at St Andrews, on which he would score an honourable 83, was nearly over.
All that remained was the 18th — and the stone Swilcan Bridge, perhaps the most photographed landmark in golf.
The said-to-be centuries-old entrance to the town, only 10 strides across, struck Tetsu like no other feature.
‘When I crossed Swilcan Bridge I had a feeling of…,’ he recalled that evening in his lodgings, ‘…how do I say it?’
He fumbled for and finally pounced on the right word, ‘Of torihada in my legs.’
Torihada?
Torihada?
Tetsu tried to explain that this was a sort of tingling in the legs.
He rendered the word in Japanese in my notebook and gazed at it.
I suggested an English equivalent: goose-bumps.
He thought for a moment, puzzled.
Then he grinned.
Goose-bumps.
Yes, maybe that was a good word for St Andrews.
INSTRUCTION
IMPROVE YOUR GOLF WITHOUT CHANGING YOUR SWING
Steve Richardson passes on a few tips on how to lower your scores by improving your on-course tactics.
I'm often amazed when playing in pro-ams at the lack of thought exercised by my amateur playing partners.
They practise their swing, but often they pay little attention to the situation at hand.
Now I don't expect you to play like the pros because we spend many hours working on every aspect of our game.
But the one thing you can do is to think like us.
I think many golfers could improve simply by taking a little more time to survey the situation and then to adjust your game accordingly.
That doesn't necessarily mean you will take more time to get around the golf course.
On many occasions you can be taking stock of the circumstances while walking to your ball, or while one of your playing partners is taking a shot.
That way, you will be ready to play sensible when your time comes.
Here are three examples of how a change of thinking can save you from making high scores.
AIM AWAY FROM THE TROUBLE
This hole (main photo)is a dogleg par-4 with a water hazard on the right (above).
Many players will find themselves in this hazard if they do not think first before playing.
I can easily carry the hazard under normal circumstances, but for most average players the landing area is level with the water hazard.
And that spells trouble.
Most players hit the ball from left to right, which means that this hazard is waiting to catch them out.
A shot aimed down the centre of the fairway will probably drift into the water hazard so the key here is to aim away, down the left-hand side.
That way, the ball will fade back into the middle of the fairway.
The lesson here is simple: don't flirt with trouble Aim away from the hazard and let your natural shape of shot leave you with a shot from the fairway.
TAKE THE DESIGNER ROUTE
This hole (main photo)is a medium length par-3 with bunkers down the right-hand side (above).
This tell us something.
The designer has dictated how we should play this hole.
A shot aimed at the right side of the green has every chance of landing in the bunkers.
The solution is simple: aim left.
There are no bunkers on the left, just a grassy bank.
Most players would prefer a chip shot from grass rather than having to play out of a bunker.
Again the lesson is a simple one: play the hole the way the designer intended it to be played.
A shot which misses the green left still gives your the chance of a chip and putt for par, rather than the extra pressure of having to get up and down from a bunker.
USE THE CONTOURS TO YOUR ADVANTAGE
Many readers might puzzled by the photos (below)because I am aiming so far away from the flag.
A lot of players would simply set-up and hit the ball directly at the flag, and them wonder why they didn't get the ball close.
In this instance I have a better chance of getting the ball close by using the slope to let the ball run down to the flag.
This does take imagination, which all good short game players have.
But it's something you can look at as you are approaching a green.
Take time to review the situation, taking all the factors into consideration.
Again the lesson is plain: don't always chip straight at the pin.
GOLF MONTHLY JUNIOR COMPETITION PART 2
WIN FREE COACHING FROM THE STARS
GOLF MONTHLY AND GLENMUIR have got together to give 12 youngsters the chance to receive free tuition from three of Britain's most famous golf figures.
Our 12 winners will travel to Scotland where they will receive special coaching from European Tour stars Sam Torrance and Gordon Brand Jnr and from Bob Torrance, personal coach to such stars as Ian Woosnam and Tony Johnstone.
The Golf Monthly /Glenmuir Masterclass will be held at one of the leading golf facilities in the West of Scotland on January 15 and 16 1993.
In each class our competition winner will get personal tuition from the stars and will also be able to play a round with them.
Each winner also receives two nights' full-board accommodation and travelling expenses from all areas of the British Isles.
This superb competition is open to all male and female junior readers aged between 14 and 18 on January 15 1993.
Unfortunately we cannot accept entries from readers who aren't in this age group.
HOW TO ENTER
To win a place at the Glenmuir Masterclass simply identify the mystery golfers who appear in the Glenmuir Masterclass competitions.
There are three golfers to identify.
The main photo is of our Mystery Golfer No. 2, while the inset is Mystery Golfer No. 1 who appeared in the October issue.
The third Mystery Golfer will be in next month's issue.
Then tell us, in no more than 20 words, why you want to attend the class.
Don't send us your solutions until you have answered all three parts of the competition.
The tiebreaker will be in Part 3, our December 1992 issue.
THE NUMBERS GAME
Making the transition from amateur to professional is an uphill struggle and it's getting tougher every year, reports Steve Muncey.
According the Benjamin Disraeli there are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies and statistics.
But that's cold comfort to the players who for the past two months or so have been attempting to qualify for the PGA European Tour.
For them statistics contain a harrowing message.
I've enjoyed my first year as a pro despite everything.
I needed the kick up the backside.
ANDREW COLTART
If they had wanted to fly supersonic jets for a living, they could have applied for the RAF's pilot training scheme — you have a one in six chance of passing that.
If they had wanted to complete the Royal Marines course that proved too tough for Prince Edward, their chance would have been slightly better — one in two.
But apply to the European Tour for a  spot in its qualifying scheme and your chances of gaining a Player's card at the end of it are a measly one in 20.
The reality is that there are few harsher selection processes than the PGA European Tour's and the reason is, of course, the high demand for a limited number of places.
Moreover, statistics show that competition for places on the European Tour is increasing every year.
In 1981, 323 players attempted to qualify for 65 Tour Cards.
Last year, 843 players vied for just 40 cards with another 10 players earning their playing cards by finishing in the top-10 of the Challenge Tour's Order of Merit.
With golf still increasing in popularity, this upward trend shows no sign of abating.
And it doesn't become any easier once a player obtains his Card.
Greater competition inevitably means higher standards.
Last year about two-thirds of the newcomers finished outside the tip 120 in the Volvo Order of Merit, therefore failing to retain their playing rights.
You have to think more as a pro.
I'm two shots better per round now than I was 12 months ago.
JIM PAYNE
I now know how vital putting is.
You must be prepared to stand on the practice green for ages.
RICKY WILLISON
So what does it take to first qualify and then make the grade as a PGA European Tour player?
According to former Great Britain and Ireland Walker Cup player Paul McGinley, who obtained his European Tour Card last year, it doesn't just come down to how much natural ability a player has.
‘I read that when Tom Watson was asked what made him such a successful player, he replied: ‘Desire, dedication, determination and a little bit of talent.’
I go along with that,’ he says.
European Tour rookie Jim Payne, winner of the Silver Medallion as top amateur in the 1991 Open, was a Walker Cup colleague of McGinley's.
He has secured enough prize-money to retain his Card by improving his course strategy.
‘You have to learn to think your way around a golf course much more as a pro,’ he says.
‘I've learnt to do that much better than I did as an amateur.
I reckon I'm two shots better per round now than I was 12 months ago, purely as a result of playing in Tour events.’
Ricky Willison is another ex-Walker Cup player playing the Tour for the first time this year.
He failed to obtain a Card at Montpelier last year finishing 66th, but his outstanding amateur record has earned him a dozen or so sponsor's invites.
From those few chances he has, like Payne, earned enough prize money — around £40,000 — to retain his Card for next year.
He claims keeping an eye on statistics, no less, helped him realise what was required of him.
‘I now know how vital putting is on Tour, the standard is so good,’ he says.
You have to be prepared to stand on the putting green for ages, which I don't like doing, but I'm having to do it because on Tour all the best players average less than 30 putts per round.’
Jim Payne has also been surprised by the standard of putting.
‘Where the greens have been good, no matter how tough the layout has been, the scores have generally been very low.’
Indeed, statistics reveal just how remarkably consistent European Tour players are in all areas of the game.
David Gilford, for instance, hits the fairway with his tee shot at least 80% of the time, Tony Johnstone gets up and down from greenside bunkers around 90% of the time and, just as remarkable, Colin Montgomerie hits 77% of greens in regulation.
The gulf is in standards between the amateur game and the Tour can be a shock for a new pro, says Willison.
‘The amateur game was dominated by a handful of players; they didn't win everything but they won a large number of tournaments,’ he adds.
‘On the Tour there are far more potential winners.
At first I was very surprised by the average standard of play; it's fantastically high when you consider cuts regularly falling at 2 or 3-under-par.’
Jim Payne was also struck by the strength in depth of the European Tour and first, not during a Tour event but when playing a private round of golf with former Ryder Cup player Mark James.
‘I was very impressed with the way he played, but then I realised how daunting it was that there were 20 or 30 guys on the Tour playing better than him,’ he says.
The initial transition from amateur to professional golf so shocked second-year professional Darren Clarke, who won the 1990 Irish Amateur before turning pro, that he completely revamped his swing as well as changing his attitude to the game.
‘The difference is vast,’ he says.
‘So much more time is spent practising, particularly the short game, which the amateurs seem to overlook…
I couldn't believe how good the pros were from 100 yards.
I had to change my methods.
Bob Torrance reshaped my swing and I worked 10 times harder than ever — all the top guys work harder than anyone else.
You can't rest on your laurels.
Unless you practise, there in only one way to go — down.’
But it is still important for amateurs to prove themselves before turning pro, claims former Irish Amateur Champion McGinley.
‘You should have a good amateur record before turning pro.
It's very important to prove yourself at the top level because the gap between top amateurs and pros is not as wide as it was a couple of years ago,’ he says.
Former Walker Cup player Andrew Coltart and former Scottish Amateur Champion Craig Everett have both proved themselves as amateurs.
They also both attempted to obtain Tour Cards last year and failed, but neither have relaxed despite being prevented from returning to amateur competition during the past year.
Both will be attempting to reach Montpellier this year and both have been trying to experience as much professional golf as they can during the past year.
Despite his amateur pedigree Coltart didn't make it through pre-qualifying to the Qualifying School in Montpelier last year.
Due to a recent rule change, players who fail at the pre-qualifying stage can now return to amateur competition.
Last year, however, once your application had been received by the Tour, you were considered a professional.
Coltart has spent the last year productively, though, playing on the Swedish Golf Tour.
He played seven events and earned £8,600, in prize-money, at least providing him with enough money to live on.
‘I've enjoyed my first year as a pro despite everything,’ he says.
‘Perhaps I need the kick up the backside.’
Everett made it through to the final Qualifying School last year where six rounds are played in successive days.
But despite leading after the first round with a 71 he failed to make the four-round cut.
This year he has endeavoured to compete in as many Challenge Tour events as he can.
At the time of writing he had competed in four tournaments that had yielded just £1,200.
Luckily, he's not playing for profit.
‘All my prize-money has gone towards my next tournament; I'm playing and practising as much as I can.
I feel like I'm learning all the time (playing in Challenge Tour events).
It's much tougher than amateur golf and even if you shoot a good round, you could be lying in only 10th or 12th place.’
Coltart, despite having a more fruitful year, did not play just for the money either.
‘I'm happy with my year.
I won enough money in Sweden to at least get a category for the Challenge Tour next year and the experience will help me in qualifying for the European Tour.
‘However, there are a lot of good players from around Europe playing on the Swedish Tour and it made me realise what I have to do to make it as a pro.
Amateurs are allowed to compete in these events, too, and while I was trying hard to push for more birdies, the amateurs would be content with 2 or 3-under-par.
Both players will this year be sampling the European Tour's qualifying procedure for the second time and Everett feels he will have a distinct advantage this time around.
‘I'll definitely be better prepared this time,’ he says.
‘After leading last year I then relaxed, partly because I didn't know what to expect, and ended up missing the four-round cut by one shot.’
Coltart is confident his performance this year will be markedly better, too.
‘If there is one thing that Sweden taught me, it was to hang in there and not let my head go down, even if I don't play particularly well.
That'll be invaluable.’
Coltart and Everett have been learning the hard way that it hardly matters if you can sometimes drive the ball 50 yards father than anyone else if the statistics show that some of your opponents single-putt an average of 24 greens per tournament.
They have been learning the in professional golf every shot counts and that in order to win, brilliance has not only to be attained, it has to be sustained.
They have been learning that professional golf is primarily a numbers game.
You should have a good amateur record before turning pro.
It's important to prove yourself.
PAUL McGINLEY
INSTRUCTION PART 5
CURE TOPPED AND THINNED SPOTS
Golf's Deadly Sins
Thou shall not slice
Thou shall not hook
Thou shall not shank
Thou shall not 3 putt
Thou shall not thin or top
Thou shall not hit fat
Thou shall not sky
Thou shall not push or pull
This month in our ‘Deadly Sins’ series we examine why some golfers hit topped and thinned shots.
The beginner, or less experienced golfer, tops with embarrassing consequences, often from the 1st tee, and especially if a crowd has gathered to watch.
The experienced player doesn't often hit a ‘cold’ top, but does thin the occasional approach shot.
Thinned and topped shots are card wreckers.
If you hit these shots, read on.
We will explain why you mishit and help you to rid your game of these destructive shots.
Usually the classic top is hit with a wooden blub, in most cases a driver from the tee.
The golfer thumps the ball with the sole of the wood, resulting in a shot which dribbles about the length of the average back garden.
Thin thinned shot is not so disastrous.
The ball runs a long way so you will probably get the distance you require.
However, a thinned shot flies very low and with a lot of run so the chances are it will run straight through the green.
It is an uncontrolled shot and one which will definitely not enhance your reputation in the clubhouse!
COMMON TIPS AND THINS
Head up — that's why you top
Golfers often think they top because they lift their heads.
That is true, but in this picture the golfer hasn't lifted his head and is going to top by letting the right side straighten on the downswing or by getting too far ahead of the shot at impact.
The normal angle of attack for a driver is level with the ball at impact below , but a topped shot is a steep swing down on top of the ball (bottom).
Thinned irons Check your posture at address if you thin your irons.
There is a good chance that you stand too upright or your legs become rigid towards impact (main photo)causing the blade of the iron to hit the top half of the ball (lower illustration).
Between clubs Here is another telltale sign of the golfer who regularly thins shots.
Finding yourself between clubs, you try to force a wedge instead of gripping down on a 9-iron.
Anxious to hit for distance, you make a bad weight transfer (main photo).
The blade of the club hits the top half of the ball, sending it low and running through the green (lower line below).
Thin or topped chip A lot of golfers will thin or top when they have to play a delicate shot over a hazard.
Lack of confidence translates into a bad shot.
The golfer is as anxious to see the result that the head rises before impact, causing a lifting action of the whole body.
The result is that the club only hits the top half of the ball sending it through the green illustration below).
WHY YOU TOP
Here we show you how to consistently hit the ball with the sweetspot.
The golfer who tops the ball is often beaten before the driver is taken from the bag.
As the inset pictures show, fear of hitting a bad shot can destroy any natural rhythm and result in a hurried thrash.
Address Start to cure your top with a good reliable address position.
Decent foundations are essential.
Visualise your tee shot splitting the fairway and rolling into the perfect position.
The shoulders, hips and toes should be aligned parallel to the ball-to-target line.
Your weight is evenly spread when you address the ball.
However, the body should be relaxed and the knees nicely flexed.
The golfer must be in a position to swing the club back.
There is not point in adopting a text book position and then standing there until you can't swing the club back without making a jerky takeaway.
Top of backswing Over-swinging is not necessarily the reason you top, but it won't help either.
The backswing which goes beyond the horizontal might work for John Daly, but most golfers are unable to transfer their body weight correctly from such an extreme position.
This golfer has allowed his weight to remain on the left side and, worse still, has allowed his right leg to straighten.
Downswing This is where your body is at impact of you top the ball.
This is a truly awful position.
Look how far the head has moved past the ball.
The left knee has locked causing a lifting action.
The weight is on the left side.
From this position the clubhead is going to smother the ball, knocking it into the turf (that's why you see that little dent in the teeing ground).
Throughswing Recognise this position?
It's a weak finish.
By now the head has come up to witness the miserable result.
The throughswing position can give you useful clues about what went wrong in the first place.
Top of backswing From a good address position your should aim to make a controlled shoulder turn.
Note how the knees are still flexed and the bulk of the body weight has moved to the right.
If you can establish this backswing position, you have an excellent chance of making a good downswing.
Impact The power has now been turned on which means the clubhead is going to smash through the ball.
You should feel in control through impact and beyond.
Your weight should transfer from the right to the left side, resulting ideally in a controlled repeatable action.
Throughswing By now the ball is flying down the fairway must as you imagined it would.
Try to achieve a well balanced follow-through position as it's a good indication that you are in control of your swing.
Just holding an ideal follow-through position for five seconds is a simple but effective golf exercise.
WHY YOU THIN
SEE-SAW DIAGNOSIS The see-saw is a good way of showing how weight transfer works.
The photos to the right illustrate a good weight transfer, while below we point out two indications of bad weight transference which will result in thinned shots.
THE CORRECT SWING Address Copy this 7-iron sequence for crisp strikes.
Adopt a comfortable address position, making sure you spread your weight evenly.
Backswing Make a controlled backswing.
Note how the right leg is still flexed, but the see-saw hasn't hit the ground, although the bulk of the body weight has transferred to the right side.
Impact Approaching impact, the body weight is surging through to the left side but the see-saw hasn't hit the ground.
This is a key position to learn to cure thinned shots.
Follow-through Only now does your weight transfer completely to the left side.
You should still be in control of the swing after the ball has left the clubface.
POOR WEIGHT TRANSFER
Address No problems here.
The weight is nicely balanced.
Backswing Avoid this position.
Look how straight the right leg has become.
The body weight has moved too much to the right side.
Impact Unable to transfer your body weight back to the left side, you hit the shot on the upswing, resulting in a low thinned shot.
Follow-through The weight is still on the right side in spite of the swing being completed.
This is a real telltale position and one you want to avoid.
REVERSE PIVOT
Address Again the golfer looks relaxed, although tension is creeping in.
Backswing This is what happens if you leave your weight on the left side.
Some golfers are afraid to transfer the weight in case they cannot get back to the ball at impact.
Impact You thin from this position because you are trying to transfer all your weight back to the right side at impact.
Follow-through This follow-through position is a sorry sight.
There is no power or control over the shot because the golfer has hit flat-footed with his body weight in the wrong place.
DOS AND DON'TS
Do work on a good address position.
Place the centre of the clubface behind the ball.
The toes, hips and shoulders should be parallel to the ball-to-target line.
Do maintain the knee flex and you should find a good top of the backswing position.
This will allow you to attack the shot with a controlled swing.
Don't stand too upright at address and certainly avoid this position.
Don't allow your right leg to straighten on the downswing.
You must maintain some knee flex throughout the swing.
Don't get too anxious to hit the ball on the downswing; give yourself time.
Keep your head behind the ball and deliver the power in a controlled dose.
PRACTICE TIP:
If you are still suffering from the thins and tops, try the following exercise: Using a-7 iron, hit 30 balls with your heels 8″ apart.
Just make three-quarter swings and see how your strikes improve.
When you feel you are hitting the ball solidly, widen your stance and make full swings.
REPORT
BACK FROM THE BRINK
Just over a year ago Brian Waites almost died in a horrific car crash.
But now he's back doing what he does best.
Jane Carter reports.
On August the 12th 1991 it was feared that Brian Waites might not live, let alone play golf ever again.
A car accident had left one of Britain's top club professionals with two broken legs, two broken arms, some fractured ribs, cuts and bruises.
Today the former Ryder Cup player has staged a most remarkable recovery — one that has been likened to Ben Hogan's and has astonished friends and colleagues on the club circuit and Senior Tour.
It was his desire to play the Senior Tour and his love of golf which has given the Notts professional the inspiration to overcome his terrible injuries and pick up where he left off a little more than a year ago.
Brian was on his way to play in a company golf day at Fulford, York.
It was 6.30 am when he set off and he had only travelled five minutes from his home when the accident happened.
For no apparent reason he had collided with a car coming in the opposite direction, killing the other driver instantly.
Brian can remember nothing of the accident — to this day it a mystery why it ever happened.
He woke up five days later in Mansfield General Hospital.
At that point people were not giving much for his chances, but luckily he had no internal injuries.
Stories abounded that he would not live, then that he would not walk and finally that he would never play golf again.
This would have been a tragedy to many club professionals but to Waites, who had lived and breathed the game ever since he was a youngster, it was quite unthinkable.
‘I never, ever thought I would not play again.
My injuries were my first concern but, as the full extent of them became clear, golf came back into my mind,’ said the 52-year-old professional.
He was in hospital for a total of three months.
He is the first to admit that he was not the best of patients.
His sometimes dour attitude on the golf course, which would leave the pro-am partners quivering in their shoes, was often due to his very intense concentration, a trademark of his game.
He switched this ability to concentrate to his own recovery and eventually began to make progress.
He has lost count of the number of operations he had, probably around a dozen, but thankfully his spine was virtually undamaged.
His right and left wrist were the worst affected and his body rejected the metal plates and wires inserted into them.
He came out of hospital just before Christmas and then began weeks of physiotherapy to get back to his current level of fitness.
‘It was hard work but they did a fantastic job on me.
I knew it was so necessary and just applied myself to doing everything they told me.’
By January Waites was practising his putting, in April he walked his first 18 holes over his own club at Hollinwell and in May he played his first round, shooting a 78.
He had an invitation to the Volvo PGA Championship at Wentworth, but he pulled out because he felt he was still not up to it.
‘I always said that if I could not break 80 then I would not play.
There would have been no pleasure or satisfaction in shooting in the 80s.’
He quickly began to play the Midland circuit again.
On July 14, less than a year since his accident, he played in a one-day pro-am and won with a 68.
It was a remarkable achievement by any standards, but it proved that Waites was well and truly back on the scene and still a competitor to be feared.
Before the accident he was enjoying a lucrative career on the Senior Tour.
He had already won the Forte PGA Seniors'  two years in a row and was aiming to qualify for the US Senior Tour last year.
‘Basically I have just put everything on hold for a year.
It is just like losing 12 months of your life.
I am considering all the things now that I was then and may try to qualify for the US Senior Tour in November.
It all depends on my fitness.’
It would have been storybook stuff had he returned to win the British Seniors' Open at Lytham or defend his Forte PGA Seniors' Open title at Royal Dublin for the third successive year.
Nevertheless, it was clear that he was still not fully back to his old self because the tough links courses took their toll as the round wore on.
But they were still two remarkable performances, particularly his top-20 finish at the Forte Seniors' Championship which included a last round 73 against a very tough par of 71.
The only sign of his accident is that he walks with a slight limp.
But he shows no bitterness that his life was placed on hold for 12 months while he made a full recovery.
As he points out, the other man was killed and he knows he is lucky to be alive.
‘If anything, I am probably a better player.
I have had to relearn the game from square one and it has increased my knowledge and understanding.
My approach and preparation are slower and I am also a different person mentally.
You can't almost die and remain the same person you were before.
I used to get upset and annoyed about things but now I just sit back.’
His aim is to be 95 per cent of the player he was before the accident.
He reckoned he was back to 75 per cent fitness at the Forte PGA Seniors' in August and allowed for that in his game.
‘My swing has not really had to alter, but I am probably hitting my drives 20 yards shorter and I'm needing two or three irons longer than I needed before the accident.’
Senior golf is about adapting your game to suit advancing years.
You body won't turn as much as it did before, you get tired more quickly, you're less able to concentrate for long periods and have to allow for more errors.
Waites has had to contend with all these signs in one year with no chance to adapt slowly to their effects.
He will tell you he has been left a better player and a better person.
Those who know him have no doubt that the Senior Tour is still to see the best of him.
MARK ROE ON TOUR
THE LONG WAIT IS OVER
This has been quite an incredible month and not just for me.
It all stated when Jamie Spence's regular Tour caddie decided that the time had come to marry his sweetheart.
The date for the joyous occasion was set for the Sunday of the Canon European Masters and so Spence had to find a replacement to carry his bag at Crans-sur-Sierre.
As Jamie was 10 shots behind going into the final round at Crans, his regular caddie, Mark Steers, was quite confident that he had chosen a good week to take off.
But that was before, our of the blue, he received a call to tell him that Jamie had scored a final round of 60 and then had beaten Anders Forsbrand n a play-off to record the first Tour victory of his career.
Mark is said to have dropped his drink when he heard the news.
His friends tried to console hi, but he couldn't help thinking about the £9,300 percentage that would have been his had he been carrying the bag on the day.
Never mind, Mark had still won the biggest prize of all.
Jamie's good fortune ran out seven days later in the final round of the GA European Open.
Once more he was in a good position when one of his tee shots hit an aluminium ladder which a spectator was carrying and ricocheted 40 yards into the trees.
Jamie ran up a quadruple-bogey 8 of which cost him thousands of pounds.
The spectator wandered off grumbling that Jamie had dented his ladder.
Mark Roe's Sunningdale high point: the chance to commentate for the BBC.
For me the high point of the week at Sunningdale was my first chance to commentate for the BBC.
I was armed with a microphone and sent onto the course after I had completed my round.
‘How's the ball lying, Roey’ was the cry and, believe me, Mike Hughesdon and Clive Clark's job is a lot harder than it might appear to be.
Alistair Scott and John Shrewsbury were kind enough to give me the opportunity to work with the BBC and I hope to have the privilege again.
When I arrived at the GA  European Open, I looked at the list of entrants for the Lancome Trophy to find that I was right at the bottom of the list of qualifiers with one week to go before the final selection.
I didn't play all that well at Sunningdale, but I did sneak into the Lancome, albeit in one of the last four places.
Now, believe me, I don't like having golf lessons.
In fact, there are very few people I would listen to simply because anything technical about the golf swing baffles me.
Enter Simon Holmes, golf guru to the ‘stars’.
I had a lesson with him and he told me that if I squeezed my knees together I would slow down my bottom half and be able to release the club as hard as I wanted to.
The rest is history.
Rounds of 67, 69, 66 and 65 made me the winner of the Lancome Trophy and a very happy man.
It took Mark Roe some three years to win his second Tour event, but when he triumphed in the Lancome, he was obviously overjoyed.
I had beaten so many of my idols that I hope it doesn't sound too arrogant to say that I was proud of my performance.
I was also pleased for the many, many people who had faith in me, even when, I guess, I had doubted myself.
This win was for them.
My wife, Jane, and close friends were all at Manchester Airport to meet me on my return from France and waiting at home were my mother, more friends, half of Sheffield United FC and Willie Thorne, whose friendship has given me so much confidence.
As you can imagine there were a lot of champagne bottles opened that night, but perhaps the most pleasurable glass of all came the next morning from the bottle in Peter Wycherley's office at the headquarters of Dunlop Slazenger who are my main sponsors.
Peter had set aside this one bottle when I won the Catalan Open in 1989 and said that he would open it when I won my next Tour event.
Every time I visited him he made me polish the dust off the bottle, so it came as a huge relief when we were finally able to open it.
TOUR TIP
THE TOUGHEST SHOT IN GOLF
Pros fear the long bunker shot as much as amateurs do.
It calls for a great deal of skill and judgment and is a shot that needs to be practised regularly in order to play it well.
I face a shot here of about 60 yards (photo 1).
Here's how I play this shot.
Like a fairway pitch, I set up with the ball forward in my stance with the clubface square to the target (photo 2).
Then I take a fairly full swing (photo 3), but making sure that my feet are securely planted in the sand (photo 4).
The key here is to take as little sand as possible, just clipping the ball off the top of the sand, contacting the ball first then the sand.
I am using a pitching wedge in these photos and I suggest you do, too.
THE PROS' PRO
PUTTING IN THE HOURS
Most Tour pros work hard on their games.
But none works harder than Vijay Singh as Norman Dabell found out.
Vijay Singh is one of the best ball strikers on the PGA European Tour.
The reason?
No-one spends more time on the practice ground than Vijay.
MARK DAVIS
Bernhard Langer — is the professionals' professional.
He gives 100 per cent.
He doesn't let anything happen by chance, and nothing is wasted during preparation, checking the course, the driving range, chipping and putting and checking equipment.
He is so particular about everything, and for that he deservedly gets terrific results.
JUAN QUIROS
Vijay Singh is number one and Jose Manuel Carriles number two.
Everybody knows that Vijay is on the range longer than anyone else, but Carriles is the Spanish Vijay Singh!
He spends all day on the practice ground sometimes and this paid off for him at the German Open.
JUSTIN HOBDAY
I'd say Vijay Singh as he's out there working at sunrise and still there at sunset.
He hits balls every day (no matter how he's playing) for hours and hours.
It's unbelievable.
It works for him and it's obviously brought him dividends because he's a really good player.
A lot of people can't practise for eight hours; they get bored.
Jack Nicklaus hits 10 shots in a row exactly like he wants to, and then packs it in.
For myself, it's the quality of practice and not the quantity.
DANIEL SILVA
I don't think there's much doubt that the guy who hits the most balls on the range is Vijay Singh .
I thing everybody on the Tour works really hard, but Vijay is on the range most often.
A lot of other guys work just as hard on the short game, but Vijay is the number one for drivers and long irons.
ANDERS SORENSEN
Vijay Singh .
— there's no doubt about it.
He spends most hours on the practice ground.
You don't know what goes on off the course with the other guys; their mental work and physical training.
They could be working just as hard, but Vijay's there for everyone to see, on the range at every tournament for hours.
ANDREW SHERBORNE
Vijay Singh because he seems to spend every spare minutes he's got either hitting balls on the range or on the practice putting green.
I'm sure his practice is constructive; you can tell that by his results, but everybody's different.
I need a lot of practice, too, but if I'm in two minds on the range, I tone down the practice, get through the week and go home for a lesson.
They I've got something constructive to work on.
PETER O'MALLEY
Peter Fowler works tremendously hard on everything, but Vijay Singh is the hardest worker on his swing overall.
Peter's got one of the best short games around and that's come through hours of practice.
But, in general terms, I would have to say Vijay.
He's obviously doing it to keep a rhythm going and it certainly seems to work.
Personally, I just get the feel going and I'm out of here!
It's whatever suits your game best.
STEVE BOWMAN
Nick Faldo , I would guess.
He's the hardest worker on all aspects of the game.
He's a technician and a great worker on the physical and mental sides.
And he's always out working on the range and the practice green.
It doesn't work for me.
For me it's just feel and the longer I stay out on the range, the more damage I do!
BRETT OGLE
Peter Fowler is the first name that springs to mind as the hardest worker on the Tour, purely because we don't see Nick Faldo too often!
Where we practise in England — I won't reveal where — Pete's always there when I turn up.
He's always one of the last few on the range and he works on everything.
I work as hard as I need to and sometimes I think I overwork myself, especially on the putting.
It can make you feel stale.
ALBERTO BINAGHI
I go for Vijay Singh , at least for his first two years on Tour.
I think it's because he's so strong.
He can play 18 holes, then put in several hours' practice afterwards and still be in good shape.
Now that he is playing well, I think he has relaxed his schedule a little.
As a team, the Swedes are the hardest workers — technically, physically and mentally.
PETER McEVOY
THE AMATEUR SCENE
STEM THE TIDE
A very sensible bit of collusion between the R & A and the PGA European Tour has allowed amateurs to compete in the Pre-Qualifying School without losing their amateur status.
This means that not only can aspiring professionals come back to play in the Home Internationals afterwards, even if they have been successful, but also that they are in a position to change their minds if successful.
In one fell swoop the authorities have made a large step towards perpetuating the quality, image and prestige of the Home Internationals by allowing the players to be available.
They have also given the lesser players their chance to see if pro golf is for them.
On the first point, I think it is a wonderful move and a great help to the amateur game.
As English Captain I am obviously delighted that I will have access one more time to the cream of the young talent who will turn pro in 1992 and in the future.
On the second point, that of allowing youngsters a chance to ‘have a look’ at the pro game, I suspect it will have little effect.
The pendulum of interest has swung so far in favour of the pro game that most young players of ability are determined to turn pro, irrespective of whether they can realistically achieve high enough playing standards.
There are many factors contributing to this flow of interest and lack of realism.
The media gives most of its attention to the pros which is fair enough.
Over the years their percentage of television time has had a direct correlation to the increase in prize-money.
This has bred a thinner, less sophisticated coverage of the game, exposed to the manipulation of agents, publicity officers and gimmicks.
Because of this, Like EuroDisney or McDonald's, it is attractive to youngsters.
It is natural that they aspire to emulate their heroes when they are presented in this way.
I believe the balance will one day be redressed.
The bubble of ever-increasing prize-money for pros must surely burst or at least deflate a little.
Just as surely the sponsors will only want to pay the best and the number of highly paid players may fall.
A relatively small number of players will be highly paid.
Currently, there are struggling efforts to house the second and third division pros.
Mini Tours have come and gone and low-key Satellite and Regional Tours are there for the young players who aspire to get on the main Tour.
I see these Tours continuing to struggle as sponsors' money is attracted towards the best.
The same situation exists in soccer where some 90-odd league teams are far too many.
There will be a need for rationalisation.
Will these stark economic realities, combined with the fact that players can now dabble in the pro game without commitment, make any difference to the flow into the paid ranks?
I doubt it, frankly.
Maybe, in time, realism may prevail, but I see young players with stars in their eyes, and realism has never been a match for that in any walk of life.
Perhaps it should not be.
These factors have stacked up against the amateur game: a preponderance of Tours to house players; a huge glamour industry attached to the pro game that seduces the players; parents wanting to push their sons into a life of perceived prestige and an automatic aspiration to be a pro among most players of ability.
It will certainly be interesting to see how many youngsters do take advantage of the new concessions.
I suspect it will be many.
Stephen Dundas recently became the first Scottish winner of The Amateur Championship for 36 years.
He will follow the route taken by Gary Wolstenholme and play in The Masters, The Open and other major world events.
If he approaches the fun level achieved by Gary, they he will have had a great year.
At only 18, Dundas will be seeing things through young and excited eyes and I wish him the best.
Scotland seems to be producing quite an interesting crop of new players with Bernard Gallacher's nephew, Stephen, the new Scottish Amateur Champion at 17.
It all bodes well for the future.
Wales and Ireland also have their share of young talent and I would highlight Raymond Burns of Ireland as being particularly exciting.
England has an excellent crop of young players, but my role as Captain and Selector precludes me from naming them in these pages.
We need these players to keep the flow of great players into the pro ranks.
But we also need them to keep the general standards up.
I hope some of the young players who do not reach the very top still see the amateur game as a satisfying golf career in itself, in conjunction with a ‘real job’.
These new Rules help.
I will watch the effect with great interest.
Stephen Dundas became the first Scot to win The Amateur for 36 years.
INSTRUCTION
ROTATE FOR POWER
Bob Torrance explains why rotating the left forearm at the start of the backswing is one of the keys to good golf.
At the halfway stage in the backswing, the left wrist should be facing straight outwards as shown in the main illustration above.
With correct forearm rotation, the club will be on the correct plane and the toe of the club will point straight up into the air at the halfway stage in the backswing (main illustration).
Make sure it isn't hooded (top) or taken too much inside (above), as this will lead to major problems.
Many golfers give themselves no chance of playing well because they ruin the swing with a poor takeaway.
Right form the start they get the club into the wrong position, meaning they have no hope of getting it into a good position afterwards.
Left forearm rotation is one of the keys to a good takeaway.
Watch any good swing closely and you will notice that the left forearm rotates clockwise on the backswing.
It is a must if you are to play good golf, and I suggest you learn it.
Left forearm rotation should not be confused with left wrist rotation, as to many amateurs think.
Many players automatically roll the wrists at the start of the backswing, with the club being laid at the top as a result.
The clubhead will be too much on the inside.
This makes it almost impossible to get the club back to the ball consistently.
No forearm rotation is the other problem for many golfers.
They take the arms straight back from the ball with the clubface closed or hooded.
As a result, the club is across the line at the top.
All I mean by forearm rotation is that the forearm rotates slightly to the left on  the backswing so that the club moves up on the correct swing plane.
The point to note is the halfway stage in the backswing.
Here the toe of the club should point straight up into the air, the clubshaft should be on the plane established at address and the back of the left wrist should be facing outwards, not turned down towards the ground or facing the sky.
Correct forearm rotation takes the club to the correct position at the top every time.
Left forearm rotation does so many things in the golf swing.
It creates power, it cocks your wrists to the swing plane, puts you into the same position at the top every time, and stretches the big muscles of the back.
All in all it adds up to power.
Left forearm rotation may happen unconsciously, in which case it should be left as it is.
Usually players with a strong left-hand grip have a good forearm rotation because the arm is already part of the way there.
The left arm needs to be rotated more when a weak grip is used.
Ben Hogan has said that he wished he had learned the importance of left forearm rotation earlier in his career, as it became one of his keys in his later years.
Have a PGA professional look at your takeaway.
He will tell you if you are rotating the left forearm properly on the backswing.
If your aren't, ask how to get the club into the correct position at the start of the backswing.
Learn to rotate the left forearm properly at the start of the backswing.
This is the key to a consistent and powerful swing.
EAST ANGLIAN DELIGHT
Norfolk and Suffolk are often overlooked by holiday golfers.
But Barry Ward says we should take a closer look at the East of England.
GOOD VALUE GOLF
Sheringham isn't a long course, but it will certainly test your technique.
The twin counties of Suffolk and Norfolk are home to several courses in the higher reaches of the golfing firmament, but the region is not generally renowned as a popular destination for holiday golfers.
Generally, however, is a qualification: knowing Southerners have been beating a path there since the railways opened up the region.
Yet, not being en route to anywhere, East Anglia tends to be overlooked by those living much beyond its boundaries.
For a rare experience, though, look no further when spring brings thoughts of golf in a delightfully pastoral setting.
There's a cluster of courses in Suffolk that are ideal for a long weekend and a similar group in Norfolk for those arriving from the North.
If you're there for a week, you could comfortably play the two groups we recommend for their value, hospitality and enjoy some agreeable accommodation.
Part of a vast coastal plain, much of the region's coastline is a frieze of cliffs, inland from which are wide expanses of heathland, richly carpeted with heather, gorse and bracken.
Both are a natural habitat for golf of indescribable beauty, and on the lower coastal levels the cliffs give way to duneland, transformed here and there into links so natural they might well be in Scotland.
If such a combination leaves a golfing visitor groping for a starting point, he might try the Woodbridge area as an aperitif.
Here he'll find Ufford Park , country club-style complex with extensive recreational facilities which fits nicely into our good value category.
The 18-hole course, while still immature, is improving at a rapid pace, though, after a summer of near-drought, it would benefit from a long soaking, which is not to detract from its considerable potential.
Thorpeness is a typical coastal heathland course where the fairways are wide and receptive.
There's a heathland vista from the hotel's bedroom balconies, but the course is largely woodland-style in undulating country quite at odds with the region's terrain.
A stream and a network of ponds add lustre to a picturesque setting and, in time, when thousands of saplings thrive further, the course will be a cracker.
At 6,352 yards, par 71, it already offers a stern test of technique without being physically onerous.
Like the rolling greens, the fairways are generous, although deep rough awaits anything wayward and some evil bunkers will snap up the timorous approach.
A happy holiday course in a sublime setting sums up Ufford Park nicely.
The hotel-cum-clubhouse, of mellow brick in the local oast house style, adds colour to a vibrant landscape.
At major attraction of Ufford Park is its proximity to other courses.
Thorpeness and Aldeburgh are 25 minutes to the north; Rushmere and Waldringfield  are no more than 15 minutes away, but closer still is Woodbridge , venue for the 1992 Amateur Seniors' Open Championship.
This is a heathland course to gladden the heart.
We haven't seen a lovelier setting for golf and it is, by general acclaim, perhaps the best conditioned course in either county.
The greens are remarkable by any standard.
The attractive 17th hole at Ufford Park.
If that's not sufficient to tempt you, consider also that Woodbridge is one of James Braid's outstanding creations, dating to 1893.
Those conversant with Ganton would nod knowingly.
The sheer beauty aside — the course was a purple fire of heather in August — the principal features are a constantly changing tempo and a string of par-4s under 370 yards.
EAST ANGLIAN DELIGHT
‘They make you think of birdies,’ says Les Jones, the club's pro for 38 years, ‘but getting them is easier said than done.
The senior amateurs were taking 80 in the wind last week.
There's a premium of accurate driving here.’
We discovered why.
The greens, jealously guarded by Braid's bunkering, were placed just so — elevated a touch and tucked around a corner, perhaps, or even half-ridden behind a clump of trees or a sand hill.
Only from ‘position A’ do they present a target large enough for even a short iron.
From anywhere else it's a choice of hitting and hoping or laying-up near the opening Braid built in as an option.
At 6,314 yards it's a tough par 70.
A day there is a glorious prospect but make sure you choose a calm one — or else be prepared to re-load frequently!
Our next stop comprises a pair of gems that would be world famous were they more amenably located, but that would be to detract from the peerless setting in which both Aldeburgh and Thorpeness golf clubs find themselves.
They're both of the coastal heathland genre and while the sites are similar — crumpled fairways in gently rolling, gorse-covered landscapes — the likeness is less marked in other respects.
Aldeburgh, for instance, stands on common land while Thorpeness is owned by a private company, the root of the principal difference.
Where the Thorpeness fairways are wide and receptive in deference to speed of play and holiday guests at the club hotel, Aldeburgh, a members' course, offers virtually no margin for error.
The card reads 6,330 yards, par 68: that's without a par-5.
There are nine par-4s over 400 yards, three 440 yards or longer.
Flavour that with heavily bunkered fairways, hard greens defended by miserly bunkers, swales and a variable breeze and you'll appreciate that carding pars here is the devil's work and birdies are virtually non-existent.
Given anything more robust than a stiffish blow, Aldeburgh becomes a test of nerve and character second to none.
A birdie is rare indeed at Aldeburgh where there is virtually no margin for error, especially if the wind blows.
The consensus it that by four or five strokes it is the toughest course in either county because the battle is only half over when you've found the green.
The putting surfaces are large undulating and marble quick, even on a rare still day.
All this and disarming natural beauty, as well.
Nor is Thorpeness trailing in the scenic stakes; the short 7th with a tee shot over a lake complete with ducks, is utterly distracting.
Like Woodbridge it's a Braid creation, but without such severity in placement and defence of greens.
There are several blind tee shots, many fairways bend at driving length and at 6,241 yards, par 69, its wide fairways flatter to deceive.
There are seven demanding par-4s in excess of 400 yards, not to mention the lovely 3rd hole — at 394 yards a cracking dog-leg over a hill to a green nestling alongside the mere.
Hedonists seeking the perfect golfing weekend could do no better than tackle these two majestic courses, using the Thorpeness Club Hotel as a base.
Certain regulars consider a week here too short by half!
There are two interesting  ports of call en route to Norfolk — one at a venerable club, the other at one of the region's newest.
You won't see a lovelier setting than Woodbridge, or a course that is in better condition.
St Helena Golf Club only opened in 1990 but has already staged county fixtures, a mark of its potential.
Formerly farmland, it's in the Blythe Valley, an area of outstanding natural beauty with topography just made for golf.
Most of the holes were ‘found’ and little earth movement was necessary.
There are several ponds, hence the startlingly green Fescue fairways, and for reasons as much ecological as golfing, rough areas have been encouraged and a series of copses planted to add character and to complement the design.
The latter was done by Johnny Johnston, the club professional, and is in two section, the 18-hole St Helena course (6,580 yards, par 72) and the 9-hole Halesworth loop (3,059 yards, par 36).
St Helena was built on land ready-made for a challenging golf course.
‘There's only one blind tee shot; everything is in view,’ said Johnny, who drew on his recollection of memorable holes he faced as a Tour player in the 1960s.
The first real growth is beginning to show — St Helena is now acquiring a considerable character and visitors are flocking in.
To frame a happy picture, a timber clubhouse of imposing Swedish design stands on the highest point, a monument to local golfing aspirations.
The nearby Bungay & Waveney Valley , which celebrated its centenary in 1989, began as a 9-holer laid out, according to legend, ‘by Fernie, the Yarmouth professional’.
In all probability this was George Fernie, brother of Willie of Dumfries, the 1883 Open Champion and later club professional at the nearby Felixstowe Ferry club.
Bungay & Waveney Valley is a lovely example of rural heathland golf.
But the course was on common land and tended to become somewhat crowded.
So in 1901 the committee agreed an extension to 18 holes at a cost of not more than 50 guineas and Braid was invited to do his stuff.
Continuous modifications over the years have left the present course as a lovely example of rural heathland golf.
It's short (5,950 yards, par 69) but nicely balanced.
Five par-4s in excess of 410 yards are interspersed by others in the 320-yard range, all with gorse in close attendance.
It's an easy walking course of good year-round condition with small greens of high quality; a second shot course offering magnanimous targets from the tee, according to Nigel Whyte.
He's been the club's professional for 26 years and an amateur member before that so he knows a thing or two about the old place.
It merits a detour, not least for its value and there's a smashing new clubhouse.
Pop in and savour it, en route to neighbouring Norfolk.
The first-rate courses in Norfolk are legion, too, but for a midweek break or longer Sheringham and Royal Cromer , close together on the northern coastline, and Great Yarmouth & Caister and Gorleston , offer a perfect combination for holiday golf.
Stay at Yarmouth's Imperial Hotel and your pleasure will increase ten-fold.
Gorleston, on the southern outskirts of town, offers a gentle walk and a pleasing test.
The wind aside, the major hazard may be the distracting landscape.
Set on Corton Cliffs high above the beach, it's a lush meadowland course ideal for mixed ability groups.
It's not overly demanding at 6,149 yards (par 71) from the visitors' tees and although the fairways are wide the greens are on the small side.
Three long two-shotters and a trio of challenging par-3s hold the key to a good score here.
Ten of the other holes are 400 yards or less, some appreciably so, and if your irons are on-song, you'll be whistling for birdies and thinking of doubling the bets over a lunchtime pint.
Play Gorleston on a fine day and  you'll find no more delightful holiday course offering such midweek green fee value.
Great Yarmouth & Caister, Norfolk's senior club, was founded in 1882 and here was coined the term ‘bogey’ for what we now call par.
It measures 6,330 yards from the medal pegs to a par of 70.
Equal that over two rounds and you'll better the winning 36-hole score in the club's 1992 championship, and that included 2s at four of the par-3s!
This is one for the tigers a traditional links with fairways wriggling between sand dunes and where bunkers and gorse are as thick as thieves in a police cell.
What you see is what you get at Caister: there are few blind shots unless you wander, but keeping on the straight and narrow is a challenge in the constant breeze.
Hitting the ball low and passably straight off the tee is vital, then comes the difficult bit!
The superb greens are generally small, with the exception of a clutch of eye-catching par-3s, each with a huge raised green surrounded by trouble.
As Lee Trevino might say, here you either hit the greens or hit the road, unless you have a Ballesteros-type short game to get out of jail, often from tight lies to elevated greens slick as a marble staircase.
This is a cracking links — a hidden gem of British golf with a homeward loop (3,240 yards form the medal tees) that will curl your hair.
Don't miss it.
Like Aldeburgh and Thorpeness, Royal Cromer and Sheringham are near neighbours, a perfectly matched pair of minor masterpieces separated by a five-mile stretch of coastline.
The two great Norfolk courses are not only similar in style; each is the focal point of a charmingly old-fashioned resort that has changed little over the years.
Both are clifftop courses that are steeped in history.
Sheringham was the scene of the famous ‘what train?’ incident involving Joyce Wethered in the final of the 1920 English Ladies' Championship; Cromer witnessed the conception of the Curtis Cup when a British ladies' team first met the Americans there in 1905.
Originally a 9-holer designed by Tom Dunn, Sheringham was extended to 18 holes in 1898 and, little changed over the years, it particularly suits the English ladies, it seems: their amateur championship has been played here several times, most recently in 1991.
One can identify the appeal.
It's not a long course, but it will examine every aspect of technique with every club in the bag.
Ufford Park offers a stern test without being too physically demanding.
It's downland with a links feel, beautifully laid out on a 400-yard wide strip of land between the railway line and the cliff tops.
So the wind is a constant factor and ball manipulation a prerequisite.
A fair amount of rough means accuracy off the tee is as important as the ability to keep it low.
There are very few blind shots at Great Yarmouth & Caister.
Cross bunkers are common 70 or so yards short of the greens, which are all well bunkered, some fiendishly.
The site is deeply rolling land so the shot is frequently down from an elevated tee, or up to a pulpit green — or the reverse!
To add to a perfect golfing setting, the sea is visible from every hole.
The members say their beautifully contoured greens are the best in Norfolk.
That's not an unusual claim hereabouts, but Sheringham's are the equal of any and, at 6,464 yards from the medal tees to a par of 70, they complete an outstanding course of rare quality.
There are four Royal clubs in Norfolk, a mark of the interest in golf by former residents of Sandringham Cromer, the most senior, was granted its title on Christmas Day 1887, a few weeks, uniquely, before the club was officially opened.
The ambience the title creates in the lovely old clubhouse is perhaps the main difference between Cromer and its neighbour.
It's not difficult to imagine royalty here.
Originally a 9-holer by George Fernie, it evolved into 18 with assistance from Old Tom Morris before moving the short distance to its present site in 1911.
More amenable land had become available and J.H. Taylor was commissioned to design the course still largely extant.
James Braid effected certain modernisations upon the advent of improved equipment in the 1920s.
The end result is a testing downland course of great variety.
Holes 4 to 12 are down at sea level, the rest on the cliff tops and exposed to swirling sea breezes which punish injudicious ambition.
In 1985 Tony Jacklin played a round by helicopter, covering a hole at each of his favourite English courses.
He included Cromer's 14th, the Lighthouse hole.
Here the drive must be straight and of passable length to carry a swathe of gorse and rough.
The fairway, with the cliff edge guarding the right-hand side, forms a bowl to collect the shot.
From here it dog-legs left, through sentinel bunkers to a small green, almost flat but with a list to port that will throw away any ball slightly wayward.
Sounds tough?
The 14th is a par-4, only 399 yards but stroke index 2.
It perfectly sums up Royal Cromer, one of the delights of East Anglian golf.
The biggest hazard at Gorleston may be the distracting seascape.
WHERE TO STAY Every month Golf Monthly recommends hotels in the area covered.
Obviously there are other hotels.
Readers should check with the local tourist board for a full list of accommodation.
The Imperial Hotel A hotel of considerable style and operated by the golfing Mobbs family for four generations, the Imperial has first-rate accommodation and also superb cuisine in the award-winning Rambouillet Restaurant.
It has 39 en suite bedrooms.
Golf packages, to include dinner, B&B and a day ticket at nearby Caister, cost £60 per person per day, based on sharing twin room for minimum of two nights.
Great value and very highly recommended.
Tariff: standard B&B is £32.5- per person per night sharing twin; three-course table d'hôte dinner £16.50 A la carte menu available.
Exceptional wine list.
Contact: Nicholas Mobbs.
The Thorpeness Golf Club Hotel A Dormey House-style hotel adjoining the clubhouse, it has 22 large en suite twin bedrooms with all mod cons, near the 1st tee.
Extremely comfortable with convenient parking and the clubhouse bar-lounge and dining room only yards away, it's a great favourite with knowing golfers.
Traditional golf club dining room offers superb cuisine from limited menu with sound wine list and substantial breakfasts.
Superb value; highly recommended.
The Ufford Park Hotel, Golf & Leisure 
(RAC 3 Star, AA 3 Star, ETB 4 Crowns, Highly Commended).
This purpose-built, country club-style hotel is ideal for parties with non-golfers.
It has an indoor heated pool, a leisure centre, steam room, sauna, spa bath, solarium, beauty salon and hair salon.
There are 25 luxurious en suite bedrooms, most with balconies and golf views, and 10 more in a golf lodge.
Privately owned and managed, the hotel has light airy public rooms overlooking the patio and course, and a cosy, non-smoking dining room offering carvery-style meals of high quality, either table d'hôte or à la carte, specifically designed for golfers.
Using local produce, the food is imaginative, wholesome and substantial.
For such a new hotel its standards are impressive.
Woodbridge is 10 minutes away, several other courses within a short drive.
Highly recommended and also good value for the region.
WHERE TO PLAY
Every month Golf Monthly will provide a rating system from 1–10, for courses it visits and plays.
It takes into account such factors as challenge, course conditions, enjoyment, setting, hospitality and facilities.
Hopefully this will help readers decide where to play.
We try to play every course in the area, but this isn't always possible.
Obviously, we cannot rate course we do not play, but that does not mean that they are bad courses.
If they are mentioned, it is because they have been recommended and are generally regarded as good courses.
We try to ensure that green fees listed are correct, but discrepancies may occur.
NEXT MONTH: We plunder the Scottish Borders for more Good Value Golf.
SYSTEMATIC GOLF BY MIKE PALMER
DON'T BE BLOWN AWAY
Golf would be a little dull if the playing conditions remained constantly perfect.
May British courses are constructed on exposed land adjacent to the sea, or on rugged heathland with few trees.
The speed and direction of the wind will become factors most days of the year.
This month I will look at ways to enable you to play effectively when the wind blows.
A POSITIVE APPROACH
You need to have a few positive thoughts to play your best golf in windy conditions.
Firstly, you must accept the weather because you will need to use it to advantage, particularly in crosswinds and on downwind holes.
The adjustments are generally made in club selection, aim and body alignment at address.
Thereafter you swing normally.
Many a club golfer tries to swing harder, or tries to beat the wind conditions with mid-swing adjustments.
You must swing normally, with a smooth and even tempo, ensuring you complete both the backswing and make a well-balanced follow-through.
That's not an easy task of the wind makes it difficult to maintain that balance.
On tree-lined courses, it is more difficult to judge wind strength and direction.
Many clubs have a map of the course on the scorecard so before you tee-off, it is a good idea to mark the wind direction (photo above).
It will be easier to judge this prior to play in the open area around the clubhouse than on a wooded course.
Most tournament players throw up blades of grass to tell them the wind direction and strength, which is ideal to copy.
Look also at the tops of the trees to establish a better idea of the wind strength, and perhaps its direction too.
CROSSWINDS
There are two approaches to consider when you're playing shots through crosswinds; wither to allow the ball to move with the wind, or to learn to shape the ball flight to nullify its effect.
The latter is really reserved for those highly skilled golfers who possess the necessary shot-making ability.
Even then it tends to be an option used for only a selection of shots depending on hazards, the pin position and preference for a particular shape of shot.
You would need a quite advanced ability at the game to vary the ball flight at will.
So the majority of golfers are best advised simply to judge the wind conditions and allow for them in their choice of club and aim.
The photo at the bottom of the page shows a player teeing off in a left-to-right crosswind.
He visualises a target in the light rough, aims his clubface there and aligns his body parallel to this target line.
The player will swing normally thereafter.
Should the ball be unaffected by the crosswind, the next stroke is playable to the green, and should the ball be caught by an extra gust, it will still find the right of the fairway or the light rough.
Remember that the allowances for the crosswinds are made entirely at address.
Once you have set-up, you should be trying to swing as normal.
The major problem with the swing itself is stability.
A golf swing is a dynamic action that demands good balance at all times.
That's a tall order with the wind buffeting your back or hitting you from the side.
To counteract the problem select a less lofted club, widen your stance a little to gain a bit of extra stability and use a three-quarter length backswing (photo below).
With a swing like this there's less likelihood that you will lose your balance, and the lower trajectory is less affected by the wind.
INTO THE WIND
Some shots inevitably will be fired directly into the wind.
The main problem here is distance loss plus the added risk of finding trouble.
A ball sliced or hooked will be exaggerated by the wind, so if you are generally inaccurate you must be aware of this.
For most golfers the shot into the wind will require 2 or 3 more clubs than normal.
It will also require a change in address position.
For this shot you should position the ball further back in your stance and compensate by fractionally strengthening the left-hand grip.
Your objectives are lower trajectory, less backspin and, in dry conditions, to run the ball onto the putting surface.
Swing mostly form the arms and shoulders, limiting the use of the hands and wrists which will scoop the shot upwards.
use of the lower body is also restricted, principally because the weight will not have fully shifted to the right side in a shortened backswing.
Skilled players may choose to hook gently or draw the shot by aiming down the right side of the fairway and encouraging an early rotation of the right hand over the left prior to impact.
This can be recognised by the clubface partly facing the ground halfway into the forward swing (photo left).
The ball will curve from right to left in flight.
The closed clubface at impact reduces loft and results in a penetrating shot through the wind.
SHORT GAME ADJUSTMENTS
Strong wind conditions affect your short game as well.
It becomes increasingly more important to keep your body still, especially when putting.
Avoid grounding your putter head at address should there be any chance of the ball moving.
Remember that if it should roll, once you have grounded the club and taken your stance, you will incur a one-stroke penalty and be required to replace the ball in its original position.
Widen your stance for greater stability, and move the ball position central to the feet (photo left).
On short putts crouch a little more and be quite deliberate about the stroke itself.
Compare this to a putting address position in still conditions where the ball would be opposite to the left heel and the body not so much over the ball (photo above).
Don't forget the effects of the wind conditions on larger putts, and on pitching and chipping, too.
Short shots played downwind will run considerably further and more finesse is needed.
When chipping and pitching into the wind, the ball will settle down more quickly and the stroke must be quite positive, with a quite noticeable acceleration through impact.
A QUESTION OF ATTITUDE
A skilled player will accept the weather conditions as just another part of a multi-faceted game.
It's a challenge, a chance to test your playing skills, despite the wind blowing.
This is the attitude you need, but you must be realistic and accept that scoring will be difficult.
Your score may go up, but so will everyone else's.
The most skilful players will learn to hold their score together despite the blustery conditions.
It's a matter of being able to play your best, even in bad weather.
DOWNWIND SHOTS
At last the conditions are more favourable, but while those drives may travel far, approach shots may run through the green.
You will need to consider the best route to a flat landing area well before the green so that you can run the ball onto the putting surface.
Select a more lofted club and swing normally thereafter.
If you tend to be inaccurate off the tee, remember that a tailwind usually reduces the effects of side spin on the ball so here's your opportunity for the long drive.
ODDBALLS
When a ball is wet, dirty, cold or warm, its flight characteristics will vary.
So should your technique.
Ralph Maltby tells you how.
WARM BALL
As a golf ball rises in temperature above the standard 75°F used in the United States Golf Association tests, there is an increase in distance.
The warm ball will compress more easily, with optimum trajectory and distance the result.
A wound ball reacts much more to the change in temperature than a solid ball.
HOW TO PLAY IT
Warm weather gives a golfer the chance of maximising distance simply by changing to a higher compression ball.
Every player can hit a high compression ball farther, provided they hit it flush.
The problem is that with normal temperatures, a high compression ball feels like a rock when hit by medium or short hitters.
In the heat, a woman golfer could move from her normal 80 compression ball to a 90, and an average male form his normal 90 to 100, and still have much the same feel as usual, but with added distance.
If you adopt this practice, by sure to take less club than usual.
WET BALL
A wet or juicy ball will tend to skid up the face of the club at impact, causing it to fly slightly higher and will much less backspin — a ‘flyer’.
The greater the loft of the club, the more the skidding occurs.
The result is a straighter shot with a higher trajectory and greater distance.
This relative lack of backspin, however, costs the player something in control because the ball doesn't stop quickly on approach shots.
Also, it is quite difficult to impart hook or slice spin to a wet ball.
HOW TO PLAY IT
Because a wet ball will fly farther, use less club then normal on approach shots.
However, you must realise that you'll have less stop and control; play for the openings between greenside bunkers, and hit for the fat part of the green.
Play for straight shots.
On wet ground, play the ball back a bit in your stance to ensure catching the ball first, thus minimising the amount of moisture squeezed between the clubface and the ball at impact.
COLD BALL
A ball that is colder than the standard 75°F used in USGA tests will tend to lose distance potential.
In theory, a wound ball with the maximum initial velocity allowable, 255 feet per second, at 65°F, will fly some 10 yards less than at the standard temperature.
Solid balls are not affected as much by the cold.
A cold ball will also have a harder feel at impact and will fly lower because of the relative inability of the clubface to impress it.
HOW TO PLAY IT
It's good practice to use three balls in rotation in cold weather, one being in play on any one hole, and the two others remaining in your pocket where your body heat can keep them at a reasonable temperature.
Even so, you're going to find yourself needing more club on approach shots.
Use a lower compression ball than usual if you're going to play in cold weather.
It will fly higher and feel better.
DIRTY OR MUDDY BALL
On a full shot the mud is often knocked off at impact.
However, there are times when a piece of mud, or dirt, has dried on the ball.
When hit, this ball will tend to flutter.
This flutter is different from a wobble in that the movement of the ball is quicker and more erratic.
Again, there will be a loss of distance.
Mud on the ball is an even more critical problem when chipping and putting.
It tends not only to slow the sphere significantly, but it may also affect its intended direction.
HOW TO PLAY IT
A muddy ball is often a wet ball so the same considerations in playing a wet ball apply when wet mud adheres to the ball.
Depending on the piece of mud, you might have to take one club more with a long fairway shot, and give the shot a little extra force in the short game.
However, remember that you can clean the ball not only when lifted from the green, but also in the circumstances spelled out in Rule 23.
LADIES' BALL
The difference between the ball women use and that of the men is basically one of compression.
If a man who can generate pretty decent clubhead speed were inadvertently to use a women's ball, the result would be higher trajectory with some distance loss — the clubhead will have compressed the ball beyond the point where the ball achieves its most efficient velocity.
For example, let's say that in the most efficient swing, the ball will travel two yards for every 10 mph of clubhead speed.
If you swing the club at 100 mph, you can expect to hit the ball 200 yards.
If you now use a low compression ball and swing at 110 mph, you will compress it too much and realise less than 220 yards.
HOW TO PLAY IT
In cold weather male golfers may prefer to use a ladies' ball because it will have similar feel to that of a 90 compression ball in normal temperatures.
However, if you do this, be sure to take more club than normal to offset the loss in distance.
CUT BALL
A cut on the top of a ball will cause a higher trajectory and a significant loss of distance.
If the cut is on the side, the sphere will have a tendency to curve in that direction.
Obviously, the flight will be erratic.
To understand why the trajectory is altered so greatly, one must understand that the aerodynamics of the golf ball's flight are based on the dimples or depressions.
As a ball is hit, spins and moves forward, the air that hits the front of the ball is dragged over the top of the ball, creating a slight vacuum on top of the ball.
This lower pressure area creates lift.
When a ball is cut on top, this lift becomes abnormal or exaggerated.
HOW TO PLAY IT
The best to deal with a cut ball is to replace it under Rule 28.
However, if you have no replacements, be sure to use more club than usual to allow for the decreased distance.
Also, if the cut is on the far side of the ball as you address it, the ball will tend to slide, so aim left to compensate.
If the cut is on the side of the ball closest to you, then aim further right than usual.
MISSHAPEN BALL
This ball has a tendency to wobble.
A ball which is not perfectly round will suffer from a 1 to 2% distance loss.
However, the trajectory of the shot is not significantly affected by imbalance.
The amount the ball will wobble depends on the position of the club at impact.
If the ball is struck flush, it won't wobble.
However, if it's struck off-centre so that some sidespin is imparted, it will wobble.
HOW TO PLAY IT
If you should notice the ball wobbling, you should retire it under Rule 29.
If you want to live with it a while, then don't try to deliberately hook or slice the ball; it will only wobble worse.
Don't worry about club selection as the 1 to 2% difference is not significant.
Ralph Maltby is the owner of The Golfworks, the world's largest supplier of machines, gauges, tools, clubheads, components and supplier for repair shops, manufacturers and custom clubmakers.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
DON'T CONDEMN US!
I read Steve Muncey's ‘Queue or Quit’ article in September with interest.
I am a high-handicapper, but as keen as anyone else to improve my game.
Although I do agree with some of his points — the need for more public courses and more emphasis put on rules of etiquette — I was somewhat alarmed to read that in the interests of quicker play, we high-handicappers were being relegated to a boring, 9-hole course until we improve our game enough to join ‘the big boys on the big-boys’ course’.
I assume that all these wonder-golfers were once the proud owners of a 36 handicap, then a 35, then a 34.
Perhaps they were lucky enough to have reduced their handicap before the golf explosion took place.
And they reduced their handicaps on full 18-hole courses, playing with low-handicap players who showed them how it was done.
Is it fair to condemn those of us who are starting out on our golf life to sub-standard courses just because we are victims of the golf boom?
I do not have a handicap because I am not a member of a club, will never be able to afford to join one and can't afford the high green fees around London to play regularly enough to improve my game.
But I am one of the lucky ones.
I am able to escape the misery of golf in the south of England once in a while and go back to Scotland where sanity reigns and nobody condemns a high-handicapper!
Taylor Made Letter of the Month
DON'T HOLD BACK
HELP THE HOMELESS
On receiving my September issue of Golf Monthly , my attention was immediately drawn to the ‘Queue or Quit’ article.
I took up golf four years ago, while living in Northern Ireland, where club membership was not a problem.
For three years I played at will.
I now live in Middlesex and endure all the problems described in the aforementioned article.
I live next to a private golf club, and I regularly walk past the 3rd hole and 4th tee area, and rarely see either in use.
On the occasions I have played this course as the guest of a member, I have never had to queue to start play, and have rarely even seen other players on the course.
As a shift worker, I am able to play during the week.
The golf club I mention refuses to accept applicants for five-day membership, and is less than hospitable towards visitors.
Private golf clubs have it within their power to ease the problem of the ‘homeless’ golfer, and should realise that they have a responsibility to the game of golf and not just to their members.
WRONG RATING
Having just read the article on Dumfries and Galloway by Barry Ward, I was both delighted and slightly amused.
I was delighted with the fact that the southwest of Scotland has been highlighted as I think that it is one of the most underrated parts of Scotland where golf is concerned.
It has, as he stated, some of the finest courses around.
I agree with most of Mr Ward's ratings.
The only exception was his Challenge Rating for Stranraer.
I am amazed how he can justify giving Portpatrick an 8 for challenge and Stranraer a 7.
Having played all the courses in the area regularly, I must point out that if Mr Ward feels that Stranraer is less of a challenge than Portpatrick he should have realised that the 18 holes to the right of the clubhouse was the putting green, not the course!
HIGH-RISK DRIVER
Following the recent court ruling in Scotland in which a golfer who hit another man with a golf ball was ordered to pay substantial damages, I overheard the following conversation taking place in the clubhouse.
BOB: ‘Well, what are you driving now, Roger?’
ROGER: ‘Well, Bob, I'm driving an Ultra AR 532 GTI using a Taylor Made System 2 Driver with a flex twist graphite shaft.
Group 15 insurance mind you!’
LIMITED VIEW
I enjoyed watching Nick Faldo win The Open again; well, I enjoyed the winning not the watching.
Having avidly watched the US Open and then The Open on BBC, I was again disappointed to see what little imagination went into the BBC production when compared to the rival production from America.
The BBC continues with the sterile use of cameras behind the tee, above and behind the greens and hand-held cameras of the fairways.
These three basic views are all that are offered by the BBC, where shows a mere fraction of the course and the shots played.
On the other hand the American production team provides breathtaking views from its ‘Zeppelin’, graphics showing the contours of a hole from tee to green and the additional use of hand-held cameras around the green.
These different views combine to provide so much more detail of the course, the problems faced en route to the green, the success rate of various shots and the difficulties faced when putting.
When will the BBC wake up to the possibilities open to it when covering the biggest annual golfing event to take place in Europe.
With sports coverage on television becoming increasingly competitive, the BBC should beware of resting on its laurels.
Editor's Note:
I'm not sure all our readers will share your views about American TV's golf coverage.
The BBC should take a look at how golf is covered in America.
LEFT OUT LEFTIES
I wonder if any Golf Monthly readers could explain to me why golf manufacturers and club professionals are under the illusion that left-handed people do not want to play golf; or, if they do, then they are able and willing to use right-handed clubs.
The supply of left-handed clubs is so insufficient as to deter those left-handers who may be considering taking up the sport.
Instead, they go on to other activities such as cricket, tennis or snooker.
One only has to look at the achievements of David Gower, Monica Seles, John McEnroe and Jimmy White, to mention just a few, to realise that left-handers can excel at their chosen sport.
However, the reason why may lie in the fact that a cricket bat, tennis racket and snooker cue can be used just as adeptly by a left-handed person as a right-hander.
Accordingly, such protagonists as Gower did not have to undertake a ‘voyage of discovery’ to acquire the appropriate tool of their trade.
Club professionals appear oblivious to the needs of left-handed golfers.
As a left-handed player myself, I had the misfortune and inconvenience of travelling to a professional shop last year only to find they had absolutely no left-handed equipment.
The situation concerning the manufacturers is equally insulting, as having attended three of the past four Open Championships I have been frustrated and angered by the scarcity of left-handed equipment exhibited in the tented village.
Only Phil Mickelson appears to have the talent to take over the mantle vacated by Bob Charles as the world's best left-handed golfer.
But until manufacturers and club professionals come to realise that a significant number play the game left-handed, the world of golf will just have to wait for its Gower, Seles, McEnroe and White.
Ian Jamieson 
BIGGER BUFFER
Working in sales and marketing, I am sure you comments in the August issue following the letter from Martin Smith on the buffer zone are deliberately designed to drum up readers' letters.
Do you really expect us to believe, as you say, that many people feel the buffer zone should be scrapped?
Surely you mean that the entire stupid handicap system should be scrapped?
Martin Smith is correct about increasing the buffer zone to four shots.
At my home club, almost without exception, in medals the scratch score is reduced by one stroke.
How can anyone dream up a handicap system whereby my handicap can go up because somebody else scored a net 65?
Was it Henry Longhurst who said that The Rules should be on the back of a cigarette packet?
I suggest that the present handicap system should be printed on a couple of toilet rolls and used accordingly!
Jack Sharpe 
PLAYING THE PERCENTAGES
I would take issue with ‘Talking Golf’(September issue) that Nick Faldo's record of five Major wins in 21 starts ‘pales into insignificance’ behind the feats of Jack Nicklaus between 1970–78.
During that time Nicklaus won eight Majors in 33 starts, a success rate of 24.2%, compared with Faldo's recent five wins in 21 starts up to and including The Open — a 23.8% success rate.
Nicklaus may have a better record of second and third places, but winning is what matters!
Peter Peel 
Faldo's hot on Nicklaus' trail
WOOSNAM'S WELL OVER PAR
I was sitting at the back of the 17th green at the Scottish Open this year watching the action.
Suddenly there was a loud shout of ‘Fore’ and a ball landed with a tremendous crack on the head of a man who was sitting right next to me.
I was sure that his brains would spill out.
It was Ian Woosnam's ball.
But when he strode on to the green, he came over, glanced fleetingly at the man, said not a word, turned on his heel and continued with his game.
He didn't say anything.
All of us there were so stunned that a man of such high standing in the golf world could be so uncaring.
The way I and others who witnessed the incident feel now is that Ian Woosnam's game is well over par.
Ann McDonald 
Ian Woosnam took little interest in a struck spectator.
ON THE RIGHT TRACK
It is sad to see that the ruling body of American golf is still not willing to invite the best players to compete in its Major Championships.
The only exception is the US PGA Championship, whose committee invited the top 50 from the Sony Rankings and must be applauded for doing so.
This leaves The Masters, which could find no place for Tom Kite, and also the US Open, which treated Greg Norman in the same sorry way.
The top 50 in the Sony Rankings as of December 31 should automatically receive invitations to the next season's four Majors.
That way the best golfers would be there for all to see.
Mr T.G. Smith 
MORE PRAISE, PLEASE
I bought the September issue to read about Nick Faldo's victory in The Open.
But I was disappointed with the churlish leader —‘A Hard Act To Follow’— which was a negative piece damning Faldo by comparing him with Nicklaus.
Faldo will never achieve the heights of Nicklaus (will anyone?), and he will probably never the win the affection of the golfing public, but he deserved better than you gave him.
Daniel Fennell 
REPAIR YOUR PITCH MARKS
I recently read an article which claimed that 30% of all shots on a golf course are putts.
However, how many times have you seen your ball deviate off course at the last moment due to someone not repairing their pitch mark?
Why do golf clubs not give pitch repairers away free?
This would surely encourage golfers to repair their own pitch marks and those left by others.
Last year Golf Monthly gave one of these pitch repairers as a free gift which I still use regularly.
Well done.
Mr A. Davey 
Editor's Note:
Handing out free pitch repairers might help a bit, but it doesn't guarantee that people will use them.
TAKING AUNTIE TO TASK
Media coverage of The Open Championship at Muirfield, in particular BBC Radio 5's extensive broadcasts, showed British commentators at their very worst.
As a nation we pride ourselves on our strong sense of sportsmanship and fair play.
However, listening to Tommy Horton & Co you would think Nick Faldo was fighting a war on our behalf.
For those of us unable to attend the tournament, it was like the BBC equivalent of the oafs who call out those little ditties ‘You're the man’ or ‘Get in the hole’.
The bias shown towards Faldo's nearest challengers was unbearable at times.
I noted the considerable glee in one commentator's voice on reporting John Cook's trouble at the 9th when he went out-of-bounds.
We all enjoy a British victory and Nick did a great job in pulling his game back in the last four holes but for me the victory was soured by the silly and jingoistic utterances of the Radio 5 team.
Let the Americans play their closed shop Open and US PGA, let them have their biased cries and catcalls, but please let us remember sportsmanship and let the best man win.
Joseph Earl 
Biased reporting on John Cook.
Each month the winner of our Taylor Made Letter of the Month receives a brand new Taylor Made System 2 Driver with a flex twist graphite shaft.
Only letters which are submitted, typed or printed, with the full name and address and contact telephone number of the sender will be considered for publication.
While every effort will be made to publish contributions in full, the Editor does reserve the right to edit the readers' letters when necessary.
SWING DRILLS
DRILL YOUR WAY TO BETTER GOLF
Paul Dellanzo gives you two tips to improve your short game
1 The Air Time Drill 
Many amateur players fall into the trap of using the same club when chipping.
Whatever the situation, they automatically reach for either the sand or the pitching wedge when hitting short shots.
It means they often have to fly the ball a long way in the air with very little run, depending, of course, on where the flag is.
I think that amateurs should adopt the professional approach and aim to let the ball run most of the way to the hole.
That means minimum air time, but maximum ground time.
To do that you must use a variety of clubs for chipping, from the sand wedge to the 5 or 4-iron.
Practice Method
Lay down a number of clubs, say four as shown (photo above), at different intervals on the practice green (first make sure you are allowed to chip onto the practice green).
Then hit balls to a spot level with the first club.
Do that with different clubs, noting how far the ball runs for each club.
Repeat the process by chipping to spots level with the remaining three clubs.
You will find that with a wedge the ball will travel most of the way in the air, while with a 5-iron the ball will roll most of the way to the hole.
The safer shot is to let the ball run up to the hole with a less-lofted club.
(photo right).
2 Five In A Row Drill 
Unlike professionals, most amateurs lack confidence on putts inside 10 feet for the simple reason that they never practise them.
This drill will give you that extra confidence on those birdie opportunities.
Practice Method
Starting from two feet away from the hole, position five balls at intervals of two feet in a straight line to the hole.
Commencing with the closest ball first (photo left), progressively putt the balls into the hole (photo below)until all have been holed.
Make sure that you hole every one and start again if you miss.
If you practise this drill regularly, it will increase confidence on the greens.
JOHN INGHAM AT LARGE 
SUPPORT YOUR PRO
Clubs attempting to sack the professional and take over the shop to earn revenue can expect no support from those in the business.
Any tendency to replace a PGA Pro with a junior shop boy who simply sells balls, clubs, clothes and chocolates would be counterproductive, believes Ray Burniston, the National Secretary of the Association of Golf Club Secretaries.
From his headquarters in Weston-super-Mare, Burniston tells me, ‘Although one of two privately owned clubs may have ideas about taking over the pro's shop, I believe that a good shop run by the professional and his staff is essential at a club.’
I know many people will agree with him.
In fact, the hours are so long at clubs I suspect an ordinary shop-keeping junior would soon quit and go back to Sainsbury's.
Incidentally, Mr Burniston reports there is a big increase in the number of ladies running clubs and reckons there will be even more in years to come.
Not all are outstanding golfers, but then 18-handicap Group Captain John Prideaux didn't become Secretary at Muirfield because of his own golfing skill.
In fact, he's not had a lesson in his life and is unlikely to start now as Muirfield doesn't even have a professional's shop!
For the record, the Group Captain says Payne Stewart didn't play a round there last year because a third party came on the line, and spoke with a girl at the desk.
‘If he had contacted me direct, I'd have tried to make room for him,’ he says.
But then the newspaper boys would have lost a story!
WRISTS NEED SLAPPING
John Jay Hopkins, creator of the World Cup, would have approved of this year's American team because Fred Couples and Davis Love III, who tee up in Madrid on November 5, represent the best from the New World in 1992.
Fred Couples is a welcome addition to this year's World Cup of Golf by Philip Morris, but the event is still likely to be plagued by slow play.
Hopkins might have been puzzled why England's top player isn't turning out.
And he would have asked manager Mark McCormack why.
Hopkins, millionaire owner of Canadair, an offshoot of Consolidated Vultee Aircraft, was not afraid to tackle famous managers.
He asked Fred Corcoran: ‘My tournament is going nowhere.
What's wrong?’
‘The trouble,’ said Fred, ‘is that your tournament is being put on by a bunch of aircraft public relations people.’
So it was.
Just like certain tournaments today are put on by public relations types who know nothing about golf.
In the 1950s, Fred Corcoran was signed on the spot by the International Golf Association, and put in charge.
One-time manager of the US Ryder Cup team, Fred ‘The Cork’ celebrated his new appointment at ‘Toot's Shor's’, a New York night spot, and told the sport's in-crowd he was now working for Hopkins, genius behind General Dynamics and the godfather of a worldwide golfing jamboree that could, handled properly, go places.
Corcoran too the view that since England was the next venue — this was 1956 — they should ask the locals which players would be favourites.
‘We met with Brigadier General Critchley — the major-domo of British golf — and were told to get Hogan and Snead for Wentworth.’
Corcoran did just that.
I saw them win.
But while Hogan and Snead impressed, I was even more impressed with the international atmosphere.
Goodwill through golf, Hopkins' idea, is based not on money, but on the notion that little-known golfers would broaden their horizons, and stretch their abilities, by matching shots with the stars.
The World Cup helped golf boom so the game touches its hat to Fred Corcoran.
Although the World Cup retains a splendid stature in the game, it is threatened, as other events, by two problems.
First, there are now so many ‘significant’ tournaments in the world that outstanding players tend to play elsewhere for themselves, basing their week's labour on financial gain rather than turning out for their country.
Slow play is the other problem for World Cup that will have to be addressed.
Competitors understandably try on every shot, but play at a funereal pace.
This causes onlookers to despair, and TV schedules to go up in smoke, which can't please Philip Morris, the sponsor.
What kind of shot will be fired in the war against slow play is hard to imagine.
Gifted professional golfers have a duty to the game just as tournament administrators have a duty to defend the integrity of sport.
So far the authorities have not done much to stamp out this ever increasing malaise.
Someone, somewhere, must speak for golf — and maybe slap a few wrists.
SPENCE ON TOP OF THE WORLD
Can you believe it?
Jamie Spence shot a last round 60 to win the Canon European Masters, then heard that someone has said he could have smashed the course record with a 58 — and had blown it!
Greenside experts saw him miss three birdie opportunities, from six, 10 and 15 feet.
And this sent him into sudden-death against Anders Forsbrand where Jamie again produced the magic wand, and downed a 20-foot birdie putt for victory.
Watching it all was Vicky Richards, manager of both Forsbrand and Spence.
So whose side was she on?
‘Anders has achieved so many of his goals this year that I was on Jamie's side.
But obviously I was really delighted for both of them, doing so well.’
Vicky left IMG to make her own mark and has been steadily building up a quality client list.
Spence, who made the 1992 Dunhill Cup team for England, is obviously a rising star.
‘The pressure on Jamie to win a tournament was great,’ she said.
‘Everyone kept telling him he should win.
Now it will be easier.
Jamie Spence found the Swiss mountain air to his liking (right), with a final round 60.
He and wife Sally Ann show off the card (above).
GOLF IN THE CITY
Nobody has built a golf course in the middle of a major city — until now.
And when I saw it the other day, on my way from London's West End, I couldn't believe it.
Coming from the House of Commons, you cross the river Thames, bear right, pass Battersea Power Station and the infamous Wandsworth Prison — and into Burntwood Lane.
And there it is, Springfield Park, a 9-hole course, with rolling fairways alongside a local hospital that sold off its recreation acres to gain cash for developing facilities indoors.
Brilliantly acquired, despite fierce competition, by PGA professional Patrick Tallack, the course is just 4,451 yards long with a par of 62.
There are two tees on each of the nine holes and playing round it twice, gives a full 18 all for a fee of £6 at weekends!
Obviously the course is quite a tight fit between the hospital and main road, but Tallack has designed the layout with safety in mind.
‘We might ban John Daly,’ says Patrick, ‘because he's almost within reach of Buckingham Palace!’
The club is recognised by the English Golf Union and by the Ladies Golf Union, and will be run on traditional lines.
Its conception is brilliant and, with the enormous demand for golf, it must be a commercial triumph.
Professional Patrick Tallack surveys his course in the city.
EUROPEAN EXTRAVAGANZA
When the European Tour stages a tournament in England — a rare event these days, it's dazzlingly international.
The one in mind had a sponsor who sells Murphy's Irish beer and a 46-year-old  Argentinian winner, Vicente Fernandez, who did a head-over-heels roll on the last green after downing a mile-long uphill putt, the longest victory shot of the year.
It was all good fun.
Even TV commentator Bruce Critchley correctly diagnosed that Per-Ulrik Johansson's heart ‘would be beating’ after the poor lad muffed a bunker shot at the 71st hole to take 6 and finish joint second.
The cameras concentrated on Australian Brett Ogle, colourfully dressed like a Chinese kite and copying the putting style of onetime ‘yipper’ Bernhard Langer.
But there was little sign of an Englishman in this English Open, staged at a re-styled Belfry which now boasts new bunkers and spectator mounds designed with the 1993 Ryder Cup in mind.
In fact, Europe's ‘Big Six’ professionals all stayed away.
Maybe they all wanted a rest, or didn't rate the £550,000 prize-money, or weren't offered a skins' game as an enticement to attend.
Or maybe they don't like The Belfry course.
They weren't missed — the visitors put up a great show in an English field that looked forever foreign!
From where I was sitting, it all looked fine.
UPHILL STRUGGLE
New courses on the Costa del Sol are feeling the recession, including hilly ones.
Architect Bryan Griffiths says some are in receivership.
‘As suitable land becomes, scarcer,’ he says, ‘investors are persuaded to build in all sorts of places, even on steep hills.
That means tons of earth have to be shifted.
The uphill fairways kill off the old boys.
Mountain golf is the kiss of death!’
Griffiths claims people don't talk about disasters.
‘When someone loses a packet, they just creep silently away.’
19th HOLE
Complete Worldwide News
Tournament Roundup, Results & Diary
Face To Face With…
Per Ulrik Johansson
New Products To Help Your Game
Swede Anders Forsbrand poses for the cameras after his win in the Equity & Law Challenge at Royal Mid-Surrey.
Did you know?
Arnold Palmer, Gary Player, George Archer and Jack Nicklaus are the only golfers ever to have won on their first appearance in a US Senior Tour event.
Ray Floyd failed to join them recently when he finished tied for 8th in the Bank One Classic.
UNLUCKY MONTY
Colin Montgomerie (below) is fast building a reputation as the Greg Norman of European golf.
It has nothing to do with his looks — he is unlikely to be mistaken for a ‘white shark’— but his misfortune.
The blond Australian has been plagued by the worst possible luck over the years.
Time after time he has had a tournament in his pocket only for a miracle shot from a rival to steal it away.
But just when he was thinking it was his exclusive preserve, along came Monty.
At the Bell's Scottish Open he was denied by one of the most incredible finishes ever when Australian peter O'Malley produced 7-under-par figures over the last five holes for a European record-equalling low 60.
The Scotsman had seen everything, right?
Wrong.
Along came the Canon European Masters and Tunbridge Wells' Jamie Spence.
Month led for the first three days — starting the final day six shots clear.
Safe?
Not a bit of it.
Bad weather during the third round had left him with three holes to complete early the next morning.
He was less than tidy over the stretch and then, after an indecently long wait to begin his final round, dropped three shots in a row from the 2nd to finish with a 71 and a 272 total.
In the meanwhile, Spence was emulating O'Malley's 60 with 7-under-par figures (one eagle and five birdies) for his last six holes.
It might have been the fourth 60 on Tour this season, but his 12-under-par return was the lowest to par ever in Europe.
Still the 29-year-old could not celebrate because Anders Forsbrand closed with five straight birdies for a 65 which tied the 29-year-old Englishman on 271.
Spence, though, would not be denied and clinched the £93,859 at the second extra hole of the play-off.
In disbelief, Montgomerie had to be content with third spot.
TOURNAMENT ROUND-UP
Belgian hotshot Florence Descampe tasted US victory for the first time when she defied the cream of the LPGA Tour to win the Stratton Mountain Classic in Vermont.
The 23-year-old Brussels ace closed with a 67 to leave US money leader Dottie Mochrie trailing two shots in her wake.
HOLING OUT
…
Darren Clarke's dreams of a place in Ireland's side for the Alfred Dunhill Cup were dashed when a recurring tendinitis problem forced his withdrawal from the Volvo German Open.
The lucky trio were: Ronan Rafferty, Christy O'Connor Jnr and Philip Walton…
CADDIE'S WEDDING DAY BLUES
Jamie Spence's caddie could be forgiven for taking a week off, especially since he was getting married.
But he didn't exactly pick the right week for doing it.
Mark Steers, who has been carrying Jamie's bag for the past 15 months, got married  in Liverpool on Saturday, September 5 1992.
On that day, his boss was playing in the Canon European Masters, returning a score of 73.
Mark and his new bride Janice were having their post nuptial celebration the next day when the good news/bad news came in — Jamie had shot a final 60 to get into a playoff with Anders Forsbrand and win the tournament.
The news was such a shock to Mark that he dropped his celebratory drink.
He wouldn't say how much money it had cost him to get married, but did say the money he would have made from Jamie's maiden win would have helped in a big way.
You can bet Mark will think twice next time about taking a week off.
CHANGES AT THE BELFRY
The 1989 Ryder Cup stepladder brigade will be delighted to learn that The Belfry has spent more than £500,000 on making improvements to the Brabazon Course in readiness for next year's rematch.
New spectator mounds will make viewing considerably easier at the 3rd, 5th and 11th holes and the finishing stretch from the 15th to the 18th.
The development also offers the players a fresh challenge as 10 of the course's holes have been transformed by the introduction of new tee positions, remodelled fairways and greenside bunkering.
Dave Thomas, one of the course's original designers and the man who is responsible for making the alterations, said: ‘It is very exciting when you can go back and do some of the things you would liked to have done originally.
I think the results of the latest work are marvellous.
‘When a golf course has been played for 15 years, as The Belfry had, it begins to show certain areas where improvements can be made by fine-tuning.
‘I believe this is something that should be done at all new courses and certainly at the true championship ones.
At Augusta, Georgia, for example, they do it almost every year.’
He added: ‘All the changes I have made to the course are straightforward and have really been designed visually rather than penally — in other words, if someone is playing well, they will be rewarded.’
Improvements have made viewing considerably easier at The Belfry.
BRABAZON COURSE CHANGES
Hole 1: Enlarged fairway bunker on the right and a reshaped one on the left.
Hole 3: Fairway bunker on the right extended and a new one introduced on the left.
Hole 4: New championship tee and new fairway bunkering.
Hole 6: New elevated tee.
Hole 9: New fairway bunker on the left and the two bunkers at the green remodelled.
Green extended into the lake.
Hole 11: Fairway bunkers on the left remodelled and a new one introduced on the right.
Reshaped bunker at the green which is now encircled by spectator mounding.
Hole 15: Remodelled bunkers at the green and extensive spectator mounding.
Hole 16: New tee and fairway bunker on left.
Hole 17: New tee and repositioned left and right fairway bunkers, as well as new enlarged bunkers at the green.
Extensive spectator mounding on both sides of the fairway.
Hole 18: Reshaped fairway and greenside bunkers, and spectator mounding on both sides of the fairway.
HOLING OUT
…
Great Britain and Ireland were represented at the Eisenhower Trophy in Vancouver, Canada, by Ireland's Raymond Burns (Banbridge), Wales' Bradley Dredge (Bryn Meadows), Scotland's Dean Robertson (Cochrane Castle) and England's Mathew Stanford (Saltford).
Amateur Champion Stephen Dundas was only named as the first reserve…
Did You Know?
Art Wall is the only Masters Champion not to defend his title.
The won the tournament in 1959, but wasn't able to compete in 1960 due to a serious knee infection that kept him out of action for most of the first half of the season.
MAYO COMES OUT ON TOP
Paul Mayo (below) won the 1992 Peugeot PGA Assistants' Championship over the East Course at East Sussex National.
Mayo (Newport) led from the start with rounds of 70-71-77-67 to finish no less than eight shots ahead of Stuart Little (Minchinhampton).
He won a cheque for £3,750, the use of a Peugeot 205 1.6 GTi, an all expenses paid trip to the 1993 US Assistants' Championship, plus places in next season's Peugeot French and Spanish Open Championships.
Former British Boys and Youths Champion James Cook (Leamington Spa) took third place.
In quite dreadful weather conditions Cook put together rounds of 75-80-71-69 for an aggregate of 295.
Zimbabwean James Loughnane was a further three shots back in fourth place.
Peugeot also staged its annual Assistants Pro-Am at East Sussex.
Earlier this season Golf Monthly readers were invited to enter for the event: 720 fortunate golfers ( three amateurs and one assistant) were balloted to compete in eight qualifying events around the British Isles.
The first three teams from each of these went through to the final at East Sussex.
Winners of the Final at East Sussex were the team that comprised Inverness assistant Gary Lister, Peter Gelard, Jeremy Carter and Colin Thompson.
Runners-up were Michael Beaumont, Sidney Hyam, George Smith and Tehidy Park assistant Nick Rogers, and in third place were Fred Speight, Robert Seaton, Roger Taylor and Simon Hurley, and assistant from Blackwell Grange club.
The Peugeot 106 XR 1.1 car put up as a special incentive to enter the event was won by Golf Monthly reader, Tom Allwyn Davies from Ipswich.
Mr Davies was ecstatic when he heard that he had won the car in the special Peugeot Golf Monthly prize draw.
‘I was speechless when I heard that I had won,’ he said.
‘The 106 will certainly feel at home in our garage parked alongside a 405 and 205.
My wife has been a golf widow for the last 30 years.
Perhaps now she will let me continue for the next 30 years.’
Our picture above shows Roger Manning, Peugeot's Marketing Director presenting Mr Davies with his car.
TOURNAMENT ROUND-UP
Twelve months after she topped the amateur charts, when winning the British, French and Italian Amateur Championships, France's Valerie Michaud left the professionals in her wake by triumphing in the Holiday Inn Leiden Open, at Rijswijk in Holland.
The 22-year-old's eighth professional outing brought her £8,250 for her one-shot win ahead of Laura Davies and Gillian Stewart.
Seve Ballesteros clinched his biggest cheque in six months when pocketing £16,000 for winning the Canon Shoot-out final at Crans-sur-Sierre.
His celebrations were heightened by the news that his wife Carmen had given birth to their second son.
BRAVE CHAMP
With a name pronounced Nicklaus, people would have every reason to assume a connection with golf.
But this certain Geoff Nicholas, like golf legend Jack Nicklaus, is not ordinary professional.
Geoff is modest, genial and has won British and American Open Championships in the sport.
And he's proved against all the adds that being disabled is no handicap.
The 31-year-old Australian is a ‘below-the-knee amputee’ and only has three toes on his left foot.
But he strode to his third consecutive British Open Amputee Championship at Bryn Meadows, South Wales, netting a new course record into the bargain.
Nicholas had opened the championship with a rather disappointing 79.
But he then surged on to victory with a 4-under-par round of gross 68 — a new course record for Bryn Meadows.
Geoff has always been a born fighter and wants to succeed alongside the great names in golf.
He was a thalidomide baby who was born with deformed legs — the right one was later amputated when Geoff was 12.
He has now undergone a total of 10 operations, of which five have been to straighten up the three remaining toes on his left foot.
Other surgery has been used to construct an ankle.
Despite the setbacks, Geoff has been playing golf for 16 years.
‘I only managed to walk round the first time,’ he said.
Living near a public course he was able to hit 200 balls a time.
Progress was slow and it took a long time to get a handicap, the first being 17.
By the time he was 22 he was down to a 9 handicap and was off 2 when he turned professional at the start of last year.
‘I improved because of a lot of practice,’ said Geoff.
‘I have always been determined and have always set myself goals.
My ambition now is to play in one of the Major tournaments, such as The Open Championship.’
His home club is at The Lakes, Sydney, which is a par-73 championship course.
Aussie golf star Greg Norman has the course record of 63, which is a mere four shots better than Geoff's performance over the course.
Geoff Nicholas has proved that being disabled is not necessarily a handicap on the golf course.
Did You Know?
Mark McCumber an Associate Member of the American Society of Golf Course Architects.
He joins Jack Nicklaus as the only Touring pros in the Society's ranks.
HOLING OUT
…
The European Women's Tour has announced that it will stage a tournament next year in troubled former Yugoslavia.
The 54-hole Slovenian Classic will be played at Bled on October 9–11.
The players' safety has been assured…
FACE TO FACE WITH PER ULRIK-JOHANSSON
Per-Ulrik Johansson, the 25-year-old Swede, burst onto the European Tour in dramatic fashion last season, winning the Renault Belgian Open and taking the BA High Flyer's and Rookie of the Year Awards.
He also helped Sweden to team glory in both the Dunhill and World Cups.
Close to a second Tour victory this season, he currently lies in 16th position on the Order of Merit with some £187,883.
If you couldn't be a golfer, what would you be?
A physical education teacher.
Who do you admire most in your sport and why?
I've always admired Ben Hogan for the way he worked at the game and the determination he showed to succeed.
Which sports do you dislike most?
Baseball and cricket because I don't understand them.
What is your favourite food?
Any sort of pasta.
What is your greatest extravagance?
Compact discs.
What car do you drive?
A Saab and a Chevrolet Camaro which I brought back with me from America.
Which talent would you most like to have?
To always be happy and feel positive.
What was your first-ever job?
Working in a baker's shop as a kid.
Since leaving school I've only played golf.
What is your biggest disappointment?
The last round of the 1991 Portuguese Open.
I was one shot behind eventual winner Steve Richardson after three rounds and then shot a 79.
What is your favourite TV show?
‘Cheers.’
What is the most satisfying moment of your career so far?
Winning the 1991 Belgian Open.
Which newspaper do you read?
In Sweden I read the Expressen and in America I usually read USA Today .
Which sports would you watch, apart from golf?
Ice hockey and basketball.
What is your favourite music or group?
I like everything — from Vivaldi right through to chart music.
If you could live anywhere, where would that be?
San Diego, California.
What is the smartest move you've ever made?
Going to America to study after high school and my military service instead of turning pro.
What is your favourite golf course?
Desert Mountain and Desert Highland in Scottsdale, Arizona, both designed by Jack Nicklaus, and Shoal Creek which I played when I was in college.
What is your ambition?
To be the best in the world and to be at the top for a long time.
What is your worst habit?
Sleeping late in the mornings.
What one thing would improve the quality of your life?
Time management.
When and where were you happiest?
When I won the 1991 Belgian Open and when I got engaged.
What causes you sleepless nights?
Any kind of remorse I may have.
Who was your first sporting hero?
Ben Hogan.
How do you relax?
By taking a Jacuzzi or a warm bath after a workout.
How would you like to be remembered?
As a gentleman or as a nice guy.
Did You Know?
Seve Ballesteros is the only man to have won four successive tournaments on the PGA European Tour.
In 1986 he won the Dunhill British Masters, the Carrolls Irish Open, the Johnnie Walker Monte Carlo Open and the Peugeot French Open in successive Tour appearances.
HOLING OUT
…
Nick James has been appointed to the newly created post of General Manager and Secretary of the St Andrews Links Trust and will take up his position on January 1 1993.
He will take responsibility for the five courses…
Did you know?
The putt which won Vicente Fernandez the Murphy's English Open has been measured at 87 feet.
It is thought to be the longest putt ever holed to win a European Tour event.
A-LEVEL GOLF
Copthorne Effingham Park Hotel is taking businessmen and women back to school for great value ‘A-Level’ courses in golf.
The hotel's spacious 9-hole course is the setting for the new Academy of Golf — a series of one-day events which combine serious tuition with golfing fun.
Under the direction of the resident PGA professionals Ian Dryden and Peter Harrison, ‘pupils’ will have their swings analysed and improved by video recordings and by using the restricted flight MacGregor MACTEC ball.
At an inclusive cost per golfer of £50, the Academy day starts with breakfast and includes tuition given on an individual basis; a group lesson; a four-course lunch with wine; Stableford competition and a champagne reception and prize-giving.
The Academy is available for corporate, club or society groups of up to 15 people and each participant receives an Academy of Golf A-Level certificate to help commemorate the day.
ALL NIGHT GOLF
The golf boom in Dubai has led to work commencing on a pay-as-you-play 18-hole floodlit course which will be open 24 hours a day!
To be known as the Nadd Al Sheba Golf and Race Club, it is being built in and around a horse-racing track and is scheduled to open in October of next year.
Nadd Al Sheba will be Dubai's third grass golf course.
Emirates GC, the venue for the annual Dubal Desert Classic, was the first in the Gulf states, while the Dubai Creek Golf and Yacht Club was due to open in October.
A TV racing video of Doncaster Racecourse, home of the St Leger, first sparked an interest in golf for Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum which has led to Dubai becoming a golfing holiday centre.
He was watching the video with his project engineer, Englishman Stephen Trutch, when he spotted the Doncaster Town Moor golf course inside the racecourse.
The Emirates course, which was designed by American Karl Litten, was the result of the Sheikh's curiosity.
It became such a success that further developments were needed.
The Nadd Al Sheba course came about when the Sheikh asked Trutch to devise a scheme that would improve the appearance of the desert wastes inside the city's popular racetrack.
There will be nine holes inside the track and nine around the outside.
HISTORIC PAINTING
An oil painting of the Royal Perth Golfing Society playing on the North Inch in Perth, by the Scottish artist McNeil Macleay, and dated 1866, is to be sold by Christie's on November 19 at the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh.
It is expected to fetch about
7,000 to £10,000. the Royal Perth Golfing Society originated from a meeting on April 5 1828.
Five years later, in 1833, King William IV became Patron and gave the Society permission to call itself The Royal Perth Golfing Society.
HOLING OUT
…
Jamie Spence, the spectacular winner of the Canon European Masters, joined Steve Richardson and David Gilford in England's team for the Alfred Dunhill Cup.
Wales failed to qualify, while Scotland called upon Colin Montgomerie, Gordon Jnr and Sandy Lyle…
SEVEN DOWN
In each of the seven vertical columns of the grid below you'll find the name of a well-known golfer.
Unfortunately although printed in the correct order.
the letters of each player's forename have become irregularly interspaced with those in his surname.
Can you tease all seven apart and then identity — in terms of nationality — the odd man out?
SOLUTION BOTTOM LEFT OF PAGE
TOURNAMENT ROUND-UP
Lanny Wadkins (above) had a superb closing 65 to win the Canon Greater  Hartford Open, at TPC at River Highlands in Connecticut, by two shots from Nick Price, Dan Forsman and Donnie Hammond.
Forsman gained his revenge winning the Buick Classic at the second extra play-off hole, ahead of both Steve Elkington and Brad Faxon.
FALDO SET TO KEEP HIS PROMISE
It was music to a Scotsman's ears when he said he owed everyone in Scotland a drink, but many were sure it was only an empty promise uttered in the heat of the moment.
Not so.
Nick has joined forces with Johnnie Walker to send two bottles of Johnnie Walker Black Label whisky to every golf club in Scotland.
The two bottles will accompany a video that contains a personal message of thanks from Nick himself.
His unique ‘thank you’ will be sent to over 500 Scottish golf clubs.
SWINGING A GOLD MINE
Can anyone help R. Standring, from Bangor in Gwynedd, who is keen to learn whether or not he is sitting on a gold mine or, to be more precise, swinging with one?
His query concerns a 2-iron which his local pro reckoned might be worth more than just a few bob.
Made in Scotland, the club in question is a Densmore Shute personal model, bearing a UK patent 15477.
It is stag-toe weighted and double-balanced.
Anyone who can help should contact Mr Standring through the editor.
Did you know?
Jamie Spence's win in the Canon European Masters made him the sixth first-time winner on this season's Volvo Tour.
The others were Ian Palmer, Daniel Silva, Peter Mitchell, Miguel Angel Martin and Peter O'Malley.
Vicente Fernandez won the English Open in dramatic style by holing a putt of around 100 feet on the last green to beat Swedes Fredrick Lindgren and Per Ulrik Johansson by a stroke.
Swede Helen Alfredsson's successful season in both Europe and America continued when she won the IBM Ladies' Open in Stockholm.
After pleasing the crowds for nearly 40 years, Neil Coles is still turning on the style for the PGA European Seniors' Tour.
GOLF SHOP
Keep up-to-date with all the latest golf equipment.
BIG BEN
Ben Sayers has released its own version of the jumbo driver —‘Big Ben’.
The clubs are fitted with the exclusive 45″ lightweight Carbolite graphite shaft which was especially designed for use with this oversized metal head.
The longer shaft gives a wider arc to your swing and, if used properly, can increase clubhead speed and add yards to your drives.
Available in 1 (9, 10.5 and 12 degree lofts), 3 and 5-woods.
REVITALISE YOUR GRIPS
Designed by an American PGA professional, the NU-GRIP incorporates a useful bristle brush for removing excess particles from your golf grips, clubfaces and shoes.
An integral elasticated cord and clip is provided to attach the NU-GRIP to your golf bag.
The makers claim that regular use of the NU-GRIP will delay the need for re-gripping, keeping your grips in peak condition throughout their life.
LOOSEN UP
Nigel Blenkarne, Director of Golf at Bowood Golf and Country Club in Wiltshire, addresses the problem of warming-up in his new instructional video, ‘Warm-Up For Golf’.
Nigel shows how a series of simple stretching exercises can help avoid injury and improve your game.
‘By being prepared and loosened up, good strokes will come much more easily and your score will come down.
This is especially true on cold days when you are more likely to pull or strain a muscle,’ says Nigel.
INDOOR ACTIVITY
‘Bunkered’ is a new board game based on golf for up to six players.
Easy to play, using the traditional rules of golf, players progress through the game by answering general knowledge questions.
The first edition of the game is aimed at older children and adults.
A junior version of the game is being developed.
The game can be played by over 9 or 18 holes and each player receives a scorecard at the start of the game to record their progress.
BIG NESSIE
Fila Golf introduces the Nessie Over-sized Driver with de luxe leather head cover.
The head is made from silicon carbide, a composite that is stronger, stiffer and more corrosion resistant than steel, says the company.
It also offers perimeter weighting, greater face thickness than any steel driver and feel and sound comparable with persimmon.
The 100 per cent graphite shafts are specifically designed with 4½ degrees for the Nessie club.
Available with 10½ degrees loft in regular or stiff flexes.
ELECTRONIC COURSE GUIDE
Columbia Tristar Home Video has launched a ‘Golf Guide to Europe’ to coincide with the availability of the world's first electronic book player — Sony's Data Discman.
The information is accessed by slipping the disc into the electronic book player, allowing you to select the best golf courses in Europe by country and by difficulty, length, green fees and a host of other criteria.
It is compatible with all electronic book players showing the EBG symbol.
NEW COLOURS
New from Cobra is the Pearl Golf colour scheme available on the top-selling Lady Cobra clubs.
The Metalwoods and Baffler Blade Irons feature Autoclave shafts, exclusive to Cobra, and attractively finished in Pearl to match the woods and irons.
Matching 9″ bag and accessories provide a complete ensemble of colour coordinates.
For even the most experienced golfer, scoring a hole-in-one will always be one of the more elusive feats in the game of golf.
Why not turn your hole-in-one into a big celebration by becoming a member of the Golf Monthly Hole-in-One Club?
We have joined forces with Wolfschmidt Kummel —‘the putting mixture’— to open the Club to anyone who scores a hole-in-one in a club competition.
A draw is now made out of all the entries received each month to select the winning hole-in-one and we will then present the winner with two cases of Wolfschmidt Kummel.
October's winner is Paul Griffiths at Hanbury Manor Golf and Country Club, with a hole-in-one of 188 yards.
We are now commencing the 1993 competition and to assess the best all-round golfer from our monthly winners, all 12 will be invited to a Grand Final in October next year at the Royal Mid-Surrey GC.
All members of the Club will receive a Golf Monthly certificate, signed by Peter Alliss, and a leather luggage tag.
Wolfschmidt Kummel Cocktail
THE 19TH Recipe:
2 parts Wolfschmidt Kummel
3 parts Crème de Banane
5 parts cream
Either stir or shake the ingredients together and serve in a tall or white wine glass.
NEXT MONTH
THE SHARK IS BACK
Earlier this month in Canada Greg Norman recorded his first win for over two years.
We talk to him about the inner turmoil he had been feeling during his long drought and about his high hopes for the future.
FIGHT THE FLAB
Eight pages of simple advice to help you stop hitting fat shots.
LADIES FIRST
A full report of the action at the Solheim Cup at Dalmahoy.
IMPROVE YOUR SCORES WITHOUT CHANGING YOUR SWING: PART TWO
Steve Richardson (below) with more advice on how to improve your tactics.
KEEP THOSE KNEES TOGETHER
Mark Roe explains the swing change that helped him win the recent Lancome Trophy.
DECEMBER ISSUE OF GOLF MONTHLY ON SALE NOVEMBER 12 DON'T MISS YOUR COPY PLUS GOOD VALUE GOLF We travel to the Scottish Borders to find some of the best golfing bargains in the British Isles 
Osman Out of Bounds
Golf can do terrible things to the nerves.
Narrow fairways, water carries, 4-foot putts for par, a myriad of challenges likely to reduce even the most hardened player to a quivering wreck.
However, none of these can compare with the unbearable sense of dread felt by every golfer in the nation as they watched this year's final Major — the US PGA Championship.
With nerves jangling, palms sweating and nails bitten to the bone, the same unthinkable notion was in the minds of millions — surely the US PGA Championship is not going to be won by someone called…
Jeff Maggert ?
Why do we have to go through this sort of agony in every American Major?
How many times have you switched on BBC2 on the weekend of a Major to hear Steve Ryder say, ‘You join us here at Crooked Stick where American Brad Faxon leads the field’ or ‘And the surprise leader is the American ex-college champion Ted Schulz’?
This is often followed by, ‘Meanwhile Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam lie five shots back, but bad news for Seve, he slumped to a 78’.
It happened every single time and it is very upsetting indeed.
You know, logically, that these people won't win, but then you start thinking about Jeff Sluman and the whole event is immediately spoiled for you.
Here is what I propose.
A blacklist will be drawn up (by me probably) of American journeymen pros who should be banned from all American Major Championships (and especially the US PGA).
I'll start the ball rolling right now shall I?
OK.
Goodbye to Brad Faxon, Ted Schulz, Gene Sauers, Dan Forsman, Jim Gallagher Jnr (and Snr if he plays golf, too).
Adios David Peoples, Billy Ray Brown, Andrew Magee, Tom Purtzer and farewell also Lee Janzen, Kenny Perry, Bill Britton and Donnie Hammond.
Begone, and never darken our television screens again!
The one journeyman pro it's all right to like, John Daly, came third from last in the US PGA.
Interestingly, his poor showing was for the same reason as that of much of the European contingent.
Europe's finest players complained that jet lag — from the long trip across the Atlantic — was affecting their play.
It was worse for Daly, however.
Every time he hit a drive it ended up at least two time zones away.
Daly started his first round at 1pm, and finished it at 7.30 the previous evening.
He played in all four rounds and was still able to take the weekend off.
Back to Europe for trouble at the Murphy's English Open where much comment was made concerning the absence of Europe's top players.
The rumours spread that this was because Murphy's had refused to pay appearance money to the Tour's major stars.
‘Not so,’ replied one such star, Ian Woosnam, ‘money is no longer an issue for me.’
From The Belfry, over to Switzerland and up an Alp for the European Masters, the first event to count towards 1993 Ryder Cup qualification.
The US PGA took this opportunity to announce some proposed Ryder Cup rule changes.
‘We are tired,’ said Andy Bean, newly appointed US Captain (for reasons that will become apparent)‘with the usual way of compiling Ryder Cup teams.
Instead of using the Orders of Merit, we suggest that, from now on, Ryder Cup teams should be composed of those Americans and Europeans who have the stupidest names.’
It is thought this idea was prompted by the PGA Championship performances of Jeff Maggert and Gene Sauers.
A thought-provoking, if somewhat radical, plan from the American camp, and it is clear that they would have a strong-looking team.
It would be hard to compete on stupid names terms with the 12 men picked by Andy Bean for 1993 — Jeff Maggert, Gene Sauers, Fred Funk, Duffy Waldorf, Scott Gump, Kirk Triplett, Dillard Pruitt, Jodie Mudd, Greg Twiggs, Orrin Vincent III, Howard Twitty and, last but not least, Nolan Henke.
Bernard Gallacher seemed quite unconcerned, however, and it became clear why during a press conference held in Switzerland.
‘After several visits to the deed poll office,’ stated Gallacher, ‘I am pleased to announce that the European team will be built around the experienced quartet of Nick Grapefruit, Ian Ptang!
Ptang!,
Jose Maria Doberman-Pinscher and Eggplant Ballesteros.
And incidentally,’ added the canny Scot, ‘I am now to be known as Princess Deborah Barbecue.
Thank you.’
These men will no doubt be joined by a shining star on view at the European Masters, a young Swiss professional who is destined for Ryder Cup glory.
Step forward and take a bow for your time has come.
Ladies and gentlemen, I give you…
Domingo Hospital!
‘You join us here at Augusta where the field is led by Swiss superstar Domingo Hospital.’
Jeff Maggert, step aside.