

Food, drink & more from your TV and radio programmes Merry Christmas Every recipe you need for the festive season Cakes of wonder and sheer delight New ways with turkey Michael Barry's perfect puds Mireille Johnston's French feasts 100 RECIPES BIGGEST ISSUE EVER!
Delicious alternatives for Christmas Day
It's the busiest time of the year for cooks, so this month's issue is packed with tips and advice to give you a helping hand.
We look at turkeys and, in particular, traditionally reared birds.
There's also the pick of shop-bought puds, three alternative Christmas menus and fabulous cakes and desserts.
We've lots of gift ideas and, if you're quick off the mark, you could win one of our giveaways on pages 12 and 13.
For wine lovers among you, there's a six-part Wine Certificate organised in association with The Wine and Spirit Education Trust.
And, who knows, you may go on to become a Master of Wine.
So make a start now by testing your taste-buds in this month's competition, the Sainsbury's Wine Taste Challenge on page 62 — you could win a trip to the wineries of New Zealand or Germany.
Cheers, and a very merry Christmas!
Cover dish: Present perfect (recipe on page 43)
A biscuit barrel of laughs
Another angle for Christmas salmon
NEWS
WHAT'S cooking
All the latest food news and products, compiled by Kitty Butterwick
HAVING A BALL
These golf ball-sized Christmas puddings, covered in milk chocolate, with caramel and ganache fillers are ideal stocking fillers.
OUT TO LAUNCH
Don't miss the launch of our new sister magazine BBC Gourmet Good Food , price £2.50, on sale November 12.
The best food shops, hotels and imaginative haute cuisine recipes are featured in stunning style.
GOURMET GATEAUX
Top quality French gâteaux are now available in the UK.
The Charlotte Elysée (right), a vanilla and chocolate mousse with sponge biscuits, is one of four Brossard frozen cakes.
Safeway, Tesco and Sainsbury stock the range 
CALIFORNIA DREAMING
Smart cookies keep their biscuits in a jar.
The Los Angeles Pottery company near Beverly Hills specialises in innovative stoneware cookie jars based on snowmen, Santas, cats and mice.
CUTTING IT FINE
For a tempting breakfast spread, try the home-made tangerine taste of Crabtree & Evelyn's Fine Cut Marmalade.
Free from any artificial additives, it's £8.95 for a 1kg/2lb jar 
WICKER'S WORLD
There's no cutting corners on quality with Presents of Mind hampers.
This wicker hamper is packed with delicious goodies and costs £64.92, inclusive of nationwide delivery.
From £14.98 to £470 and you can choose your own contents.
Call (0245) 381220 for a brochure.
THE SMART SET
Treat someone special to a Fortnum & Mason gift set of champagne and fresh cream champagne truffles (available separately too),
MEN ONLY
They say the way to a man's heart is through his stomach, so pick up an elegant Gentleman's Gift Tray from Waitrose at £13.50.
It comprises a bottle of sparkling white wine, a Taylors of Harrogate Darjeeling tea caddy, continental plain chocolate and Gentleman's Relish.
ALL IN VEIN
Creamy in texture and blue-veined, ‘Blues’ will be a hit on your cheese-board.
Made in Pays de Bresse in France, this full-fat soft cheese costs £4.50 per lb from the food shops nationwide.
HERD INSTINCT
A cast-iron corkscrew in the shape of a cow's head is ideal for wine lovers —
MUG SHOTS
Take tea with Her Ladyship, Squire, Cook and Butler china mugs.
Available from National Trust shops and by mail order 
BRUSH STROKES
For the cook who has absolutely everything — well almost — a wooden mushroom-shaped cleaning brush for cleaning fungi.
NOVELTY IDEAS
Jane Asher has put her creative talents to work to come up with a range of designer cakes that are exclusive to Sainsbury.
Catering for every age and passion, the selection includes a red Lotus racing car, Nintendo game boy, pink cat and champagne cake.
MUSEUM PIECES
For a heart-warming tipple, try these aromatic spices in whisky or red and white wine.
From the V&A Treasury Christmas catalogue, they cost £6.95 for three.
SLEIGH 'EM
Children will certainly love the range of novelty chocolates from Thorntons.
A highly detailed mould is used to make this Santa Claus and the red and white decorations are hand-piped, £2.99.
The range also includes a rocking horse at £3.50.
GINGER GROUP
Add a festive frolic to Christmas tea time or a child's stocking with Asda's Iced Ginger Biscuits.
These big biccies — they measure 8.5cm/3¼in diameter — cost £1.50 for a pack of four.
SOME DAY MY PRINTS WILL COME
These wooden-framed prints will look great in the kitchen.
Yellow Daffodils and Country Kitchen are normally £15 each, but BBC Good Food readers can buy both for just £25 plus £1.50 p+p.
WALL'S TREAT
Introducing La Bomboniera from Wall's — a vanilla ice cream coated with dark chocolate.
An original and delicious ending to a meal; price: £1.89 for 20 from major supermarkets everywhere.
TESTING TESTING
In the magazine's October issue, we assessed the wrong varieties of two pasta sauces in Tried & Tasted.
So we have re-tested Dolmio and Asda's own label Napoletana sauces.
Dolmio: rich tomato, but odd herb flavours, nice pulpy texture with an acidic aftertaste; 14/20.
Asda: chunks of tomato, onion and mushroom in a runny sauce.
Bland, processed flavour with sharpish finish; 11/20.
Giveaways
Merry Christmas — Kitty Butterwick presents a host of freebie stocking fillers and gifts
LOVELY BUBBLY
Victoria Wine's Post Haste delivery service despatches wine or spirits for £5.99, excluding bottle price.
Order through Victoria Wine branches or call the hotline on 0800 526464.
We have 75 gift-wrapped bottles of Moët & Chandon (worth £23.98) to give away.
PEP TALK
Say goodbye to stale or flat wine with the Wine Saver.
This simple canister squirts a harmless gas into the bottle, so it remains drinkable for up to four weeks and it lasts for over 100 applications.
Costs about £6 from high street and independent wine merchants, selected Asda stored or by mail order .
We have 200 canisters to give away —
PUT THE KETTLE ON
Savour the flavour of salmon with this super stainless steel fish kettle.
Normally £40 in department stores, it holds a 3–3.5kg/7–8lb fish (look out for Quality Approved Scottish Salmon).
We have 30 kettles and 30 aprons to give away 
LIQUID GOLD
Glengoyne Vintage 1967 is an unpeated single malt whisky matured in oak for almost 25 years.
Usually £75 a bottle (call 041–429 1100 for stockists), we have 20 to give away.
PANTASTIC
Meyer's Steelon skillet has a raised lattice inside which stops food sticking.
We have 50 (worth £28.99) to give away  
GO WEST COUNTRY
The Cheese and Wine Shop in Wellington, Somerset, stocks delicious West Country fare.
Prices from £12.50 to £38 (inc. delivery); We have 50 baskets containing three cheeses, biscuits and chutney (worth £20) to give away.
A RELIABLE SAUCE
Ocean Spray Cranberry Sauce is tops with turkey.
We have 50 vouchers for a 190g jar of cranberry sauce or jellied cranberry sauce, plus a Royal Brierley crystal sauce pot (worth £25) and recipe booklet to give away.
BOOTIFUL BISCUITS
A selection of scrummy biscuits is a must at Christmas.
We have 250 1kg tins of Boots Luxury English Biscuits (normally worth £5.99) to give away.
FILO FAX
Make sure you have everything wrapped up this Christmas with Jus-Rol's frozen filo pastry.
It costs 99p for 275g from major supermarkets, but we have 1,000 vouchers, plus recipe booklets, to give away.
CHOC TACTICS
Chocoholics will love The Chocolate Book by Sara Perry, an American cookbook that is now published in the UK.
We have 200 copies to give away —
FREE FOR ALL
To enter for any of our free offers, simply send postcards with offer details to: Or call the numbers linked to each offer; calls prefixed by 0839 cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute at all other times.
Winners will be chosen at random by the end of December.
State if you do not want to receive other material linked to any of the offers.
PASS THE PORT
Enjoy the smooth taste of Offley 1985 LBV, made from the grapes of a single estate.
From Oddbins, Littlewoods and Budgen , it comes with an extra stopper to reseal the bottle.
We have 100 to give away —
SAFEWAY AND BBC GOODFOOD
Partners in Quality
There are lots of delicious food ideas that little bit different to choose from at Safeway this Christmas
Three of the best
Cheer up your Christmas cheeseboard with a mouth-watering Connoisseurs Choice special selection pack of three traditional English cheeses.
Choose from Oak Smoked Cheddar, Mature Red Leicester and Mature Blue Stilton.
It's looking good
Treat your guests to the King of English cheeses — Blue Stilton.
What better way to end a dinner party than to relax and linger over a glass of port and a generous chunk of Stilton.
Give yourself time to savour its unmistakably smooth, rich taste and texture.
Available at Safeway in an attractive 275g white and blue glazed jar, it will also make a welcome and attractive Christmas present idea.
How totally unexpected!
How's this for something completely different and unique?
A chocolate ball made from delectable Belgian chocolate — filled with Stilton steeped in port.
It's so delicious, you'll wonder why no one has ever thought of it before!
Available from early December, the Safeway Stilton and Port chocolates (sold in an eight pack) are a novel alternative to after-dinner mints.
Have a white Christmas
Traditionally Christmas and snow have always gone together — and even though Safeway can't guarantee the weather, it does have a delectable, fully iced Christmas cake which should more than make up for it!
The cake is decorated to look like a parcel, even down to the gift tag which is edible.
It tastes as good as it looks, too — a rich, moist fruit cake, full of all kinds of mouth-watering goodies like currants, sultanas and cherries and almonds, and generously laced with Grand Marnier to give it even more flavour.
It's then covered in a generous layer of almond marzipan and finally topped with a layer of melt-in-the-mouth soft-eating Regal ice.
Just desserts
If you want a delicious, lightly whipped dessert, choose Safeway delectable Crème Fraîche in orange or raspberry.
It's made from a combination of cream and fruit which gives it a refreshing piquant flavour.
Sold in 2×65g packs, it's great as an alternative topping on Christmas pudding.
Well read
Keep the children amused while you're cooking by giving them one of the books from the new Safeway Superbooks range.
They are competitively priced children's books which are both entertaining and instructive and cater for all age groups.
The healthy option
Treat your family to one of the new Safeway healthy Supertrim packs of meat.
Supertrim is specially selected lean quality meat, ready trimmed, so little if any preparation is necessary.
There's Supertrim Beef Steak & Kidney, Supertrim Beef for Olives,(slices of beef rolled and ready to stuff); Supertrim Beef for Goulash/Bourguignon,(lean, large cubes of silverside beef); Supertrim Beef Strips,(for use in Stroganoff or stir fries).
All packs have peel-back labels with recipe ideas like stuffing for the Beef Olives (see right).
Or, try our quick and tasty recipe for Goulash (see far right).
You will need:
1 Brown beef in the oil and add the onions, peppers, canned tomatoes, tomato purée and paprika, stirring gently to mix well.
Cook for an hour or until meat is tender.
2 Add potatoes and caraway seeds.
Season to taste.
Cook for a further 15 minutes.
3 Five minutes before the end of cooking time, mix the cornflour with a little water to a smooth paste and add to the stew to thicken.
Serve with spinach fusilli pasta.
Wines to savour
You don't need to be a wine expert to make the right choice of wines for any of your Christmas meals — simply take a trip to Safeway, recently awarded the title of Supermarket Wine Merchant of the Year 92/93 and look at the staggering array of wines on offer.
If you like red wines, try Romanian Special Reserve Cabernet Sauvignon 1985, Dealul Mare and Pinot Noir 1988, Dealul Mare, both are excellent choices.
Or try the Australian Cabernet Sauvignon 1992, Riverina, NSW, perfect with grills and roasts.
The Portuguese Safeway Barrada 1987 goes well with herbed and spiced dishes and rich sauces.
Australian Chardonnay 1992, also from Riverina is an excellent choice of white wine with white meats, poultry, spicy recipes and vegetable dishes, as is the sophisticated Safeway Chardonnay 1991, Vin de Pays des Côteaux de l'Ardèche, which is also great with smoked fish, shellfish and egg dishes.
All items are subject to availability.
MEALS IN MINUTES
Now on BBC1's Good Morning…with Anne & Nick, 10.30am–12.15pm, weekdays
Mixed pepper galettes with Caerphilly
1 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Divide the pastry into four and roll out each piece to a 20cm/8in round.
Prick lightly with a fork, place on greased baking sheets.
Leave to chill in the fridge for about 10 minutes.
2 Heat the oil in a frying pan and gently cook the peppers for 10–15 minutes until soft.
Spoon a quarter of the peppers into the middle of each pastry round, sprinkle a little marjoram on top and season.
Scatter with the Caerphilly and bake for 15 minutes until the pastry is crisp and the cheese is golden and bubbling.
Garnish with fresh marjoram and serve hot or cold with salad leaves.
Per serving: 467 calories, fat high, saturated medium, protein medium, fibre medium, sodium high 
If you haven't any Caerphilly, you can use any flavourful hard cheese instead.
Hot French toasts
1 Heat three tablespoons of olive oil and sauté the onion, carrot and one clove of crushed garlic for 3–5 minutes.
Add the livers and cook for 5 minutes.
2 Add the white wine, tomato purée, capers, chilli sauce and seasoning and cook until thick.
3 Mix the tomatoes, two tablespoons of oil, basil and rest of crushed garlic.
Season.
4 Meanwhile, toast the bread and, while still warm, rub with the halved clove of garlic and drizzle over a little olive oil.
Spoon the toppings on to the toasts, arrange the prosciutto over the tomato topping and serve at once, garnished with the basil.
Creamy prawns
1 Heat the oil and fry the onion until soft.
Stir in the flour and cook for 2 minutes.
Gradually pour in the sherry and stock and cook, stirring, until thickened.
Simmer gently for 8–10 minutes.
2 Add the garlic, tomatoes, thyme and green beans and cook gently for a further 5–7 minutes.
Drain the prawns thoroughly and pat them dry on kitchen paper.
Stir the prawns and cream into the mixture and heat through gently.
Season to taste, garnish with the parsley and serve with fresh or dried tagliatelle.
Cod baked in parchment
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Cut non-stick baking paper or foil into four 30×45cm/12×18in rectangles.
Divide half the courgette, lemon, carrot and mushrooms among rectangles.
2 Lay the cod fillets on top and scatter over the remaining vegetables and lemon.
Add the thyme and white wine.
Season and dot each one with butter.
3 Draw up the paper or foil around the fillets, then fold and crimp edges to seal.
Place on baking sheets and bake for 10–15 minutes.
Bring the parcels to the table for everyone to open.
You can use frozen cod, but make sure that it is thoroughly defrosted and dried well on kitchen paper.
Quick beef stroganoff
1 Sprinkle the steak with paprika and seasoning.
Heat the butter and oil in a pan, add the steak and fry on both sides for about 5 minutes until it is well browned.
2 Add the mushrooms and spring onions, then stir in the tomato purée and soured cream and simmer for a few minutes.
Add a dash of lemon juice and seasoning and garnish with the coriander.
Serve hot with boiled rice and a dollop of soured cream on top, if you wish.
Instead of using shop-bought soured cream, you can easily make your own by stirring one teaspoon of lemon juice into 150ml/¼ pint of single cream.
Bacon and pasta bake
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil and cook the pasta until al dente ; drain.
2 Meanwhile, grill the bacon chops for 3–4 minutes on each side, cut into chunks and set aside.
Mix the tomatoes with the hot pepper sauce and oregano.
3 Layer the pasta in an ovenproof dish with the tomatoes, bacon and peas, seasoning each layer.
Mix together the breadcrumbs and cheese and sprinkle over the top.
Bake for 20–25 minutes until hot and golden brown.
Serve at once with salad leaves.
Smoked streaky bacon can be used instead of the chops.
Spicy cauliflower pasta
1 Cook the cauliflower in a pan of boiling, salted water for 6–8 minutes until just tender.
Meanwhile, cook the pasta in a separate pan of boiling, salted water for 10 minutes or until al dente .
Drain well.
2 Heat the oil in a frying pan and cook the onion until softened.
Add the almonds and cook over a high heat until golden.
Reduce the heat, add the pepperoni and raisins and cook for 1 minute.
3 Add the cauliflower, pasta, pesto sauce, seasoning and Cheddar.
Toss well to mix, garnish with basil and serve at once with crusty bread.
Fresh basil is much cheaper if you keep it potted.
Keep the plants on a bright window-sill and remember to water.
Mixed berry pie
1 Preheat the oven to 150C/300F/Gas 2.
Mix together oats, coconut and butter and press firmly into the base and sides of a 20cm/8in loose-bottomed flan tin.
Bake for 15 minutes; cool.
2 Sift the flour and salt into a bowl.
Beat sugar and egg yolks together until thick and creamy, then gradually mix in the flour
3 Heat the milk and lemon rind in a small pan, bring to simmering point, cool slightly then pour into the yolks, stirring constantly.
Tip into a small pan and bring to the boil.
Cook, stirring constantly until thickened; about 2 minutes.
4 Cool, stirring occasionally to prevent a skin forming.
Fold in the cream and pour into the pie case.
Pile the berries on top.
Chill and serve with cream.
RADIO 4
Cooper's COLUMN
The renaissance of the raisin is one of the great US marketing success stories.
Derek Cooper finds out how the wrinklies were sold to the younger generation
RAISIN D'ETRE
The humble raisin has been around for at least 2,000 years, but it hasn't always been very popular — particularly in the US where novelty is all when it comes to food.
Behind the rise of the wrinkly no-hoper to its current status as a hip, healthy snack lies an absorbing tale of modern marketing.
This autumn I visited the San Joaquin Valley in California where almost half of the world's raisin crop is grown.
In this fertile, irrigated region which is roughly the same size as the Netherlands, there is an abundance of fruit.
Peaches, apricots, plums and nectarines nestle amid thousands of acres of vine, originally planted for table grapes and wine.
In the summer of 1873 there was an unseasonal heatwave in the valley — so intense that it shrivelled the grapes in every vineyard.
The growers appeared to be facing ruin until one bright spark hit on an idea.
He took a wagonload of the spoiled crop to San Francisco and passed it off as a Peruvian delicacy.
It was a sell-out, and the Californian raisin industry was born.
BUMPER TO BUMPER
This year the UK will import 28,000 tonnes of raisins — that's five times the figure of a decade ago.
Yet, in recent years, raisins have suffered from an image problem, which seems odd in the health-conscious US.
After all, what could be more natural and nutritious than a deliciously sweet grape dried by the sun?
Low in fat and sodium, rich in minerals and fibre, the raisin contains virtually no fear-inducing cholesterol.
The simple fact is that American consumers regarded them as boring, which is why 60 per cent of the crop had always gone into products like bread and biscuits.
Research revealed that people were prepared to buy raisins, but only as an ingredient for the store cupboard.
Even then, they would only put in a brief appearance in puddings and cakes at Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Little old ladies who had relished home baking were a dying breed and the younger generation simply couldn't relate to them.
Small wonder that the US marketing industry was finding it hard to sell the idea of the raisin as an all-day snack.
In 1985, the advertising agency Foote, Cone & Belding conducted a series of surveys to discover how the younger sector viewed these ‘little nuggets of sunshine’.
Compared with other nutritious foods, they fared badly.
Perceived as ‘weak’ and ‘lonely’, one respondent went so far as to condemn raisins as ‘embarrassing to be seen with in public’!
Lorna Wood, a promotion activist working for the industry, gave me the full shock-horror story: ‘People knew raisins were good for them.
They liked them, but they were regarded as wimpy and very uncool.
Eating raisins just wasn't the neat thing to do.
They needed a total personality make-over.’
MOVING TO MARVIN
What happened next has passed into advertising legend.
Through the wonders of animation, the dancing raisins campaign was born.
As they strutted along to Marvin Gaye's Motown smash hit I Heard it Through the Grapevine , these wrinkled little fellows captured the hearts of American youngsters.
‘Kids kept insisting on actually meeting ‘The Raisins’, so they were brought to life for celebrity appearances in New York's Thanksgiving Day Parade — and even for the presidential inauguration,’ said Ms Wood.
‘We persuaded people to think of raisins as warm, funky and cool — and it worked.’
Needless to say, sales rocketed.
SMART COOKIES
The manufacturers have a high regard for their product.
Take food technologist Garry Obenault: ‘Raisins plump up during cooking whereas sultanas fall apart.
And they are a great enhancer of shelf-life.
Put them into a product and you can take out most of the preservatives.’
Raisins were first included in American cookies only six years ago, but the idea has caught on with a vengeance.
‘People from the UK are astounded when they walk down a cookie aisle in the US, as it may be 60 feet long.
Not all contain raisins, but a great deal do,’ said a marketing mogul.
He explained that every biscuit has to have a different flavour and must be new or improved, as Americans have a short attention span: ‘The food here is a bit like the film industry; you always have to come up with something else.’
So, with such a fast turnover, there's plenty of scope for raisins.
DRY CURE?
However, there is another problem — drought.
Before the wells were sunk in the 19th century, the San Joaquin Valley was as dry as the Sahara.
Even now the irrigated patches are surrounded by arid desert.
‘We're in our sixth year of drought,’ said farmer Joe van Gundy.
‘No new water supplies have been developed in 20 years.’
If rain doesn't come soon, there will be no vines or raisins and the desert will swallow up the fertile land.
At the moment that is not a future anyone is prepared to consider in the happy valley of San Joaquin.
Derek Cooper investigates topical food issues on BBC Radio 4's The Food Programme 
STOP press
COMPILED BY TIM LANG AND AMANDA URSELL
I CAN ‘C’ CLEARLY NOW
An orange a day keeps the ophthalmologist away, so new research suggests.
The report confirms that a diet rich in vitamin C can help to prevent the development of cataracts, which frequently afflict the over-65s.
The eight-year project involving 50,000 people discovered that those with a high intake of vitamin C and beta carotene (found in fresh fruit and vegetables) were less likely to suffer from cataracts.
A CLEAN BILL
Under the requirements of the 1990 Food Safety Act retailers were expected to improve the standard of hygiene in shops.
So, this year, the Consumers' Association conducted a series of spot checks.
The results were not at all encouraging: four out of five hams on sale in delicatessens, a third in supermarkets and almost half of those in butcher shops were contaminated.
Overall, only two out of three supermarkets, one in three delicatessens and one in five butchers scored high marks for hygiene.
Looks like most British retailers have yet to clean up their act.
PRESSURE GROUP
Good news for people who have high blood pressure.
A healthy diet is now considered the most effective way of treating this condition, apart from the use of drugs.
A study of 2,000 women aged 30–54 discovered a reduction in blood pressure levels in those who had lost weight and restricted sodium consumption.
If you want to keep an eye on your sodium intake, refer to the nutritional information which accompanies some of the recipes in BBC Good Food .
And always consult your doctor before embarking on any new diet.
DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
The Lancet recently featured an Italian report linking coeliac disease and epilepsy sufferers who have calcium deposits on the brain.
Coeliac disease, which causes intestinal problems and is often associated with complications of the nervous system, is treated by following a diet free from the protein gluten, found in wheat, barley and rye.
Patients on the diet saw a reduction or end to seizures, where drugs had failed.
The researchers suggest that once epilepsy and calcium deposits are diagnosed, a test for coeliac disease should be carried out, so a gluten-free diet can be prescribed.
DAIRY, DAIRY…
QUITE CONTRARY
Now that the Government is committed to a national healthy eating policy, we need to examine school nutritional standards — and where better to start than with milk?
While children under seven need full-fat milk because they are still in the early stages of development, older children should have skimmed or semi-skimmed.
This may sound straightforward, but every school caterer tells the same story: ‘We'd love to serve skimmed milk, but as full-fat is cheaper we'd lose our subsidy’.
British civil servants would like to reverse this policy, but are prevented from doing so by the EC.
NUTRITION: THE NORTH/SOUTH DIVIDE
The world's governments will meet in Rome this December for the first global food conference for nearly 20 years, and it is hoped that it will produce the nutritional blueprint for the next century.
However, like the Earth Summit, the conference agenda has already provided arguments.
Some governments consider inadequate food resources in the developing countries to be the number one priority.
Others believe that the countries of the southern hemisphere need to learn from the West's mistakes in eating a diet high in fat, sugar and salt if they want to avoid our high incidence of heart disease and cancer.
Britain, meanwhile, has set an important precedent by including a number of representatives from the food industry and consumer groups in its delegation to the conference.
SEASONAL EATING
Talk turkey
Linda Fraser gives us a bird's eye view of this festive meat and makes saucy comments about cranberries
For most of us , the turkey is as traditional as mince pies, but the story of how it found its way on to the Christmas table is an interesting one.
The turkey originated from the American continent as far back as 10 million years ago.
Dark-feathered and wild, it dwelt in woods, surviving on a diet of maize, fruit and grass.
The north American Indians hunted it for food and used the feather to decorate their headdresses, but the Mexican Aztecs were responsible for domesticating it.
The early bird
In the 16th century, the turkey was imported into England by Yorkshireman William Strickland, and it soon usurped the swan as the favoured traditional dish of the nobility.
Henry VIII was the first monarch to dine on turkey, but Edward VII made it fashionable to eat at Christmas.
George II liked it so much that he reared 3,000 birds in Richmond Park for his Christmas guests.
The origin of the word turkey is not so easy to trace.
Although the bird was native to America, its name may have evolved from the days when turkey was first distributed in England by Turkish merchants.
It is also possible that the fowl's red face and strutting gait reminded the English of a caricature of a haughty Turkish dignitary, complete with fez, especially as the curious gobbling noise sounded rather like Arabic.
The English first bred turkeys in Norfolk during the 17th and 18th centuries.
The birds were often marched from there (a distance of more than 100 miles) to be sold at London markets and, as it was such a lengthy journey, their feet were protected by small, leather boots, or with a coating of tar.
Until the 1940s, the turkey was reared in relatively small numbers — up to 500 to a flock.
The plumage was usually bronze or black and the breast was narrow, quite different from the broad-breasted, white-feathered fowls which are bred in such huge numbers today.
Breeding and hatching dates were planned solely for the Christmas market when up to two million birds would be sold.
However, it remained a luxury food item, available only to the rich, until the 1950s when turkey farming was developed on a much greater scale.
Feather bred
While the turkey was bred primarily for Christmas, the introduction of modern freezing techniques enabled birds to be frozen and stored.
Farmers began producing two flocks a year (which substantially reduced their costs) and the breed changed from the traditional bronze or black strain to a white-feathered bird.
This white turkey virtually took over as the sole breed; and, by the Christmas of 1959, there was hardly any demand for the bronze bird.
Expanding supermarket chains preferred the white breeds because the plucked birds' sin was clean and white, as opposed to the speckled skin of bronze- or black-feathered turkeys.
But, as we all know, beauty is only skin deep — it is more likely that the new breeds were favoured because they grew faster and to almost twice the size of bronze strains.
Value for money became the watchword, explains Derek Kelly, a turkey breeder for over 40 years: ‘It was all a matter of  price per pound.’
As with so many things, it was a simple case of economics that brought this one-time luxury fowl within everybody's reach.
Good breeding
Over the last 20 years Derek's collection of rare breeds has been joined by bronze- and black-feathered birds.
In the mid-'80s, a local butcher asked him to supply a handful of bronze-feathered turkeys for Christmas — and they all sold.
So he produced 18 the following year and, by 1991, that figure had reached 15,000.
‘It's all to do with the breed,’ he explains.
‘The modern white-feathered turkey doesn't have the same flavour.’
The tastiest are the Norfolk Black, a small-breasted bird which is rare in this country; and the bronze-feathered turkey; not quite as good, although it has a much meatier breast.
Derek has been working at capturing the flavour of the Norfolk Black — but in a bigger-breasted bird.
He hopes that his latest breeding venture: a cross between a bronze, a Norfolk Black and a Wrolstead (a slow-growing, white-feathered turkey from America) will be the shape and taste of the future.
Derek is one of roughly 50 farmers who are members of the Traditional Farmfresh Turkey Association (TFTA).
Their birds are eligible for the ‘Golden Triangle’, an assurance that guarantees a turkey has been reared and produced with utmost care by an independent farmer.
This means it has been grown slowly to full maturity, fattened on food containing no animal protein and at least 70 per cent cereal, and reared without the use of any antibiotics or growth-promoting additives.
Plucky creatures
When it comes to flavour, the difference between a TFTA turkey and a standard one is that a traditional bird is hung for at least seven days.
Most TFTA members hang theirs for 10 days, while Derek allows two to three weeks.
The big producers do not hang turkeys — which inevitably affects the flavour — because they are plucked and cleaned by machine.
Traditionally reared birds can be hung because they are dry-plucked by hand — a careful procedure which leaves the skin intact.
Hung turkeys are left whole, not because the innards contribute to the flavour, but because their removal creates holes which allow in bacteria — if left intact, a bird is sealed and therefore safe.
A huge variety will be on sale this year: the majority are frozen and by far the cheapest.
A fresh standard supermarket turkey costs a little more than frozen, while the price of a traditional farm fresh bird does vary depending on the producer, breed and whether or not it is free range — but you can pay up to twice as much.
You can purchase birds direct from the producer.
Last year, Derek sold some 1,500 from his farm — on Christmas Eve the queue stretched out as far as the main road.
But you don't have to go to the farm in person: good butchers all over the country will be selling Derek's bronze birds — call the number below to find out whether there is a stockist in your area.
Michael Barry will be offering advice on how to cook the turkey in our January issue.
VEGETABLES
Avocados:green-skinned Israeli Fuerte are now available — they are ready to eat when the stalk end is slightly soft.
Mash with lime juice, a pinch of chilli powder, chopped herbs and seasoning for guacamole.
Serve with taco chips.
Beetroot:bake fresh in their skins at 200C/400F/Gas 6 for 40–50 minutes and serve with soured cream.
Or grate raw and stir fry in walnut oil, orange juice and rind.
Celeriac:tastes like a sweet and nutty celery, it's rich in calcium and delicious grated raw in salads.
Celeriac has a rough, thick exterior, so cut it into pieces before peeling and drop into acidulated water to prevent browning.
Mushrooms:large open cup mushrooms are full of flavour.
Wipe with a damp cloth and grill them, or top each one with a spoonful of stuffing, then bake.
Add unused stalks to soups and stock.
Swede:mash with olive oil, a little grated nutmeg and a pinch of ground ginger.
Always choose a bright swede over a dull one.
FRUIT
Grapes:Muscat grapes go well with poultry and game birds, such as partridge and quail.
Pomelos:sharp, yet sweet fruit.
Remove the skin and white pith and eat as it is for a simple, refreshing dessert.
Even when ripe, these huge fruits have a greenish yellow skin and flesh, so don't be put off.
Satsumas:easy to peel and virtually seedless, these are the traditional Christmas fruit.
GAME
Hare:this is a good month for fresh hare, which has dark meat and a rich flavour.
You can but it whole or already cut into joints, such as saddle or hind legs.
Tenderise the meat of older hare and develop its flavour by marinating it in oil, wine and wine vinegar.
Pheasant:readily available and surprisingly cheap, any chicken recipe can be adapted for pheasant.
A moist method of cooking, such as casseroling, works best.
Use cold meat as the basis of a winter salad with apples, celery and walnuts.
Bitter harvest
When the  North  American Indians gave fresh cranberries as a gift to the Pilgrim families, it's unlikely that they were aware of the berries' peculiar talent — they can bounce!
Today, it is this factor which determines whether they will be sold as fresh fruit or processed into juice or sauce.
During the selection process berries are bounced along shaking conveyor belts which are crossed with four inch high wooden barriers — they must be fresh and firm enough to bounce over the boards.
A dollop of cranberry sauce has been the traditional accompaniment to turkey since the Pilgrim Fathers ate what they called crane berries (the flowers resemble cranes)— probably in the form of a sauce — with turkey at the Thanksgiving feast, celebrating their survival of the first winter spent in America.
At that time, cranberries were one of only three native fruits in the country.
They were baked in bread, cakes and buns and crushed to make juice.
The Indians used the berries to dye feathers and fabrics, and they were prized for their healing properties (wounds were bathed with the juice).
American sailors ate cranberries by the barrel load for their high vitamin C content, which helped to stave off scurvy.
Taking the sea air
The berries grow on low vines in damp, marshy ground, but they also thrive in the sandy hills along the coastline of New England where they benefit from the salty spray of the sea.
Cranberries for commercial cultivation are planted in vast peat bogs or marshes.
It takes three to five years for a new plantation to bear a crop, but, with care, the vines will last indefinitely — some bogs are more than 100 years old.
Berries ripen in late September and harvesting continues up to early November.
There are two different methods.
For dry harvesting, machines with rotating teeth are pushed up and down the bogs to gently comb the berries from the vines.
They then fall on to a conveyor belt which tips them into a wooden box.
A more extensively used method, wet harvesting is far more efficient: the bogs are dammed, flooded with a foot of water and the ripe berries are dislodged from the vines by mechanical water reels, known as giant egg beaters.
The beaters stir up the water with enough force to loosen the berries which float to the surface forming brilliant, crimson lakes.
They are then corralled by floating, wooden booms and transported via conveyor belts to waiting trucks.
About 80 per cent of the cranberry harvest comes from Massachusetts and Wisconsin.
This year, growers will reap more than two million barrels (although they are no longer shipped to market in the original 100lb wooden barrels, this term of measurement has stuck.)
Yet only about 15 per cent will be sold fresh; the rest will go to make cranberry sauce, juice and other products.
Fresh cranberries are available in the UK from mid-October until January.
They freeze well — pop them into the freezer in a polythene bag or box — and can be cooked from frozen after a good rinse.
Raw fruits also keep well if stored in the fridge, where they will remain fresh for several weeks.
Raw berries should be cooked and sweetened before being eaten because they have an intensely bitter flavour.
Instead of buying a jar of sauce this year, buy fresh or frozen cranberries and make your own from our recipe.
Cranberry sauce
Place 450g/1lb cranberries in a shallow pan with about 150ml/¼ pint of water, orange or apple juice (or use red or white wine); add a cinnamon stick and a little freshly grated nutmeg for flavour.
Cover and simmer until just tender and beginning to pop.
Leave to cool and remove the cinnamon stick.
Stir in 175–225g/6–8oz light muscovado sugar plus a tablespoon or two of rum, brandy or Cointreau, if you like — a shop-bought jar will benefit from a little alcohol to pep up the flavour.
Serve the sauce cold; or warm it through just before serving.
Berry Christmas
Sauce isn't all that cranberries are fit for — they can be used to good effect in a number of recipes.
Their tart flavour adds piquancy and the bright colour looks stunning.
Stir some into the stuffing for turkey or game birds, or mix with minced meat when making pâté.
A few berries in a rich wine sauce for goose or chicken adds a delicious note.
On page 110 we've used them in a wonderful vegetarian Christmas pie, and on page 77 freshly cooked cranberries have been combined with a shop-bought cranberry sauce as a chunky topping for apples to serve with goose.
You can also use them in crumbles or tarts, cake and bread mixtures.
CHRISTMAS CAKES
We three cakes
Cakes of wonder, cakes so light/Cakes with royal icing bright/Keep on reading, you'll be succeeding/All you bake will be sheer delight
Winter Wonderland
A lovely traditional cake: moist, rich and full of fruit and nuts.
Preheat the oven to 150C/300F/Gas 2.
Grease and line a 15cm/6in round cake tin and an 18cm/7in round cake tin with a double layer of greaseproof paper, then wrap the tins with a collar of double thickness brown paper — it needs to stand well above the tin.
Beat together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy.
Beat in the lemon rind and eggs, and little at a time, beating well after each addition.
Sift in half of the flour with the spice, then mix in half of the fruit and almonds.
Repeat with remaining flour, fruit and almonds, then stir in brandy.
Divide mixture between tins, so that it comes up to the same level in both.
Make a slight hollow in the middle of each cake.
Stand tins on a baking tray lined with a double thickness of brown paper.
Bake on the centre shelf o the oven for 1¼ hours, then cover cakes with brown paper to prevent overbrowning.
Bake for another 1¼ hours or until a skewer comes out clean.
Leave cakes to cool in tins, then turn out and store, wrapped in fresh greaseproof paper and foil.
Trim tops of cakes to level them.
Place larger cake upside-down on a cake board and spread thinly with jam.
Use 750g/1¼lb of the marzipan to cover larger cake: first fill any gaps around base then, using about two-thirds of the remainder, roll out a strip to cover side of cake completely.
Wrap around the cake and smooth join.
Roll out remaining marzipan to an 18cm/7in round, place on top of cake and trim around edges.
Spread top of smaller cake with jam, invert on to larger cake and press down firmly.
Spread rest of smaller cake with jam and cover with remaining marzipan, as before.
Leave cakes to dry for at least 24 hours.
Trace the snowflake designs on this page on to paper and stick to a board.
Tape non-stick baking paper over the top.
Fill a small greaseproof piping bag with a little white royal icing and snip a tiny hole in the end, or use a number 1 writing nozzle.
Pipe over the designs, moving the paper as necessary, to make 30 flakes.
Leave to dry overnight.
Colour 1kg/2lb of the sugar paste icing deep blue.
Roll it out on a board, dusted with a little icing sugar, to a rough triangle large enough to wrap around and over the top of the cake.
Dampen the marzipan-covered cake, with a little water and wrap the blue icing around it.
Smooth the icing and blend the joins carefully.
Trim around the edge and reserve trimmings.
Roll out 150g/5oz of white sugar paste icing and cut out hill shaped with one straight edge.
Brush with water and press on to bottom of cake.
Cut out strips and use to cover the board, trim the edge and smooth any joins.
Colour a spoonful of royal icing dark brown, place in a paper piping bag and snip end.
Pipe on three trunks.
Colour half of the remaining royal icing dark green, place in a paper piping bag and snip the end to a V-shape.
Pipe boughs in a similar way to leaves.
Work around cake, adding more icing to parts that have dried a little to give a 3-D effect.
Put the remaining royal icing in a paper piping bag and snip the end to a V-shape.
Pipe snow over the trees.
The green colour comes through the white as it dries, giving a muted effect.
Ease the snowflakes off the paper and stick them on the cake using white royal icing.
Colour the remaining sugar paste icing different shades of brown and model a house with door, shutters and chimney.
Use white sugar paste icing trimmings to cover the roof.
Attach house to the cake board with a little water.
Pipe a tiny wreath on the door using green royal icing.
Put a little white icing in a paper piping bag, snip the end and pipe snow on the chimney and window-sills.
Leave to dry for 24 hours.
Paint the bottom half of the white candles with blue food colouring.
Leave to dry, then press into the top of the cake.
The Holly and the Ivy
This is lighter than traditional fruit cake.
After baking, pierce with a skewer and spoon over a few tablespoons of brandy.
Preheat the oven to 325F/160C/Gas 3.
Rinse the pineapple and cherries to remove sugary coating and pat dry on kitchen paper.
Roughly chop the pineapple and apricots and quarter the cherries.
Place in a bowl with walnuts and sultanas.
Beat butter and sugar until very pale and fluffy.
Beat in eggs, a little at a time, beating well after each addition.
Add some flour with the last few additions of egg to prevent curdling.
Sift in the remaining flour and salt.
Add the grated orange rind and the sherry or milk and fold in with a large spoon.
Finally, stir in the fruit and walnuts.
Spoon the mixture into a well greased and base-lined 2.25 litre/4 pint pudding basin, hollowing the centre slightly.
Place on a baking tray lined with folded newspaper on the lowest shelf of oven.
Bake for 1 hour, then reduce temperature to 150C/300F/Gas 2 and bake for a further 1¾–2 hours or until a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean.
Cover the cake with foil or brown paper if the top begins to overbrown.
Leave cake to cool in the basin, then run a palette knife around the edge and down the side to loosen it.
Turn out the cake and wrap in a double thickness of greaseproof and foil until ready to decorate.
Transfer the cake upside-down to the cake board.
Heat the apricot jam gently and brush over the cake.
Roll out marzipan to a round large enough to cover the cake.
Lift marzipan over cake and smooth down, easing out folds.
Trim neatly around bottom edge and leave to dry overnight.
Colour the royal icing pale yellow and spoon into a paper piping bag.
Snip off the end to leave a very small hole.
Pipe a circle of tiny dots in the middle of each of the smaller red flowers, then pipe a blob in the centre of all the white flowers, surrounding it with a circle of yellow dots.
To finish the roses, lightly brush green colouring around edge of each petal.
Brush ivy leaves with a little green colour for a variegated effect.
When dry, brush the flowers and leaves with gold dusting powder.
Stick small poinsettias inside the larger ones with royal icing, then arrange flowers and leaves on the cake, as shown.
Unravel ribbons, cut both into three or four lengths and drape over the cake, tucking under the flowers.
The icing on the cake
Sugar paste icing is available ready-made from large supermarkets and cake decorating shops, but you can make it at home.
Beat 675g/1½lb icing sugar into three egg white and three rounded tablespoons of liquid glucose.
Knead in a further 675g/1½lb icing sugar to form a fairly stiff paste.
Wrap tightly in a polythene bag until ready to roll.
To make royal icing, beat half an egg white in a small bowl until frothy.
Using a spatula, gradually beat in 225g/8oz icing sugar.
Cover bowl with clear film or a damp cloth until ready to use.
Present Perfect
These parcels have different cakes inside.
We used the fruit cake from page 38 and two from Cook's Directory on page 136, but you could use ready-made cakes instead.
Cut a 2.5cm/1in thick slice from one side of the fruit cake.
From this piece, cut out a small round for the smallest parcel.
Halve the remaining cake vertically.
Press the apricot jam through a sieve and stir in one tablespoon of cold water.
Use a little to sandwich the fruit cakes together for the rectangular parcel.
Brush all four cakes with the remaining apricot glaze.
Thinly roll out the almond paste on a surface dusted with icing sugar and use to cover the tops and sides of the cakes.
Position the rectangular cake at the back of the board.
Colour 675g/1½lb of the sugar paste icing green, 225g/8oz red and 225g/8oz burgundy.
Leave the remainder white.
Set aside 100g/4oz of the green icing.
Press pieces of white icing on to the remaining green icing, then roll and fold the ends into the centre.
Repeat the process several times until the green becomes marbled with white.
Thinly roll out the icing on a surface dusted with icing sugar.
Cover the rectangular bar cake, smoothing the icing over the top and sides with hands dusted with icing sugar.
Trim off excess icing around the base.
Cover the round cake with white icing.
Using the wide end of an icing nozzle dipped in icing sugar, cut out rounds from the icing on the top and sides of the cake.
Press small balls of burgundy icing into the holes and smooth down flat.
Position cake against the green parcel.
Use some red icing to cover the smallest cake and place on top of the green and white parcels.
For the striped ribbon, thinly roll out the burgundy icing and cut into thick strips.
Roll out thin strips of white icing, dampen and lay over the burgundy icing.
Gently roll with a rolling pin to secure.
Bend a 10cm/4in length for each ribbon loop, dampening ends and pinching together to secure.
Position small balls of foil under the loops to help them retain their shape until the icing dries.
For holly ribbon, thinly roll out some of the burgundy icing and cut out small holly leaf shapes.
Dampen the edges of the holes, cut out green holly leaves and press into the leaf-shaped holes in the burgundy ribbon, then smooth gently to secure in place.
Cut out wide strips and wrap around cake and arrange strip of ribbon on board.
Cut four 10cm/4in lengths of ribbon and fold over the make loops.
Tuck a ball of foil under each one to hold the shape.
Leave to dry, then arrange on the cake.
For the chequered parcel, thinly roll out a little icing of each colour and cut into 1cm/½in squares.
Dampen the marzipan with water and position the squares, as shown.
Arrange on top of other cakes, as shown.
Roll out thin strips of white icing and lay over parcel, dampening strips and pressing gold beading down the centre of each one.
Use red and white strips for the ribbon on top of the parcel.
Twist some lengths of red ribbon and let them fall down the sides of the cake.
Using the striped ribbon technique, make a small gift tag and lay it on the small red parcel with a white twisted ribbon to secure.
Make a small bow for the green cake as before and leave to dry.
Position on top of the cake.
Using a fine paintbrush and the gold liquid food colouring, paint dots on the small red parcel and holly berries on the holly ribbons.
Scatter a few chocolate coins around the base of the cake.
Special offer
With the help of sugarcraft specialists Woodnutts, we have put together kits containing all the accessories and food colourings required for completing our three cakes.
Winter Wonderland kit
Cornflower, jade green and dark brown paste food colourings, 12 white twisted candles, 25cm/10in square non-stick sheet for piping snowflakes on, number 1 metal icing nozzle, 25 parchment icing triangles, £10.50 (inc. p+p).
The Holly and the Ivy kit
Christmas red, jade green and cream paste food colourings, 3 white candles, gold dusting powder, 3 ivy leaf cutters, holly cutter, Christmas rose cutter, 2 poinsettia cutters, tartan and red ribbons, £14.50 (inc. p+p).
Present Perfect kit
Gold liquid food colouring, Christmas red, apple green and burgundy paste food colourings, holly leaf cutter, gold beading, easy-flow smoother for sugar paste, mini rolling pin, £13.50 (inc p+p).
Woodnutts can also supply sugar paste icing, marzipan and various cake boards.
You can pay by cheque, Visa or Access credit card.
Call (0273) 205353 for further details.
TV SPECIAL
Custom-made CHRISTMAS
Paul Levy's new television series and book looks at the culinary ghosts of Christmas past and brings them up to the present day
The Feast of Christmas begins a five-week series on Channel 4 from November 24 at 8.30pm
Turkey, plum pudding, Stilton …typical traditional fare, but from where did they originate and how did the custom for eating them at Christmas arise?
In his new five-part Channel 4 series The Feast of Christmas , Paul Levy takes an idiosyncratic view of this important festival in the Christian calendar.
He looks at its age-old mysteries and traditions as well as the modern rituals and victuals that we have come to enjoy today.
Here is a selection of the book's recipes which would grace any festive table: Frances Bissell's oysters and turkey, Claudia Roden's turkey stuffing, butter and a cake with a hint of the exotic and an American whiskey fruitcake, courtesy of Paul himself.
As the recipes come from different cooks, the weights and measures may vary slightly, depending on the author.
Follow either metric or imperial — don't switch between the two.
Frances Bissell's potted oysters
Fills 12 small ramekins or pots or oyster shells 
1 Coarsely chop the oysters, then process for a moment with the rest of the ingredients, except the clarified butter, citrus juice and fresh parsley
2 Drizzle clarified butter over the top and chill until required.
You can make oval quenelle shapes with the mixture by moulding it between two teaspoons.
Place each oyster ‘sausage’ in an oyster shell, small pot or ramekin.
Add citrus juice to taste and garnish with parsley.
Serve with thin toast.
As this dish contains fresh oysters, eat it as soon as possible — remember, the oysters are not cooked.
Frances Bissell's turkey in two ways
Remove the breasts and thighs from the turkey carcase — or ask your butcher to do it for you.
Bone and skin and cut the thigh meat (better than drumsticks which are too sinewy) into regular-sized chunks.
Marinate the thigh meat overnight in a heavy plastic bag with olive oil, the juice and rind of a lemon, garlic, thyme, bay leaves, salt, freshly ground black pepper and some white wine.
You can marinate the skinned and boned whole breasts in the marinade for the same time, or slice into think steaks and flatten them into very thin paillards .
Marinate for only an hour or so in the same marinade as before or use just olive oil, lemon juice salt and freshly ground black pepper.
Remove the thigh meat from the marinade, dry it, then brown gently in olive oil with aromatics such as sliced onion or leek, and celery.
Either stew briefly in the strained marinade, or in white wine.
Add a bit of orange peel, it you like, and a crushed dried and seeded chilli gives a nice flavour.
As soon as the thigh meat is ready, remove it from the heat and keep warm.
If there is too much liquid left in the pan, pour it off and reduce in a separate pan (so the meat does not overcook).
Add black olives (Nyons variety if you like them), just in time to warm through and sprinkle with chopped parsley.
At the same time serve everyone with a grilled breast paillard or thicker steak.
It looks wonderful if you heat a metal skewer to red-hot and make a quadrillage — hatched grill marks — on both sides of the meat.
Roast turkey
If you are using a frozen turkey, make sure that it has thoroughly defrosted before cooking.
Calculate the cooking time by using the bird's stuffed weight.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas4 (for a fan-assisted oven, use manufacturer's handbook).
You great big beautiful bird: Roast turkey with Claudia Roden's flavoured butter and stuffing
Claudia Roden's flavoured butter for turkey
Make this butter in quantities to suit the size of your turkey.
The recipe is sufficient for a bird of 5kg/10lb or under; double the recipe for a larger bird and treble it for a very large turkey.
This is a slightly Middle Eastern butter, with sweet spices.
Almost any flavouring can be added — from garlic, parsley and grated lemon zest to anchovy paste or finely minced black truffle.
Separate the turkey skin from the flesh with your fingers, so as not to tear it — sew it up if it does tear.
Start by loosening the skin of the breasts, and you will find that you can easily detach the thin membranes that join the flesh to the skin of the thighs.
The skin covering the backbone and the ends of the legs is more difficult to detach.
Simply massage the flavoured butter into the flesh, giving a thicker coating of butter to the breast, and roast the bird as normal.
1 Using a fork, blend the butter, cinnamon, allspice and seasoning together well.
Claudia Roden's turkey stuffing
This is taken from a recipe for Persian chicken stuffed with dried fruit.
The quantity given will stuff a 5kg/10lb turkey fore and aft, as you do not want to cram the bird to bursting.
Double or treble the quantities, as required.
1 Sauté the chopped onions in the butter until soft and golden.
Add the chopped prunes, apricots, apples, raisins and broken walnuts and cook gently until the fruits plump up.
Season to taste with salt, pepper and the ground cinnamon.
Claudia Roden's m'hencha (Moroccan almond snake)
Originally this would have been made with the Moroccan pastry ouarka , but filo pastry is fine.
Makes 30.
1 Make the filling by mixing the almonds, sugar and cinnamon with your fingers and adding orange flower water (or rosewater) until the mixture feels like moist sand.
Work into a paste with your hands.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
2 Keep the filo sheets stacked and covered with a damp cloth.
Brush the top sheet of the stack lightly with butter.
Take balls of the almond paste and roll into thick fingers and place end to end, so as to have a thick line of paste.
Place this line about 2.5cm/1in from one long side of the first sheet of filo pastry.
3 Tightly roll the pastry up over the almond filling.
Push the ends of the roll towards the centre, so the pastry crinkles (this will prevent it tearing when the roll is curved).
Place on a large sheet of foil on a large baking tray.
4 Starting from the centre of the tray, curve the roll into a tight spiral.
Repeat the process with the remaining butter, filling and pastry until it is all used up.
Place each new roll at the end of the spiral until you have made a long, coiled snake shape.
5 Brush the top with the egg yolks beaten with one tablespoon of water.
Bake for 45 minutes or until crisp and brown.
6 Dust with icing sugar and sprinkle over lines of cinnamon in the shape of a cross.
You can serve it hot, but it's better at room temperature.
Kentucky bourbon fruitcake
This recipe is the closest I've ever seen to the one which our family cook Rhoda would make, months in advance of Christmas.
Fills one 2 litre/3½pint cake mould or 15×10cm/6×4in cake tin 
1 Place the candied fruit in a bowl with the candied peel, currants and pecans and add half of the bourbon.
Leave to soak — do this a day in advance, so that the currants swell.
2 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/Gas 3.
Whisk the dry ingredients together.
Cream together the butter and sugar in a large bowl and beat in the eggs.
Add the flour mixture a little at a time, following each addition with a little treacle and milk until everything is incorporated.
Beat in the fruit and nuts and the bourbon used to soak them.
The cake mixture will curdle slightly, as it contains so little flour — but do not worry.
3 Turn the mixture into a greased and floured 2 litre/3½pint cake mould or 15×10cm/6×4in cake tin.
Bake for at least 1 hour or until the cake has just begun to shrink from sides of tin and is springy to the touch — a skewer inserted into the centre should come out clean.
Leave to cool in the tin for 10–20 minutes and sprinkle with two-thirds of remaining bourbon.
4 Place a large piece of plastic film on the work surface.
Take a new but washed tea towel or piece of muslin large enough to hold the cake and moisten with half of the remaining bourbon.
(Rhoda used to soak the whole cloth in bourbon.)
Place the cloth on the plastic film and turn out the still warm cake on to it.
Add the last of the bourbon to the cloth, swathe the cake in it, then wrap the plastic film around the cloth.
When the cake cools, cover tightly with foil and store in a tightly closed tin.
Rhoda would open the tin and foil once a week or at least once a fortnight before Christmas to soak the cloth with more bourbon before resealing it.
Finger lickin' good: Paul Levy's Kentucky bourbon fruitcake.
A COOK'S TOUR OF FRANCE PART 2
Mireille Johnston continues her culinary journey exploring the myriad flavours of regional Gallic gastronomy
France is the home of good food and the birthplace of Mireille Johnston, who is a highly respected authority on French cooking.
She spent two years travelling through her native land to film her current BBC2 series.
This month we feature her recipes from Burgundy, which is renowned for its beef, poultry and wine; sunny Provence, which boasts a cuisine built around colourful seasonal produce and pungent herbs; and Auvergne and Limousin, an isolated, unspoilt region of France, famous for its cheeses, hearty meat dishes and the delicate Puy lentil.
A Cook's Tour of France began a six-week run on Thursday October 1, 8pm, on BBC2.
The recipes from the first three episodes are featured in BBC Good Food 's November issue.
Beignets de courgettes (Courgette fritters)
Serves 4 
1 Make the batter; place the flour in a large bowl and make a well in the centre.
Pour the egg yolks, beer and olive oil into the well, then gradually draw in the flour to form a batter.
Cover and leave in a cool place for 1 hour.
2 Place the courgettes in a sieve and sprinkle with salt.
Place a plate on top of them and put a weight on the plate.
Leave for 1 hour.
Rinse the courgettes under cold water, then dry with paper towels.
Stir the courgettes and mint into the batter and season with pepper.
3 Whisk the egg whites until stiff.
Gently fold them into the batter, using a tablespoon.
4 Heat the oil in a frying pan, then add tablespoonfuls of the courgette mixture.
Cook for 3–4 minutes on each side until golden brown.
Using a fish slice, transfer the cooked fritters to paper towels to drain.
Keep them warm while frying the remaining mixture.
Serve hot.
Boeuf à la ficelle (Poached beef)
Serves 4 
1 With the point of a sharp knife, make a hole through each slice of beef, near one edge.
Pass a long piece of string through each hole and tie the ends of the string to a carving fork, so the meat can be suspended in a pan without it touching the bottom.
Put the meat to one side.
2 Place herbs, peppercorns, carrots, celery, potatoes and cabbage in a pan of boiling water, put the tomato on top and boil for 10 minutes.
Strain off the cooking fluid, make up to 1.75 litres/3 pints and pour into another pan with the mustard and salt.
Keep the vegetables warm.
Bring the mustard liquid to the boil, add the beef slices tied to the fork and simmer gently for 5–7 minutes.
3 Meanwhile, place the crumbled bread in a small bowl, sprinkle over the milk and leave for 10–15 minutes.
4 Place the drained vegetables on a warm plate with the beef, cover and keep warm.
5 Stir the mustard and salt into the soaked breadcrumbs.
Whisk the egg white until stiff but not dry, then lightly fold into the breadcrumb mixture.
Lightly oil a non-stick frying pan and place  over a medium heat.
Drop small spoonfuls of croquette mixture into the pan, taking care not to crowd them.
Cook for 1½–2 minutes until set and golden underneath, then turn over and cook other side for a further 1½–2 minutes.
Transfer cooked croquettes to a plate and keep them warm while frying the remaining mixture.
Serve hot with the beef and vegetables.
Petits farcis (Stuffed vegetables)
Serves 4–6 
1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Brush aubergines with half a tablespoon of the olive oil and place on an oiled baking sheet.
Bake for about 15 minutes until soft.
Leave until cool enough to handle, then cut in half lengthways and scoop the flesh from the aubergines into a large bowl.
Leave a 1cm/½in shell — do not pierce the skin.
2 Cut the whole tomatoes in half lengthways, sprinkle with salt and leave upside-down on paper towels for 10 minutes.
Gently squeeze out the excess juice and scoop away the pulp.
Place the pulp in the bowl with the aubergine flesh.
3 Meanwhile, bring a large pan of salted water to the boil.
Add the whole onions and boil for about 5–7 minutes.
Add the courgettes and continue to boil for a further 10 minutes.
Drain both vegetables and leave until cool enough to handle.
4 Cut onions in half crossways, then remove the centres, leaving about two layers of skin.
Put the centres into the bowl with the aubergine and tomato.
5 Cut the courgettes in half lengthways and, using a teaspoon, scoop flesh into the bowl.
Use kitchen scissors to chop the vegetables in the bowl.
6 Increase oven temperature to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Oil one or two baking sheets and place the vegetable shells on them.
7 Heat one tablespoon of the olive oil in a frying pan and add the chopped onion and bacon.
Cook gently for 4–5 minutes until tender.
Stir in the flesh from the vegetables, the chopped tomato, then the beef, lamb, ham or chicken, rice, parsley, thyme, garlic and seasoning.
Cook, stirring occasionally, for 3–4 minutes, then remove pan from heat and stir in the eggs.
8 Divide the mixture among the vegetable shells, then sprinkle the cheese and breadcrumbs over the top.
Trickle over remaining olive oil and bake for about 20 minutes.
Serve hot, warm or cold.
A recipe from Burgundy that's worth poaching: Boeuf à la ficelle (left), served with crispy mustard croquettes.
Pissaladière (right), a tart with a heart of onions.
Pissaladière (Onion and anchovy tart)
Serves 4 
1 Heat the olive oil in a large frying pan, add the onions, garlic, bay leaf, thyme and seasoning (salt will draw water from the onions, preventing them from drying out).
Cook gently, stirring occasionally with a wooden spoon, for about 1–1½ hours until the onions are very soft.
Remove from the heat, discard the bay leaf and thyme, then, using a slotted spoon, squeeze the onions gently against one side of the pan, draining off the liquid into a measuring jug.
Make up to 150ml/¼ pint with lukewarm water and put to one side.
2 Make the dough; sift the flour and one teaspoon of salt into a large bowl.
Stir in yeast, make a well in the centre and slowly pour in the onion liquid and one teaspoon of the olive oil, stirring constantly to form a smooth dough.
Beat well until the dough comes away from the sides of  the bowl, then transfer to a lightly floured surface and knead well by stretching the dough away from you, using the heel of one hand to push it from the centre outwards.
Pull it back with your fingers, slap it on the work surface and repeat the process, turning the dough slightly with each movement.
Continue for about 15 minutes until the dough is soft, smooth and elastic.
Add a little more olive oil if it is not supple enough.
Form into a ball, place in an oiled bowl and turn the dough over.
Cover with a damp cloth and leave in a warm place until double in volume — about 1¼–1½ hours.
3 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas7.
Oil a 23cm/9in×33cm/13in swill roll tin.
Turn the dough on to a lightly floured surface and punch it down.
Roll out with a lightly floured rolling pin to a rectangle the same size as the tin.
Lightly fold one half of the dough back over the rolling pin, then carefully transfer to the tin.
Press dough into the corners and slightly up the sides.
4 Taste the onion filling to check the seasoning and then spoon it evenly over the dough.
Sprinkle over the thyme.
Arrange the anchovy fillets on top in a lattice pattern and place the olives in the spaces.
Sprinkle over the remaining olive oil and freshly ground pepper.
5 Bake for 25–30 minutes until the dough has shrunk slightly away from the sides of the tin and is golden and crisp.
Remove from the oven and serve warm, garnished with fresh basil leaves.
Note
If you are using dried yeast, measure four tablespoons of the onion liquid into a small bowl and stir in half a teaspoon of caster sugar.
Sprinkle one and a half teaspoons of dried yeast over the surface, stir once and leave until there is a good head of froth, usually after about 10–15 minutes.
Pour into the well in the flour with the remaining onion liquid.
If you are using fresh yeast, pour 150ml/¼ pint of the onion liquid into a small bowl, crumble over 15g/½oz fresh yeast and blend in, using a teaspoon.
Add to the flour and continue as in the original recipe.
Variations
If the pissaladière is cooked in advance, sprinkle it with olive oil and reheat for 15–20 minutes in a low oven.
Pissaladière can also be baked in a 25cm/10in–28cm/11in round flan tin.
Arrange the anchovy fillets like the spokes of a wheel.
Caneton rôti et sa farce (Roast duck with spinach stuffing)
Serves 3 
1 Preheat the oven to 230C/450F/Gas 8.
Butter a 12cm/4½in round earthenware or china dish for the stuffing.
2 Remove as much fat and excess skin from the neck and tail end of the duck as possible.
Sprinkle the thyme, lemon juice and seasoning over the skin and put the garlic cloves and bay leaves into the cavity.
Season inside the bird with salt, the truss it and prick the breasts and legs several times with a fork.
Place the duck on a rack in a roasting tin.
Cook in the oven for 20 minutes, then pour away as much fat as possible from the roasting tin.
Reduce the oven temperature to 180C/350F/Gas 4 and cook the duck for a further 1¼–1½ hours until the juices run pale yellow when flesh is pierced.
3 Meanwhile, prepare the stuffing.
Heat the oil in a frying pan, add the garlic and liver and sautè for 2–3 minutes.
Stir in the spinach and cook for 2–3 minutes, then add the rice, egg, parsley, thyme, nutmeg and seasoning.
Spoon the stuffing into the buttered dish, cover tightly with foil and place on the oven shelf below the duck when the temperature is at the reduced setting.
Cook for about 40–45 minutes.
4 Transfer the rack and duck to a plate and return it to the oven to ‘rest’ with the heat now turned off and the door slightly ajar.
Spoon or pour off any surplus fat from the roasting tin, then stir the parsley, wine, brandy, spring onions and olives into the tin, scraping up the thickened juices with a wooden spoon.
Simmer the sauce on the hob for a few minutes, then stir in the lemon rind and seasoning.
5 Carve the bird and arrange on a warmed serving plate.
Unmould the stuffing, cut it into slices and serve with the duck.
Spoon the sauce over the duck and stuffing.
Out for a duck: left, Caneton rôti et sa farce is popular throughout France.
Redolent of the fragrant fields of Provence: Agneau aux herbes (right).
Agneau aux herbes (Lamb with herbs and garlic
Serves 4   salt and freshly ground pepper
1 Place the lamb in a dish and sprinkle over half of the rosemary and thyme and one tablespoon of the oil.
Turn the lamb over and sprinkle with the remaining herbs and another tablespoon of the oil.
Cover and leave to marinate for about 2 hours.
2 Thread the garlic cloves on to four wooden cocktail sticks.
Heat the remaining oil and half of the butter in a heavy-based frying pan.
Add the lamb and cook quickly for about 3 minutes, turning frequently, until evenly browned.
3 Reduce the heat to moderate.
Season the lamb and add the remaining butter to the pan.
When it begins to sizzle, add the garlic cloves and cook until tender and evenly browned.
4 Transfer the lamb and garlic to warmed plates and pour over the cooking juices.
Pot au feu (Boiled meat with marrow bones and vegetables)
Serves 8 
1 Place the bones, except the marrow bones, in a large pan and pile all the meat on top.
Cover with cold water and heat to just on simmering point.
After a few minutes, use a slotted spoon to remove the beige scum that has risen to the surface.
Continue removing the scum until it turns white and frothy: add a few tablespoons of cold water twice as you skim the surface.
Add the broth vegetables, herbs, peppercorns and salt to taste.
Bring just to the boil, then reduce the heat immediately, cover and simmer gently for 2½ hours.
2 Scoop the meat from the broth and put it on a plate to cool.
Remove and discard the vegetables and bones.
Taste the broth and add salt and pepper if necessary.
Reheat and bring to the boil, uncovered, for 5–10 minutes.
Pour the broth into a bowl and leave to cool.
Cover the meat and broth and refrigerate overnight.
3 One hour before the meal, skim off the fat from the top of the broth.
Pour the broth into a large pan and bring to the boil.
If necessary, boil to concentrate the flavours.
Add the meat and celeriac, carrots, parsnips or turnips, leeks and potatoes.
Cook over a moderate heat (so the liquid just moves) for about 40 minutes.
4 Meanwhile, pat salt into the ends of the marrow bones, then wrap them in muslin and tie with string.
Place the bones in cold water, bring to the boil and simmer for 20 minutes.
Leave in the water until ready to serve.
5 Reserve a bowl of the hot broth.
Serve the remainder as a starter with eight of the croûtons and the cheese.
For the second course, serve the meat and vegetables with the reserved broth, remaining croûtons and the marrow bones (provide small spoons for extracting the marrow from the bones).
Also supply bowls of your chosen accompaniments.
Bone appétit: Pot au feu (left), a warm and welcoming stew.
Vibrant vegetables, Provençal-style: Gratin de tomates, courgettes et oignons (right).
Gratin de tomates, courgettes et oignons (Tomato, courgette and onion gratin)
Serves 4 
1 Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Oil a baking dish.
2 Heat one and a half tablespoons of the oil in a frying pan and sauté the onions for 5 minutes.
Add the garlic, cook for 1–2 minutes, then pour in a little more oil with the courgettes.
Sauté for 3 minutes, then add the tomatoes.
Cook for a further 5 minutes.
3 Layer the vegetables in  the baking dish with the bay leaves, thyme, parsley or basil and seasoning.
4 Mix together the cheese and breadcrumbs.
Sprinkle evenly over the top of the vegetables, drizzle all over with a little olive oil and bake for 15–20 minutes until crisp and lightly browned.
Serve warm or lukewarm.
Variation
Layer the raw sliced vegetables in a shallow baking dish, season with salt, pepper and olive oil and bake in a low oven (160C/325F/Gas 3) for about 1½ hours.
Add the gratin mixture 20 minutes before end of cooking.
Saumon aux lentilles (Salmon with lentils)
Serves 6 
1 Rinse the lentils in water, then place in a pan with the onion, garlic, bay leaf and thyme.
Pour in water, then cover with a lid or foil and bring to the boil.
Simmer for 25–60 minutes, depending on the quality and freshness of the lentils, until tender but not too soft.
Drain well and discard the onion, garlic, bay leaf and thyme.
2 Sauté the shallots in the butter for 3–4 minutes.
Add the lentils and cream, season with salt and pepper, then cover and keep warm over a very low heat, shaking the pan occasionally.
3 Heat the oil in a heavy frying pan.
Season the salmon with salt and pepper and cook for about 5 minutes, depending on the thickness of the fillets, so the underside is lightly cooked and the top barely warm.
Serve the salmon on the lentils and sprinkle over the fresh chervil or dill and pink peppercorns.
Poires à la fourme d'ambert (Pears with blue cheese)
Serves 6 
1 Peel the pears and rub them all over with the cut side of the lemon.
If necessary, poach them in a pan which is just large enough to hold them.
Add the caster sugar, if using, and sufficient water to cover, then poach until tender but not too soft.
Halve, core and cut each pear into eight slices.
2 Preheat the grill.
If you have a heart-shaped biscuit cutter, cut out hearts from the brioche slices; otherwise, make six circles.
Cut the brioche trimmings into small cubes.
Toast the brioche hearts or circles until they are golden brown on both sides.
3 Scatter the brioche cubes in six small gratin or shallow heatproof dishes.
Place four slices of pear on top, then cover each one with a slice of cheese.
Scatter over the peppercorns, if using.
Grill until the cheese has melted.
Place a brioche heart or circle on top of each one, sift over the icing sugar, if using, and serve immediately.
Truffade (Mashed potato with cheese)
Serves 6 
1 Heat the fat or oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan.
Add the potatoes and cook, covered, for about 25 minutes, stirring from time to time with a wooden spoon.
Some potatoes will be soft, others will remain crisp.
2 Sprinkle with pepper and a little salt, cover briefly, remove from the heat and add the cheese.
Cover again for a minute or so, then add the soured cream and beat the potatoes well.
Add the garlic and parsley before serving.
COMPETITION
Sainsbury's Wine Taste Challenge
If you're a fan of the vine, follow your nose and you could be one of the lucky winners of a fantastic trip to the wineries of New Zealand or Germany, or receive £1,000 worth of Sainsbury's wine
Do you enjoy wine?
Are you interested in tasting and comparing different varieties from around the world?
Would you like to learn more about the growers and their vineyards?
Do you enthusiastically read the labels on bottles?
If this description sounds familiar, you could enter the 1993 Sainsbury's Wine Taste Challenge.
All you have to do is answer five questions and write a short tie-breaker to give you the opportunity of winning the title and prize of Sainsbury's Wine Taste Challenge Winner.
The prizes
The first prize is a magnificent week-long visit to New Zealand to discover the flavour of the wonderful wines of the southern hemisphere.
The trip includes excursions to some of the top New Zealand wineries, such as Nobilo — the largest family-owned concern — Babich and Delegats.
The winner will also have the chance to explore the unspoiled treasures of the country's North and South Islands.
The prize includes flights, accommodation and the  cost of a hire car for a week.
The second prize is a visit to the German wine-making regions of the picturesque Rhine and Mosel valleys.
And the third prize is £1,000 worth of Sainsbury's wine.
How to enter
Fill out the entry form on the right, including your answers, tie-breaker and your full name, address and telephone number.
Please state which regional final you would be able to attend from the list below, and provide a second option in case it is not possible to accommodate you at your first choice of location.
The finals
The first 500 correct entries will win a copy of the new Sainsbury's Pocket Guide to Wine .
The top 30 entrants for each region will be invited to attend a regional final on one of the dates previously given.
This will be part of an informal open tasting evening held at a Sainsbury's store where visitors will be able to taste a range of wines.
Regional finalists will be asked to answer questions about a selected number of wines at the tasting.
Prizes will be awarded to the top three entrants in each region.
The top 30 regional entrants will be invited to the final which will be held in London on June 4, 1993.
The Sainsbury's Wine Taste Challenge prize will be awarded to the one who gives best answers at the final tasting.
Questions
1.
Which of the following wines is not sparkling?
2.
Which of the following is a wine-making region in France?
3.
Which of the following grape varieties is the odd one out?
4.
Which of the following rivers does not run through a major wine-producing region?
5.
Which of the following is a full-bodied red wine?
Tie-breaker
Describe in no more than 100 words how the production of sweet white wines varies from that of dry white wines.
BOOKS
food FOR THOUGHT
Read all about it — Sara Robinson and Mike Johnson go by the book
Take a leaf (or a berry) from Malcolm Hillier's book this year and give your home an authentic feel of yuletide past.
Christmas contains a wealth of festive wreaths, garlands, pot pourris, candles and centrepieces created from foliage and flowers.
There are lots of ideas for foodie gifts — crystallised fruit, truffles, biscuits, petits fours — and tips on decorative packaging.
Savour the delights of French regional cuisine in France: A Culinary Journey The food, wine and local customs are lavishly photographed and portrayed in fascinating detail by top cookery writers.
With over 200 simple dishes from sources as varied as bakers, farmers and innkeepers, this is a practical cookbook and an inspiring travel guide.
It's back —Oz Clarke's Wine Guide 1993 returns for its ninth year with a prediction: that Australian winemakers who know ‘how to take a pile of sows’ ears and turn them into silk purses’are taking over from the vineyards of Europe.
In his own inimitable style, Oz provides sound advice on best buys and stockists.
Opinionated and indispensable.
Pierre Koffmann's dishes reveal an abiding affection for his native Gascony in La Tante Claire .
It's a nicely balanced combination of reminiscences from his early years (when he was employed as a chef by the Roux Brothers) and his own delicious creations of today.
Unlike some chef's recipes, these make a relatively easy transition to a conventional kitchen and make this a special gift for any Francophile foodie.
The Inspired Vegetarian by our own Louise Pickford  is a celebration of the vegetable — with French, Italian and Far Eastern influences among others.
No meatless martyrdom here, there are 80 innovative dishes using fresh, cheap produce to masterly effect, and the photography is exquisite.
Great for veggies and meat-eaters alike.
Italian food guru Valentina Harris stresses speed in Instant Italian .
Her book features 100 authentic recipes that can be conjured up in just 35 minutes from start to finish, including antipasti and starters — try ricotta-stuffed dates for an unusual appetiser — and pasta, risotto and other typically Italian main courses.
Over filled, over priced and over here, American-style muffins have certainly made their mark.
Yet home-made muffins are nicer and can be savoury as well as sweet.
As part of the Perfectly Simple range,Muffins by Steven Stellingwert  is a tiny book but packed with mouth-watering ideas and pretty illustrations.
Especially seasonal are orange-date, pumpkin and Christmas muffins.
A good stocking filler.
Celebrated writer Yan-Kit So ploughs through 3,000 years of culinary history in the Classic Food of China .
There are sections on vegetarian and bean curd dishes, plus ways with poultry, pork, beef and lamb and sweets such as the intriguingly named ‘lamb's tail’.
Absorbing snippets of information too: did you know that Confucius was a gourmet?
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
Christmas TREATS
What's in store for Christmas and the New Year at Tesco
SHORT AND SWEET
For an extra tea or coffee-time treat, how about some Tesco shortbread?
The 400g selection comes in an assortment of shapes including crescents, fingers and petticoat tails.
Of try Tesco Luxury Shortbread, the 500g selection has four  irresistible varieties — choose from choc chip, hazelnut, all butter and wholemeal.
And look out for Tesco's delectable Chocolate and Toffee Assortment which includes Orange Creme, Coconut Dessert, Chocolate Caramel and Macaroon.
Available in 220g and 440g packs or 1,350g jars.
They're a great idea for stocking fillers.
THE TASTES OF CHRISTMAS PAST
Keep Santa happy with any of the delectable Tesco Traditionally Made range of products, all made with care from the finest ingredients to traditional pre-World War II recipes.
Savour the Traditionally Made Mince Pies with melt-in-the-mouth pastry; or enjoy the refreshing citrus flavour of a Traditionally Made Christmas Pudding (1½lb).
And for tea, how about treating your guests to a slice of Tesco Traditionally Made Dundee Cake — a rich, moist fruit cake full of cherries and topped with almonds.
JUST DESSERTS!
If you really want to spoil your guests in the Christmas, serve a slice of delectable Tesco Tia Maria Gateau as an after-dinner of coffee-time treat.
It's the perfect way to end a meal.
There's also a choice of equally delicious Baileys or Cointreau gateaux.
All are Tesco specialities available at Christmas only.
And if you're a self-confessed chocoholic, then you'll really be able to spoil yourself with a slice of Tesco Chocolate Roulade.
It's a rich indulgent chocolate Swiss Roll filled with lashings of fresh cream — a real after-dinner treat.
Of course you might have to share a slice or two!
All featured lines subject to availability at selected stores.
CAUSE FOR CONCERN
CHARITY BEGINS AT CRISIS
Sian Kinsey puts seasonal goodwill into perspective and finds out what's cooking at Crisis
Even the most cool-headed individuals can be thrown into a mild panic at the prospect of organising Christmas.
If you think that planning the family festivities is an assault course, spare a thought for the volunteer groups around the country who organise yuletide feasts to rival the feeding of the five thousand.
Imagine hosting Christmas for a similarly huge number in a disused warehouse, with nothing more sophisticated than a Portakabin for a kitchen.
Yes, a Portakabin from which you would have to produce three cooked meals a day for roughly 2,000 people, including a turkey dinner with all the trimmings.
That's the challenge facing the charity Crisis which works all year round providing food, warmth and shelter for single, homeless people in London.
However, it's the work at Christmas that remains in the public perception.
Eight-day wonder
Now in its 25th year, the Crisis Open Christmas campaign has evolved from being a small-scale soup kitchen into an extremely sophisticated operation.
In fact, it's the biggest of its kind in Europe.
Last year, Crisis catered for 1,800 people with some 700 sleeping overnight during an eight-day period.
They were all given breakfast, lunch and dinner, a bed, medical and dental care, hairdressing and chiropody facilities, and clothing.
Games, books, television and videos were on hand to provide entertainment.
As Adam Woolf of Crisis explains: ‘Our perception is that everyone else is enjoying themselves at Christmas with roast turkey, mince pies and pudding.
So we aim to provide some of the luxuries which most of us tend to take for granted at this time of year.’
The success of the campaign is almost entirely due to the input of volunteers, with a core committee of organisers who co-ordinate the programme, planning it throughout the year.
Over Christmas there will be roughly 350 helpers working a 24-hour shift, split into three rotas: tasks range from cooking and cleaning to driving.
The countdown begins in earnest as early as October.
Volunteers are signed up and the hunt gets underway — not only for sufficient food, but also equipment for turning a building into a temporary home.
Donations are the key, although Crisis makes a cash injection of around £50,000.
Yet the biggest obstacle is locating a suitable venue for this gargantuan Christmas dinner.
It may be a church, warehouse or old factory, but it must be open-plan with a large forecourt which is ample enough to house everyone (last year's site was a 30,000 sq ft warehouse) and ideally, the venue should be in central London.
Once the venue has been found, teams of up to 100 work non-stop to install partitions, electricity, Portaloos, showers, carpeting and bedding.
In fact, they may still be working a week before the opening.
The mobile kitchen has three industrial cookers, a large Calor gas ring, sinks and a giant fridge; a freezer truck is parked on the forecourt.
When everything is in readiness, the Christmas decorations lend a final festive touch.
Open to offers
The Open Christmas is now so well established that food manufacturers take the initiative with offers of help.
Food parcels flow in from many other sources, such as schools and individual members of the public.
When the site is accessible, deliveries are organised and Open Christmas food co-ordinator Paul Thomas and his team assess the quantities available and how much is needed to supplement any shortfall.
The vegetables — cabbage, sprouts, potatoes and carrots — come mainly from a Norfolk farmer who co-ordinates the local farming community's donations.
Turkey portions, meanwhile — all 2,000 of them — are cooked and frozen in advance in the kitchens of catering colleges.
Crisis welcomes all donations, but non-perishable items are preferred, as they can be kept and used at a later date.
Paul recalls one year when thousands of Christmas pudding ice creams were donated — however, limited freezer space meant they had to be distributed quickly before they melted.
Feeding of the 2,000
‘Start early, keep going and be inventive.’
That's Paul Thomas's recipe for success.
His extensive Christmas shopping list includes 2,500lb of potatoes, almost the same quantity of green vegetables and half as much again of meat.
It is supplemented by some 800 loaves of bread, 400lb of porridge oats, 150 Christmas puddings and about 2,000 mince pies.
Despite these enormous quantities, Paul doesn't believe in skimping on quality and the emphasis is very much on good food.
‘We aim to make everything as presentable and tasty as possible, while concentrating on variety and nutritional value,’ he explains.
‘We also try to take into account any special dietary needs.’
No matter how much organisation goes into the planning, Paul and his team never know exactly how many people will turn up.
Their worst fear is that they will run out of food — if so, they will improvise.
‘You just have to think on your feet and open a few tins,’ says Paul.
The shopping list includes 2,500lb of potatoes
Behind the times
The volunteer cooks follow a busy schedule at Christmas.
At 8am on Christmas morning the night shift goes home.
As the kitchen is staffed round the clock, breakfast will have already been cooked: porridge, bacon and sausages, with marmalade  sandwiches and tea.
The Christmas dinner vegetables will have been prepared too.
So the first tasks of the day are cooking the vegetables and preparing the lunchtime desserts — probably trifle, apple crumbs and bread pudding, because they are all firm favourites.
By 10am, the potatoes have been boiled and roasted and stored in insulated containers.
The cooking water isn't wasted though — it goes towards making the lunchtime soup for which the volunteers will now be frantically chopping fresh vegetables.
The bread sauce is certainly a mammoth task and involves an entire morning's work, as the breadcrumbs must be crumbled by hand.
Paul's guide to this mighty sauce is three large refuse sacks of breadcrumbs to 60 pints of milk.
Somewhat hit and miss, he admits, but if they can avoid ‘disaster’— namely, the milk boiling over — it tends to work out fine.
Gravy is made fresh from boiled turkey bones.
The stuffing also has to be cooked and sliced up ready for reheating, and the Christmas puddings are prepared with the help of cooks at London's St Thomas's Hospital.
The puddings are unpacked in the morning, driven over to the hospital kitchens for steaming and collected in time for dinner.
Things are hotting up — in more ways than one — by 11am when the soup comes to the boil and the lunchtime savouries — frozen sausage rolls or chicken drumsticks which have been defrosted overnight — are popped into the ovens.
At midday, lunch is on the table.
An hour later, the kitchen volunteers go back into action again to finish the Christmas meal for the evening, as it all has to be reheated and served.
The second shift arrives at 3pm to serve tea and Christmas cake before making the final preparations for the grand supper at 6pm.
But it doesn't end there: one task that continues throughout the day is the washing up: the vast quantities of dirty dishes occupy the energies of at least 10 people!
Helplines
London Open Christmas is the biggest in the UK and requires a great deal of help, but there are a number of others that also need your support.
Birmingham Open Christmas provides three cooked meals a day over a four-day period, including a daily roast.
There's a Caring at Christmas campaign in Bristol, and in Milton Keynes the Homeless Persons Enterprise runs a two-week programme embracing Christmas and the New Year in which entertainers are taken on as well as general volunteers.
Check out day centres in your area: Canterbury's Prince of Wales Youth Trust Day Centre has been organising its own Open Christmas scheme for the last two years.
Most campaign committees have signed up their volunteers by December, but you can still help by making donations of the following:
non-perishable food
mattresses, blankets, sleeping bags and pillows
toiletries, such as soap and shampoo
clothes
Christmas decorations
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
Ground to Perfection
Kenco smooth, rich-tasting coffee and superb aroma has always been a great favourite, but now Kenco Single Grind has gone one better — it can be used in any coffee-making system you choose.
If you are a regular coffee drinker, the aroma of freshly brewed coffee really does set the taste buds tingling.
As an early morning reviver, or a welcome mid-morning break what could be better than a cup of your favourite coffee?
And, of course, when entertaining family or friends, a cup of smooth, rich-tasting coffee makes the perfect end to a delicious meal.
With Kenco Ground Coffee you can be sure that you are getting the best, because since it was established in 1922, Kenco has acquired a long-established history as traditional coffee makers.
Today, as always, Kenco selects and blends only the finest coffee beans to give a superb coffee taste.
And now Kenco is leading the market by introducing a new dimension to its coffee — it is now a single grind , which means you can use it in any type of coffee-making system without any loss of taste or quality.
It effectively does away with the need to buy fine grind coffee for filter machines and a coarser grind for cafetières and percolators.
With Kenco's new Single Grind Coffee you can have a perfect cup of coffee whenever and however you choose to make it.
And there are Kenco coffees to suit all tastes.
Apart from the Kenco Medium Roast Coffee which has proved such a favourite with so many coffee drinkers for so long; you can now choose new Kenco Light which contains only half the caffeine but still has all the great Kenco taste; or Kenco Espresso if you prefer a rich, dark-tasting coffee, typical of the Continental Espresso-style coffee.
Vacuum-packed for freshness, new Kenco Single Grind coffee comes complete with a convenient, easy-to-open tear strip.
Kenco ground coffee is the perfect choice at any time during the day whether it's for a special occasion or not.
Relaxing after dinner with a cup of any of the new Kenco rich-tasting coffees is a great way of unwinding after the stresses and strains of a long day.
So when you want a cup of coffee that is full of flavour, simply look to Kenco — the Real Coffee Experts.
The perfect way to end a meal, relax and enjoy a cup of smooth, rich-tasting Kenco coffee, selected and blended from the finest coffee beans.
SPECIAL
Season's FEASTINGS
Forget turkey and look further afield for festive inspiration with Linda Fraser's three alternative menus
Roast rib of beef with a mustard and herb crust
Ask the butcher to cut through the chine bone (which runs at right angles to the ribs along the base) just above the point where it joins the ribs.
Serves 8–12 
1 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Trim some of the fat from the beef and cut tiny slits all over the surface.
Tuck a sliver of garlic into each one and make a note of the weight of the beef.
Season well and place on a wire rack in a large roasting tin, with the rib bones pointing upwards.
2 Roast the joint in the oven for 30 minutes, then reduce the temperature to 190C/375F/Gas 5 and cook for 15 minutes per 450g/1lb for rare beef, or 20 minutes per 450g/1lb for medium.
Baste occasionally during cooking.
3 Meanwhile, mix together the mustard, olive oil, cream and mixed herbs.
Half an hour before the end of cooking, remove the beef from the oven and carefully spread the mustard and herb mixture over the surface, then return to the oven to finish cooking.
Check it is cooked by pushing a skewer into the centre near the bone: the juices that ooze out should be pale pink for rare meat, or clear and golden for medium to well done.
4 Remove the beef from the oven, transfer to a serving dish and press the parsley into the mustard and herb crust.
Cover the joint loosely with a tent of foil and leave to rest for 15–20 minutes before carving.
To carve the joint, stand it with the ribs underneath, cut away the chine bone and discard.
Hold the knife horizontally and cut between meat and end rib to free the beef.
Carve thin slices vertically, then repeat.
Mushrooms with brandy butter
If you run out of room in the oven, fry the mushrooms in the butter for about 5 minutes, then add the other ingredients.
Serves 8–12 
1 Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Arrange the mushrooms in a greased baking dish and season well.
Mix together the butter, brandy and cream and pour over the mushrooms.
Bake for 15–20 minutes, basting occasionally.
Scatter the parsley over the mushrooms and serve hot.
Roast potatoes and parsnips
Serves 8–12  
1 Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Parboil the vegetables in boiling, salted water for about 5 minutes.
2 Heat the oil in a roasting tin for 5 minutes.
Add the parsnips, potatoes, thyme and seasoning.
Bake for 40–50 minutes until tender and golden, turning and basting occasionally.
Serve hot.
Crunchy-topped broccoli
To save time during the crucial final stages, cook the broccoli beforehand, rinse under cold water and drain.
Set aside until almost ready to serve.
Serves 8–12
1 Cook the broccoli for 3–5 minutes in boiling, salted water until almost tender.
Drain at once and rinse under cold running water.
Set aside.
2 Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Melt the butter in a small frying pan, add the breadcrumbs and fry until golden.
Stir in parsley, lemon rind and seasoning.
Arrange the florets in an ovenproof serving dish and scatter the breadcrumb mixture on top.
3 To heat through, cover the serving dish with aluminium foil and bake for 10 minutes or so.
Serve immediately.
Hollandaise sauce
This delicious sauce is simple to prepare and is an ideal accompaniment.
It is best made at the last possible moment, although it can be kept warm for a short time in a bowl set over a pan of hot water.
Makes 750ml/1¼ pints 
1 Melt the butter over a low heat in a pan with a poring lip.
Place the eggs in a food processor with the lemon juice and plenty of black pepper and switch on.
Slowly pour in the butter and whizz until the sauce has just thickened.
Rule the roast, from left: Potatoes and parsnips, Crunchy-topped broccoli, Hollandaise sauce, Rib of beef, Mushrooms with brandy butter.
Aromatic spiced salmon
Christmas dinner needn't be a heavy affair — try a light-hearted approach with this exotic baked salmon.
Serves 8–12 
1 Wash the fish thoroughly inside and out and pat dry with kitchen paper.
Make six shallow slashed across the salmon on both sides.
Mix the garlic, ginger, spice, lemon juice, yogurt, one tablespoon of sesame oil and salt to taste.
2 Brush a large, doubled piece of foil with the rest of the sesame oil.
Place salmon on top and coat both sides with the spice mixture.
Fold over foil and seal.
Place in the fridge for an hour to absorb the flavours.
3 Preheat the oven to 140C/275F/Gas 1.
Weight the salmon and bake for 20 minutes per 450g/1lb, plus 20 minutes.
4 Open the parcel at one end, pour the juices into a bowl and set aside for Red pepper sauce (see facing page).
Unwrap salmon; cut the skin around head, tail and along backbone, then peel it off.
Remove skin from other side, transfer the salmon to a serving dish, cover with foil and keep warm.
5 Heat the oil and deep fry the carrot and cabbage until crisp.
Drain well, season with salt and scatter a little around the salmon; serve the rest in a bowl.
To serve the salmon, cut one side into 5cm/2in wide pieces, then carefully ease each portion away from the backbone.
When the whole side has been removed, pull off the backbone and cut the remaining salmon into pieces.
Roast cherry tomatoes
Serves 8–10
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Score a cross in the top of eight to 12 cherry tomatoes and place on a baking sheet.
Lightly brush with one tablespoon of melted butter, bake for 5–8 minutes until just soft.
Serve hot.
Lemon potatoes with herbs and olive oil
Serves 8–12  
1 Cook the potatoes in their skins in boiling, salted water until almost tender.
Drain and allow to cool enough to handle.
2 Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Peel off the skins and thickly slice the potatoes.
Brush a shallow ovenproof dish, with a little of the oil and layer the potatoes, scattering the lemon rind, herbs and seasoning in between.
Drizzle over the remaining oil.
Bake for 15 minutes until just beginning to colour.
Serve hot.
Little leaf salad
Look out for bags of ready-prepared mixed leaves — they are perfect for this salad.
Substitute two tablespoons of walnut or hazelnut oil for half of the olive oil, if you wish.
Serves 8–12 
1 Combine all the salad and herb leaves in a bowl, cover and chill until ready to serve it.
2 Place all the dressing ingredients in a screw-topped jar and shake thoroughly until smooth.
Pour over the salad, toss lightly and serve at once.
Red pepper sauce
Makes about 300ml/½pint
Heat two tablespoons of olive oil in a pan and sauté one tablespoon of finely chopped spring onion and half a crushed garlic clove until soft.
Add four quartered and seeded red peppers and the juices from the salmon and simmer, uncovered, for about 20 minutes until peppers are soft and the liquid reduces by half.
Blend to a smooth purée.
Serve warm swirled with soured cream and garnished with fresh herbs.
Watercress sauce
Makes about 300ml/½ pint
Whizz 150ml/¼ pint of quality mayonnaise in a food processor with the leaves from a bunch of watercress, a few mint leaves and 150ml/¼ pint of hot water until the leaves are finely chopped and the sauce is smooth.
Add lemon juice and seasoning.
Serve cold, garnished with fresh herbs.
Light entertainment, from left: Lemon potatoes with herbs and olive oil, Little leaf salad, Aromatic spiced salmon with Roast cherry tomatoes, Red pepper sauce and Watercress sauce.
Glazed goose
Goose used to be a traditional Christmas bird until turkey superseded it in popularity.
Try a taste of yesteryear, but with an oriental flavour.
This dish will need long, slow marinating, so prepare the goose the night before.
Serves 6–8 
1 Rinse the goose inside the out and dry with kitchen paper.
Remove the wing tips and reserve with the neck and gizzard for a stock.
Truss and place in a non-metallic dish.
2 Mix marinade ingredients and pour over goose.
Cover and leave overnight, turning and basting occasionally.
3 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Remove goose from marinade and pat dry.
Weight the bird; transfer to a rack in a roasting tin and cover with aluminium foil.
Roast for 20 minutes, then reduce the temperature of the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6 and roast for 15 minutes per 450g/1lb.
Transfer to a serving dish and leave to rest in a warm place.
Use a small, sharp knife to joint the bird.
Place on a flat dish with legs pointing diagonally towards you, hold with a carving fork and cut through wing joints; carve legs the same way and divide in two.
Use a long knife to carve the breast.
Roast swede, sweet potatoes and celeriac
Use orange-coloured sweet potatoes for this recipe.
If you cannot find any, substitute ordinary waxy potatoes.
Serves 6–8 
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Parboil the vegetables in separate pans of boiling water until just tender.
2 Place the butter and oil in a large roasting dish and leave in the oven to heat for 5 minutes.
Add the parboiled vegetables and grated nutmeg; toss to coat in the hot butter and oil.
Return to the oven and bake for 30–40 minutes until tender and golden.
Serve hot.
Vegetables with garlic, thyme and butter
Serves 6–8 
1 Heat the butter and stir fry the courgettes, red peppers, sweetcorn and garlic over a high heat for 4–5 minutes until just tender, then add sugar and seasoning.
Garnish with thyme.
Roast apples with cranberry sauce
Serves 6–8 
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Arrange the apple halves, cut sides down, in a greased baking dish, dot with a little butter and bake for 25–30 minutes until soft.
2 Simmer the cranberries, orange juice and sugar for 5 minutes until soft.
Strain off any excess juice and stir in the cranberry sauce.
Spoon on to the apples and serve.
Red wine and port sauce
Serves 6–8
Melt 25g/1oz butter in a pan, add two finely chopped shallots or one small red onion and cook until soft.
Stir in 150ml/¼ pint each of red wine and port and bring to boil.
Add 300ml/½ point of Goose stock (see the following recipe), one tablespoon of tomato purée and a bay leaf and reduce by half.
Season and serve hot.
Goose stock
Makes 600ml/1 pint
Place the giblets and any bones in a pan with one small halved onion, one carrot and one celery stick, cut into chunks.
Add a few bacon rinds (optional).
Pour in 1.2 litres/2 pints of water and bring to the boil.
Skim off any scum, then add six black peppercorns.
Cover and simmer for 2 hours.
Strain and use for the Red wine and port sauce, or gravy.
Wine choice
The right wine can make all the difference to the meal.
Beef — serve a fuller-style Beaujolais (such as Moulin à Vent or Fleurie) or a mature Rioja Gran Reserva.
Salmon — choose a fuller-style white, such as an Alsace Gewürztraminer or New Zealand Sauvignon Blanc.
Goose — try a red Bordeaux or an Australian Shiraz Cabernet.
Sauce for the goose…from left: Red wine and port sauce, Vegetables with garlic, thyme and butter, Roast apples with cranberry sauce, Roast swede, sweet potatoes and celeriac and Glazed goose.
READER EVENT
Come to our CHRISTMAS ROADSHOW
The Cheeses of England and Wales and Zanussi take to the road with BBC Good Food cookery editor Linda Fraser for a programme of culinary events
We've got together with the Cheeses of England and Wales and Zanussi to hold a series of festive cookery demonstrations throughout the country.
There will be tips and advice on how to make the most of cheese in elaborate dishes as well as simple family meals — so there's something for everyone.
The events are being held from November 24 to December 4 BBC Good Food cookery editor Linda Fraser will host them and share her ideas for creative yuletide treats — from attractive edible gifts to delicious party nibbles.
Dishy meals
Whether you want inspiration for a light lunch or an impressive supper, we can provide it.
Home economists Jane Fox of the National Dairy Council and Diane White of Zanussi will demonstrate the versatility of English and Welsh cheeses in savouries and desserts, including Lancashire smoked chicken, spinach and turkey roulade and salmon en papillote.
They will also give you advice on how to choose the perfect cheeseboard and the way to store cheese.
Diane White will explain how Zanussi's range of combination ovens, cookers, microwaves and fridges can make light work of Christmas cooking.
And you won't miss out on any of the action because all of our demonstrations will be relayed on a large video screen.
Before each demonstration you will get the chance to meet Linda and the roadshow team over a free glass of wine or a soft drink, while you sample different varieties of cheese.
Tickets cost only £4.
At the end of each evening there will a special prize draw in which you can win Good Food Club annual memberships, cheeseboards, Zanussi cool bags and storage containers and Tupperware cheese graters.
All visitors will receive a goodie bag free of charge and a complementary copy of Cooking with Cheese (total retail value £8.50).
How to book
Be sure to book early to avoid disappointment.
There are several options for securing tickets: you can complete the coupon on the far right.
Alternatively, tickets can be purchased from the National Dairy Council stand (number 645) at the BBC Good Food Cooking & Kitchen Show (which is being held November 12–15 at the NEC in Birmingham).
Or simply call 071–736 7249 for 24-hour recorded information on how to book.
Any remaining tickets can be bought at the door on the night of the demonstration.
Doors open at 6pm and all demonstrations begin at 7pm with a duration of about 1 hour 40 minutes.
Clockwise from left: Linda Fraser with Jane Brown, who is a nutritional at the National Dairy Council and Diane White of Zanussi; a selection of fine English and Welsh cheeses; delicious spinach and turkey roulade and a Zanussi cooker.
HEALTH MATTERS
YOUR VERY GOOD HEALTH
Sarah Jane Evans raises her glass to the Caroline Walker Trust Awards which honour all aspects of nutrition
In 1988, Caroline Walker — the highly respected nutritionist and health writer — died at the tragically young age of 38.
Her achievements have not been forgotten, and five awards are given annually to commemorate her work in the field of nutrition and public awareness of healthy eating.
A panel composed of more than 100 friends of the Caroline Walker Trust casts it net widely for the annual nominations.
Prominent campaigners are invariably selected, but the trawl also includes scientists and journalists, small shopkeepers and major supermarkets.
There are four individual categories: consumer, media, science and industry — which reflect Caroline's concern for all aspects of public health, and an overall award.
This year's diverse shortlist includes a dentist, a trading standards officer and a bakery, as well as a clutch of magazines and television producers.
One would think that it must be a daunting task finding worthy nominees every year.
Yet according to panel chairman Maggie Sanderson, this is not so.
She sees the awards as a good barometer of nutritional issues.
‘They show how concern is growing over food standards and the health of the nation,’ she says.
‘We are very excited about the quality of the entries.’
Last year's main award went to Dr Martin Wiseman, head of nutrition at the Department of Health.
This year, it could be any of the following candidates.
Consumer award
The first contender in the consumer category is Alisa Morrant, who is concerned with children's diets.
She has been nominated for her bounty packs campaign — the samples of baby food, drinks, nappies and creams given free to new mothers.
Alisa Morrant is a senior registrar in dental public health for the North-West Regional Health Authority, which reports a high proportion of five-year-olds with teeth in a poor condition.
More than half have dental decay in their milk teeth, and she believes that the problem is increasing.
While she approves of mothers getting the opportunity to try new products, she was concerned about the contents of bounty boxes.
These seemed to imply that the products were officially ‘approved’, yet many were high in sugar.
Particularly worrisome were the fruit drinks, which projected a wholesome image while containing sugar in some form or another.
Alisa Morrant realised that she had to target new mothers — it would be too late by the time the children attended the dentist for fillings.
So, during 1992, she and the midwives of her region ran a very effective campaign which resulted in nationwide changes in the contents of the packs.
David Roberts, chief trading standards officer of Shropshire County Council, is another contender.
His job involves monitoring products to ensure they reflect the manufacturer's claims.
In other words, he double-checks the contents of a fish finger or a sausage.
He is an authority on UK food law and is described as ‘the scourge of manufacturers who adulterate or cheat on food standards…someone who never hesitates in tackling the biggest companies’.
His view is that consumers should be told the whole truth: ‘If the public wants fish fingers made up of minced fish that's OK, so long as they are told and can make up their own minds.
Otherwise it amounts to fraud.’
Other nominees in this category include Alan and Jackie Gear of the Henry Doubleday Research Association, who are renowned for their enthusiastic promotion of organic food; Caroline Waldegrave, principal of  Leith's Cookery School and cookery writer Claudia Roden, who worked jointly in revamping the menu at London's Guy's Hospital to offer tempting and nutritious dishes.
Media award
Since the introduction of the awards, media coverage of health issues has mushroomed.
Although everyone seems to have an opinion, it's not easy to find a clear, authoritative voice.
So the media award is given to a person or organisation who has brought the subject into the public perception.
One of the best-known figures in this field is Dr Hilary Jones, TV-AM's resident doctor.
He appeared on BBC1's The Health Show earlier this year and will soon be moving to GMTV as an early morning medical adviser.
Dr Jones has been nominated for his ability to communicate serious medical issues in a simple and entertaining way.
Another candidate is The Food Magazine , edited by Sue Dibb and Tim Lobstein, which has earned a reputation for its thorough research into topics such as food labelling and health products.
The Food Magazine has achieved a great deal in a very short time, and the national press regards it as a reliable source of information.
One of the citations succinctly sums it up: ‘It is the Private Eye of the food industry: not always welcome, sometimes sensational, but very necessary all the same’.
Science award
The nominees for the science award have years and years of experience behind them.
Dr E.R.
Orskov of the Rowett Research Institute in Aberdeen specialises in the continuing conflict between the Third World and the West's approach to food production.
He believes that the way ahead lies in the establishment of an international food policy which concentrates on obtaining the very maximum from crops.
Professor Geoffrey Rose — now retired — is highly respected for his work at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
He has brought a profound influence to bear on the belief that preventing illness is not simply a matter of treating the individual.
As one of the trustee members explains, ‘He's the godfather of the school that believes nutrition should target the population as a whole, not just those who are at risk’.
At the Dunn Nutrition Laboratory in Cambridge, Dr John Cummings has built his reputation on the importance of dietary fibre (or what he calls non-starch polysaccharides).
As a member of the influential Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy (COMA), he helped to establish the new Dietary Reference Values (DRVs) for nutrients, which replaced the old RDA (Recommended Daily Amounts) guidelines.
Of Dr Cummings, the panel has this to say: ‘He always has his work on public health uppermost in his mind’.
Industry award
The industry award produces the most varied shortlist.
Nominees range from Neal's Yard (a combined grocery, bakery and dairy in central London) to Michelle Berriedale-Johnson, who makes ices without dairy products and publishes a newsletter for people on special diets.
Tesco's technical director Dr Richard Pugh has been chosen for his decision to promote quality food and healthy eating in all of its stores.
Another contender is Mike Glasgow who represents the Portobello Road Street Traders' Association — this is in recognition of the efforts of stallholders in keeping an inner city market alive.
Outside London, the panel was eager to include the Village Bakery in Penrith, founded in 1976 by Andrew and Lis Whitley.
This restaurant and bakery is popular with local residents and specialises in organic bread and delicious pasties, pies, pizzas and cakes.
In addition to regular loaves, the bakery sells two different kinds of olive bread from a traditional Russian recipe and a large round French country loaf.
While the shop supplies all of the local wholefood stores and hotels, it remains very much a family concern.
All winners will be announced on November 24 at the annual Caroline Walker Lecture being held at London's Royal Society.
BBC Good Food will be there to witness who takes the accolades and we will publish the results.
If you have any enquiries or would like to make a donation, contact:.
FOOD & DRINK
FINISHING TOUCHES
A refreshing dessert is the ideal foil to a rich main course.
Michael leads the way in the charge of the light brigade
At this time of the year, our appetites tend to favour rich, stodgy puddings, but you can have too much of a good thing.
Try these tempting desserts as a welcome alternative.
The Crafty Cook Michael Barry appears every Tuesday evening on Food & Drink , BBC2, at 8.30pm.
St Clement's syllabub
A traditional English pudding, syllabub was originally made with milk fresh from the cow.
Over the generations, it has been transformed into a kind of set pudding with a rather tart flavour and honeycomb-like texture.
This version is based on an 18th-century recipe and makes a lovely, sharp ending to a meal.
Use unwaxed lemons if possible, as the rind plays an important part in the flavour.
Serves 4 
1 Lightly beat the double cream until holding soft peaks.
Mix together the lemon juice and freshly squeezed orange juice, then stir in the caster sugar.
Gradually whisk the juice into the double cream and continue whisking until the cream rethickens.
2 Stir the grated lemon rind into the mixture and divide the syllabub among four wine glasses.
Chill for 2 hours: if you don't want to serve the dessert immediately, keep it covered in the fridge for up to 24 hours.
Serve decorated with the finely shredded lemon rind.
Caramel oranges
This is one of my favourite recipes — it is also a familiar sight on a number of Italian restaurant dessert trolleys.
It is very often flavoured with liqueurs such as Strega or Grand Marnier, but the version I personally like best is this one which has a caramel flavour.
If possible, buy the biggest and juiciest oranges for this dish.
Serves 4 
1 Peel one of the oranges very carefully, using a vegetable parer or sharp knife — don't include the pith; you need only the orange part.
Cut peel into thin shreds and set aside.
Peel the other oranges, removing as much pith as possible, and discard the peel.
Cut oranges horizontally into 5mm/¼in slices.
2 Arrange the orange slices, overlapping, in a shallow serving dish or individual bowls.
3 Bring 300ml/½ pint of water to the boil, add the orange peel and simmer for 5 minutes.
Strain the water and reserve the peel.
In the same pan, dissolve the sugar in one tablespoon of water over a low heat, then cook until just beginning to turn golden.
Return the peel to the pan and  pour in 250ml/8fl oz cold water (do this carefully, as the caramel may splutter).
Remove the pan from the heat and stir until the caramelised sugar and water have dissolved together.
4 Allow the sauce  to cool for 1 minute, add the cinnamon stick and pour it over the oranges.
Chill for 2 hours or preferably overnight to allow the flavours to improve; remove the cinnamon stick from the sauce and serve.
Hot fruit salad
An unusual way of serving fresh fruit, which is very good at this time of year as it combines a rich flavour and texture.
Serve warm with Greek yogurt or, if you're feeling self indulgent, double cream.
The cooking method may seem unusual, but it does work extraordinarily well.
Serves 4–6
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Wash all the fruit, except the bananas.
Core the apples and pears without peeling and divide each one into 12 pieces.
Cut the oranges in half, remove any pips and slice each half (with the skin still intact) into six sections.
2 Peel the bananas and cut into 1–2cm/½–¾in pieces.
Mix all of the chopped fruit together and add the grapes, then place in a large, shallow dish.
Sprinkle over the sugar and spices.
3 Bake for 1 hour, turning the fruit over once halfway through cooking.
Remove the dish from the oven and allow to cool for 5 minutes before serving.
Yorkshire apple cake
The combination of cheese and apples is not an invention of the north of England, but the merging of rich Wensleydale with sharp apple almost certainly is.
This pie should not be eaten hot, so you'll have to be patient despite its wonderful aroma.
Serves 6–8 
1 Preheat oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Roll out two-thirds of the pasty on a lightly floured surface and use to line a greased and floured 20cm/8in straight-sided, loose-bottomed pie tin.
2 Arrange apple slices in the pastry case, scattering with sugar between layers.
Sprinkle over the spices and top with 150g/5oz of the cheese.
Brush pastry edges with water.
Roll out remaining pastry and use to cover the pie.
Seal edges, then trim and crimp.
Brush the top with milk and sprinkle with remaining cheese.
3 Bake for 25 minutes, then reduce the oven temperature to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Cover the pie with foil and bake for a further 35 minutes.
Remove from the oven and allow to cool.
Spiced ice cream pudding
This ice cream boasts American parentage, though its ancestry goes back to the exotic sherbets which were made in the Arab kingdoms of Granada and Cordoba in Spain.
Snow from the mountains were used to make the sherbets of yesteryear, but nowadays we have freezers.
You don't need an ice cream maker, just my crafty technique which produces smooth results.
Serves 6 
1 Place the cream, spices and lemon rind in a non-stick pan and bring gently to the boil.
Simmer for 10 minutes, stirring occasionally, then allow the mixture to cool completely.
2 Beat the eggs and egg yolk with the vanilla essence, adding the icing sugar in four stages until the mixture is pale, thick and mousse-like and double in volume (an electric whisk does the job best).
3 Strain the cream through a fine sieve into the egg mixture and fold together.
4 Spoon into a freezer container and freeze until solid — this takes about 3–4 hours.
Soften for 15 minutes in the fridge before eating.
Serve with Sharp sauce (see below).
Sharp sauce
1 Simmer the lime juice with the sugar and 250ml/8fl oz water for 10 minutes.
2 Meanwhile, cut the lime rind into fine shreds.
Mix the arrowroot with one teaspoon of cold water and stir into the syrup along with the shreds.
Bring to the boil, stirring until the sauce is clear and thickened.
Serve hot or cold with the Spiced ice cream pudding.
Fruit trifle
One of the joys of making a trifle is that the ingredients can be changed according to taste and season.
Frozen raspberries are available all year, but poached pears or plums, or even canned fruit in natural juice can work just as well.
Serves 6 
1 Spread the sponge with jam and cut into chunks.
Place in an glass serving bowl and crumble the biscuits over the sponge.
Pour over the sherry or fruit juice, then scatter the raspberries and almonds on top.
2 Make a custard by heating the milk and caster sugar in a small pan until it is almost boiling.
Whisk the egg yolks lightly and pour the hot milk on top.
Return the custard to the pan and heat gently, stirring continuously over a very low heat until it thickens.
3 Stir in the vanilla essence, then strain the custard over the raspberries and almonds and leave to cool.
4 Whip the cream until holding soft peaks and spread or pipe over the custard.
Decorate with candied peel and angelica.
Bombes away for a happy ending: Spiced ice cream pudding.
Daphne Metland looks at the shape of things to come this Christmas
EQUIPMENT
ALL DECKED OUT
Festive food should be fun as well as tasty, so pick a few items of specialist kitchen equipment and tableware to add the finishing touches to your yuletide table spread.
Start with table decorations: go over the top with a bright festive tablecloth and napkins.
But don't stop there — use your imagination and serve decorative food.
Inexpensive biscuit cutters come in a whole host of shapes, such as stars, bells or holly leaves (see Kids Stuff, page 117 for recipe ideas).
The Christmas cake is usually the centrepiece, so invest in a cake turntable for easy icing.
Buy a good quality piping bag, nozzles and a spatula for a professional finish and smooth edges.
And don't forget food colour pens for your special seasonal message.
Finally, add extra sparkle by serving up the Christmas spirit with bobbing snowmen and fir tree-shaped ice cubes — they'll certainly break the ice at parties!
Christmas tree baking tray set
Create your own 18cm/7in high edible Christmas tree with these clever star shapes.
Cole & Mason nutmeg grater
from major department stores and good kitchen shops, £9.25.
Flavour your mulled wine with freshly grated spice.
Holly cutters
For traditional-shaped biscuits and icing finishes.
Mini pudding mould
Ideal for single servings.
Christmas tree cake rack
Miniature trees on a rack for sponge cake mixes and jellies.
They need oiling and flouring for cakes and soaking for jellies.
Victorinox offset spatula
from good kitchen shops, £8.75.
Has a broad blade; a moulded nylon handle makes it easy to hold while turning the cake.
Chocolate-making starter pack
Contains all you need to make delicious choccies, including couverture chocolate which has a high proportion of cocoa butter — and therefore a better flavour.
National Trust tablecloth and tea towel
Spread the Christmas word and decorate the table with new linen — and treat the kitchen to a festive tea towel.
Food colour pens
Food colour pens work the same way as felt tips, but are non-toxic.
Use them for writing your own personal seasonal message on either biscuits or cakes.
Lattice cutter
For a perfect criss-cross finish to pastry.
Wedgwood plate
from good china shops and department stores; bread and butter plate, £19.95; oval platter, £28.95.
Medieval Christmas village scene pattern — classic china and makes a lovely gift.
Christmas teapot
It may be kitsch, but this is the festive season.
This china teapot is the perfect centrepiece to accompany shortbread and Christmas cake.
Cake turntable
from kitchen shops or by mail order from B.R. Mathews and Son .
A must for royal icing.
This turntable spins smoothly, even when holding a large cake.
Stands 15cm/6in high and can bear the heaviest fruit cake.
Metal yule log mould
This traditional mould needs oiling and flouring before baking.
Hallmark Spode party ware
We've 50 sets, worth £34.25 each, to give away.
Ice cube tray
from larger branches of Boots, 99p each.
Jolly frosty snowmen and frozen fir trees will add a touch of cold comfort to a gin and tonic or a fruit cup.
Six ice cubes per tray; made of flexible plastic, so they turn out easily.
Spherical Christmas pudding mould
BBC Good Food readers can obtain this mould for only £16.50 inc p+p.
Produced a 1.75kg/4lb pudding — ideal for a large family gathering.
OFFER
CHRISTMAS GIFTS all wrapped up
Twelve presents in one — a magazine subscription gift is perfect for friends and family, as it provides pleasure every month throughout the year to come
Solve all your present problems with gift subscriptions for our popular BBC cookery titles — and as it's Christmas, we will include a free binder (worth £5.95) with each subscription ordered before December 7.
Club class
A subscription to BBC Good Food ensures monthly delivery of the magazine and a fact-packed newsletter.
It also includes membership of the Good Food Club, which gives you the chance to attend special events and receive discounts on offers, both in the magazine and Club, all for just £20.
BBC Vegetarian Good Food is another ideal gift.
It's packed with delicious recipes and ideas aimed at those who choose not to eat meat or who wish to learn more about healthy-style menus.
There are also lots of offers and exclusive events — and 12 issues cost just £18.
How to order
Don't delay — complete the coupon on the left or call our credit card hotline, quoting reference GFC16 by December 7, and we will ensure that a special gift card is dispatched before Christmas.
The first issue of BBC Good Food in the New Year will accompany the binder.
Share your enjoyment of the best recipes and the latest food news with a year's subscription to BBC Good Food or Vegetarian Good Food .
And why not give someone a treat by investing in a subscription to both magazines?
12 CHRISTMAS PUDDING WINES
Jill Goolden sweet talks her way through dessert wines for the festive season.
Jill appears on Food & Drink every Tuesday, BBC2, 8.30pm
Vouvray Moelleux '90 Grande Année Domaine des Aubuisières
Dry Vouvray is more common than sweet these days, but the best of the crop goes towards making wines like this one.
The Chenin Blanc grape should be proud of itself, producing a delicate and flowery wine that has a stab of fresh acidity.
Bad Bergzaberner Kloster Liebfrauenberg ‘90
A nutty German Auslese from the Rheinhessen.
This lush medium-sweet wine is made from the generous Ortega grape (a recent progeny of the ubiquitous Müller-Thurgau).
Bags of wonderful peach flavours and a gentle, floral quality.
Moscatel de Valencia
An inexpensive sweet Muscat which is from the Mediterranean coast of Spain, boasting sultana and honey notes tagged on to the familiar medley of citrus fruits.
This wine is concentrated enough to take a dash of soda, should you wish to brighten it up.
Danie de Wet Rhine Riesling Reserve ‘91
An unusual sweetie made in South Africa from Germany's most aristocratic grape.
It is aged in oak, which gives a bit of a boost to the classic scent of petrol and honey.
On the medium-side-of-sweet palate you'll find hints of lime, quince and plum.
Moscato Spumante
This fresh and flowery sparkling wine — in the pungent Asti style — is not as sweet as some on the market, but it has an attractive Muscatel and almond bouquet.
The nutty edge is carried through into the flavour, where it meets pleasant hints of green apples and greengages.
Muscat de Beaumes de Venise
From the southern Rhône, this is a famous vin doux natural (wine fortified with grape brandy before the sugar is fermented out) with a high alcohol content.
It is big on thrills and headily grapey with a lush sweetness.
Good with the pud, or try instead of port after the meal.
Mavrodaphne of Patras
Unusual, unforgettable sweet red wine made from grapes dried in the Greek sun which concentrates the sugar, so it reaches a hefty 15 per cent alcohol.
Has a port-like quality, rich with the scent and flavour of nuts and plums.
Albiger Hundskopf Siegerrebe Auslese ‘88
This Rheinhessen wine is made from the Siegerrebe — the richest German grape variety — which makes it capable of packing a walloping great punch of sweetness.
Strongly flavoured with apricot, gooseberry and peach fruit, there is also a gloss of caramel.
Far weightier than you would expect.
Tamaioasa ‘86
This gleaming gold, buttery-sweet dessert wine is one of the best to come out of Romania.
Made from the grape of the same name, it has a haunting tobacco and snuff bouquet, leading into a syrupy, apricot flavour.
Ideal accompaniment to any sort of pud.
Moscato d'Asti Vigna Senza
A gorgeously youthful sparkling Moscato — just as it should be.
It has an enticing scent and flavour of just pressed grapes cut with a fresh note of lemon.
Frothy, frivolous stuff with enough sweetness to give Christmas pud a run for its money.
Samos
A thoroughly sweet Greek wine from the island of Samos, hence its name.
Has a rich combination of flavours recalling marmalade and sultanas — and a touch of resin too.
Like the Muscat de Beaumes de Venise, this wine is a vin doux naturel , but there's a noticeable fieriness to it.
Château des Coulinats ‘83
A white Bordeaux from Sainte-Croix-du-Mont (across the Garonne river from Sauternes), where the wines are still sweet, but lighter in style than their famous cousins.
Good, rich, ripe flavours emanate from this one, but it remains refreshingly cut by a zip of acidity.
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
Eastern Promise
If you want to serve something completely different this Christmas, why not look to the East for some delicious and healthy alternatives to roast turkey?
Christmas is a time of magic and mysticism — so if you fancy a delicious healthy change from the traditional English fare, why not look to the mysteries of India for inspiration?
If you want special dishes with a difference that still have a sense of occasion and which are both tasty and good for you, then you couldn't do better than choosing Tilda Basmati rice.
Basmati — known as the Prince of Rice — is India's most famed variety.
You can't mistake its special qualities: long, elegant grains, which expand at least three times in length during cooking; delicate, distinctive aroma and delicious texture and taste.
As it can only be grown in Northern India among the foothills of the Himalayas, it is naturally always in great demand and once you savour the fragrance and taste of the rice for yourself you will understand why.
It has always been so greatly prized in Indian homes where it is served particularly on special occasions and whenever possible.
If you want the best Basmati rice, look for Tilda Basmati, Brown Basmati and Easy Cook Basmati: Tilda selects its Basmati from its own highly trained buyers who purchase only the finest quality of Basmati from the season's crop.
You can be certain that Tilda is the purest you can buy.
Nutritionists have long extolled the virtues of incorporating more rice in our Western diets, and as well as being so healthy, cooking with Tilda Basmati Rice couldn't be simpler.
It is so versatile: you can use it for everyday cooking and for special and festive occasions in starters, main courses, salads and puddings.
It is equally at home in any international cuisine.
You can create classic pilaus; authentic curries; use it as a base for salads using leftover turkey and ham; or try it Waldorf-style with satsumas and nuts; in a gammon stir fry or nasi goreng.
It can bring an exotic and fragrant touch to soups or stews; and it even makes an alternative to short grain rice in cakes and puddings.
Once your family have tasted the unique flavour of Basmati rice, they'll be clamouring for more!
And at only 70 calories per generous serving of plain boiled rice, you know you are giving them the healthy option.
They'll be equally impressed with out wonderful Christmas recipes, too, which use both white and brown Basmati and Easy Cook — they are both imaginative and different, full of fragrance and flavour — and just that little bit extra-special!
If you would like further recipe leaflets and information, please send an sae to:
Smoked salmon rolls with pesto rice
Serves 6 
1 Cook the Basmati according to the pack instructions then mix with the pesto and pine-nuts.
Season well and allow to cool.
2 Spoon pesto rice down the centre of each salmon slice and roll up neatly.
3 Toss salad leaves with vinaigrette to taste.
Serve with salmon and rice rolls, garnished with lemon and dill.
Christmas jewel basmati salad
Serves 10–12 
1 Cook the rice according to the packet instructions.
Reserve about six tablespoons and keep warm.
Pour the dressing over the rest and toss.
Season well and leave to cool.
2 Heat the oil in a small frying pan and fry the turmeric for a few seconds.
Toss into the reserved rice.
Season and cool.
3 Mix the fresh herbs into the white rice and mound up on an attractive serving plate.
Sprinkle over the yellow turmeric rice.
Cover with clingfilm and chill.
4 Scatter the diced pepper over the yellow rice.
Serve with slices of cold turkey or ham.
Basmati rice cake
Serves 6–8  
1 Boil the rice for 3 minutes in water, then drain.
Return to the saucepan with the milk and four tablespoons of sugar.
Bring to the boil and simmer gently, uncovered, for 20 minutes, stirring occasionally until the milk is almost absorbed.
Remove and allow to cool, stirring occasionally to prevent skin forming.
2 Heat the raisins and peel with the rum or brandy and reserve.
3 Stir the cream or fromage frais into the rice along with the cinnamon, raisins and peel.
Beat the egg yolks and add extra sugar to taste, if liked.
4 Preheat the oven to 170C/325F/Gas 3.
Grease and line the base of a deep 23cm/9in round cake tin with greaseproof paper.
Whisk the egg whites until they form soft peaks and fold into the rice mixture.
Spoon into the tin and bake for about 1–1¼ hours until golden brown.
The top should be slightly wobbly like a soufflé.
5 Remove and cool.
(Don't worry if it sinks).
Chill for at least 6 hours.
6 Turn out on to a large plate and remove the paper.
Soften the cheese, then beat in the soured cream or fromage frais.
Flavour with grated lemon rind and vanilla.
Sweeten with caster sugar to taste, then spread over the sides and top of the cake.
7 With a table knife, mark a line pattern on the top and arrange the fruit.
Decorate with holly leaves.
Chill until ready to serve.
From top, Smoked salmon rolls with pesto rice, Christmas jewel basmati salad, Basmati rice cake.
PLUM JOB
TRIED AND TASTED
The proof of the pudding is in the eating.
Kitty Butterwick and her team give their verdict on the commercially made options to end the traditional Christmas meal
As children , our sole incentive for tucking into the Christmas pudding was personal gain — to locate the sixpences and lucky charms hidden in the sticky, dried fruit mixture.
For adults, it's a chance to indulge in a wickedly rich dessert (a 100g portion contains roughly 375 calories) all in the name of tradition.
Christmas pudding is thought to have originated from a type of medieval porridge or pottage, which was made of meat, cornmeal, dried fruit, nuts, sugar and spices.
It was eaten with a spoon and served on festal days as part of the main course.
Imported dried plums were a fashionable ingredient in Elizabeth broths and meat pies.
‘Plum’ consequently became a blanket term for dried fruit, which explains why plum pudding does not actually contain any.
It wasn't until the early 18th century that this thick porridge became a solid, round pudding which was wrapped in a cloth and boiled in a pot.
By the 19th century the meat had ceased to be an ingredient and, in Mrs Beeton's day, the mixture was cooked in elaborate, castle-shaped moulds.
Stirring words
The traditional time to make Christmas pudding is on Stir-Up Sunday, which is the Sunday before Advent.
The appellation comes from a special prayer for that day: ‘Stir up, O Lord, the wills of your faithful people…’
In the past every member of the family would stir the pudding mixture from east to west to commemorate the three wise men's journey.
Nowadays we're more likely to make a wish.
A ready-made pudding is served in almost 50 per cent of British households.
The trend is now moving increasingly upmarket, with most supermarkets offering ‘luxury’ varieties.
But does the description reflect high-quality ingredients or is it merely a marketing tag?
We put them to the test with the help of: Gloria Hunniford, television cook Glynn Christian, cake expert Mary Berry, Emma Forbes of BBC1's Going Live!, children's presenter Andi Peters,Food & Drink producer Alison Field and Willie Elsner, chef of London's Dorchester Hotel.
The panel was generally disappointed by the quality of the so-called ‘luxury’ brands.
Surprisingly, supermarket products fared far better than specialist varieties.
The main criticism was lack of richness: a Christmas pudding is only as good as its ingredients and any skimping is clearly apparent.
The majority contained inadequate amounts of alcohol and dried fruit and some had artificial flavourings or were cloyingly sweet.
Texture was a matter of personal preference — some panel members relished heavy, sticky puddings while others preferred a lighter touch.
Our overall verdict: nothing beats home-made.
Don't miss Jill Goolden's recommendations for sweet dessert wines to accompany Christmas pudding — see p. 96.
1st St Michael
Moist and dark.
Excellent, rich flavour with plenty of fruit, nuts and alcohol, though it needs a little more spice and peel.
Lovely, sticky, toffee pudding texture.
2nd Mosimann's
Almost golden in colour.
Lots of spice, lemon and orange peel.
Texture is open and light as well as moist.
Low in fat: 227 calories per 100g.
3rd Asda
Dark, home-made appearance; very moist and fruity.
Dense, soft texture, which some of the panel found rather wet.
Not too sweet.
Needs more alcohol and spice, but still a good pudding.
4th Tesco
Dark in colour.
Good, light texture, if a little on the bready side.
Has an interesting nuttiness and generous amount of alcohol, but not much spice.
However, it does taste fairly home-made.
5th Waitrose
Has real visual appeal: a dark and gleaming appearance.
Nice flavour, but rather overloaded with nuts and cherries.
Soft and easy-to-eat, although the texture almost verges on the soggy.
6th Mrs Beeton's
about £5.95 for 680g, from independent retailers, delicatessens and food halls.
Very dark, moulded look.
Highly sweet and heavy pudding that has an overcooked flavour.
Dull, with a rather wet texture.
7th Bettys
Looks good.
Crumbly, dry texture is more like fruit cake than pud.
Fruity and sweet, lacks alcohol and spice.
8th Cole's Traditional
£3.99 for 450g, from delicatessens and independent retailers.
Appealingly shiny, golden appearance.
Very greasy, suety taste and texture with artificial lemon flavour.
Lacking in spice and peel.
The Country Victualler
Pale and wet-looking.
Unpleasant acidic, artificial flavour.
Tacky, insubstantial texture.
Last orders
The following puddings arrived too late for our tasting:
Sainsbury's , £5.70 for 2lb.
Good, dark colour.
Moist, fair amount of fruit and alcohol, but lacks spice.
Falls apart.
Safeway , £6.85 for 907g.
Dark and appealing.
Excellent alcohol content.
Rich, lots of fruit, with an attractive flavour.
Moist and sticky texture.
Microwave warning
You should steam a pudding rather than microwaving it, as steaming produces a better flavour.
The high sugar and alcohol content means that a pudding can become dangerously hot in a microwave.
However, if you still want to use a microwave, cut into slices before placing in the oven, then reshape afterwards.
GOOD FOOD CLUB
Join the Food & Drink team
For those of you who are intrigued by live television, we've lined up a special Good Food Club Christmas treat this month.
It is an invitation to join in the fun with the BBC Good Food team at a live recording of the popular Food & Drink Christmas quiz.
The action takes place at the Teddington Lock studios in Middlesex on Saturday December 12 at 6–10pm.
The teams will include presenters Chris Kelly, Michael Barry, Jill Goolden and Oz Clarke, who will be joined by other celebrities in demonstrating their culinary skills and knowledge.
Jill and Oz will pit their wits against each other, as they try to identify mystery wines.
But it won't be all competitive spirit; the evening will also include practical advice and last-minute tips for Christmas entertaining.
Two separate shows will be recorded during the evening for transmission on Tuesday December 15 and Tuesday December 22.
Tickets for the event cost £10, of which £8 will go to Crisis at Christmas, the charity that provides food and shelter for homeless people in London (read all about their admirable work in our feature on page 68).
Prize possessions
During the interval everyone will be served a glass of Cuvée Napa by Mumm, a delicious and refreshing new Californian sparkling wine.
A Good Food Club raffle will also be held with over £500 worth of prizes to be won, including a wonderful six-course champagne dinner for two at Chris Kelly and Hans Schweitzer's luxury restaurant Midsummer House in Cambridge, a gourmet Christmas hamper of Italian goodies from Antonio and Priscilla Carlucci's London delicatessen and a signed copy of Antonio Carlucci's book A Passion for Mushrooms .
There is also a case of Mumm Cuvée Napa wine to be won and an exciting selection of BBC books, including Michael Barry's Food & Drink Cookbook , Valentina Harris's Complete Italian Cookery Course , Jill Goolden's Food & Drink :Taste of Wine and Hot Chefs .
Tickets are supplied on a first come first served basis and audience capacity is limited, so don't delay — fill out the coupon below.
Join the Club
If you haven't yet become a member of the Good Food Club, now's your chance.
As well as having the magazine delivered monthly, you'll receive a Club newsletter.
All Club members are invited to attend out specially organised exclusive events and there are discounts on a whole host of reader offers.
See page 66 for full details of Club membership and the opportunity to subscribe to BBC Vegetarian Good Food .
And for the ideal Christmas present, we are offering gift memberships.
Dine at Chris Kelly's restaurant
Lights, camera, action — you're invited to an audience in the Food & Drink studio, with the chance to win a super raffle prize
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
Using Your LOAF
With over 200 delicious varieties to choose from bread — be it brown or white — has an important and vital part to play in a healthy diet
You can forget about giving up bread if you're on a diet, because contrary to popular belief, bread — whether it's white or brown — is good for you and your figure.
Many of us still incorrectly believe that a well-balanced diet should include only small amounts of bread because it is fattening.
But that simply isn't true — both brown and white breads contain fibre and are valuable sources of complex carbohydrate, protein, vitamins and minerals.
Bread will stop you feeling hungry, and lessen the temptation to binge on high-fat, high-calorie foods.
In fact obesity can be effectively reversed by eating more brad and cutting down on the amounts of butter, margarine and oil we eat, and taking some exercise.
And now with over 200 types of bread, you're really spoilt for choice.
As well as the great British breads like Bloomer, Cottage Farmhouse and Cob, there's a variety of cosmopolitan breads like bagels, ciabatta, focaccia, petit pain, pitta, naan and rye that are made from brown or white flours.
Some contain such exotic ingredients as olives, garlic, herbs, onion, or cheese.
Together with the multi-grain loaves, there are breads to suit every type of meal.
For more information, together with some useful tips on nutrition and some tempting low-calorie recipes, write for a free leaflet to: The Flour Advisory Bureau  It also runs a 24-hour Helpline on 071–4936786.
Top chef, Anton Mosimann, knows just how good bread is — his bread and butter pudding is delicious, as are our innovative snacks, using varied cosmopolitan breads.
Ham and onion loaf
Serves 4–6
Preheat oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Make deep slits in a round onion loaf, or round granary cob.
Mix 100g/4oz of low-fat spread mixed with two tablespoons of Dijon mustard and spread mixture over one side of each slit.
Fill with 175g/6oz smoked sliced ham, one or two sliced beefsteak tomatoes and six finely shredded spring onions.
Wrap in foil and bake for 30 minutes.
Five minutes before end of cooking, open foil to crisp the top.
Serve sliced or in wedges.
Italian style
Serves 4
Cut 12 10cm/4in rounds from a mixed grain loaf.
Toast both sides of four rounds and one side of the remaining eight.
Top each of the eight rounds with one teaspoon of tomato with pesto sauce, 25g/1oz sliced mozzarella, two slices of tomato and ¼ teaspoon shredded fresh basil.
Grill until cheese melts.
Place one round on another to make four piles.
Top with the remaining rounds of toast.
Garnish with a sprig of basil.
Bumper bap
Serves 1
Make two horizontal slips in a large bap without cutting right through.
Spread each slit with low fat spread and low calorie mayonnaise mixed with chopped fresh herbs.
Fill the top slit with prawns and cress and the bottom with cucumber and frisée.
Anton Mosimann with his delicious healthy-option, Bread and Butter pudding
All-in-one breakfast
 Serves 1
Dip a halved chunk of French bread in beaten egg.
Fry in a little olive or sunflower oil until golden.
Top with slices of grilled low fat herb sausage, half a tomato, whole button  mushrooms and bacon, sliced into strips.
Sprinkle with fresh chopped chives.
Ribbon pizza
Serves 4
Preheat grill to a low heat.
Top warmed  focaccia bread with four tablespoons of tomato sauce.
Shred one medium carrot into ribbon strips with a potato peeler, repeat with one medium courgette.
Finely slice 50g/2oz red and yellow peppers into long thin strips.
Mix the vegetables in a bowl with two tablespoons olive oil and two tablespoons fresh chopped parsley.
Pile on top of bread.
Grill until vegetables are soft.
Autumn pudding
Serves 6
Remove the crusts from 280g/10oz small white sliced loaf.
Use 200g/7oz to cover the base and sides of a 1.2litre/2 pint pudding basin.
Dissolve 50g/2oz caster sugar in 150ml/¼ pint orange and four tablespoons of lemon juice.
Stir in 1.25kg/2½lb fresh Autumn fruits.
Cook for 8–10 minutes until soft.
Drain, reserving juice.
Spoon into the basin and cover with remaining bread.
Place a saucer on top.
Chill for several hours.
Turn out on to a deep-sided dish.
Pour over the reserved juice.
Decorate with a sprig of mint.
Anton Mosimann's Bread and butter pudding
Serves 6–8 
1 Preheat the oven to 140C/275F/Gas 1.
Cut the rolls into thin slices and butter.
Arrange in a buttered dish and sprinkle the sultanas evenly over the top.
2 Bring the milk, a little salt and the vanilla pod to the boil.
Gently stir in the Greek yogurt and mix well.
3 Mix the egg and sugar together.
Add the milk and yogurt mixture and stir well.
4 Push the mixture through a sieve.
Gently ladle mixture on the bread.
Poach in a bain marie (a roasting dish a third full of water) and bake on the middle shell for 35–40 minutes, or until set.
5 Mix the jam with one tablespoon of boiling water.
Sieve gently, then brush evenly over the top of the pudding.
Dust lightly with a little icing sugar before serving.
Opposite page, left, Ham and onion load and All-in-one breakfast.
This page, top, Autumn pudding and Bumper bap.
Bottom, Ribbon pizza and Italian style.
VEGETARIAN
festive FLAVOURS
It's the party season, so Louise Pickford takes our favourite winter fruits and gets cracking with the nuts to produce a selection of Christmas canapés and two delicious dishes
Nutty but nice
Fresh nuts are at their best in late autumn and early winter, hence their association with Christmas.
They are rich in protein, vitamins, calcium, iron and oil.
However, their high oil content means that they ‘spoil’ quickly, so buy them in small quantities.
Chestnuts are traditionally used in Christmas stuffings and purées, but they also feature in desserts such as the classic French festive roulade Bûche de Noël.
You can buy sweetened whole chestnuts and purés as well as fresh chestnuts.
However, the latter are time-consuming to peel, so you may prefer ready-peeled chestnuts, available in cans or vacuum packs.
Fruitful harvest
The festive season's finest fruit includes clementines, satsumas, tangerines and mandarins, figs, dates and cranberries.
Raw cranberries are extremely sharp and must always be cooked with a little sugar.
Fresh cranberries are on sale around Christmas, but they are also available frozen throughout the year.
Fresh fruit has been dried for centuries to preserve the glut of a good harvest.
The drying process concentrates a fruit's natural sweetness, without causing the loss of essential minerals and vitamin A. Dried fruit complements both sweet and savoury dishes and is delicious in stuffings, mince pies, Christmas cakes and puddings.
Finger food: from top left, Spiced nuts, Festive purses, Cashew stars, Date surprises, Stilton and pear toasts.
Nibbles
Cover seedless grapes with cream cheese, sandwich between two walnut halves and roll in toasted ground hazelnuts.
Dip shelled Brazils in melted  chocolate and allow set.
Peel and stone fresh dates, stuff with almond paste flavoured with a little coffee and rum, then roll in ground almonds.
Quarter figs, top them with some cinnamon-spiced ricotta and drizzle with clear honey.
Appetisers
Serve these tempting snacks with a glass or two of your favourite festive fizz.
Stilton and pear toasts
Beat 100g/4oz vegetarian Stilton with 25g/1oz softened butter, one tablespoon of port, one finely chopped pear and one teaspoon of snipped chives.
Spread on rounds of toasted rye or walnut bread.
Cashew stars
Combine 75g/3oz self-raising flour with 25g/1oz ground cashews, 25g/1oz vegetarian Cheddar, one teaspoon of mustard powder and quarter of a teaspoon of salt.
Rub in 75g/3oz butter.
Roll out dough, cut into stars and top with cashew halves.
Bake at 190C/375F/Gas 5 for 10–12 minutes.
Festive purses
Mix 65g/2½oz ricotta with one chopped fresh apricot, four chopped spring onions, one crushed garlic clove, 25g/1oz chopped pecans with nutmeg and seasoning.
Lightly oil 16×10cm/4in filo squares, spoon on filling and draw up edges into purses.
Deep fry in hot oil for 1–2 minutes.
Serve tied with a chive.
Spiced nuts
Coat 225g/8oz mixed nuts and 50g/2oz pumpkin seeds in 25g/1oz melted butter, one and a half teaspoons of paprika, one teaspoon of ground cumin, half a teaspoon of ground allspice and quarter of a teaspoon of salt.
Spread on a baking sheet and bake at 200C/400F/Gas 6 for 15–20 minutes until golden.
Drain and serve warm or cold.
Date surprises
Slit 100g/4oz fresh dates and remove stones.
Mix 50g/2oz creamy goat's cheese with one teaspoon of chopped stem ginger, 25g/1oz chopped pistachios and a little grated nutmeg.
Use to stuff the dates.
Winter fruit brûlée
Serves 8 
1 Heat the orange juice and brandy until boiling, then pour over the dried fruit and ginger.
Leave to soak for several hours or overnight.
2 Transfer fruit and liquid to a large pan, add the peel and spices and bring slowly to the boil.
Cover and simmer gently for 10 minutes until the fruit is plump and soft.
Discard the peel and whole spices and leave to cool slightly.
3 Toast the bread, place in the base of a heatproof dish and top with the fruit mixture.
4 Beat cream, ginger syrup and cinnamon until just thickened.
Spread over fruit.
5 Sprinkle with the sugar and place under a very hot grill for 3–4 minutes until the sugar caramelises.
Allow to cool slightly so the topping turns crisp and serve warm.
READER ADVICE
AT YOUR SERVICE
Make the most of the recipes in BBC Good Food with our guide to the magazine small print and tips on food safety and freezing
Nutrition notes
Regular readers will have noticed that a number of our recipes are now followed by an assessment of their nutritional content.
These categories are based on guidelines from the Coronary Prevention Group.
We shall continue to assess recipes every month to enable you to plan your diet for good health.
For both fat and protein, aim to eat a combination of foods that balance out at an overall medium .
Saturated fat consumption, though, should be low ; as far as sodium (salt) is concerned, aim for low intake; and for fibre, optimum intake is medium to high .
Measuring up
When following recipes in the magazine always use either metric or imperial measures — don't switch between the two.
Use proper measuring spoons:1 teaspoon = 5ml .
1 tablespoon = 15ml.
Old-fashioned tablespoons are much larger in size, and using them could  imbalance the final result.
Our recipes assume all spoon measures are level; draw a knife over the top of the spoon.
Play safe
Some of our recipes include raw eggs.
Remember that as a result of the scares regarding salmonella in eggs, MAFF still advises against serving uncooked eggs to vulnerable groups, such as babies, the elderly, the sick or women who are pregnant.
Freezing tips
If you wish to freeze any dishes after you have cooked them, slightly reduce the cooking time to ensure that the food doesn't overcook during reheating.
Cool the dish very quickly, first to room temperature and then in the fridge.
When cold, cover or overwrap with foil or a freezer bag.
Label and freeze for the recommended period, bearing in mind that the lower your freezer temperature, the longer food can be frozen.
Refreezing
There are a few golden rules for safe refreezing:
When you remove food from the freezer, don't leave it in a warm atmosphere or allow it to come into contact with unclean hands, surfaces or equipment before returning it to the freezer — you will be at risk of freezing in any contamination.
Raw food from the freezer can be completely cooked and the finished dish cooled, packed and frozen as usual.
Do not return defrosted cooked meats — particularly offal — to the freezer.
Do not freeze an uncooked dish that includes any type of thawed frozen shellfish.
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
Have a healthy Christmas
To make sure you're not dishing up any trouble for you or your family during the forthcoming festivities, Domestos has some simple hygiene rules to follow in the kitchen
As the festive season is now in full swing, there will be extra mouths to feed with visiting friends and relatives and among them, of course, young children and the elderly — the two groups most susceptible to food poisoning.
So, as you add the final trimmings to the turkey, remember to follow some simple hygiene rules to ensure all your guests enjoy a happy and healthy Christmas.
There are over 55,000 reported case of food poisoning each year, but because many cases go unreported, experts believe the real figure could be 100 times greater.
And as there are four times as many outbreaks in the home than in hotels, takeaways and restaurants etc, it is clear that the domestic kitchen is the last line of defence when it comes to food hygiene.
So to make sure all those extra guests stay healthy this Christmas, it makes sense to add a hygienic cleaner like Domestos Multi Surface Cleaner to your seasonal shopping list.
It's specially formulated to cut through grease and dirt and to wipe away germs, leaving surfaces and floors not just clean but hygienically clean.
To offer some seasonal advice, we invited Dr Liz Scott, consultant microbiologist to the Domestos Hygiene Advisory Service into the new BBC Good Food kitchen.
Liz, a busy working mother of three, is pictured with promotions executive, Elizabeth Ollier, who is expecting many friends to join in the family celebrations.
She put a few questions to Dr Scott.
Elizabeth I'm planning to prepare ham and pork to complement the Christmas turkey.
Is there any special advice you would offer with regard to preparation?
Dr Scott Yes indeed.
It is sensible to treat all raw meat and poultry with extreme care as it must be assumed that it is likely to be contaminated by food poisoning germs.
Cook the meat thoroughly — 25 minutes per 450g/1lb if boiling ham; 25 minutes per 450g/1lb plus 25 minutes for roasting pork; 20 minutes per 450g/1lb for a turkey under 4.5kg/10lb; 18 minutes per 450g/1lb for a turkey weighing between 4.5–6.5kg/10–14lb; 16 minutes per 450g/1lb for a turkey over 6.5kg/14lb.
To make sure the meat is cooked through, you should use a meat thermometer.
And follow the simple ‘clean as you go’ principle which will help to prevent germs spreading from one area of the kitchen to another (commonly termed as ‘cross contamination’).
After preparing the meat, make sure the work surfaces or chopping board which have been in contact with raw meat and poultry are disinfected with a germ-killing product such as Domestos Multi Surface Cleaner, before going on to prepare salad stuffs and vegetables.
If possible, keep a separate chopping board just for meat preparation.
Finally, with a lot of activity centring around the kitchen sink (such as cleaning the turkey), the draining board, sink and plug can harbour many germs, so it is important to ensure these areas are kept hygienically clean.
Elizabeth With friends and relatives coming to stay, the fridge will be extremely full.
Do you have any advice about storage?
Dr Scott Although I know the temptation is great, try not to buy more food than can be safely stored.
Keep the fridge temperature below 5C; it may need adjusting if you're storing more food.
You should remember that a fridge doesn't kill bacteria, only slows down the rate at which they multiply.
Store raw meat at the bottom of the fridge to avoid any blood dripping on to any other foods.
And never store cooked meat alongside cooked meat and always make sure all cooked meat is well covered.
Mop up any spillages and keep the fridge clean by using a germ killing product such as Domestos Multi Surface Cleaner.
Elizabeth At this time of year, there is more leftover food than usual, so do you have any general hints that you might offer?
Dr Scott Yes.
Obviously there will be turkey left after the main Christmas meal and there are lots of interesting ways to use this up.
However, do be careful with leftovers.
Make sure you refrigerate or freeze them  quickly.
Previously frozen meat can be refrozen as long as it has been cooked, but don't recook anything more than twice.
Also make sure your food hygiene efforts are not wasted by forgetting to deal with the biggest culprit of all — the dishcloth.
There are potentially more germs on a dishcloth than there are in an average pedal bin — so disinfect cloths regularly.
Dr Liz Scott also has these tips for a healthy Christmas.
FESTIVE COUNTDOWN
Don't take everything out of the freezer until you need it because partially defrosted food can be dangerous if refrozen.
Make sure you defrost the turkey slowly.
A 5lb oven-ready turkey will take 15 hours to defrost at room temperature.
A 20lb bird needs 30 hours.
Take care when preparing vegetables — wash thoroughly, as any traces of soil are likely to be full of bacteria.
Once the turkey is defrosted, remove the giblets, keep it in a fridge and cook within 24 hours.
It is safer to cook the stuffing separately from the turkey to give the turkey a better chance of cooking right through.
Use a meat thermometer if possible.
If you are not eating the turkey straight away, remove from the oven and allow to cool thoroughly.
Once cooled refrigerate as soon as you can.
Be careful with leftovers — refrigerate or freeze them quickly.
Previously frozen uncooked meat can be refrozen as long as it has been cooked, but don't re-cook anything more than twice.
Mincemeat often contains raw animal suet, so always store any uncooked mincemeat in the fridge and don't be tempted to taste it before cooking.
Don't be tempted by uncooked cake or pudding mixture — it contains raw eggs.
Be sure that your hands are clean before you start to cook and always remember to wash them again before starting another dish.
If you would like to receive a set of three free leaflets about home and food hygiene, write to: Or visit the Domestos Hygiene Advisory Service on Stand 746 at the BBC Good Food Cooking & Kitchen Show at the Birmingham NEC, where any questions on food or home hygiene will be answered by the Domestos team, including Dr Liz Scott.
And visitors to the stand will be given a free sample of Domestos Multi Surface Cleaner.
It's better to be safe than sorry — especially at Christmas, as consultant microbiologist Dr Liz Scott tells promotions executive Elizabeth Ollier (left) in the BBC Good Food kitchen
Kids stuff
Emma Forbes, presenter of BBC1's Going Live!, brings you a whole Santa's sackful of fab food gifts — perhaps even too good to give away!
Surprise your family and friends with something truly original this year: Christmas presents based on food.
There are so many fantastic things you can make.
A fragrant orange pomander would be a great gift for your mum or gran, and my really easy Breakfast banana muffins and Christmas tree cookies certainly make tasty presents.
If you really want to make an impression, decorate a basket or box to parcel them in.
Christmas tree cookies
If piping the icing sounds too much trouble, you can use instant icing in tubes.
Makes about 24 
1 Beat butter and sugar with a wooden spoon in a mixing bowl until light and creamy.
Sift in flour, salt and spices and mix well.
2 Stir in the egg yolk, half a tablespoon of cold water and the vanilla essence.
Mix until the mixture pulls together and forms a ball.
Wrap the dough in kitchen foil and chill for 1 hour.
3 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Roll out the dough on a floured surface to a 5mm/¼in thickness and stamp or cut out festive shapes (see equipment, page 92).
4 Place the shapes on two greased baking sheets and, using a skewer or cocktail stick, make a hole in each at one end.
Bake for 10–15 minutes or until golden.
Leave the cookies to cool and harden on a wire rack.
5 Mix the icing sugar with two tablespoons of water.
Divide it among four small bowls, then mix a few drops of food colouring into each one.
Make four small cones of greaseproof paper and fill each with a different coloured icing.
Strip off the end of the cones with scissors to make a tiny hole.
Slowly squeeze the icing on to each cookie, making any pattern you like.
6 When the icing is dry, thread ribbon through the hole in the top of each cookie and hang them on the tree.
Or you could always eat them straight away!
Breakfast banana muffins
If you are giving muffins as a present, they look really pretty tucked into a basket lined with a napkin.
Makes 8–12 
1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Beat together the butter and sugar in a mixing bowl until light and creamy — use a wooden spoon or an electric mixer if you have one.
Beat in the egg, then mash the bananas with a fork and stir into the mixture.
2 Mix the wholemeal and plain flours, salt and baking powder in another bowl, then add to the banana mixture.
Stir in the yogurt and vanilla essence and keep stirring until everything is well mixed together — the mixture will be lumpy because of the banana.
3 Grease a muffin tin and fill each hollow with two large tablespoons of the mixture.
Bake for 20–25 minutes or until risen and golden.
BE VERY CAREFUL WHEN TAKING THEM OUT OF THE OVEN AND USE OVEN GLOVES.
Leave to cool before removing from the tin.
Eat within two days.
A muffin tin looks like a large, deep bun tray.
If you cannot get hold of one, make smaller muffins in an ordinary bun tray and bake for only 10–15 minutes.
You can make lots of different muffins from the basic mixture above.
Add a handful of nuts or raisins and some grated raw apple, or even raspberries — whatever you like!
Orange pomanders
1 So that you can hang the pomander, wind two pieces of tape around the orange at right angles to each other.
When you take it off you will have rows for tying the ribbon — but don't remove it yet.
2 Use a skewer to poke holed in the orange around the sticky tape.
Press in the cloves.
Do not mark the holes too close together, or the cloves will fall out when the orange dries out.
3 Put the cinnamon and orris root powder in the bag and shake to mix.
Drop in the orange and dust with the mixture to set the fragrance.
4 Leave the pomander in a warm, dry place for about 4 weeks until it is hard and dry.
Blow away the surplus powder and remove the sticky tape.
Tie the ribbon around the orange.
Prize draw — jump to it!
Jack-in-a-Box packs are full of dolly mixtures and farmyard animal gums.
They cost 99p from Boots, but we have 750 to give away.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute at other times.
Winners will be chosen at random at the end of December, when a Jack-in-a-Box could be on its way to you.
GROW YOUR OWN
kitchen garden
Pretty perennial plants: BBC Gardeners' World editor Pasco thinks the world of globe artichokes
Action for December
Rake up any fallen leaves for the compost heap
Treat timber with a wood preservative — one that is safe to use near plants
Dig over any empty sites, adding large quantities of compost as you do so.
Inspect stored fruit every week and throw out any that has started to go rotten.
Harvest Brussels sprouts, cabbage, carrots, celeriac, chicory, endive, kohlrabi, leeks, parsnips, salsify, scorzonera, swede, turnips and winter spinach.
Prune apple and pear trees by the end of the year, but not during very cold weather as frost can damage them.
Rhubarb, sea kale and Witloof Belgian chicory can all be forced for a winter crop.
Pruning should now have been completed on summer-fruiting raspberries: remove old canes and tie the new ones to their support wires.
Apple pie order: check stored fruit regularly for signs of rot.
Rhubarb, rhubarb…forcing ensures an earlier yield.
Big-hearted: globe artichokes
If you doubt that vegetables can be as attractive as flowers, then take a closer look at globe artichokes.
This perennial plant's big, bold, green clumps, measuring 90cm/3ft high and the same in diameter, grow even bigger and more productive before they deteriorate after a few years' growth, and are then best replaced.
You can grow artichokes from seed, but the most common method is from rooted suckers or offsets.
These can be bought during early spring or detached from mature specimens and planted out in March and April.
Choose a site in full sun, but sheltered from strong winds.
Soil should be free-draining and well prepared, with plenty of compost — keep plants watered during the first season.
Flowering usually starts in the second year, with one flower head — the edible part — at the end of each shoot.
If you want large heads, restrict the number of shoots per plant to three.
Surround crowns with straw during winter to protect them from frost — in colder areas you may need to earth up the stems first.
Older clumps flower earlier and crop during June and July, while young plants yield later in September.
Ensure a regular supply by taking a few sucker cuttings each year, so you always have plants at different stages of growth.
Family fare
The fruit, vegetables and herbs you grow yourself often make the most delicious dishes, which is why Marshalls Seeds is running a competition to find the best family recipes.
All those published in the customer newsletter will win a Marshalls voucher to the value of £5.
Send the recipe for your favourite dish to:
Covering notes
The style of the Victorian era has been enjoying a revival, first with the conservatory and now reproduction cloches.
The cloches are just as functional as modern designs, but have an elegance that plastic and aluminium cannot match.
Single tartan-style cloches certainly lend themselves to a kitchen garden, although they don't come cheap — prices start at £58.
If you have problems finding gifts for green-fingered friends and family, look no further than the December BBC Gardeners' World .
On sale now for just £1.45.
Reading between the wines Part 1
Satisfy your thirst for knowledge with Kitty Butterwick's six-part wine appreciation course, and you could by quaffing your way to a qualification
Do you ever feel confused by the vast array of wines on supermarket shelves?
Do you plump for a bottle with an attractive label or simply stick to a wine that is familiar?
Then the BBC Good Food Beginner's Wine Certificate is for you.
Starting in this issue, our six-month course will begin by taking you right back to the basics.
It has been devised in conjunction with the Wine and Spirit Education Trust — the official examination body for the trade (see below).
There will be a multiple choice questionnaire in seven issues time covering the entire course, so you must collect all six preceding issues.
If all of your answers are correct you will receive your BBC Good Food Beginner's Wine Certificate.
Our comprehensive course will help you buy with confidence and increase your enjoyment of different wines.
Each month we will take you through the major wine-producing areas of the world, highlighting the leading grape varieties.
We also recommend four good quality, value-for-money wines from Sainsbury's, which typify a particular style or region.
Forget the snobbery and mystique that surrounds wine appreciation — our course makes it accessible to one and all.
The Wine and Spirit Education Trust  runs trade Certificate, Higher Certificate and Diploma wine courses, which are now open to consumers.
Send an sae for details.
A world of wine
Wine is exported from areas all over the world.
The traditional wine-producing nations — France, Italy, Spain and Germany — have now been joined by Australia, New Zealand, North and South American countries, Bulgaria, China and even India.
What makes a wine taste so different from another?
Although wine is simply fermented grape juice, where and how it is made radically affects its flavour, and these are the determining factors:
Influences
Climate
Weather
Soil
Grape variety
Viticulture (how the vines are grown)
Vinification (how the wine is made)
In the vineyard
Climate: wine is made in a wide range of climates and this creates different styles.
The cool conditions in Germany produce wines with high acidity and lower alcohol, while the sun-drenched Australian or Chilean vineyards create robust, fruity wines that are high in alcohol.
Weather: annual changes in the weather provoke corresponding differences in the quality and quantity of a crop, or vintage.
An Indian summer leads to extra-ripe grapes with a higher sugar content.
These sweeter grapes produce rich, fruity wines with a potentially higher level of alcohol.
On the other hand, too much rain ‘dilutes’ the grapes and the result is a thin tasting product.
Frost and hail during spring or summer may cause damage to young growth and lead to a disappointingly small crop — which will inevitably affect the price of the wine.
Soil: surprisingly, vines thrive in poor soil — rich earth produces inferior quality wines; and different grape varieties flourish in differing types of soil.
The chalky earth of the French Champagne region gives the famous fizz its particular flavour.
Grape variety: the type depends on the soil and climate.
There are 3,000 varieties, but you need only remember a few of them: Chardonnay, Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot are some of the most common examples.
Each variety has its own different characteristics — a wine may be made from a single type or, as in the case of claret, a careful blend of two or three.
Viticulture: the way a crop is grown affects the results.
Whether you are cultivating cabbages or grapes, care is needed to achieve a good harvest: good grapes make good wine.
Prudent pruning produces a low yield and, therefore, a better quality wine because each bunch of grapes receives more nutrients from the soil and thus develops more flavour and structure.
It takes time, effort and money to produce top quality fruit and this is reflected in the price.
A typical year
Winter: dormant vines are pruned and the vineyard is tidied up.
Spring: new vines planted.
Summer: vines in flower.
Autumn: the vintage or harvest (about 100 days after flowering).
Grapes picked, mainly by machine.
In the winery
Vinification:
or the way in which the wine is made.
The first stage is fermentation.
Traditional hand-picking methods at Château Palmer in the Médoc area
Fermentation:
The skins of grapes are covered in a fine waxy film speckled with yeast cells.
When the skin is broken (by crushing), the yeast comes into contact with the natural sugar in the fruit pulp.
The yeast feeds on the sugar and produces alcohol and carbon dioxide.
The degree of sugar in the grape determines the alcoholic content.
In cooler areas where ripening is a problem — such as Germany or Burgundy in France — a little extra sugar may be added to bump up the alcohol.
Now let's look at how vinification affects both red and white wine.
Reds
Fermentation:
the grapes are crushed and the juice (or must) and skins go into the fermentation vat.
Red wines are fermented at a higher  temperature than whites to extract colour and tannin from the skins.
The tannin (see Balancing act overleaf) provides ageing potential.
Length of fermentation depends on the wine desired.
Light reds, such as Beaujolais, have less contact with the skins than tannic reds, like Bordeaux.
After fermentation, ‘free run’ wine is drawn off and the skins are pressed to extract further juice and tannin, which are blended with the ‘free run’.
Maturation:
fine red wines may be matured in oak barrels for one to two years.
This process allows the harsh tannin to mellow and the wine to develop complexity.
If the wine is aged in barrels made from new oak, an extra vanilla-like flavour is imparted.
This can be detected in many Australian Chardonnays, fine red Bordeaux and red Spanish Riojas.
Whites
Fermentation:
the main difference is that the wine is fermented without the skins (and thus contains virtually no tannin) and at a lower temperature to preserve the delicate flavour and aroma.
Maturation:
white wines generally need less maturation than reds, but expensive whites which contains lots of fruit spend time in oak — for example it is fashionable to oak New World Chardonnay.
Variations on a wine
Most wine contains between 8.5% and 15% alcohol.
Liqueurs or fortified wines such as port and sherry are given a higher alcohol level (15.5% upwards) by adding grape spirit during or after fermentation.
Wines can be red, white or rosé, and still or sparkling — where the natural carbon dioxide from fermentation is trapped in the wine.
They can be flavoured with herbs and spices — vermouth is an example.
They can also be classified according to their sugar content, ie dry, medium or sweet.
In dry wines no sugar is left after fermentation.
Keeping
Wine needs to be stored in the right environment to retain its top condition.
This is especially applicable for those that are not yet ready to drink and therefore need to be laid down for a year or more.
However, even wine intended for immediate consumption can go off, so keep bottles in the following conditions:
1
At a constant and cool temperature — ideally 10–15C.
2
Away from strong light, as this ages wine prematurely.
3
Clean and dry: damp conditions will cause the cork to deteriorate and encourage bugs.
4
Free from vibration, as this disturbs wine.
5
On their sides to keep the corks moist.
If a cork dries out, shrinkage occurs and air and moisture can seep in and spoil wine.
This is not relevant for wine in screw-topped bottles.
Serving
Whites:
light whites should be served cool but not cold, otherwise you cannot taste the delicate flavours; 10–15C is perfect.
Full-bodied, sweet or sparkling wines can be drunk at a cooler temperature.
Reds:
room temperature (15–20C) is fine.
Don't warm wine by placing it next to a radiator or open fire, as this will cause it to taste coarse.
Open full-bodied reds about two hours in advance and lighter ones about an hour beforehand.
Letting a wine ‘breathe’ is not just part of its mystique — it allows oxygen to enter, which releases flavours and softens harsh edges, so you can appreciate its flavour.
However, some reds — such as Beaujolais — can be chilled.
WHITE WINE WHITE GRAPES ARE FIRST CRUSHED AND THEN PRESSED ONLY THE JUICE IS FERMENTED IN THE VATS.
AFTER BEING LEFT TO MATURE IN THE CASKS, THE WINE IS BOTTLED.
RED WINE RED GRAPES ARE CRUSHED AND LEFT TO FERMENT IN A VAT.
HERE THE JUICE ABSORBS COLOUR FROM THE GRAPE SKINS.
AFTER BEING PRESSED, THE WINE IS MATURED BEFORE BOTTLING
Tasting
Whichever words you use, the important thing is to enjoy wine.
A little knowledge will help you to discover which types you like  and how to spot a faulty wine.
With practice, you will become familiar with different flavours.
Take time to savour a wine's qualities and make notes, so you can remember its name.
The ideal tasting glass should be broader at the base than the top, so that the aroma concentrates around the rim — this makes it easier to appreciate.
When tasting, pour in only a third of a glassful and use the following guidelines:
Sight:
a wine should be bright, not hazy and cloudy.
Hold the glass at an angle to assess the colour.
Young reds will be purplish at the rim — as they age this becomes red, mahogany and eventually brown.
Young whites are greeny-white and turn yellow, then golden as they mature.
Sweet whites are yellow-toned.
Aroma:
the nose or bouquet tells you plenty.
Hold the glass by the stem and swirl it to release the aroma.
Give the wine a short, sharp sniff: it should be clean.
Musty ‘off’ smells mean that it is out of condition.
What does the aroma remind you of?
Can you identify vanilla, gooseberries or blackcurrants for example?
Taste:
also called palate.
Take a small mouthful.
Swirl it around your mouth — different areas are sensitive to certain tastes.
Draw in a little air to release the flavours — this takes some practice, and don't worry about making slurping noises!
Once you have swirled the wine around your tastebuds, spit it out into a lined bucket.
This may seem rather inelegant or wasteful but, if you are sampling several wines, swallowing them all will result in your senses of taste and smell, and thus your powers of differentiation, becoming jaded.
Balancing act
The following elements should be balanced in a wine:
Fruit:
a well made young wine will be very fruity.
This doesn't mean it actually tastes of grapes — only wines made from Muscat grapes do so.
It's just that the flavour alters during fermentation and consequently becomes reminiscent of other fruits, such as raspberries, blackcurrants or gooseberries.
A certain level of fruit is needed for a wine to be rounded and flavourful.
Acidity:
this is the quality in lemon juice that makes your mouth water.
The acidity in grapes comes from the pulp: too much produces a sour wine while too little makes it flat and unrefreshing.
Tannin:
this comes from the skin and stalk of the grape.
It makes young wines harsh and gives your mouth a dry and furry feeling.
Tea contains tannin — drink a ‘stewed’ cup to get the feel of it.
Tannin gives a wine structure and ageing potential.
As red wine matures, tannin softens and it becomes more balanced and drinkable.
Buy and try
Sample the selected wines from Sainsbury's (below), bearing in mind our sight, aroma and taste categories and you will be able to appreciate four very individual wine styles.
There will be a £5 charge to enter the questionnaire in our June issue which could lead to you receiving the certificate.
NEXT MONTH IN PART TWO: The wines of France and how to enjoy them.
RECOMMENDED WINES FROM SAINSBURY'S
Sainsbury's Piesporter Michelsberg, £2.98
Very pale; a typical light German wine.
Delicate, slightly flowery flavour with enough acidity to keep it fresh and balanced.
Off-dry and easy drinking — a perfect aperitif.
Sainsbury's Hunter Valley Chardonnay 1991, £4.99
Pale gold; a much fuller white.
Classic New World Chardonnay with vanilla, butter and exotic fruit aromas.
Oaky, dry and tangy.
Best served with food.
Sainsbury's Beaujolais, £3.25
Pale cherry colour.
Typical cherry, jammy aroma and flavour of the Gamay grape.
Smooth and rounded with low tannin.
High alcohol adds body.
Drink with food or on its own, even chill slightly.
Sainsbury's Chilean Cabernet Sauvignon, £3.25
Dark, rich colour.
Classic Cabernet Sauvignon aroma: blackcurrant.
Spicy, cooked berry flavours, with clear tannin.
Gutsy and full-bodied — serve with food.
COOK'S DIRECTORY
Recipes from all your favourite TV and radio cookery programmes
FOOD & DRINK
A touch of the exotic is definitely the preserve of Michael Barry as he tackles fruity formulas and spicy suppers
For more culinary creations, join Michael Barry on BBC2's Food & Drink, Tuesday evenings at 8.30pm
These three crafty preserves will lend an unusual note to your table this Noêl.
The first has a tangy, modern taste, the second hails from days gone by and the third brings a hint of traditional Danish flavour to our shores.
Brightly coloured and bottled in pretty jars, not only do they taste good but they look good too!
Michael will also demonstrate his other delicious savoury dishes and desserts on BBC2's Food & Drink .
Spiced kumquats
Make this preserve with whole baby oranges (kumquats) or with neat slices of large Navel or any Jaffa type of orange.
This bitter-sweet preserve is perfect with rich, cold meats such as duck.
The juice also makes a good base for a sweet and sour sauce.
Makes about 1.25kg/2½lb 
1 If you are using large oranges, cut them across into 7mm/½in slices, discarding the pips and end slices.
Place the kumquats or orange slices in a pan, cover with water, bring to the boil, strain and discard the water.
Return the fruit to the pan and add enough water to come just below the level of the fruit.
Simmer gently for 35 minutes or until the fruit is translucent.
2 Remove the pan from the heat and add the caster sugar and vinegar, stirring continuously until the sugar has dissolved, then bring to a rolling boil for 5 minutes.
Place the fruit in a sterilised bottling jar together with the star anise, coriander seeds, bay leaves, chilli pepper and peppercorns.
Seal the jar when the fruit is cold.
This bottled preserve should keep for about six months.
Bottling it up: Spiced kumquats make a sweet and sour surprise.
Orange rum butter
Orange rum butter is a cousin of brandy butter.
This 18th-century sweet preserve was traditionally made for high days and holidays.
In the health-conscious '90s such sumptuous flavours are now reserved for the all-too-brief moment of self-indulgence that is typical of Christmas.
In small quantities it adds a tangy richness to mince pies and Christmas pudding.
Makes about 350g/12oz 
1 Cream the butter with the sugar until light and fluffy.
Beat in the orange rind and juice, rum and cinnamon.
Pack into sterilised jars and smooth the tops, then seal well.
This butter should keep for no more than one month.
Cranberry and pear relish
Although we tend to associate cranberries with the US, they are also a Scandinavian tradition.
This delicious preserve comes from Denmark where it's popular with cold meat.
Makes about 675g/1½lb  
1 Place the cranberries with the lemon juice, rind and sugar in a pan.
Cover and simmer until the berries have ‘popped’ and are reduced to a juicy pulp — you may need to add a couple of tablespoons of water.
2 Peel, core and cut the pears into eight segments lengthways, then cut each one into four across.
Add to the cranberries and simmer for about 8 minutes until the pears are translucent but not too squashy.
Pack into sterilised jars.
This preserve will keep for three months.
Goujons of sole
Here's a recipe to make the lovely, firm texture and subtle flavour of sole go a little further.
It requires deep-frying but, if you're worried about the high fat content, quickly brown the strips of fish in a little shallow oil fist, then bake them in the oven at 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 10–15 minutes, and you'll find they cook quite crisply with less fat.
Serves 2 
1 Cut the fillets diagonally across the grain into 7mm/⅓in strips.
Soak them in the lemon juice for 5 minutes.
2 Dip the strips in the flour, then the egg, then the breadcrumbs, coating evenly.
Heat the oil in a pan until just below smoking point.
Add the goujons and cook for about 4 minutes until golden.
Serve hot.
Hunter's pheasant
Game is now widely available in many large supermarkets, butchers and from game dealers.
Pheasant — when not hung to destruction — is not a strong-tasting bird and feeds four people surprisingly well, which makes it good value.
Serves 4 
1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Heat the oil in a flameproof casserole and fry the pheasant pieces until lightly golden.
Stir in the chopped onion, celery and carrot and cook for 2 minutes.
2 Pour in enough of the stock to just cover the pheasant and season generously.
Add the bouquet garni and cook for 1–1 hour 20 minutes until the pheasant is well cooked but not falling to pieces.
3 Transfer the pheasant to a dish with a slotted spoon and keep warm.
Remove the bouquet garni from the casserole, stir in the jelly and arrowroot.
Bring quickly to the boil, stirring continuously until the sauce thickens and clears.
Return the pheasant to the casserole and serve with the sauce, plenty of mashed potato and red cabbage.
Pear tart
Use firm, ripe pears, but not ones that have gone squashy.
I think this tart is best eaten warm, but it's also delicious cold — although the filling will sink a little.
Serves 4–6 
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Roll out the pastry on a floured surface and use to line a 23cm/9in flan tin that is at least 2.5cm/1in deep.
Prick the base all over with a fork, line with foil and then add rice or baking beans.
Bake blind for about 12 minutes.
Remove the foil and the rice or beans.
2 Reduce oven temperature to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Arrange the sliced pears neatly in the pastry case and sprinkle with lemon juice to prevent them from discolouring.
Mix together the cream, eggs, yolk and sugar and pour over the pears.
Bake for 20–25 minutes until the cream is just set.
Allow to cool for 10 minutes before serving.
Scandinavian apple cake
Use traditional English apples for their more intense flavour.
This cake is more like a pudding — serve it in a glass bowl so that everyone can appreciate the attractive layering.
Serves 4–6 
1 Place the apples, cloves, sugar and lemon juice in a pan with just enough water to prevent them from sticking.
Cook for about 15–20 minutes until soft and puréed, stirring occasionally — they do not need to be completely smooth.
2 Melt the butter in a pan and fry breadcrumbs until golden.
Remove from the heat and stir in the light muscovado sugar, the  cinnamon and the lemon rind.
3 Place a third of the apple mixture in the bottom of a glass bowl and top with a third of the breadcrumbs.
Continue in this way, finishing with a layer of breadcrumbs.
4 Tap the bowl gently on the work surface to settle the layers.
Chill for at least 2 hours.
Serve with fromage frais or cream.
The following recipes are from Michael Barry's Exotic Food Fast with the Crafty Cook , out now in paperback.
Cream of the crop: custard topping adds a crafty touch to Pear tart.
Tandoori spiced trout
Serves 4 
1 Place the trout in a non-metallic dish.
Mix the yogurt, coriander, cumin, turmeric, paprika, ginger, garlic salt and chilli powder.
Pour over the trout and turn to coat evenly.
Cover and marinate for 4–6 hours in the fridge, turning at least once.
2 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Remove the trout from the marinade with a slotted spoon and transfer to a rack in a baking dish.
Bake for 20 minutes, then turn and bake for a further 10 minutes.
Serve each trout on a bed of finely shredded lettuce, garnished with a lemon wedge.
Green beans with garlic
This Chinese-style dish goes well with Mediterranean-type meat and fish dishes.
Serves 2–4 
1 Heat the oil and butter together in a pan and when the butter has melted, toss in the beans.
Cover the pan and cook over a low heat for 3 minutes.
2 Sprinkle the garlic, soy sauce and sugar over the beans and pour in 250ml/8fl oz water.
Bring to the boil and cook until all of the liquid has evaporated — the beans should be glossy and bright green.
Serve at once in a warmed dish.
Penang lamb
Serves 4 
1 Fry the onion, garlic and ginger in the oil for a minute until the onion softens.
Add the lamb and cook gently for 3–4 minutes.
2 Add the chilli powder, coriander, soy sauce and 250ml/8fl oz water.
Simmer for 25–30 minutes until the meat is tender.
3 Stir in the peanut butter and gently bring back to the boil until the sauce thickens and goes glossy and smooth.
You may need to add a little more water if the sauce becomes too thick.
4 Add the other ingredients and stir gently to mix.
Remove from the heat and allow to stand for 2–3 minutes before serving.
Malaysian crispy garlic chicken
Serves 4 
1 Whizz the garlic, salt, chilli and lemon juice together in a food processor until blended.
2 Place the chicken in a non-metallic dish and completely coat with the garlic mixture.
Cover and leave for at least 4 hours or overnight in the fridge.
3 Heat the oil to 190C/375F, place the chicken pieces in a basket and lower into the hot oil.
Reduce the heat to 170C/340F and cook for about 10 minutes, then turn over and cook for 5 minutes until brown and crispy.
THIS MORNING
Susan Brookes' New World travels end with a trip down Mexico way
ITV Susan Brookes discusses the flavours of the New World and cooks her Mexican recipes on This Morning, ITV, Mondays at 11am
Mexico has a long culinary history and is therefore a must for any travelling cook.
Sadly, it was to be the final port of call on my Latin American tour before returning to Liverpool's Albert Dock studios — but what a country to end in!
Long before we Brits got to grips with spices, the Mexicans were grinding all kinds of seasonings into their sauces to serve with tortillas.
In fact, Mexico has played an important role in international cooking culture: the tomato was first grown there and chillies, corn and chocolate were introduced into Europe from Mexico.
Vanilla, avocados and peppers also number among its popular food exports.
I was invited to sample a traditional Mexican Christmas recipe — Montezuma's feast (turkey covered in chocolate and chilli).
It certainly made an unusual change from cranberry sauce and was one of the most memorable tastes I experienced in the New World.
Montezuma's feast
Serves 4 
1 Heat one tablespoon of the oil in a large pan, add half of the onion and garlic and fry until the onion begins to brown.
Add the chicken or turkey pieces and fry until they are golden brown on both sides.
2 Pour in enough water to cover the meat, season to taste and simmer gently for 20–30 minutes until cooked through.
Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and keep warm.
Pour stock into a jug; set aside.
3 Place the nuts, raisins, allspice and half of the sesame seeds in a food processor, whizz until blended and transfer to a bowl.
Place the remaining onion, garlic, toast or tortilla, tomatoes and chillies in the processor, whizz until blended and stir into the nut mixture.
4 Heat the remaining oil in the pan and gently fry the nut and tomato mixture for 2–3 minutes, stirring constantly.
Pour in about half of the stock, add chocolate and stir gently until melted.
5 Return the turkey or chicken pieces to the pan and cook gently for a few minutes.
Sprinkle over remaining sesame seeds.
Guacamole
Serves 4–6 as a starter 
1 No more than half an hour before serving, halve, stone and peel the avocados.
Using a fork, mash the flesh in a bowl, so that it retains a slightly rough texture.
2 Stir in the tomatoes, onion, chilli and coriander and season to taste.
Serve with the lime wedges and tortilla chips.
Guacamole: an appetiser to make your mouth — and eyes — water.
Tortillas
You can buy fresh or frozen tortillas, which are usually made which masa harina (maize flour).
As this is not always available, I've used wheat flour.
Makes about 18 
1 Sift the flour and salt into a bowl and rub in the fat until it resembles fine breadcrumbs.
Gradually mix in about 300ml/½  pint of warm water to enable you to gather the dough into a ball with your hands — it should be soft and slightly sticky.
Knead lightly until smooth, then cover and leave to rest for 20 minutes.
2 Divide dough into 18 balls and, on a floured surface, roll each one into a thin pancake to fit a 23cm/9in frying pan.
Heat the dry pan and cook each tortilla for about 30 seconds until the top bubbles up.
Puncture the large blisters, turn the tortilla over, press down and cook until the underside develops brown patches.
When the tortillas are ready, wrap each one in a tea towel (if serving later, wrap in foil to reheat in the oven).
Serve warm with Salsa cruda, Refried beans, Hot tomato sauce (see following recipes), shredded iceberg lettuce and sour cream.
To freeze, layer tortillas with foil or greaseproof paper.
They can be frozen for up to three months.
Always allow to thaw before reheating.
Salsa cruda
As there are many variations to this recipe, I have decided to give you a list of ingredients to experiment with until you find the one you like best.
Use as an accompaniment to tortillas or as a relish to go with all sorts of grilled meat or fish.
Makes about 450ml/¾ pint 
1 Mix all of the ingredients together in a small bowl and leave at room temperature for 30 minutes for the flavours to develop.
Season to taste.
Larger chillies tend to be less fiery than small ones.
As the seeds are the hottest part, make sure you remove them.
Adapt the chilli content according to your palate: the preceding recipe should not be too fiery, but add more chillies if you feel brave.
Refried beans
Makes about 740g/1¾lb 
1 Heat the oil in a pan and fry the onion and chilli halves until the onion browns.
Remove the onion and chilli from the oil with a slotted spoon and discard.
2 Add the drained beans to the pan and mash them with a fork or potato masher into the flavoured oil.
Cook the beans, stirring continuously, until they are heated through and look like thick porridge.
Serve hot with tortillas or as an accompaniment.
If the beans start to stick to the bottom during cooking, make a well in the centre of the pan and stir in a little more oil and water.
Hot tomato sauce
Makes about 400ml/14fl oz 
1 Fry the onion in the oil until transparent.
Stir in the chilli powder and cook for 1 minute.
Pour in the tomatoes and then add the tomato purée, sugar and seasoning.
Cook gently for about 5 minutes until the sauce thickens slightly.
Serve with tortillas or the other Mexican dishes.
Seviche
You need to use the freshest fish for the best results.
Serves 4 
1 Place the fish in a small bowl and stir in the lime juice.
Chill for about 8 hours, stirring once or twice, until the fish has turned white and developed a cooked appearance.
2 Add the taco sauce, olive oil, spring onions and seasoning and chill for at least 30 minutes.
Garnish with lime slices and serve piled up in a dish.
Three cheers for Tortillas, Salsa cruda and Refried beans.
If you would like to try more of Susan's recipes, send a cheque for £2.50 (inc. p+p) made payable to Granada Television to: Allow 28 days for delivery.
BACK TO BASICS
SOUND BITES
Let your fingers do the walking with Orla Broderick's selection of light canapés and imaginative ideas for entertaining
It's not easy catering for a large number of people, as the chances are they won't fit round your dining table.
A fun solution is to treat them to finger food.
Provide a wide selection, making sure there are lots of different colours, flavours and textures.
As for quantities, allow four to six canapés and nibbles per person as a pre-dinner appetiser, and eight to 10 for a longer party.
Alcohol and soft drinks are much harder to estimate.
As a guide, there are roughly six glasses to a bottle of wine, 25 measures to a 70cl bottle of spirits and four glasses, or enough for six mixers in a 500ml/18fl oz bottle of tonic.
You may want to serve spirits or cocktails when the guests arrive, or simply beer and wine throughout.
But don't forget any teetotallers, children and those who are driving — offer non-alcoholic cocktails, fruit juice and sparkling mineral water.
Order, order
Always plan ahead to save time and unnecessary effort.
Make two separate shopping lists: one for non-perishables and the other for last-minute foods, such as fresh cream or fruit.
Draw up a timetable — some recipes can be cooked and frozen weeks in advance while others can be prepared a day beforehand; some dishes can only be made on the day.
Work out numbers of plates and glasses.
Wine merchants often lend glasses to customers for a small charge or even for free — assuming that you buy a few bottles from them.
And don't forget to borrow extra tables and chairs if necessary.
Bacon cocktail sausages
Makes 40 Using the back of a knife, stretch 20 rashers of streaky bacon, spread with a little herb mustard and cut in half.
Grill 40 cocktail sausages, cool a little and wrap bacon around each one.
Grill for 5–10 minutes, turning occasionally until the bacon is crisp and sausages are cooked through.
Serve hot or cold.
Prepare the day before and cook on the day.
Corn and pepper spirals
Keep uncooked spirals in the freezer, or make ready to slice rolls the day before and store in the fridge.
Makes about 25 
1 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Mix the sweetcorn, parsley and diced bread.
2 Heat the oil and fry the garlic and red pepper until soft, then mix in the dried breadcrumbs.
3 Take one sheet of filo pastry, brush with a little melted butter, then place another three sheets on top, brushing each one with melted butter.
Leaving a 4cm/1½in border, spread the corn mixture lengthways over half of the pastry, then cover the remaining half with the pepper mixture.
Roll up the pastry tightly, starting at the corn side, brush lightly with a little melted butter and chill for at least 1 hour.
4 Cut into 1cm/½in thick slices and place on a baking sheet.
Bake for about 15 minutes until crisp, then leave to cool on a wire rack.
Tomato Parmesan twists
Makes about 40
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Roll out 375g/13oz ready-made puff pastry into a 35×40cm/14×16in rectangle and trim the edges.
Spread three tablespoons of tomato purée on top; season with black pepper.
Fold the pastry in half widthways, brush with milk and sprinkle over three tablespoons of freshly grated Parmesan.
Cut the pastry into 1cm/½in wide strips, gently twist each one and cut in half lengthways.
Place on baking sheets and bake four about 10 minutes until crisp and golden.
Cool on a wire rack.
Freeze or prepare a day ahead of the party and store in an airtight container.
Roast beef and mustard canapés
Makes 12
Toast three slices of crustless bread.
Blend two teaspoons of mild mustard with one teaspoon of butter and spread over the toast.
Cut the slices into 12 4cm/1½in equal-sided triangles.
Top each toast triangle with a 2.5cm/1in square slice of rare roast beef.
Divide one tablespoon of chopped gherkins among the toasts and serve.
Prawn and alfalfa sprouts canapés
Makes 10
Mix two tablespoons each of cottage cheese and curd cheese.
Stir in 25g/1oz chopped canned pimientos, season with cayenne pepper and add a dash of lemon juice.
Spread 10 small crackers with the mixture and top each with a cooked peeled prawn and sprinkle with a few alfalfa sprouts.
Camembert and bacon canapés
Makes 12
Butter three slices of rye bread and cut each one into quarters.
Arrange a few lamb's lettuce leaves on each, so they overlap  the squares.
Thinly slice 100g/4oz Camembert and place a couple of pieces on top.
Divide 100g/4oz finely chopped grilled back bacon among the squares and garnish with snipped chives.
Creamy horseradish and salmon canapés
Makes 10
Using a 4cm/1½in round cutter, stamp out rounds from pumpernickel bread.
Mix two tablespoons of Greek strained yogurt and two teaspoons of horseradish sauce and divide among the mounds.
Cut a slice of smoked salmon into 10 thin strips, place on top and garnish with dill sprigs.
All these canapés should be prepared on the day of the party.
Soft choux shuffle
You can freeze these buns or make them the day before and keep in an airtight container.
Makes about 60.
1 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Gently melt the butter in 150ml/¼ pint of water.
Bring to a rolling boil, add the flour, then remove from the heat and beat until the mixture forms a ball and leaves the sides of the pan clean.
Leave to cool slightly, then gradually beat in the eggs.
2 Spoon 1cm/½in dollops of mixture on to greased baking sheets, keeping them well spaced.
Bake for 8 minutes until puffed, crisp and golden.
Cool on a wire rack, then slit each bun.
Party lines: a delicious array of finger food and warming Mulled wine.
Try the following two fillings (they can both be prepared a day in advance and refrigerated), but wait until the last minute before filling the choux buns to prevent the pastry going soggy.
Avocado and tomato filling
Fills about 30
Halve, stone and peel one small avocado, then finely dice and mix with one tablespoon each of French dressing, chopped fresh basil and finely chopped, seeded tomato.
Spoon into the choux buns and sprinkle with paprika.
Garnish with sprigs of basil.
Raspberry and fromage frais filling
Fills about 30
Mix 150g/5oz chopped raspberries with one and a half tablespoons of natural fromage frais, three tablespoons of whipped double cream, three teaspoons of crème de cassis, one and a half teaspoons of golden caster sugar and one and a half tablespoons of chopped fresh mint.
Spoon into the choux buns and decorate with fresh whole raspberries.
Chocolate fruits
Makes 10
Melt 50g/2oz plain chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over a pan of hot water.
Dip 10 strawberries, holding the stalks into the chocolate.
Place on waxed paper, leave to cool and chill until set.
Mulled wine
Makes about 10 glasses
Quarter one small apple and stud with eight cloves.
Place in a pan with the pared rind of one lemon, three cinnamon sticks, 225g/8oz light muscovado sugar and 1.75 litres/3 pints of red wine.
Simmer for a few minutes.
Remove from the heat and pour in 150ml/¼ pint brandy, if you like.
Strain the mulled wine, add lemon slices and serve hot.
Spiced fruit warmer
Makes about 30 glasses
Place 450ml/¼ pint of water, two cinnamon sticks, 10 cloves and 100g/4oz light muscovado sugar in a pan and bring to the boil.
Simmer for about 5 minutes until the sugar has dissolved, then stir in four tablespoons of clear honey.
Add 1.75 litres/3 pints each of fresh orange juice and apple juice and heat it through gently.
Strain the liquid, then add orange, lemon and apple slices.
Serve hot.
COOK'S DIRECTORY
DOUBLE BILL
These two deliciously simple cakes are tailor-made for our Present perfect Christmas cake recipe on page 40
Madeira cake
Makes one 13cm/5in cake 
1 Preheat the oven to 160C/320F/Gas 3.
Grease a 13cm/5in diameter cake tin and line with greased greaseproof paper.
2 Beat margarine or butter and sugar together until fluffy.
Beat in the eggs a little at a time, adding a little flour if it begins to curdle.
3 Sift the flours and, using a metal spoon, fold into mixture with the lemon rind and juice.
4 Turn mixture into tin and level top.
Bake in centre of oven for 1 hour until golden brown and firm to the touch.
Turn out and leave to cool.
Store in a tin for up to one week before icing or using in our Present Perfect recipe.
The cake can also be frozen.
Chocolate Madeira cake: substitute 50g/2oz cocoa powder for the plain flour.
Almond and cherry Madeira cake: substitute 50g/2oz ground almonds for the plain flour, add a few drops of almond essence, then add 50g/2oz halved glacé cherries.
Golden fruit loaf
Makes one 450g/1lb loaf 
1 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/Gas 3.
Grease a 450g/1lb loaf tin and line with greased greaseproof paper.
2 Beat the margarine or butter and sugar until fluffy.
Beat in the eggs a little at a time, adding a little flour if it begins to curdle.
3 Using a metal spoon, fold in the flour, mixed spice and fruits, adding a little milk if necessary to give a stiff dropping consistency.
4 Turn mixture into tin and level top.
Bake in centre of oven for 1 hour until golden brown and firm to the touch.
Turn out and allow to cool.
This cake can be stored in a tin for up to one month before icing or using in our Present Perfect recipe.
next month it's Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year
BBC GOOD FOOD OUT ON DECEMBER 10
The seasonal sparkle continues, as we bring you our simply mouth-watering menu plans, exciting edible gifts and decorations, divine drinks — and much more besides
Not only do we have the BBC2 Food & Drink team to help you with Christmas and New Year entertaining, we also bring you a host of yuletide ideas.
First of all, set the scene for the big day: our fabulous, easy-to-make edible decorations will add the finishing festive touches to your dining room.
Seasonal Eating considers the end of the meal and looks at Stilton, the classic Christmas cheese, and another traditional favourite — dates.
If searching for last-minute presents, look no further than What's Cooking .
You can even make your own gifts — try mince pies, peanut brittle and chocolate truffles.
And, in keeping with the spirit of Christmas,Jill Goolden suggests the best bottles to give to deserving friends.
Having people over during the holiday break?
Then try Josceline Dimbleby 's  stylish but simple dinner party menus.
As for Christmas Day itself, don't panic if you're cooking a big turkey lunch for the very first time.
Michael Barry gives plenty of advice on how to defrost a frozen bird plus clear roasting and carving instructions.
He also shares his recipes for stuffings, vegetables and all the trimmings.
Boxing Day for Chris Kelly means a family day at the races followed by a warm evening meal.
Share his festive fare with your family, or treat them to Jill Goolden 's splendid New Year's Eve party nibbles — all washed down with the best wines and cocktails.
If you are holding a New Year highland fling, who better to supply Scottish recipes than Sue Lawrence , the 1991 MasterChef winner who is from north of the border.
After the annual over-indulgence your New Year resolutions will probably include healthy eating.
So don't miss our feature on dieting which will help you to lose weight steadily while ensuring that you eat well throughout the year.
FREE CALENDAR
Make a date with the BBC Good Food calendar , which we are giving away in next month's issue.
There's plenty of space for you to jot down those important dates, and there are super recipes to try throughout the year.
Begin 1993 with Dundee cake and fruit shortbread layers followed by panfuls of pancakes in February.
Keep it in the kitchen for culinary inspiration all year round.
MY FAVOURITE RESTAURANTS
Michael CAINE
One of our prolific actors, Michael Caine is also an avid foodie and successful restaurateur — though not a lot of people know that
Arguably this country's most successful thespian export, Michael Caine claims to have dined in every one of the world's best restaurants.
This passion for haute cuisine has led him to an involvement with the restaurant industry itself.
His first collaboration began when he was invited to invest in an upmarket Roux Brothers establishment.
Then came his partnership in London's Langan Brasserie.
Fittingly, it was through another actor that the venture was born.
Caine was filming in London with Sidney Poitier, and once or twice a week they would take it in turns to treat each other to a decent meal.
Caine would choose from a variety of eateries, while Poitier always plumped for Peter Langan's elegantly seductive Odin's, just off Marylebone High Street.
Caine and Langan soon became good friends.
‘I've spent a lot of time in Paris,’ explains Caine, ‘and the result is I'm now a committed Francophile.
That is when I got a real bee in my bonnet about British restaurants.
As I saw it, they were either downmarket Wimpy bars or precious bistros where all you could hear were the sounds of the cutlery hitting the plate, and people would cough before speaking because they hadn't said anything for such a long time, what with all the hush.
‘There was no spectacle, nothing to match the sheer style and excitement of, for instance, La Coupole in Paris.
I'm a big, noisy fellow and had always felt out of place in those discreet British restaurants with their strict dress code and moody staff who'd be looking at their watches every five minutes from 9pm onwards.’
So, when Caine told Peter Langan that he was interested in setting up a British restaurant along the lines of La Coupole, Langan found it an irresistible proposition.
With little hesitation, he advanced two-thirds of the necessary finance — and Langan's Brasserie was born.
The two were later joined by the gifted chef, Richard Shepherd.
It was a wonderful combination of talents: Langan created the legendary ambience, Caine supplied the celebrity customers and Shepherd won critical acclaim for his unpretentious menu featuring black pudding with apples and bangers and mash — as well as his ability to sell up to 700 outstanding meals a day.
Wishing to capitalise on this success, Langan suggested a similar arrangement in Los Angeles.
Caine and Shepherd, however, demurred and offered financial backing instead — in the event, the Californian venture was a flop.
The partnership was broken when Peter Langan died tragically — and today the surviving pair are joint owners of Odin's, Langan's Bistro and Brasserie, as well as Langan's Bistro in Brighton.
The love affair with the restaurant business doesn't end there.
Caine recently opened The Canteen in London's fashionable Chelsea Harbour in collaboration with mercurial chef Marco Pierre White.
It's not, he stresses, for patrons with generous expense accounts.
‘We serve light continental food — a bit of French, a bit of Italian — at prices everyone can afford.
I want to attract people in their lunch hour for a bowl of spaghetti.’
Caine has even bought an apartment overlooking the restaurant.
‘I can get out my binoculars to check on how many customers we've got — and see if anyone's nicking anything out of the till.’
Beneath the heavy lids, the blue eyes twinkle.
For a man who confesses to a lifelong passion for food, he is equally enthusiastic about wine.
‘I cannot remember the last time I had a proper meal without having a nice drop of wine to go with it.
I used to be a partner in a wine merchants, and when we sold up I took all the best stuff.
Now I have a cellar full of expensive wine, but I don't feel I'm good enough to drink any of it.’
The high life can, of course, play havoc with the waistline but Caine has it well under control.
‘I lived in Los Angeles, so I know all there is to know about diets.
Californians have a reputation for latching on to fads, and it's true — yet a lot of what they preach is eminently sensible.
The basic British diet is a killer — I never touch white bread, salt or sugar and I rarely eat dairy products.’
He is also a keen cook.
‘Last Sunday I cooked sea trout with dill and a drop of wine.
I also love spaghetti with a simple sauce — pasta's great for weight watchers.
But we deliberately don't have much food in the fridge — that way, we keep temptation at bay!’
Still, Caine can always visit one of his restaurants if he feels a little peckish.
He smiles.
‘When Sidney Poitier comes to London we still dine at Odin's — the only difference being, I now own it.’
Interview by Richard Barber