

Editorial
Guitarist's Readers' Ads have taken over as the foremost private buying, selling, swapping and personnel advertising service around.
This service averages over five hundred separate insertions per month, and while in the strictest sense of the term you do pay for it via the call charge, it still represents amazing value for money.
The maximum you should pay is 48p for a minute; I've checked it and I can place a concisely worded advert in about 45 seconds, and at cheap rate that works out at 27p.
A 1st class stamp costs 24p and the ease of phoning versus the traipse to the letter box wins hands down for me every time.
Anyway, I digress.
We do occasionally get calls from people who've dialled a number listed in one of the ads only to find that it's wrong — an old lady in Dunfirmline insisting that she's definitely not selling a Malmsteen Strat — or perhaps giving the ‘unobtainable’ tone on a number which doesn't exist.
Whilst we cannot deny the odd typographical error on our part, these problems are almost always the result of a lack of clarity on the part of the caller.
And as your phone number is the crucial element in your ad, it surely makes sense for all concerned to speak it slowly and clearly.
The other complaint we receive is ‘I waited for the issue to come out and my ad wasn't in it.
Now I've got to wait another month’.
True, and that's an unfortunate state of affairs.
But you've probably noticed the ad count has risen considerably in recent months, due to the fact that we've upped the pages to five and edited out some of the waffle (which the waffler pays for, I might add) in order to ensure that most ads make it into the desired issue.
Obviously there will always be ads called in after our final press deadline, and those will have to wait until the following issue.
There's nothing we can do about that; it's how magazines work.
However, we can help you to help yourselves by letting you know what this deadline is; the date up to which we can pretty much guarantee your ad's inclusion (as far as we can ever guarantee anything).
So, for instance, had you wanted an ad in this issue, we would need to have received your call by 25th August, since that would have given us time to process the ads and put the pages through the system.
But to help you even further, from now on we will print the next deadline at the foot of the final Readers' Ads page each month, so you know exactly where you stand.
Obviously we will try our best to include each and every one, whilst ensuring total accuracy, although you'd agree I'd be a mug to promise the system won't ever fall down.
However, I use Guitarist Readers' Ads myself, as do most of the staff here, so we know just how successful they can be; of course that also means we can see where the service can be improved and we will endeavour to see that it does…
See you next month…
WHAT'S NEW News & New Products Memories of Semie Moseley, and the chance to play guitar for a worthy cause.
Plus the usual generous barrowload of bits and bobs…
SOMETHING IN THE EIRE
Musicians in the Emerald Isle can now swallow their jealousy at all the music shows available to their English and Scottish counterparts, because soon there'll be a special public music show in Dublin.
The show will feature guitars, basses and amplifiers as well as the latest in sound processing and studio technology — much of which will be available for you to fiddle with to your heart's content — and continuous live demos will be taking place on stage throughout the full two days.
Technology giants Roland are taking care of the main arrangements, and the live guitar demos will be organised by yours truly,Guitarist magazine.
The dates and times are October the 17th, from midday until 6pm, and October the 18th, from 11am until 5pm.
Tickets are absolutely free, and available from Roland UK, from Roland dealers in Ireland or simply on the door.
BITS FOR BRITS
If your Marshall is presently going through a bit of a traumatic phase, then keep a sharp eye out for the new range of Marshall original spares.
All the new Marshall spares are exclusive Marshall items, as used in the regular production amps, and have been tested in exactly the same way for durability and reliability.
Valves are available in three different packages — two EL34s, three ECC83s or one ECC83 — and are all pre-tested and proven Grade A. The new Marshall spares will be in the shops from September.
HOT FOR TEACHER?
Good news for teachers and pupils alike, information is beginning to trickle through about the new Rock School Ltd graded examinations for guitar, drums and bass.
The grades will carry the full weight of the system already in force for classical instruments and will enable students to follow a more structured path through to diploma level.
Examination pieces have been specially written for each grade in a variety of styles and will be performed at the exam by the student using backing tapes.
Also included will be sight-reading and technical exercises.
The new grades will be launched in a suitable blaze of glory at this year's London Music Show at Wembley on 28/29th November.
Meanwhile, teachers can apply for a special information pack by telephoning Rock School Ltd. on 
LOGICAL SONG
Logic Promotions, those people who do the Number One range of instrument care products — fingerboard oil, and so on— have just brought out a new set of unusual and rather delectable guitar cables.
As well as standard black, blue or red leads, they do fluorescent orange and mint green (no-one's going to walk off with those by accident), a beautiful translucent pink lead with the copper shielding visible underneath and, funkiest of all, red/green and black/red cotton-wound cables, looking rather like climbing rope or the lead on your Gran's old toaster.
Supplied with a lifetime warranty, all Logic guitar cables use electrolytic copper in a mono-crystalline structure for excellent conductivity, along with gold-plated jacks, soft rubber jack housings and ‘Silver League’ solder to ensure low noise.
Prices range from £9.95 for a three-metre black, blue or red cable up to £13.95 for a 5 metre orange or green version, £15.95 for a 5m translucent pink jobbie and £17.95 for a 5m toaster-type.
Invade your local music shop or contact Logic at 
FLAMIN' GROOVY
This year's World's Worst Guitarist competition has been won by a 29 year-old coach-driver called Harry Craig from Tullibody, Clackmanshire in Scotland.
‘We listened to more than five thousand tapes from all over the world,’ gravely announced Armand Schaudroeck, president of The House Of Guitars in Rochester, New York, ‘and Harry is simply the worst player we've ever heard.
His style of playing would make Jimi turn in his grave.
In Harry's hands, a guitar is a lethal weapon.’
‘I only sent the tape in as a joke,’ Harry cheerfully admitted.
‘I'm hopeless on the guitar — I can only play a few chords.’
Harry won a trip to New York, a luridly-coloured Ibanez guitar and the chance to terrify 400 innocent music lovers by torching his Les Paul in performance.
He much enjoyed his week in a 5-star hotel: ‘It was great!
I only spent a tenner all week.
I spent more money in Glasgow airport waiting for the plane…’
If you want to be the next Harry Craig, send a tape of your playing to I'm The World's Worst Guitar Player, The House Of Guitars, 645 Titus Avenue, Rochester, N.Y. 14617 sometime before the end of the year, and the very worst of luck to you…
ROCK AGAINST BLINDNESS
If you can play three chords and you can lay your hands on a guitar, then your help is needed to take part in the biggest guitar jam in the world to help combat River Blindness in Africa.
The event, sponsored by Sight Savers, Marshall Amplification and Guitarist , aims to beat the world record for the biggest number of guitarists playing the same song non-stop for one hour.
It's a very worthy cause, since River Blindness is the biggest cause of blindness in West and Central Africa.
The disease is carried by a black fly which breeds in the rivers, and over 1,000,000 people are already blinded with another 17,000,000 infected and some 85,000,000 at risk.
Just £10 in sponsorship money will protect ten people from river blindness for a year.
To help, just contact Sight Savers at 21 The Strand, Bromsgrove, Worcestershire B61 8AB (tel: 0527 579226)or pick up a leaflet from Sound Control at 61 Jamaica Street, Glasgow G1 4NN for a sponsorship form, and then go along to either the Birmingham Town Hall on Sunday September the 20th between 2.00pm and 4.00pm, or our Scottish Music Show at the SECC in Glasgow at the same time.
Please note, there'll be no mains power for amplification available.
A BRIDGE TOO FAR
The Screwjack bass bridge has been designed as a replacement unit for the world's most popular bass models.
The makers say that the solid machined brass construction maximises the transmission of string vibration through the bridge and into the instrument's body, giving greater sustain and warmth and improving the general tone and clarity of any bass.
Pictured is the standard black nickel finish Screwjack bridge, fitted to an early '60s sunburst Jazz Bass.
This version costs £66, while the chrome-finished model comes in at £70 and the gold-plated one at £102.
If interested, contact Pace MM Electronics on .
GRAPHIC DESIGN
As you'll have heard, bass makers Warwick are branching out into the area of specialised bass amplification.
This little box of tricks is the new WP3–7 rackmount preamp which, in addition to the usual clean/filthy choices, offers two completely independant tone control systems: a three-band section with a parametric midrange, and a seven-band graphic section with its own master fader.
This means a pseudo-twin channel effect, since you can footswitch between the basic three-band sound and a preset ‘solo’ sound from the seven-band section.
Alternatively, you could set up the WP3–7 to give two different volume levels, different sounds for slap and fingerstyle, different EQs for your fretted and fretless basses, or any other combination.
In addition, Turbo Bass and, ahem, Turbo Treble round off the tone section at the top and bottom.
Finally, there are active and passive inputs, a gain control with LED clip indicators, a standby switch, full-range or low-cut effects send, a stereo effects return, stereo line in and out, an XLR DI out with groundlift, a tuner and a footswitch…
SEMIE MOSELEY 1935–1992
Semie Moseley — the man who invented the classic Ventures guitar, built radical double-necks for country stars and pioneered light-action vibratos, polyester finishes and the low-action speed-neck — died last month aged 57.
Semie started early as a guitar-maker.
At the age of eighteen in the early '50s he was working for Rickenbacker (and was allegedly sacked for building a guitar to his own design).
Turning self-employed, Semie drew upon the influences of Rickenbacker's Paul Barth and Roger Rossmeisl and built a triple-neck guitar/mandolin/octave guitar, which led to an order for a double-neck guitar/octave guitar from the well-known country picker Joe Maphis.
But the big break came in the early '60s, when Moseley met Nokie Edwards of top guitar instrumental group The Ventures.
The resulting Mosrite Ventures guitars were funded by the group themselves, and designed by the simple expedient of tracing around a Strat and flipping the paper over.
They enjoyed huge success from ‘63 to ‘68, not only because of the Ventures connection but also because they looked cool and had great-sounding handwound Alnico pickups (Moseley purposely slanted his rhythm pickups to help balance out the treble and bass response).
The guitars also had some of the thinnest necks, the lowest, fastest frets and the best vibratos around at the time.
In fact, the ‘Vibramute’ vibrato design worked in a limited transposing fashion, and predated Steinberger's TransTrem by more than twenty years.
After the Ventures period, Moseley moved into the manufacture of Dobros until about 1969.
Throughout the '70s and '80s he divided his time between being a minister, a gospel musician and a guitar-maker.
Mosrite guitars were reissued a number of times, and the Japanese market proved particularly supportive.
Despite this, Moseley's skills never made him rich.
In fact he had a hard life, battling against the taxman, factory fires, ill health and, on top of all that, a serious car-crash.
The end came this year during a charity concert; Semie managed to complete his encore, but collapsed immediately afterwards — a true musician's exit, and we're lucky to have such bizarre and wonderful instruments to remember him by.
Mosrite Ventures Model 1988.
Our thanks to Don Clayton at Route 66
CLASSICAL GAS
One hundred and twenty quid might sound steep for a set of classical guitar machineheads, but perhaps not when they're as nice as these.
Handcrafted by Graham Macey in Surrey, the machines are individually adjustable for minimum backlash and feature solid machined brass baseplates, a computer-aided ‘involute’ gear design for consistent feel and longevity, integral gears and rollers, fully supported synthetic bone rollers, a choice of plain or engraved plates and interchangeable buttons in ebony, rosewood, pearl or imitation ivory.
Contact 
SCREAMING LORD SATCH Joe Satriani Guitar teachers of the world, Satch is back to make you sweat, with an album that plunders a musical empire stretching from the Tigris to the Mississippi.
David Mead wonders where he found the bagpipes…
The instrumental guitar album boom of recent years has seen few players survive with their credibility intact.
One very notable exception, though, is Joe Satriani who, with the release of his new album, ‘The Extremist’, proves that the final chapter in the book of fretboard fire and fury has still to be writ.
But I think everyone is aware of the fact that before Joe Satriani took his place in the hallowed halls of plank-spanking celebrity, he taught guitar.
Having existed in the twilight world of private guitar tuition myself for nine years or more, it was easy to establish some common ground.
In fact, we were so absorbed in relating our relative rites of passage, the interview was almost forgotten.
I flicked the tape machine on at the point where I'd suggested to Joe that he had swapped sides, from the analytical guitar teacher to being the very subject of such analysis himself.
Was he aware of the challenge he was presenting to the world he had just left and, in any case, didn't the role reversal situation feel slightly strange?
‘Well, the funny thing is that I don't know really what it's like because I'm not in that little room any more.
So I can't sit there and observe someone bringing in my stuff.
It was happening with a few students because I was still teaching for two or three months after ‘Surfing’ was released.
So I started to get people to come in and ask me to specifically teach them stuff that was on my records.
‘It certainly was a challenge to have to teach people stuff by Steve Vai or Yngwie Malmsteen, but the most difficult was Allan Holdsworth.
Even when you could figure it out, the student generally couldn't play it anyway!
And writing it out in a half hour or hour lesson was almost impossible because it took too many sheets of paper.
You couldn't just use repeats and codas because he doesn't really use them.’
Did you slow them down?
‘No, I just listened to it.
I developed a pretty good ear, although I started out as a complete idiot.
And a little of that remains today!
But I had a really good music teacher in high school and he taught me relative pitch.
I guess he taught me the right way, because after a couple of years, when I heard something, I knew what it was before any intellectual wheels were turning in my head.
I started to memorise the sound of a minor thirteenth or a dominant eleventh chord.
Those sort of things became natural.
‘I was a drummer when I started out and so right now I know what a group of seven is, or three or five or eight.
Rhythmically, I can remember things.
And that's only because I had good teachers — I don't think that I have any special superhuman gift for it.’
Did you write things out in standard notation or tab?
‘It depended.
Some of them didn't read music or tablature and they just needed chord symbols and little expressions that made sense to them.
We'd agree on a symbol for, say, anticipation.
Other times, though, if it was a student who stuck with me for a couple of years, eventually they would get interested in reading in some form.
They would begin to know that putting a little eighth note right before the next bar meant anticipation and that made things easier because, if you have a half hour lesson and they want to learn something by Iron Maiden, and you want to show them a dorian mode in three octaves and they've got to show you their chords in four or five positions, you've got to work fast!
Generally, it was a trade off.
I'd play for them or write out any song they wanted to learn as long as they gave me ten or fifteen minutes worth of scales and exercises first.’
I try that, too.
But did you find that the overall thing is an obsession with speed.
I mean, you are aware that we now have ‘Satriani-esque’ in the language!
‘Oh yeah,’ Joe laughs, ‘but there are students that come in who don't want to learn lead — they want to learn chords and rhythm.
They would come in with different agendas.
Maybe they're songwriters — they don't really care about really good guitar players.
They just want to know ‘Are there any other chords?
How come Lennon and McCartney used all these chords for these simple pop songs…and what's Allan Holdsworth using?’
‘They may be in a band or have a solo project which is unique but just based around singing and unusual compositions and so for them it's harmony.
They don't care about melody, because they're going to write that themselves.
So I had quite a wide variety of requests from students.’
You must have been familiar then with the books containing transcribed guitar parts from albums — and now you see your own work presented that way.
Have you ever picked one up and said to yourself, ‘That's wrong…
It's not what I played.’
‘Yeah, they send me the stuff before it's published and I try to proof read it as well as I can.
For some of the stuff, they use symbols that go beyond me, because I never learned to read guitar book music.
I learned to read for drums first and then to sight sing choral music and then I learned to read music in general.
I had to write string quartets and little symphonies and I had to write jazz melodies over chords and, eventually, I had to write down my own music.
But I never developed symbols for whammy bars and screaming dive bombs or scraping the strings.
I just figured, well what's the point?
I didn't need it for myself and none of my students could read it anyway.
Everyone was more interested in playing than reading — with the exception of Steve Vai, that is.
He really took to reading at a very early age.
‘So when I look at the books now and I see all the symbols and all the stuff they do, I think ‘Well, I've already played this, and I'm not really interested in reading it!’
‘In my mind, the notes are the most important thing and not all the little directions about how exactly Joe was holding his pick when he made this note!
To me, that was one fragment of a moment in the studio that got to tape.
I played it probably a million different ways during the days leading up to the recording and what's on tape is some form of an improvisation on a somewhat generalised idea.
So it's funny to see it written in stone, as it were, something that I did off the top of my head.’
I've seen many of those books and reviewed some of them and the moan I've had is that sometimes they try to be too accurate.
There's maybe a little sixteenth note at the top of five or six ledger lines and the text says ‘feedback’— like I really need to know that!
‘Yeah, that's right!
There was one thing where a guy was writing The Bells Of Lal Pt 2 from the ‘Flying’ record and he had done the entire song an eighth note off!
He didn't understand that it was in four and that the snare drum was on beats two and four.
It's a very simple rhythm, but he had written the whole thing shifted over and I got the manuscript and I'm looking at it and going ‘Man, I know it's been a while since I read a lot of solo guitar, but this doesn't look right!’
And I kept thinking, ‘What's wrong with this thing?’
I picked out notes where he had just screwed up totally, but then I went back to the beginning again and realised that the whole song was just shifted.
‘Some of them figured that I played Headless Horseman on bass — y'know…the weirdest concepts!
I think the first time I saw Day At The Beach they had it written on the wrong strings.
It was note perfect, but everything was one string over!’
Have you ever been tempted to put a couple of booby trap techniques in there on purpose, just to screw up the poor guy transcribing it?
‘That's funny,’ chuckles Joe.
‘I can see that, but I don't think there was ever anything that was obviously not playable by a human!
We never used speeded-up tapes, except on vocals.’
I was thinking about certain techniques like the single-handed arpeggios on Mystical Potato Head Groove Thing .
When you played Hammersmith a couple of years back and it got to that point in the song, I looked around and a lot of people were craning their necks, checking out how that was done.
It's obviously a hell of a technique to master and somebody told me that, just to make things worse, you grinned when you did it!
‘I used to laugh at myself because that's a particularly difficult song to pull off.
I have to make decisions every second about when I leave the rhythm guitar part to play the melody and how I balance between switching the pickup selection, reach over, mute the strings and play.
I would laugh at myself because sometimes I would pull it off and other times I'd go to reach over real fast and I'd just go ‘Aaaaaargh.’
I'd create an extra note and I'd just laugh at myself and think, ‘I never should have written this song!’
You have to get back really fast for that E chord in the rhythm part…
‘Yeah, and that E chord should really be on the bridge pickup, but I could never get it and every once in a while I'd be thinking, ‘I'm gonna try it…
Nooo!’
Up until the solo I just had to think constantly as I was playing.
It was very difficult to do the rhythm and play the melody and then go back to doing little bits of rhythm.’
Turning to guitars, I hear you've got a stop tailpiece Ibanez that you've been using.
Have you forsaken the whammy bar?
‘Well, when you use a vibrato bar guitar, when you hit the strings really hard, a lot of the vibration gets transferred to the springs and back into the bar in a sort of flutter and I really don't like that sound at all.
I've never used it as a technique like Steve Vai — or there's a British guitarist, Jan Cyrka, who does that.
But I hate that sound.
To me it just sounds horrible or like there's something wrong with your tape.
So I've always tried to eliminate it and Ibanez has worked with me to try to get as little flutter in that vibrato bar as possible by using certain springs or arrangements of springs.
One day I had one of the prototype JS1s; it was an ash body and that didn't work out too well when we were looking for woods.
So I brought it to Gary Brawer, the San Francisco luthier who does a lot of my setup work and he filled it up — took out the springs and the bar and filled it all up with ash and we put in a regular DiMarzio stop tailpiece, with through-the-body strings.
And it was perfect for me because a lot of the vibrato that I had developed over the years suddenly sounded more like me, because the vibrato bar wasn't there taking up the slack and giving way every time I applied vibrato.
And when I hit those chords really hard, there was none of that fluttering noise and so the rhythm parts became a little spankier sounding.
All sorts of different tunings suddenly became really easy for me and we wound up using that guitar for Friends, The Extremist, War and Motorcycle Driver .’
There are a couple of tracks from ‘The Extremist’ where it sounds like you could have been using a Les Paul, and that could have been the influence of the new stop tailpiece…
‘Yeah, the sound in front of the amp is sort of a cross between a Les Paul and a Telecaster.
It's big, but it's not fat.
It's round, but it has a clarity to it that you might associate with a Telecaster and not with a Les Paul.’
The Les Paul/Telecaster idea is a very Jimmy Page thing.
Was he an influence on you?
‘Oh yeah, certainly.
Hendrix was my number one influence, but I spent years playing Led Zeppelin covers in a band.
Black Sabbath, Cream, Beatles and Stones and stuff like that.
A lot of that stuff is in my head, but Jimmy Page is one of my all-time favourite guitar players.
Amazing producer, composer and he can play great stuff.
The solo on Since I've Been Loving You is amazing!
It's one of those solos that's got so much personality all over it that, even when you learn it and play it perfectly, it will never sound as good as Jimmy Page doing it.
That's what happens when people play Hendrix songs: they just pale.’
What about your current amplification setup?
‘Well, I don't really own very much any more, because most of it was stolen.
But what I did was, right before we started recording, I purchased a 1969 all-original Marshall 100 watt stack with the original speakers and we used that for most of the record for the rhythm tracks.
For a lot of melodies and solos, we had to really develop the guitar parts because there are no vocals, and so we rented a lot of stuff from a place in Los Angeles called Andy Bruaer Rentals and he's got an amazing selection of amps.
We had stuff like a ‘79 Marshall combo, which was really wonderful and a Mesa Boogie Dual Rectifier amp, which was a beautiful amp.
Peavey lent us a 5150 amp, which was great on some stuff and I rented a Soldano amp and that was also really nice.
I used another Soldano on some of the tracks on the album, but that one got stolen.
I used it for New Blues and almost all of Summer Song and perhaps the solo on Rubina's Blue Sky Happiness .
We had some more Marshalls that some friends lent us and maybe a Roland JC120 — I don't know whether those ever made it to the final edit, though.’
It must be almost impossible to remember exactly what you used and when…
‘Well, my tech wrote everything down, including the settings, but the book is in my case in storage somewhere.
We've got to sit down one of these days…
We'll probably wait for some boring moment on the tour and go over it, collect it and put it in a book for posterity!’
Are you going to do any dates in London?
‘Well, we start the tour November 1st and we should reach London, Hammersmith Odeon at the end of January.’
My first impression of the new album, ‘The Extremist’, was that it is a very positive sounding record.
Lots of strong, major harmony…
‘Yeah, it's a collection of tunes that I've been working on for a while.
Friends I think I started writing in 1988 and I just worked and worked on it.
A lot of the tunes represent not only musical goals, but more down-to-earth events of recent times with my life — unlike the other records which were more fantasising about other-worldly situations or remembering dreams and make-believe world material.’
Listening to Friends on the album, I was waiting for it to modulate to a minor key in the middle…
‘And it didn't!
You see, even I know not to repeat myself!
The old tricks should be left alone, because the reality of it is that when I go on tour in a couple of months, I'm going to be playing all these songs and I've been careful never to repeat past compositional techniques.
For instance, if I had written six songs, one on each record, that used the Not Of This Earth technique of one bass note, three chords, pitch axis, it would be quite boring at a concert when you get to the fourth one.
So you have to be careful with that.
It's like those one-handed arpeggios…
I can't use that again because it would be a disservice to the Mystical Potato Head Groove Thing to lift my own lick and use it in another song.’
The title track on the new album has a very Zeppelin feel to it — the harmonica solo sounds very much in the mood of When The Levee Breaks …
‘Well, I said to Andy Johns, the producer, that I would really like the harmonica to sound like Levee Breaks .
(Andy Johns was involved in the production of ‘Led Zep 4’—Ed.)
He didn't know there was a harmonica solo on The Extremist until the day we got to it and he said, ‘Well, I guess we're done,’ and I said ‘Oh, no, there are two harmonica solos,’and he went, ‘Really?
So what you gonna do?’
And I said, ‘Well, what did you do on When The Levee Breaks ?’!
And he said, ‘Well, we had this Tremolux amp and I put it through this compressor.’
So we called up Andy Bruaer and rented one and in about ten minutes, there it was!’
Is that E flat tuning on that?
‘Yes it is.
The first three songs on the album are tuned down a half step.’
War is firmly phrygian based.
Was this to suggest a sort of Middle-Eastern flavour to the song?
‘The whole song is about the thousands of years of war in that particular part of the world: North Africa, Arabia, The Orient and Middle East.
Amazing cultures have sprung up out of that area.
And the recent conflict between Presidents Hussein and Bush dragged the rest of us into it, causing even more ridiculous carnage over what I still don't know.
I was writing a lot of tunes around my studies of that culture and then the Gulf War broke out and so there was more stuff to influence me.’
Cryin ’ is the album's big ballad.
You've pitched the melody very high…
‘Very high, very difficult to play.
It was difficult to settle on the right key.
When you're doing a melody like Rubina or Always With Me, Always With You they sit at a nice register, but the chorus, second verse of Cryin ’ is right up there,War is up there,Friends is up there.
But I knew it would work, I knew it was the perfect register for it; it was just a question of the right tonality and the right feeling.
‘Cryin ’ was a one take, reference guitar track.
I plugged into a Zoom and everyone said, ‘It's just a reference guitar so let's focus on the drums.’
Earlier, I had put down a keyboard part to a click track and so Gregg, Matt (the Bissonette brothers, Dave Lee Roth's erstwhile rhythm section — Ed) and myself went and did Cryin '.
When we got to the end of it, Andy Johns had goosebumps on his arm and he said, ‘Man, that was the track.’
So I felt really good about it until I remembered, ‘Damn, I was only plugged into a Zoom.
I wish we had set up the amp.’
But Andy worked with the tone on tape to get it so it really came out.’
Where did the bagpipe idea at the end of Rubina's Blue Sky Happiness come from?
‘That was completely improvised by Phil Ashley.
We had gotten to that section of the tune where it was obvious that we had played enough for the outro and I decided, off the top of my head, to start playing a song that I had started writing earlier in the week.
And so I just started playing it and the other guys started improvising around me.
Doug Wimbish started playing harmonics on that funny Guild bass (the rubber-stringed Ashbory model — Ed) and I got down to a really quiet moment, and suddenly Phil just surprised the hell out of us with this keyboard patch!
I think if you listen hard, you can probably hear some laughing.
And Simon Phillips, when he heard the bagpipes, started in on this Highland drumming thing!’
What is the electro-classical you're using on Tears ?
‘It's a Gibson Chet Atkins.
That was one night after we had stopped and I stayed on and me and the assistant engineer just hooked that up together.
It's a very straightforward piece — no two-handed tricks, nothing!
Just one big stretchy chord right at the beginning.’
I was waiting for The Headless Horseman Three …
‘No, I held myself back on this one!’
There is hardly any dissonance on this album.
You haven't gone for the Enigmatic or Hordes Of Locusts style of material.
‘Well, I used a form of editing here to create the proper mood.
Getting into certain scales and saying, ‘What happens if I don't play a third?
How can I suspend the mystery of the scale?’
Specifically, that worked best on the song War , where the melody is played over an E riff and then it's played over a B riff and then over an A, but the melody of the verse never uses a third and so you don't know whether it's phrygian or phrygian dominant.
The chords are Dminor, Dmin sus2 to A flat major 7th, 6th and sharp 11th and then to the E again — that sort of ambiguous E phrygian riff thing.
Those are the three chords for the chorus, but the melody and harmony represent 4ths on the first two strings at the fifth fret, third fret and then open.
So there is this simplicity going in one direction while we've got this sort of tritone bass line going in another.
The bass line is the one that is saying, ‘Major third before we go to E,’ but the melody stays out of it.
And the chords don't express that either.
That's the kind of concept that interests me.
‘After I wrote and recorded songs like The Enigmatic or Mr Potato Head Groove Thing , I started to zero in on just being careful.
The Bells Of Lal Pt 2 , it's absolutely pure minor scale; I didn't throw in harmonic minor or other stuff to make it sound exotic.
I kept the thought and the intent very pure on that.
As a result, when I did Friends or War I had to make sure there was a distance between them, because they are about completely different subjects.
So I didn't say, ‘Okay, I'm Joe and I can play anything and I'm going to make sure that everyone knows on every song that I'm Master Shredder!’
To me that's really annoying because all you do is destroy your song and you turn it into a guitarist's track and I've never really been interested in that.
I've always thought that you get a bunch of songs together and if they're good songs, you're really lucky and if they all fit together and make a great album you're really, really lucky.
And the worst thing you can do is to screw it all up by putting a lot of technique all over it!'
STYLE FILE Hilborne on Satriani
Joe Satriani is a player who seems to have been influenced by almost every imaginable musical style.
In his own music he applies these influences along with his vast understanding and strong technique to produce a very distinctive approach.
In this article I would like to have a look at the nuts and bolts of his style, with the emphasis being shifted to the devices that he uses as opposed to the specific parts that he plays.
Harmony
Joe has a very thorough method for approaching harmonisation and scale-based harmony.
He sets out the triads that can be extracted from a particular scale, then he applies various formulae for adding and subtracting notes to and from the triads in order to realise the scale type's total harmonic potential.
The first three examples (figs 1–3) should help to make this clearer.
Assuming that we wanted to explore the harmonic potential of a basic C major scale (remember you can and should apply this approach to other scale types as well!), the first step would be to play through the triads (a suggested fingering with each maj chord voiced 1,5,1,3, each min chord voiced 1,2,1, ♭3, and the diminished chord voiced 1, ♭5,1, ♭3 is given in fig 1).
After playing through this you then start to apply the formulae.
The first one is for producing diatonic sus4 type chords and the formula is ‘substitute 3 for 4’, so to build these chords on every scale degree all you do is delete the thirds from each triad and add in its place the note that is a diatonic fourth (four letter names inclusive of the root note) above the root of the chord.
Fig 2 shows what you would end up with if you applied the formula to the chord voicings that were shown in fig 1.
The beauty of this method is that it makes you aware of the most harmonic choices that are avaible to you on any chosen scale degree.
So, if you had written a I, vi, IV progression in C, rather than just playing C, Am and F you could play Csus4-C, Asus4-Am and Fadd♯4-F.
If you study and apply the formulae shown below in fig 3 you will see that there are many potential chord-type possibilities available.
Harmonic choices like those shown above obviously allow Joe to come up with some very interesting chord voicings and sequences.
In fig 4 I have shown a few illustrative voicing examples:
Melody and Technique
For his improvising and melody line resources Joe draws from much the same scales we saw him use for his harmony.
Aside from the standard rock fare of pentatonic and blues scales his preferred types seem to be major scale modes such as Aeolian, Dorian, Mixolydian and Lydian.
Often these scales are to be found interchanged in the same solo.
Both Joe and his former pupil Steve Vai seem to have a special fondness for one in particular: the Lydian.
This scale, which can be looked upon either as mode 4 of a major scale (eg. G major starting from C, or a C major scale with a ♯4th), or the major scale that is found a 5th higher than the root of the chord that you want to play it against.
Whichever way you decide to view it, the appeal of this scale is the ♯4/♯11 note that yields some interesting chords and melodies.
Flying In A Blue Dream is a good example of this scale in action in his music.
Fig 5 shows a typical fingering, and fig 6 illustrates an example of the sort of legato (smooth hammer-on/pull-offs) sequence that Joe often uses in his solos (fig 6).
After playing through figs 5 and 6 it is a good idea to record some major or ‘5’ ♯4/♯11 chords such as those in fig 4 (resolved to either a sus4 or the major on the same root) and put in some time improvising over them to familiarise yourself with the sound and feel of the scale.
Another favoured scale is the Harmonic minor and its assocaited modes — particularly mode 4 (the melody of Crushing Day is an example of this ‘minor lydian’ sounding scale) and mode 5, which is also known as the ‘phrygian dominant’or ‘Spanish phrygian’.
Because of its major 3rd (as opposed to the conventional ♭3 found in a normal phrygian mode) this scale has a very Spanish/Classical flavour and can be heard quite a lot during the solos on the track Surfing With The Alien .
Figs 7 and 8 show a couple of illustrative fingerings; as you play through these make sure that you take careful note of the formulae that are written underneath the notation.
Being aware of the interval structure of scales is vitally important if they are to be used creatively and effectively against chords.
NB.
See this month's solo analysis for an example of Harmonic minor harmony.
As well as the fairly conventional scales we have seen so far, Joe also uses a couple of the more exotic types, such as the Hungarian minor, which is like a harmonic minor scale with a lowered 5th, and the very unusual Enigmatic scale (listen to The Enigmatic to hear this.
Figs 9–10 show a couple of example fingerings.
Although Joe doesn't use much sweep picking,la Frank Gambale, or rapid-fire althernate picking,la Yngwie, he covers more or less every other technique in the book!
To my mind his strong points are his single note two-hand tapping (which is often done with the side of the pick rather than with a right-hand finger — see Satch Boogie ), his chordal tapping (as in Midnight, The Forgotten Part 1 and Headless ) and his tremolo and legato work (as in nearly everything!).
His bending and vibrato are very distinctive and to my mind this side of his playing comes from the Hendrix/B.B.King school, whereby he often bends minor thirds slightly sharp and fifths slightly flat — both of which help to lend a bluesy tinge to his style.
Equipment
Finally, apart from the obvious Joe Satriani Ibanez guitars which, incidentally, are strung quite light and with low actions (on tour his tech measures the action prior to every gig!), he also uses quite a lot of ‘Nashville’ tuned acoustics.
These are regular acoustic instruments strung with the six lightest strings from a 12-string, thereby making the G the highest open string.
These guitars are often used to double conventional guitar parts to give a large, well-defined 12-string effect.
Other instruments which Joe occasionally uses are Coral electro sitars and Deering banjos.
As a rule, he uses a pair of Marshall tops/cabs with either a Chandler Tube Driver or an Ibanez Tube Screamer, and a Cry Baby wah-wah used mostly for tonal coloration.
WATER MUSIC Lakewood D-18 & D-32 Just another bunch of dreadnoughts, or something a bit special?
Rick Bateyapplies his pinkies to some bright new contenders in the solid-wood acoustic stakes…
Every so often, and it's not often enough, we at Guitarist Mansions get a review guitar through the post which is well-built, reasonably priced, nicely styled and which does what it says it does, with no design gimmickry, cheap glitter or high-falutin' bumph claiming it to be a ‘sound revolution’, or some equally laughable piece of flannel.
We weren't exactly holding our breath for the arrival of these Lakewood flat-top guitars, but within five minutes of the boxes being opened, the two of them — and one of them in particular— were drawing noises of appreciation from all present.
And, believe us, before three cups of tea on a Monday morning, we are not very easily impressed.
Lakewood guitars are designed by one Martin Seeliger, and they're built at the rate of about twenty-five per week in a town called Geissen in Germany, an hour or so up the autobahn from Frankfurt.
The range starts with the basic cedar-topped D-14, at £525, and finishes with the all-out luxury D-54, which has back and sides of Brazilian rosewood, curly maple or Maccassar ebony and costs a hefty £1,695.
Options available on all models include a cutaway for £100, a 48mm wide ‘ragtime’ neck for £60, and left-handed versions for £45 extra.
Lakewood also build their guitars to incorporate pickups by Shadow and preamps by AER; the MkI system costs an extra £150, while the all-singing MkII with individual level controls for each string is priced at £230.
Our review guitars, a D-18 and a slightly more expensive D-32, are simple models — no electrics, no cutaways, and with the standard 43mm neck.
All Lakewood acoustics are built from solid woods throughout — top, back, sides, edge-binding, the lot — and these two are essentially the same guitar, but with different decoration and different woods for the back and sides.
The D-32 is made of Indian rosewood and has gold Gotoh machines, while the D-18 has the chrome versions and is built from a very attractive wood called Mutenye, or Ovangol — something like walnut, but very strongly straight-grained and with a most becoming yellow-brown colour.
First impressions of the Lakewoods are excellent.
They're lightly built, for a start, and the all-over matt lacquer looks good and should stay that way.
As far as styling goes Lakewood are obviously borrowing heavily from the Martin heritage, since in outline these are millimetre-perfect dreadnought copies.
At the same time the distinctive single-band soundhole rosette is a reminder of Daion guitars, an underrated and sadly expired early-'80s Japanese brand.
Both guitars have solid spruce tops, although the D-32's is closer-grained and prettier, and both are bound in faintly-flamed maple for a combination of looks and durability, with a decorative maple stripe down the centre of the back.
Rosewood has been used for the bridges, the headstock facings and the fingerboards and, unusually, to cover the rear of the headstock as well.
Construction is very, very clean throughout.
Both guitars have necks that are properly set to line up with the top of the bridges, and which are set up to give the correct amount of neck relief.
Fretting a string at the first and sixteenth frets simultaneously gives around 0.5mm gap between the string and the top of the ninth fret on the D-18 model, and about 0.7mm on the D-32.
The action on both guitars is maybe slightly higher than some players would like, but the quality of the necks and the height of the saddles leaves room for adjustment.
Lakewood make their necks from Nicaraguan mahogany.
I like the way they splice on their headstocks (almost invisibly underneath the headstock facing) but not the way they make up the depth of the heel with a very different-coloured piece of mahogany — although I suppose some people might.
Overall these are very comfortable necks to play, but the only areas which could be tidied are perhaps the most important ones: the nuts and the fret-ends.
All the string slots are cut dead straight, in line with the strings, instead of being slightly angled to help the strings wend their way towards the machineheads.
Also, the D-32's nut has a nasty sharp corner on the treble side.
The frets have a good profile and are well polished, but seating is not 100% perfect and the corners of the ends are, again, slightly sharp.
Any honest guitar maker will admit that making acoustics is no exact science, but an unpredictable art.
You can use the rarest woods, you can smother the thing in mother-of-pearl, you can fine-sand the braces with dogfish skin and spray the lacquer by the light of the midnight sun, but the result will never be completely within your control.
In other words, the guitar is going to sound the way it wants to sound, and there's not a lot you can do about it.
One advantage of this is that it's not always the most expensive guitars that sound the best.
I suppose you'd call these ‘upper mid-range’ in price, but they both sound great and they both sound very different.
The D-32 is very Martin D-28 in character — not surprising, seeing as that's what it basically is.
It's warm, it's rich, it's classy, and it's got a strong upper mid tone throughout the range, which makes it sound very ‘together’.
The only fault — if you could call it a fault on a brand-new guitar — is that it's perhaps still a bit closed-in and inhibited.
Playing the D-18, however, is a whole different story.
It's got a deeper natural body resonance than the D-32, but at the same time there's a much brighter, more immediate treble with a lot more bounce and sparkle overall.
So if the D-32 was middley, this one's got more top and bottom.
And while the D-32's sound seemed to hang back when fingerpicked, the D-18 seems broken in already.
The strings and the weight of the top seem perfectly balanced, and it just goes boom!
Fingerpicking always accentuates the inherent tone of guitars, and when you use a pick on the D-18 and D-32, the whole picture changes.
The immediacy of the D-18 transfers wonderfully to strumming; it's big and it's grand, but the brightness and the zinginess mean it's best played with a modicum of right-arm restraint.
In contrast, the D-32's tighter, more introverted qualities mean that you can thrash away at it with complete abandon and still get a smooth, rich, controlled and, it has to be said, very Martin-esque result.
So, as an all-rounder that can cope with fingerpicking, strumming and solo work, the ultra-responsive D-18 seems to me the runaway winner; but as a pure rhythm/accompaniment instrument, the D-32 perhaps just nicks the biscuit.
CONCLUSION
Notwithstanding the fact that this amount of money would buy you any amount of glossy varnish, cheap gold plating, plastic pearl and flamed-maple veneer, these German-made acoustics appear exceptional value.
Not because they're tastefully designed, extremely cleanly built and a pleasure to play — which they are — but because both the guitars we've reviewed have a quality of sound that would rival a number of US-made guitars costing about twice the price.
Left-handers available for £45 extra.
For further information please contact 
AUTUMN COLLECTION Bass Collection SB401 SB405 SB 305 The desire to own and play a more ‘exclusively’ styled instrument doesn't automatically mean a second mortgage…
Gibson Keddiepleads poverty.
It's a familiar quandary: buy an affordable production line bass and live with the fact that you share your new baby with thousands of others, or take the handmade option, pay through the nose and bask in the reflected glory of your instrument's exclusivity.
As a rule, financial embarrassment leaves most of us with no choice but to run with the crowd.
However, one solution to these homogeneous blues could be Bass Collection basses.
Manufactured by SGC Nanyo, these oriental instruments have an air of the exotic about them, but without the accompanying price tags.
Bass Collection instruments have a look of ‘integrated organics’, combined with a long, slender neck and minimalist headstock design.
Very ‘now’.
All models in Bass Collection's SB-series are heel-less bolt-ons, utilising a three-piece laminate of rock maple for the necks.
These feature two-octave fingerboards in either rosewood or, on the 5- and 6-string versions, ebony.
Bodies are solid wood laminates — basswood normally, with ash on the 5-series and walnut or paduak-capped maple on the more exotic 6-series.
Pickups come as various combinations of the P/J arrangement.
The general specifications of the instruments are high, so there's no obvious ‘rationalisation’; the hardware is mainly by Gotoh, in black, or gold on the higher-spec models.
The SB 3-series represents the passive side of Bass Collection's range, and the model reviewed here is the SB ‘305’(there's also a 4-stringer designated ‘301’ and a fretless ‘302’version).
The 305 shares identical body dimensions with the other basses here, with a top horn extending past the twelfth fret for optimum balance.
The abbreviated lower horn works well with the tight curve of the waist, and aids comfort when sitting to play.
The ‘organic’ look primarily stems from the pronounced edge radiusing, with slight ribcage contouring, giving the shape of the body a pleasant flowing form.
Despite the two-octave fretboard, Bass Collection have avoided making this bass look overlong by bolting the neck deep into the body, in half-through fashion.
It's here that the drawback of mass manufacture manifests itself: the SB 3-series is built in Korea, to minimise costs, and the erratic fit of the neck bolts and collars shows this, as does the large gap between the lower neck/body join.
It feels strong enough, though, and there's no evidence of unwanted neck movement.
One problem with setting the neck so deep into the body is that relatively little space is left for pickup separation.
Two J-types are used, made by SGC themselves, and these work in conjunction with the 305's passive EQ, offering treble and bass controls, plus centre-notched pan and volume pots.
On this model a black Gotoh-like bridge, again manufactured by SGC, sits face-mounted and provides three-way adjustment.
On the back of the body, a plastic cover offers easy access to the control cavity.
For such a cost-conscious instrument, the neck really has an impressive feel, proving, as did the Korean-manufactured Epiphone 5-string EBM bass, that companies really are becoming au fait with this type of instrument.
The layout of the rosewood fingerboard feels reassuringly positive under the fingers, aided by the wide (almost 3mm) oval frets.
A definite tick in the margin here for the quality of the fretwork; I was impressed by SGC's attention to this important, and often hurriedly-finished feature.
Equally good is the string spacing, which does not feel cramped at all(39mm across a 47mm nut, 81mm at bridge)— obviously another feature given special consideration.
The fit of the plastic nut is a little untidy, but again, not serious or detrimental to the playing performance of the instrument — and after all, fitting another nut isn't the end of the world.
Allen-key truss rod adjustment lives up here, too, under the ‘Bass Collection’ embossed plastic cover.
The raked-back headstock is scarfed-on behind the first fret, in keeping with the price category of the bass, but the use of Gotoh machines provides a classy finishing touch and makes adjustment positive and easy.
In use, the 305 feels good, and my enjoyment of it was probably helped by subconscious relief that any accidental misuse didn't mean joining the Foreign Legion until the importers forgot my name!
The performance of the instrument belies its humble price; the action is even and consistent across all twenty-four frets, and even down to the relatively unflappable low B. The minimalist headstock and long top horn combine with the bass's reasonable weight for a well-balanced and comfortable instrument, with total access to all frets an added bonus.
The all-over, see-through red colour scheme and understated black hardware contributes to the sophisticated look of the bass; the fretboard is unmarked, the reference points being small side-dots.
But the real beauty of this bass is that the playing of it does not detract from this favourable first impression.
Sure, there are a few areas where quality control could be bettered, but basically the instrument does not suffer in any way.
The J/J pickups provide a smooth, thick tone that complements walking jazz/blues progressions, which could then be lightened for, say, funk workouts.
Someone enquired as to the price of the SB305 whilst I was playing it; to their great surprise I told them £395, but I'm sure I could have put a ‘1’ in front of that figure and it wouldn't have raised an eyebrow.
When the price of such attractive styling on so usable a 5-string is this low, I can't understand why the whole country isn't playing them…
SB401 and 405
These two basses follow the specs of the 3 fairly closely, except for the addition of active, 2-band low-impedance EQ offering ±15dB treble and bass boost/cut.
This gives more tonal flexibility and response, making these basses arguably more studio-friendly.
SGC's own pickups are still used, but the 305's bridge is exchanged for the ever-formidable Gotoh unit, which offers superior six-way adjustment.
Again, 4, 5 and fretless versions are available.
There's no doubt that the build quality of these Japanese models is superior to that of the Korean one; all the various routing work and insertion of related components is far more consistent.
Also, the headstock is part of the same piece of wood as the neck, and not scarfed-on.
But then you're paying for all this, so the choice is yours…
The 4-series 4-string played equally well, with its added P-style pickup further augmenting the range of sounds.
This one had a pleasantly slim neck, reminiscent of the Pedullas I recently tried, but it didn't quite make it into my affections because of its finish; that slightly metallic-looking uniform of navy blue made the bass feel psychologically ‘cold’ to me.
CONCLUSION
If cornered into making a decision, then I'd say the obvious star of this threesome has to be the Japanese SB405.
No problems with the assembly and fitting here, the neck/body join is just so, and the meticulously-applied three-tone sunbursting is just so attractive.
I'm not normally a fan of painted-over necks, but would make an exception in this case.
The headstock-facing sunburst is beautifully done, too, with just a slightly darker overall hue.
The lightly-grained basswood body is two-piece, and even the centre laminate of the maple neck possesses some attractive grain patterns, and again the feel of the neck in both profile and response is particularly praiseworthy.
The fingerboard/neck jointing and overall fretwork is exemplary; the neck-edging feels impossibly smooth, and hopefully manufacturing consistency means that all similar-spec'd Bass Collection instruments will be as good as this.
The final icing on the cake is the beautifully-cut brass nut which looks terrific against the sunbursting.
And with this spec we get straplocks.
So, up-to-the-minute styling and first-class performance, combined with that irresistible whiff of exclusivity doesn't have to cost the earth, as these three fine examples most assuredly demonstrate.
For further information please contact 
PATCHWORK Marshall JMP-1 Get the cheque book out, dust off the credit card or prepare to attack that porcelain pig with a mallet!
Marshall's JMP-1 is here and I think you're going to want one…
Review by Neville Marten.
We don't normally give the verdict at the beginning of the review, but what the heck: this MIDI preamp from Marshall had the collective pulse rate quickening by the minute, as rack and reviewers put each other through their paces.
So what impressed us so much?
Well, for starters, how about stunning sounds, simplicity of use and silly price?
Few products are without their warts, though, and the JMP-1 is not without its own.
But more of that later…
The digi-terror which still afflicts we analogue-minded guitarists is, in reality, founded on common sense, not, as is usually stated, on our well-documented Luddite tendencies.
Guitarists need to make running changes to their stage sounds in real time.
A panel full of increment/decrement wheels and pads can be confusing at the best of times, but in the heat of the moment the effect on a performance can prove more than negative — it can be destructive.
But companies are at last cottoning on to this, and beginning to produce equipment that doesn't just make sense to the MIDI-literate studio engineer, but can be incorporated into guitarists' setups and actually used .
The JMP-1 is an attractive 1U package, with what looks like a gold anodised front panel into which has been set a window for all the data controls.
The input sockets, output level knob and on/off button are housed on the gold panel itself, thereby separating the basic functions from those of programming.
These data buttons have been chosen and laid out with great logic, giving the player instant and sensible choices for altering patches, or the parameters which go to make up those patches.
In this instance, a patch is a setup of tones, gain and volume settings etc., as chosen by the user and stored in the favoured memory location.
The JMP-1 has 100 memory locations, twenty-six of which contain factory presets.
These can be amended to taste or completely overwritten.
Patches can also be moved to different locations.
For example, say you'd tinkered JMP-1 presets 4, 14, 20 and 26 until they represented sonic perfection.
You could move these to locations 1, 2, 3 and 4, for conveniently calling them up from a MIDI pedal.
Marshall do provide, as an optional extra, the MPM 4E footswitch; this will call up patches 1 to 4, and although this doesn't seem like many sounds, most guitarists would probably find that adequate.
And anyway, a dedicated MIDI pedal will call up any chosen patch using the JMP-1's MIDI input mapping facility, whereby MIDI signals can be routed for your convenience so that the pedals on your MIDI pedalboard always call the same JMP-1 patches.
So you see that being a MIDI device has massive advantages: first, sound changes which might otherwise require the drastic resetting of several controls can be carried out instantly, by calling up a patch containing the new settings; and second, when using another MIDI device, such as a multi-effects processor, the two can be linked via the MIDI sockets and a patch change on one can trigger a patch change on the other.
What this means practically is that, for example, a clean picking tone with a bit of slapback and chorus can be changed with the single press of a pedal to a thranging overdrive with concert hall reverb.
This requires you to utilise the JMP-1's output mapping, and all it means is that you tell the JMP-1 that every time it selects, say, patch 6, information is sent to the effects processor to change its current patch to whatever patch you require.
It will then duplicate this process every time you select that JMP-1 patch, either from the front panel or from a pedal.
Keyboard players have been doing this for years, but it's a revelation to most guitarists.
And this might sound like a facile comment, but should you purchase a MIDI preamp and fancy using a processor as well, remember to get one with MIDI!
Despite the MIDI nature of the JMP-1, it's useful still to think of it as a basic preamp.
In this case the preamp is equipped with four channels, each with the selectable extra of Bass Shift, a tonal element vital for certain tones and inappropriate to others.
The JMP's channels are: OD1 (classic vintage style Marshall distortion but capable of being pushed a lot farther); OD2 (modern, more distorted and thrashy, but can be tamed); Clean 1 (basically the rhythm version of OD1, sparkling and natural); and Clean 2 (ultra sparkly, studio-style clean sounds — very LA).
Once the channel has been selected (with or without bass shift) using the requisite button, a patch can be selected and adjustments made using the Data wheel in conjunction with the volume, gain and EQ buttons.
Those of you familiar with car radios where you press ‘vol’‘treble’‘bass’‘bal’ or ‘fade’and then use a single infinitely rotating knob to set the required levels, will know exactly how to operate the JMP-1.
It's really that simple.
So let's take a preset patch and modify it to taste.
Factory preset number 14 is called ‘More Gary’ but sounds like a particularly wimpy Gazza to me.
So let's amend things.
The handbook says this represents a JTM45 on ‘6’ but I thought Gary's was nailed on ‘10’and with a Guv'nor pedal super-glued in and gaffer taped ‘on’!
The OD2 channel is selected for this patch, but I think OD1 would be a better bet, so we simply press ‘OD1’ and it's set.
Bass shift is already in, so all we need to look at are the gains and tones etc.
The level seems okay, and pressing ‘volume’ I find it's set to 17, so I'll leave it there.
OD1 has less distortion to it than OD2 but even for that channel the gain preset of 4 is well down, so I kick it right up to 20 (the upper limit of both gain and volume) and things begin to sound a little more like it.
As for bass, middle, treble and presence, Marshall have these at 3, 0, 3 and 3 respectively (6 being the ceiling for these controls).
I try the rig through various sets of speakers — Celestions, EVs and JBL studio monitors, etc. — and obviously the results vary accordingly, but I end up with my tone controls on 4, 3, 3 and 4, while arriving at a Moore-ish/Beck-ish/Clapton-ish sound.
The remaining data buttons are ‘Effect’, ‘Map’ and ‘Channel’.
The first of these sets the amount of effect coming in from the JMP's effects loop — a really good idea and all amps should have this in some form.
‘Map’ is the button to press for routing MIDI messages to other machines or relocating patches within the JMP-1 itself.
‘Channel’ relates not to the preamp's channels but to the MIDI channels that the preamp can send or receive on.
There are sixteen channels plus an ‘Omni’ channel, which will receive on any channel and transmit on channel 1.
Most MIDI processors come factory set to Omni, so you shouldn't need to dabble too much here unless you really want to.
In my own experience of rack systems, the biggest problem, if you can call it a problem, is that each unit in the rack has its own level control, and the way each is set against the others can introduce different tonal and distortion elements to the sound.
For instance, with the live rig that we set up to check out the JMP-1 (Boogie 50/50 power amp and ART Multiverb Alpha 2.0 MIDI processor), if you wanted to get louder you could tweak the Marshall's output, increase the power amp's volume or even adjust the level of the processor.
And who wouldn't die for such a dilemma?
But it can affect the way the rig interacts and I'm pointing it out as it relates to all rack systems, not just those based upon a JMP-1.
I could go on about how many different sounds you can muster from Marshall's new baby, but there are just so many that this would be unrealistic.
As usual I've pandered to the distortomanaics among you, but the preamp's clean channels really are something too.
The vintage style Clean 1 is perfect for almost anything, while Clean 2 is enough to bring out the Mutt Lange in anyone — it's so sparkly, and begs for the addition of some subtle effects.
DIRECT INJECTION
Of course, you don't have to set up the JMP-1 through a regular stage rack.
Among the output sockets on the back of the unit (MIDI in, thru and out, one for the MPM 4E footswitch, a set of effects loop sockets with +4dB or -20dB level switch, plus similarly attenuable left/right master outputs) are a pair of outs for the built-in speaker emulator.
This feature allows you to play direct to tape, or direct to a house P.A. The output from the emulator is not affected by the level control on the JMP-1's front panel, so any changes you make for your stage level will not affect what goes out front, or to tape, should you be recording the ‘Live Album’.
The quality of sound via these outputs is nothing short of amazing.
Having tried it here in our own studio and been most impressed, I have also spoken to JMP-1 converts Geoff Whitehorn and Phil Hilborne who say it's been a godsend to their recording.
Phil also played me a track he'd recorded using the JMP-1 direct and the tones were awesome.
CONCLUSION
Unfortunately there is one flaw in the JMP-1's design, and one which I think Marshall are going to have to address.
When setting up a rack system, the connections are nearly always made from the back, and if a wireless system is used this is fed into the preamp's rear input, although the front panel input invariably overrides this should you ever require the use of a lead.
Also, some people like to run their processors, especially the analogue sounds — distortion and so on— through the preamp's main input — not via the effects loop.
This way, with the connections all at the rear and the rack components connected to a mains distribution board within the rack housing, the patch cables (of which there can be quite a few) need never be touched, and a single mains cable is usually all that's needed to plug into the wall and power the whole thing up.
Unfortunately, the JMP-1 has no input on the back and so in some ways it falls at the final fence, because I can't really see how you can set it up to work in a neat and user-friendly rack; you'd have to wire the thing up every time you gigged it.
However, everything else about this unit is quite remarkable.
And remember, although it's a ‘valve’ preamp it's not an ‘all-valve’preamp like the Mesa Boogie TriAxis (which we will be looking at next month).
Still, the sounds the JMP-1 produces — not only live, but direct to tape — would lead you to believe you were dealing with a whole crate of bottles.
I have to say I loved the sound through the Boogie power amp, although the essence remained distinctly Marshall.
The lack of a rear input is a serious drawback, but the company tell me that considerations of space (where they'd put this socket, heaven knows) and cost were uppermost in the decision not to include it.
And when you consider that you're getting all this for only £450 the competition has got to be sweating.
RRP: £448.85
For further information please contact 
DETH wish Megadeth's Marty Friedman In the fast and furious world of thrash metal there lurk some fine guitarists; one of the most musically articulate is Megadeth's Marty Friedman…
Interview by Nick Bowcott.
Regardless of your opinion of the hard driving, speed metal wares of high flying thrash titans Metallica, Slayer, Anthrax and Megadeth, there's no denying their impressive longevity and there's certainly no way of ignoring their ever increasing popularity.
Megadeth's fifth and finest LP, ‘Countdown To Extinction’ slammed its way straight into the upper reaches of LP charts all over the globe (it entered the US chart at a staggering No. 2!) and its first single,Symphony Of Destruction , was such a hit in the UK that a Top Of The Pops appearance was simply unavoidable.
‘It was hysterical!’ laughs the group's superlead player, Marty Friedman.
‘We followed Diana Ross!’
At the time of writing, ‘Countdown To Extinction’ was enjoying its sixth consecutive week in the US Top 10 and had already generated in excess of two million sales worldwide.
Mega-success indeed.
Born in Washington D.C on Sept 8th 1964 Marty Friedman started playing guitar at around fourteen.
One of his best friends was already playing and the two were big Kiss and Black Sabbath fans, ‘so it seemed like the natural thing to do.’
Marty's first real heroes were, not surprisingly, Ace Frehley and Tony Iommi but, less obviously, so The Ramones and The Scorpions — particularly when Uli Roth was the Scorps' lead guitarist.
‘Uli is my favourite guitarist in the world’ enthuses Marty.
‘I honestly don't think anyone else even approaches him.
Okay, the stuff he's doing nowadays is a bit weird to some people, but I find it totally incredible.
He's also continued to improve, which is something you can't say about many of his peers.
Uli's still pushing his musical boundaries and he's a continual source of inspiration for me.’
Friedman's early guitar lessons were not what you'd call fruitful, since his teacher was less than keen on showing Marty his favourite Frehley licks.
‘The guy was a bit of a throwback from the '60s and was more interested in teaching me Wishbone Ash tunes,’ Friedman recalls, ‘which was not exactly my thing.’
Marty found little more consolation in tuition books…
‘If ever I went out of my way to learn something from a book the chances were that It'd be hopelessly wrong — you know, inaccurate transcriptions of a song or solo — so I decided to try and develop my own ear by learning things from record.’
But Marty had to learn his trade fast, since he began teaching guitar less than a year after starting to play himself!
‘As a result of this, most of my students were only a couple of weeks behind me,’ he laughs.
‘But actually, being in that situation really helped to develop my ear, because a guy would come for a lesson and ask me to show him a lick from some song or other, which kind of put me on the spot!
So I was continually forced into learning new stuff very quickly, and that helped develop my ear.’
Following a couple of years in covers bands, Friedman's first serious group was called Deuce.
‘I thought we really had something special.
We all worked extremely hard on the project, and the band was really ahead of its time compared to what the heavy metal scene in Washington DC was doing in the early '80s; we were faster and more complex than the majority of the other outfits in the area.
I'd have to say that Deuce was the most aggressive and distorted band around Washington, and that's always been one of my attitudes: to be the most aggressive, no-holds-barred type of player that I can possibly be.’
Friedman feels a lot of today's rock guitarists are guilty of playing with weak attitudes…
‘They have a great technique, but it's all too smooth and almost jazz-like; they might as well be performing in a Holiday Inn lounge or something!
I've always been the type of guy who'll dig into every note regardless of whether that note might be right or wrong or in or out of tune.
I'll play it like I completely mean it.’
When Deuce split up, Marty moved to Hawaii and formed a band down there called…
Hawaii!
‘We had a lot of attention from a lot of the metal magazines.
Again, I guess we were ahead of a lot of other groups because our music was really fast and chop-orientated, without it being fusion-like.
That's a really fine line right there because some bands tend to come across as doing a speed metal/jazz fusion.
Hawaii wasn't like that at all; we were just pure metal wildness played really fast and with a lot of chops.
Of course, that sort of thing has a really limited audience and, because we were living in Hawaii, there was nobody there to watch us anyway, so we were coming up with the most insane stuff we could do, basically just to please ourselves!
The attention that the magazines gave us produced a large underground following, which was really cool to have because we thought it was really bitchin' that people from all over the world were sending for our demo tape.’
After Hawaii came a liaison with Jason Becker and Shrapnel Records.
‘I was all set to do a solo record for Shrapnel, but a couple of months before I was due to do it, Mike Varney introduced me to Jason, who was only 16 at the time.
Jason came over to my apartment, we jammed and I was completely floored by the kid — he was unbelievable!
I've never seen anybody who could play like he could at that age.
Jason had some really cool material, too, and so we decided to collaborate, and instead of me doing a solo album we combined our material and made a record.
We were both really excited about each other 's playing and we could actually get along as people, too, so it was great partnership.
Our styles were so very different that we were both interested in what the other was doing.
We continued to jam together, wrote some music and made a couple of records.’
Marty and Jason called their partnership Cacophony and recorded ‘Go Off’ and ‘Speed Metal Symphony’, both for Shrapnel Records.
‘We even went so far as to put together a group and do some touring; we did a club tour of the States and a mini-tour in Japan, too.
We got some recognition from the other guitarists but didn't really have the foresight to make it into something big.
Our music was really ‘out there’, but it wasn't something you could stuff down people's throats; you had to really want to hear a lot of guitar if you wanted to listen to our records!’
Much as I loathe using the term ‘chops’, you possess them in abundance.
You must have put in many, many hours of practice to attain your current level of technique…
‘Over the years, yeah, I've practised my fair share!
But I've never been one of those guys who set out to be a technical guitarist and I still don't refer to myself as a technical player.
Having said that, I've always known that if I want to express myself I have to have a large vocabulary on the guitar.
It's not that I want to play the most difficult things; I really don't.
I just want to have the facility to do anything I want, and to be able to do that you have to learn a lot of things that you're not necessarily ever going to use.’
How did you build up this vocabulary and how do you maintain it?
‘I started off by getting all the rock chops together.
Then, when I was about 18 or 19 I figured that I'd learned every rock guitar lead that I ever wanted to know — all my favourite Ulrich Roth solos and all my favourite Frank Marino leads.
I also developed the speed to play as fast as I wanted.
Then, at that point I decided there must be something else out there, and what it turned out to be was music from other countries.
The phrasing of Japanese, Indian and Chinese music really fascinated me, so I spent a lot of time studying what made that music work.
I also got really specific about the phrasing and how I could transcribe that onto the guitar.
The instruments those guys use are completely different from guitar and I knew that if I could emulate the phrasing of those instruments then I would be breaking new ground instead of just playing the rock phrases that everybody knows.
Basically, I figured that this was my ticket to at least branching out a little bit.
But it turned out to be an endless task and, as a result, for the last few years I've been learning phrasings from all kinds of foreign instruments.
‘Recently I've been copying vocal ideas — particularly the traditional singers of Japan.
It's just incredible to try to create their vibrato and note choice on guitar.
It's a constant challenge that I'm centuries away from even thinking about mastering, but it's definitely presented me with a universe of what's out there left to do.
I mean, a lot of guitarists get into a rut and I think it comes from the fact that their pool of influences is really limited and shallow.
Sometimes you have to listen to some really weird things to get yourself out of that rut.
For example, you might want to take a country record and copy the inflections of some singer's voice; doing that will give you something completely new.
You've got to break out of the rock guitar, Van Halen, Steve Vai syndrome.
Once you've got a pretty good grip on what they're doing then you've really got to think of something else if you want your playing to sound different from everyone else's.
Obviously you can't just take a vocal line from some traditional Japanese album and put it straight into a heavy metal song because it's not going to work!
But that's the fine line you have to walk; you have to assimilate those ideas into your own style, which is the real challenge.’
So how do you approach a solo?
Do you build a picture in your head before you play anything or do you just jam around over the backing track and wait for something good to happen?
‘Soloing is the thing I do best; everything else I kind of struggle with.
I'm not a great rhythm player, I don't look at myself as a great chops dude and arranging is definitely not my forte.
But one thing I think I can do and do well is a guitar solo.
‘I can remember Brian May once saying something that really impressed me, because it explained something in a good way.
He said that the guitar solo is like the window of a song: you'll be going through the song and then the lead will break and it's like a window you can look out of while you're walking by.
Then, when it's gone, you're back in the rest of the house.
Brian May is one of my favourite guitarists and I found that I could really relate to his window idea.
So, when I'm soloing I try to take the song someplace else than where it is, and also somewhere different than where the next solo takes the next song.
That's much more important to me than just having someone recognise my style.
I want each song to have its own distinct personality, and that window is my chance to take the listener on a little ‘Marty Trip’ and let them listen to what I'm trying to say in that particular song.
Luckily, in Megadeth most of our tunes are quite different from each other and so it's not too much of a problem to keep my solos different.’
When you're trying to custom fit each solo to the mood of the track, how much attention do you pay to the lyrical topic that Dave Mustaine is addressing, and his approach to it emotionally?
‘I try to do that as much as I can, without getting ridiculously cosmic about it.
I hate to listen to guitarists rattle off rubbish about ‘the only thing that matters is the story of the song’ because that's just a bunch of crap!
I like to visualise the mood of the song and then take it from there.
But I honestly can't validate getting seriously wrapped up in the story of the song because how on earth can you relate that to notes?
The mood is the important thing.’
You've mentioned the importance of note choice.
Do you think in terms of scales and modes relative to the chordal structure you're playing over, or do you think more in terms of the overall picture?
‘I believe that note choice is the most important thing in any kind of solo.
That's your ace in the hole; the more you concentrate on note choice, the more quality you're gonna get.
If you really know what you're doing on each and every single note in your lead then you're controlling your solo, as opposed to merely playing a bunch of licks and exercises while trying to land on a cool note here and there.
That approach is okay, I guess, but if you're completely aware of each note you play and where it lands in what part of which measure, over which chord, that's you in total control.’
How long does it usually take you to come up with a solo that meets the demanding criteria you've just described?
‘On the new album I went to extremes, and for each song I had two or three complete lead breaks worked out for every solo, prior to actually going in to make the album.
Then, when we were demoing the songs during pre-production, I recorded the different lead breaks on separate tracks.
Having done that, we listened to them over and over, took the best parts from each solo and I worked on composites from there.
The next step was for me to learn how to play the new solo and then record a rough version of it, to double check that we all liked it.
When it came time to actually record the chosen composite solo, each note was checked over what seemed like millions of times.
As a result, I didn't do much spontaneous playing in the actual studio.’
How hard was it to come up with three totally different solos for a section of a song?
‘It was really hard, because as a rule the first one you do is the one you'll really believe in.
So, to come up with another completely different solo, or two, you've got to dig deep, and also be open-minded enough to take some suggestions from the producers.
In this case the producers were Max Norman (An Englishman whose past production credits include Lynch Mob, Ozzy Ozbourne and Armored Saint — NJB) and Dave Mustaine.’
How was it working with two producers?
‘It was great.
They were both very demanding but always rejected something in such a way that it didn't upset you.
Max has a very funny way of telling you that you should try a different approach.
For example, he'll say something like, ‘Well, I wouldn't wanna spend the last two minutes of my life listening to that lick!’
Dave's approach was equally effective.
He was forever saying things like, ‘Dig deep, man.
I know you can do better because I've heard you do it.’
‘But it was really hard to deal with sometimes, especially when I got the thumbs down on something I really believed in and didn't want to change.
In those instances I'd force myself and in the long run it turned out better.
I came up with a lot of very hard guitar parts for this album and I had to practise the hell out of them so I could pull them off.
The great thing about Dave and Max being such perfectionists is that when they were both pleased with something I'd figure, ‘Hey, I must be doing something really right here!’
And feeling like that definitely helps you with the next tough part.
‘But, as you can imagine, it got pretty sick in some places because we were being so exact.
There were occasions where I'd do a whole solo and be totally satisfied with it and then Max would go, ‘Well, this one section here is a little bit late…’
Things like that don't really bug me that much but I'd do it again and again until it was perfect.
Looking back, every solo on ‘Rust In Peace’ would've needed another three or four hours' more work to have satisfied Max, because they're all in and out of time.
To be honest, I kinda like that loose, gliding feel, but when you're getting everything totally nailed to perfection — the drums, the bass, the rhythms and the lead — the songs just have a ‘snap’ to them.’
There are some sections on the record that are unbelievably tight.
Parts of Symphony Of Destruction sound like there's a huge atomic clock ticking ominously away there…
‘That's why the hours spent achieving that ‘snap’ on every instrument were definitely worth it.
I mean, during the verse of Symphony the kick drum pattern and bass line are totally locked.
That's why Max is totally into it and will go for it like a madman if he knows that the guys playing are good enough to get it.
He knew that we were all willing to bust ass on this record and so he really drove us hard.
Just so you know, there's no reverb on any guitar on the whole record.
Max made us nail everything so that nobody had to put reverb on anything to cover up a mistake.
Everything is just totally dry and in your face and I like that.’
Going back to your lead playing, how close do you stick to your recorded solos in the live situation?
‘I like to stick as close to the recorded version as possible.
I mean, when I record a solo on an album, I put down on tape exactly what I think is the best possible lead for the song, so why should I mess with that?
Playing the exact same solos every night on tour is good too, because the notes are firmly ingrained in your head and that makes it harder for you to mess up in a major way, which is something that could happen if you were winging it every night.
I also think it's important to stick to a recorded solo from the standpoint of a fan.
If I'm in an audience I want to hear the solo on the record and see the guy pull it off live.
Everybody in the audience expects to hear a certian solo in each song, and so would I if I'd spent a small fortune on a ticket.’
You don't use a whammy bar.
Any specific reason for that?
‘Yeah, I don't like the sound of a tremolo bar!
All the vibrato I want I can do with my left hand fingers and I despise the sound of dive bombs and squeals.
To me, that sort of whammy bar stuff is a total waste of space in your solo and I can't validate that.
Some guys do it really well but I absolutely suck at it!
To be frank with you, I've never found a space in a lead break where I've felt like using a whammy move.’
I remember you telling me that you were really proud of ‘Rust Of Peace’ because you played one rhythm track to Dave's two on every track, and he is one of the best players of his ilk in he world.
Did you do the same on this record?
‘No, I just played all the rhythm parts that were in harmony or as a counterpoint to Dave's main rhythm part — like in the bridge of Symphony Of Destruction for example.
I also did all the texture guitar parts — all the acoustic and clean tone stuff.
Anything that wasn't like that, though, Dave would handle all the rhythms and I'm really glad that we did that this time because it allowed us each to focus in on what we were doing — me on my solos and Dave on the rhythms.
I mean, Dave's high point as a guitarist is definitely his rhythm work.’
He's definitely up there with James Hetfield and Scott Ian…
‘You're 110% correct!
Dave's rhythm work has got his name written all over it, and hopefully I've got my signature on all my solos too.
I was really proud of having recorded one rhythm pass on all of ‘Rust In Peace’ though.’
Compared to ‘Rust In Peace’, ‘Countdown To Extinction’ is somewhat less complex in terms of arrangements, number of riffs per song etc.
Was this deliberate?
‘That's a tricky one to answer because the complexities are still there but we made them a lot more hidden.
We spent a lot more time on note choice and really concentrated each song by getting rid of any filler parts or riffs and only keeping the best.
We discovered that we'd got a lot of unnecessary parts — things that were over-indulgent — so we chucked 'em out.’
On ‘Countdown…’ it definitely seems like Megadeth has found its perfect line-up at last…
‘Yeah, it feels that way to me too.
We seem to be working really well as a unit and things really gel when we write together.
I think we proved ourselves with Go To Hell (a tune written for the movie ‘Bill And Ted's Bogus Journey' — NJB), which we all played a part in writing.’
So Megadeth fans can expect to see this line-up staying together for quite some time?
‘Absolutely!’
What are your current ambitions, both as a player and as a member of Megadeth?
‘Firstly, I want to play better on our next record than I did on this one; that always has to be a major goal for me.
I've always worked hard on changing and refining my practice schedules and finding different ways to get better.
When I was in Hawaii I practised for eight or nine hours a day; now I practise a lot less, but I do so a lot more efficiently and effectively.
The time I have available to practise is my sacred time and I make sure that I accomplish everything I set out to do.
As a result of that I'm learning more now than I ever have, even though I have less time in which to do so.’
Megadeth are a band with thousands of followers, some of them just starting out on the guitar.
What's your advice to those who'd sell their souls for a career playing guitar?
‘After having been a teacher in my past, my best answer is this: kids always seem to want to learn stuff that's way to hard for them at the time.
I think that if you concentrate on really short term goals and practise things that are maybe a week away instead of a month away then you'll gradually, slowly but surely, definitely improve.
I never practise anything that's too difficult for me, ever!
I practise perfecting things I can almost already play.
And if you do it this way it ensures that you start seeing results straight away— the harder stuff will come anyway.
Getting a little gratification often is infinitely better than trying to become Edward Van Halen in a year and failing…!’
EQUIPMENT
Marty's equipment is relatively straightforward.
His guitar is made by Jackson-Kelly guitars; it has twenty-four frets and Seymour Duncan Jeff Beck and Jazz pickups.
His strings are Dean Markley 0.010 to 0.052.
Effects are two Yamaha SPX-900s.
For his lead sound Marty uses a Bogner preamp (Triplet Giant) and VHT Power amp.
Rhythm is taken care of by a Tube Works preamp and VHT power amp.
DARK STAR Decimax D12 Digital Bass System Someone's finally opted to control a signal with a digital-based interface.
It's certainly different, but is it a pain or pleasure…?
Review by Gibson Keddie.
One of my pet hates is finding, after lugging big speaker cabinets across vast floor spaces and collapsing in a panting heap, tilt-back casters,la Ampeg 8x10, hidden under the vinyl slip cover.
Such was my introduction to the Decimax D12 system, designed and manufactured by Outline Technical Services of Braintree in Essex.
Having looked at the photos you will probably be wondering why, despite this being a completely new product, there is such an air of familiarity about the design.
The answer is thus: Stuart Watson, who is responsible for the D12, was also the originator and creative force behind the Trace Elliot range.
The D12 has been designed to perform as the ultimate in digitally controlled amplification.
The preamp, apart from delivering as pure a signal as possible, also offers up to 128 fully programmable equalisation and volume settings; these can then be stored in the D12's memory and recalled by using the unit's front-panel keypad, a MIDI controller or the Decimax FC-60 footswitch.
The unit possesses an external effects send and return facility to allow the user to incorporate external devices into the programmed settings.
The main 10-band EQ system (plus two further sliders for input gain and volume) is augmented by a smaller, manually-adjusted 7-band ‘acoustic correction’ system which allows you to compensate for the acoustics of each gig, without having to go back into your preset program — positive thinking on the part of Decimax.
What may well be the most off-putting thought for some about this amplifier is, having glanced at the front panel, a fear of what could lurk around the back: does it resemble the buss panel of a 32-channel mixing desk, or the flight deck of a 757?
Actually, the truth is it's remarkably sparse; the Decimax sensibly has all its main facilities and connections on the front panel, with the obvious exception of the XLR and ″ jack speaker connections which are located rearward, with the power-in socket, mains fuse and power-on switch.
Overall, the unit is really simple and straightforward to use, but there's no doubt that if you have difficulties with the volume and tone knobs on a Jazz bass, then you might not suss the Decimax right away.
Along the lower projecting section of the front panel are two instrument inputs and the effects loop jacks.
To the right of the central logo are four DIN-plug inputs, the first of which accepts the FC-60 footswitch, with the next three relating to MIDI control: In, Thru and Out.
To the far right are two output jacks offering Pre-Fade input (for connecting other preamps into the D12's power amp) and Post-Fade output (for hooking up to other power amps or to a desk or mixer).
Just above this section sit two rows of increase/decrease buttons, accompanied by a single red ‘save current setting’ button.
When illuminated, the front panel looks something like a heart rate monitor, as seen in all the best hospital soaps.
This is the unit's graphic equaliser: ten bands, covering 40, 75, 140, 270, 520, 990, 1K8 (the fashionable term for 1800Hz, or 1.8KHz), 3K4, 6K5 and 12KHz offer ±16dB of boost or cut, with the green LED to the left showing input gain and the green LED to the right indicating programmed/preset volume.
The smaller, vertical indicator column headed ‘program’ tells you which memory number is in use, while to its right sits the memory selector keypad.
The aforementioned ‘acoustic correction’ equaliser is found at the right of the front panel; this acts on frequencies 80, 160, 320, 640, 1K3, 2K6 and 5KHz.
The good old master volume slider sits farthest right.
IN USE
The D12 can be obtained as either a 300w or a 600w system.
This one's the 300, with a single jack/XLR output on the back for connecting to linked cabs (we used the D115 topped by a D410, as recommended by the company).
XLRs really are heaps better than jacks: the connections are much more positive while power losses in the cable are minimised.
And in this case they provide the power for the Decimax badges on the cabs to illuminate.
In fact the complete stack looks really impressive on a low-lit stage.
All those red and green LEDs from the two graphic equalisers and their level indicators should knock 'em dead at the next British Legion Blues Night!
Having first made sure that the master volume is well back, Decimax recommend that the ‘acoustic correction’ equaliser should be set for flat response while the desired sounds are assembled.
Thereafter, it's anything goes, really, and it's fun to experiment with this novel method of obtaining bass sounds.
Most bassists probably know what their favourite sounds ‘look’ like on a graphic, so this idea is actually quite practical, and setting up the programs couldn't be simpler.
All you do is set the input gain to a reasonable level (the green input level LED flashes gently if there's too much signal) and then use the plus/minus switches to set up the desired sound via the graphic.
Although Decimax's current ad shows these switches to be of the keypad variety, our unit used membrane types; each push of the switch on the plus or minus end gives a corresponding level change (indicated by the LEDs) on that particular frequency.
Of course you program in your volume level too, then press the ‘save’ button, having selected an appropriate patch for it to be saved into.
Then on to the next sound.
Comments so far: I don't really like membrane switches; they have a vague, indistinct action, even though they help in keeping gig-type crud out of the workings.
But you can at least monitor their response on the graphic, via the LEDs, but there's nothing to let you know that a program has been properly saved with the ‘save’ button.
The fact that this button also felt particularly woolly meant that ‘non-save paranoia’ set in, and a couple of times I had to exit the program then return to see if my settings had actually been stored.
Talking to Stuart Watson revealed that he isn't fond of the membrane switches either, and plans to revert to buttons in the near future.
It's important, too, to remember to keep volume levels consistent, unless of course you want one setting to have significantly more oomph as a soloing channel.
I also feel that the memory display is an area which has not yet been addressed properly; this is critical information and the readout should be instantly legible.
The supplied footswitch (hooray) works fine, even if the buttons do look rather insubstantial.
Again, though, there's a legibility problem; although back-lit, the letters and numerals are too small to be easily distinguished.
Incidentally, only banks A to F can be accessed without some form of MIDI control, but with sixty possible selections that hardly leaves the user struggling for memory space.
The stack's general performance is impressive; the sound is clear and bright, and the sheer impact of volume takes you back.
Lots of power, abetted by good response from the switching systems, makes for an extremely useable rig.
It all works, and works well.
Physically the Decimax should go the distance, too.
Both amp and speakers are enclosed in wooden cabs and covered in a tactile grey fabric.
The speaker cab handles are deep dish rock'n'roll types, matched by the protective metal mesh grilles.
Speaker connections are also in a recessed section of the cab's backs for further protection.
CONCLUSION
Since the actual performance of the Decimax is so impressive, any misgivings will probably be reserved for the system's hi-tech looks.
Layouts such as this seem to completely polarise opinion, and the decision is obviously down to the individual.
Hopefully the contemporary ‘digital’ look won't seem too dated a concept in the near future, unlike James Bond film sets or talking MG Maestros…
We all use a core number of sounds; with the D12 these can be stored in a memory bank leaving the bassist free to experiment safely.
The real user bonus from this setup is that once you've found your desired sound and stored it, it's there for use any time, always consistent and accurate, but with scope for ‘fine-tuning’ to suit the gig.
Price includes FC-60 footswitch
For further information please contact 
TOTAL RECALL Ibanez Rock an PLay RP 50 For a fair grounding in the subtle art of lick-nicking, Ibanez invite you to loop-the-loop the Rock'n'Play way…
Review by David Mead.
I was once engaged in idle banter with an American jazz guitarist of considerable repute on the subject of ear training.
He had learned to play during the 1940s when record players were still a rarity on the domestic front and so his exposure to jazz came mainly from the radio.
He used to try and learn other players' licks from the radio and this process was hampered by the fact that he only had one pass in which to do so.
In the end, he told me, he got quite good at it and reckoned that this form of involuntary pitch training was responsible for the fact that he had a good musical ear now.
Things have become far more sophisticated over the last fifty years, of course— from slowing down Clapton's licks on record (while 16RPM was still a reality) to units like this one.
But the same basic premise remains: tablature is fine, but in order to learn the feel and dynamics associated with a player's style, you have to go to the horse's mouth and listen .
Ibanez have unleashed a couple of tape-driven units before now, but this is their first solid state effort.
Akai tried a similar idea a few years back with their U4 phrase trainer, but that was, surprisingly, a flop.
The RP50 is a compact 5¾″ long by 3″ wide and a little less than ¾ inch thick.
The record in and headphone sockets are both stereo mini jacks, but the line out and instrument input are both the full size mono equivalent.
The unit can be powered either by 9v mains adaptor or battery.
The three rotary controls on the front panel control the pitch and volume of the recorded sample and also the volume of the guitar input.
Five push buttons take care of the full-speed play, half-speed play, record, instrument distortion and stop options.
Two LEDs indicate battery level and ‘record on’ functions.
IN USE
Basically, you can link the RP50 up to the headphone output of a cassette player or CD equipped with the appropriate mini-jack.
Cue up the phrase you wish to learn, press record and then you have a maximum of fifteen seconds sampling time at your disposal.
In reality, this is probably as much as you'll ever need, translating into about 7 bars of music at a fairly moderate tempo — enough for a single sitting (…but not for Freebird — Ed).
The sample is automatically looped to repeat continuously until you tell it to stop.
You have the facility to slow the music down to half speed, but it is here that I think Ibanez have missed the point.
At half speed, guitar tones are mutated into bass frequencies and can become dull and difficult to hear (the main problem with the Akai U4) but when dealing with a digital signal, it is merely a matter of mathematics to ‘slow’ a signal down.
There are no moving parts as such and this is where digital equipment can score quite significantly.
It wouldn't take too much more ingenuity to cut the speed of the sample down but keep the pitch the same, thus making the target guitar part much easier to distinguish.
Sadly, even the pitch control on the RP affects the speed of the sample and so Ibanez have only really got it about half right.
On the positive side, it must be said that the unit does the job it sets out to do quite admirably and that the fidelity of the original signal is kept well and truly intact.
The idea of inputting a guitar in order to play along with the sample is quite in order, too.
The distortion on the unit, which I expected to be awful, is actually very good, although I don't think it quite lives up to Ibanez's claim that the unit could serve as a preamp, when linked to an amplifier.
CONCLUSION
The idea behind the RP50 is very, very sound.
Given that ear-training is too often struck from a guitar student's personal agenda, and moreover the value of such training is consistently understated in most ‘play rock guitar by numbers’ type books, then units like this could prove indispensable in putting things right.
If Ibanez were to revise the digital half-speed idea outlined above, the RP50 would become an essential part of the trainee shredder's armoury.
RRP: £75.00
For further information please contact 
A2 BRUTÉ Korg A2 Performance When players like Elliott Randall and Jennifer Batten use a piece of processing equipment, it's got to be worth checking out…
Review by Eddie Allen.
Jennifer Batten uses her Korg A2 in a rack along with a Mesa Boogie Triaxis Preamp and Crown power amps, while the last time I saw Elliott Randall, his was feeding a Marshall 2x12 combo.
From this you can assume that the A2 works connected up to pretty much anything and for this review that's how I put it through its paces.
I tried four different combos, three power amps and DI'ed straight into a mixer through studio reference speakers, a pair of cheapo ghetto blasters and some ordinary domestic hi-fi speakers.
Korg make much of the A2's alleged versatility, and I was tempted set myself a challenge: how small a rack could I put together?
A pro rack in a briefcase became my target.
The briefcase would have to be able to handle any live gig but would also have to be suitable for rehearsals and recording sessions.
The preamp/processor was the easy part; I'd use the A2.
The power amp on the other hand looked like it might be a problem, until a box arrived containing three Stadium power amps.
These solid state stereo units are only 1U high and fit into a 19 inch rack space.
There are various power outputs available but the ST200 I settled for kicks out 100 watts per side in stereo and, when bridged into mono, the full 200 watts.
I housed both the processor and amp in an SKB 2U rack case and hardwired a double mains board in the back.
I can't stress highly enough that, because of the heat build up, a fan should always be fitted to this type of setup.
The fan can be discreetly housed and hardwired in the back of the flightcase, but if you are in any doubt contact the equipment manufacturers for advice.
The setup in the photograph shows how the finished case looks, and for its size it has to be one of the most versatile and powerful rigs around.
Of course the Korg A2 is the heart of the system and the real subject of this review, so getting back on track I'll get into what Korg have managed to put together.
I tend to view devices which rely purely on digital technology with suspicion because, as we all know, digital ain't analogue and analogue makes the best guitar sounds.
Well, to be fair, that's not always the case, and in this instance I've definitely been forced into something of a rethink.
Korg seem to have done the impossible and produced a totally digital processor with some absolutely authentic guitar sounds.
Mind you, given the A2's remarkable programming capability there really wouldn't be much of an excuse for not getting it right.
To start with there are 102 effects which can be combined to make up an effect chain using up to 6 effects simultaneously.
These can be stored in the 100 program onboard memory, but by using an additional ROM card the amount of programs available can be expanded to 200.
Using an extra RAM card your own settings can be stored and recalled for future use, or for use with another A2 — possibly one installed in a studio you are visiting.
This gives the guitarist the same facility for storing and recalling a library of sounds that keyboard players have been enjoying for years.
The layout of the A2 couldn't be simpler, although I'm surprised that the word ‘guitar’ doesn't appear anywhere on it, for while it's true the A2 is an effects processor for any instrument, the bulk of its sounds are aimed at the guitarist.
Looking at the front panel it appears fairly basic until you realise that the seven rotary pots sited under the LCD display are double function editors.
This isn't as intimidating as it sounds; it simply means they do two jobs, depending on whether they are rotated or pushed.
The first of these knobs is the chain/bypass control.
In ‘play’ mode, rotating this control selects effect chains, and when pushed it activates the bypass function.
In ‘edit’ mode, rotating the control varies the selected effect, while pushing turns the effect on or off.
This control will also compare the programmed patch to the original when in ‘parameter/edit’ mode.
The remaining six controls are for setting parameter values, effect variations or turning the effect on/off, depending on which mode the A2 is set to.
When used in play mode they turn off/on and adjust the effect shown in the LCD display directly above the relevant control.
This means that in a playing situation, if the patch has, say, too much or too little delay, it can be altered simply by turning the control.
This is a real advantage when using the A2 live and also goes a long way to keeping the engineer happy in the studio, without taking precious minutes to reprogram.
Everything is clearly displayed in the LCD but live it can be awkward to see.
However, when all that's needed is a quick glance to confirm a patch number the LED comes into its own, showing clearly which patch is selected.
Three status lights indicate whether the A2 is in ‘performance’, ‘individual’ or ‘bypass’mode.
Bypass is self-explanatory, but the difference between the other modes is interesting.
In performance mode, each program is treated as a complete effect unit and can be controlled by editing the parameters that make up the program.
Individual mode allows for separate control of each effect, switching them on or off or adjusting their levels.
The A2 automatically boots up in individual mode.
Six push switches control patch changes, parameter edit, display select (individual or performance), write (storing patches) and utility, while to the left of these are the guitar input and headphone output, each with their own level control.
It's important to set the input level correctly otherwise too much signal will cause distortion while too little causes some strange sounds (like a faint fuzz box followed by a fax signal) to appear once the guitar sound starts to decay.
At the other end of the front panel is the mains switch and the slot for inserting RAM and ROM cards.
(As well as its own A2 cards, the A3 processor's cards can also be used.)
The A2's rear panel is very simple.
The facilities start with a remote switch socket for connecting the optional FC6 foot controller, offering remote switching without tying up the MIDI in socket (I tried the FC6 but found it more suited to a keyboard player, so would recommend a standard MIDI switching pedal).
The switchable MIDI out/thru socket and the MIDI in come next, followed by two jack sockets to take footswitches or volume pedals (Korg's aforementioned FC6 will also take effects pedals).
The A2's stereo outputs feature a level attenuator to match the unit to whatever application (mixer, combo, power amp etc.) it's used for.
The final sockets are left and right line-ins (the left socket of both the ins and outs is designated mono).
IN USE
It's not often that I can say a piece of equipment is inspiring, but reviewing the A2 actually got me coming up with some ideas that I just had to get on tape.
The sound that really got me going came from one of the A3's ROM cards, numbered SPC-04, a patch called ‘Amp 66’ which is also stored in the A2's internal memory as patch 63.
This was an incredibly accurate valve amp sound which more than one person commented had the character and warmth of an AC30, especially when using the A2 through the solid state Stadium power amp into a Proamplifiers speaker cab.
I also tried a Mesa Boogie 1x12 Theile cabinet and while the sound was slightly boxier it still sounded like Vox's finest at full tilt.
Recorded, the sound didn't lose any of its character, and only a touch of hi-mid EQ was needed to make the sound work mixed onto cassette.
Scrolling through the A2's patches it soon becomes obvious that it's crammed full of great sounds, although, as usual, some do need severely sorting out for ouput level, which means that there's no escaping learning how to program the thing!
This does take a bit of sussing out, but once mastered it all makes sense.
Being able to adjust effects in real time is great, especially to change the amount of effect to suit the room, but without altering the written patch.
Using the A2 with the Stadium amp for a rehearsal, the verdict was ‘great sound but turn the bloody thing down!’
Tonally the A2 seems to match up to any amp or processor, and although there are some lead sounds which didn't quite make it, they were closer than many processors can claim to get.
I even found myself able to use acoustic feedback through the studio monitors at a sensible volume, with the A2 DI'd straight into the board.
Through a selection of combos including Carlsbro, Ampeg, Vantage, Vox and Dean Markley the A2 came up with the goods easily.
Although it's interesting to hear the difference between these amps with a signal source as stable as the A2, there wasn't one where I couldn't produce the desired sound simply by tweaking the combo's own EQ.
Swapping to Korg's SPC-1 sound card produced more of the same, with only a few interesting variations.
However, the real fun was in using the NYC Guitar Card, programmed by Ira Seigel, Chuck Loeb, Elliott Randall and Sid McGinnis.
I'm not over familiar with the works of Ira, Chuck and Sid but Elliott's sounds are pretty much what I was expecting.
With all these artists' patches there are some sounds which are great and others which defy logic.
Still, they can all be altered to suit, and when somebody asks where you got that dodgy or otherwise guitar sound you can say
which Pro session player wrote the program for you!
CONCLUSION
I've spent nearly a week playing around with the Korg A2 and I feel I haven't done more than scratch the surface.
I've played through it, recorded with it, connected it up to almost everything but the kitchen sink and every time it's delivered either the sound I wanted or something very close.
I see now why Ms Batten and Mr Randall use one!
For a first call session player the A2 can be expanded to one of the most comprehensive sound libraries a guitarist can buy.
One thing I would like to see added to the A2 would be a second pair of outputs to send a DI signal straight to the front of house mixer while the main outputs were feeding the guitarist's own rig.
I actually spoke to the A2's designer and he agreed that in such a situation this would be a boon.
As for the briefcase rack idea, as you can see it's very neat.
The Stadium power amp doesn't colour the sound of the A2 at all, so I can fully recommend it.
The whole setup weighs about the same as a small combo, but is easier to carry because there's less bulk.
Plus, it only takes seconds to connect up, and as time is money that's always important.
Korg's A2 Performance Signal Processor has impressed everyone here, and I'd be surprised if it's not destined to be the one that others are judged by.
It's certainly made me rethink my approach to digital processors and what I expect from them.
Contact 
Stadium ST200 power amp £365.00
Contact 
SKB 2U rackcase £89.00
Contact
BORN IN THE FIFTIES?
Hame Special & Sunburst Archtop Question: does an instrument have to be old before it can produce a vintage tone?
Answer: not necessarily…
Review by David Mead.
The Hamer company was started around 1974 in Illinois by a group of vintage guitar enthusiasts/ repairers led by Jol Dantzig.
They had seen the rise in output from the giants Fender and Gibson have an adverse effect on quality (in short, they weren't making 'em like they used to) and Jol and his team were determined to put matters straight.
Hamer say that they are committed to producing instruments of the highest quality, using only the best woods, so that any potential purchaser may have a vintage quality guitar without the mega-buck price tag.
SUNBURST ARCHTOP
The one thing that dominates the appearance of this guitar is the superbly figured maple top.
The finish is what Hamer refer to as their ‘'59 Burst’ and is indeed reminiscent of that which adorns the best Gibson Les Pauls from around that era.
The maple sits on a body of Honduras mahogany, another favourite of the Gibson company — expensive and exclusive, but a reflection of the golden era on which Hamer have based their design philosophy.
CONSTRUCTION
There are places around the binding where shrinkage has caused the finish to crack, making it look a little untidy.
I'm inclined to believe that this probably happened after the guitar left the Hamer factory; any quality control worth its salt would have picked it up, otherwise.
The neck is made from maple, which was a surprise, because I was expecting mahogany.
Close inspection reveals that a strip of reverse grain timber has been laid down the centre in order to add strength — another old-fashioned idea and a good one, too.
The fingerboard is rosewood, after the fashion of '50s Les Paul Standards, and the pearl inlays have been expertly applied with little or no sign of filler around the edges to mar the effect.
The neck has been bound to include the fret ends, which is another nice touch as it looks tidier and actually adds quite a lot to the overall feel of the fingerboard.
Machineheads are Hamer's own, finished in gold as is the locking tremolo.
This is another of those licensed Floyd Rose systems.
This particular specimen, probably because of its height and relative position to the body, tends to inhibit right hand movement.
Some playing positions are prone to collide with a Floyd's fine tuning system and this one seems to be especially sensitive.
I'm not particularly fond of the control layout, either; all the pots in a row look a bit‘lumpy’ and don't do anything for the line of the body.
Also, manufacturers like Patrick Eggle and Paul Reed Smith have countersunk their controls, which looks far more attractive and is more in keeping with the otherwise classy demeanour of a guitar like this.
The neck joint is another area that I think could do with a slight re-design.
Whereas you might think that access to the top of the fingerboard would be pretty straightforward with a double cutaway, in practice the lower cut is just not deep enough.
I found that the edge of my left hand was cramped up when I attempted to negotiate the upper frets and any urgency in so doing was rewarded by a considerable jolt as my hand hit the buffers, so to speak.
If a little wood were to be dressed away in this area, both from the back of the body and the lower cutaway, things would improve significantly.
The pickups in the Sunburst are by Seymour Duncan, with a Jeff Beck in the bridge position and a ‘59 in the neck.
IN USE
I must say that, despite my reservations in other areas, this guitar sounds beautiful.
Again, the control layout would bother me because the volume pot for the bridge pickup is the middle of the three, but I think I could get used to it — although at present it is like trying to get used to driving a new car where they've put the gearstick in the middle of the passenger seat.
Both pickups are coil-tapped by means of a pull-pot on the neck pickup volume control.
Hamer USA told me when I spoke to them that this is a custom option and not featured on the standard Sunburst models.
With both humbuckers selected, Hamer have wired the Sunburst to give the out-of-phase Peter Green type of sound, but the company will happily offer any other wiring option on request.
The feel of the neck is very similar to that of an early Gibson SG, rather than the Les Paul which one might be expecting — somewhat shallower and feeling a little wider.
In fact the whole guitar is a sort of ‘summed-up’ Gibson in both design and feel.
As to the available sounds on the Sunburst, they are in general quite warm and bluesy at the bridge end, with a nice smooth and mellow effect when the neck humbucker enters the picture.
All the early Fleetwood Mac guitar tones are available in the middle position and this is further accentuated when both humbuckers are coil-tapped.
THE SPECIAL
The name of this guitar refers, no doubt, to the appearance it shares with Gibson's Les Paul Special of the mid-fifties, before the same design became known as the SG Special in 1960.
The original Specials were quite wonderful guitars; I'm sure I saw Steve Marriot (still sorely missed) use one with Humble Pie back in the '70s to pretty devastating effect.
The body is made from a single piece of mahogany with a very authentic, Gibson-like cherry finish.
The neck is mahogany with a very fine rosewood fingerboard.
Fretwork is well up to scratch and the nut is made from a substance which Hamer refer to as ‘Lubritrak resin'.
Doubtless a sort of graphite derivative, it should ensure that tuning stays smooth and ping free.
The tuners are, once again, Hamer's own but this time finished in chrome, as is the tune-o-matic style bridge and tailpiece.
Pickups are P90s, with a three-way switch and the same basic control layout as the Sunburst's.
The control cavities of both these guitars have been screened, which is further indication that Hamer intend you to travel first class all the way.
The Special does, however, have the same sort of neck joint and cutaways as before, resulting in a similar finger squash at the top of the neck.
IN USE
Anybody who thought that P90s were a little bit old hat would be sure to think again when confronted with this guitar, because they sound just right.
The natural warmth of the mahogany is a perfect foil for the P90s’ tonal characteristics and recalls almost precisely the sound of an old Les Paul Junior.
The neck is very good to play; the balance is about right and I'm slowly getting used to the weird control arrangement.
What is really great about this guitar is that it is such an uncomplicated affair.
No trem, solid body, two pickups and bang! there's your sound.
CONCLUSION
There is little doubt that Hamer have achieved what they set out to do as far as producing great vintage guitar tones from contemporary instruments.
Indeed, it is the sound of these two guitars which is their most outstanding feature.
They look good, too, of course, though I think that more consideration should be given the neck joints in both cases.
The Gibson Les Paul Junior guitars used to join the body at the last fret, giving a functional, but slightly neck-heavy look.
If Hamer have sought to redesign this feature so that it looks better overall then I'd suggest that they have made a mistake.
But the Junior also felt a little odd, the playing area being rather off to one side, so Hamer would say it's this that they've looked to address — but I still think they could have done it better.
In terms of price, Hamer challenge Gibson's own reissues amongst other quality guitars, and I'm sure that if someone were to go shopping for an instrument with a classic tone, but prepared to keep an open mind and buy with their ears, then they may well end up going home with a Hamer.
Custom options available including left-handers.
For further information please contact 
KISS AND TELL Gene Simmons Nothing succeeds like…excess!
Kiss's bass-playing spokesman Gene Simmons ponders the curious longevity of his band, while imparting a few wise words on rock'n'roll in general.
Gibson Keddie finds himself on the wrong end of a tongue lashing…
Although unquestionably still a successful band, it could be argued that Kiss's heyday was some time ago.
An intrinsic and notorious part of the '70s rock scene, Kiss created a personal performing arena for themselves which no-one else dared to enter, with their outrageous costumes and make-up, extravagant stage presentations and riffy pop-metal songs.
But when the appeal of fire-spewing guitars and exploding basses started to pall, Kiss were forced to prove that behind the pan-stick and pyrotechnics lay a band with staying power.
And, with the cute costumes long since ditched, they still won't go away.
The band continues to feature in the charts, too, most recently through their association with the film ‘Bill And Ted's Bogus Journey’, which contained their version of the old Argent hit God Gave Rock And Roll To You , and rode unfashionably high in the currently dance-dominated charts.
What, I wondered, drew Kiss to the song?
‘Actually, we didn't choose that song to record at all, so don't blame us,’ points out Simmons.
‘It was a favourite of another record company called Intrascope Records, who asked us to cover the song.
Strangely enough, we actually opened for Argent back in 1974 on one of our first big tours in America, and were promptly thrown off the tour for behaving like rude Americans…which all Americans are anyway.
Of course we are; if we weren't rude Americans we'd still be colonists, so tough shit!
Anyway, we thought it would be suitably ironic and some sort of justice for having been booted off the Argent tour to cover that song, especially as Argent have not existed for a long time.
‘Kidding aside, there's no-one in the band who has a clue about possible singles, because the rules of radio hits change every day.
The most you can hope to do is to record the songs that you like, and that is as much ‘planning’ as there is in Kiss.
All these music fashions come and go, each one the ‘saviour’ of rock'n'roll.
They last a couple of years, but like meat and potatoes, nothing fancy, we're there every day, critics or not.
We're your worst nightmare.
And we're American — that just sucks, doesn't it?
‘And it keeps getting bigger and bigger, and so we keep coming back to complain about the size of the hotels and the lousy service, and STOP PUTTING CUCUMBER AND BUTTER ON MY F***ING SANDWICHES!
Gimme some meat!
I mean, do you want me to ship over some cows?
Actually you've got McDonalds so you're getting better.’
Something like Crazy, Crazy Nights , though, is such a catchy song you must have known it was going to be huge…
‘No, no-one guessed that, and it's certainly not one of my favourite songs.
In fact, if anything, we're going to be doing less and less of that kind of music as we go along.
If you look at the history of the band, songs like I Was Made For Loving You , which had a kind of dance feel, we could have done much more of that and been successful with it.
But as soon as we hit with something that wasn't what we were about, we always tried to get the band back to what we thought it should be — three guitars and drums played loud by four New York bums.
That's what it basically is, and whenever it gets too slick or too planned, we stop, in complete mid-stream if necessary, and just go back to being more primitive.
‘Ultimately, rock'n'roll has to contend with carrying the burden of primitive music on its shoulders, the way Atlas carried the world on his shoulders.
Rock'n'roll is primal, or it should be, and on a day when every band starts to sound as radio-friendly and careful as Bon Jovi, it's time to change.
I want the hairs on the back of your neck to stand up and say ‘Wooaah!
What was that ?’
‘On the day that your parents like the same music that you do, it's all over; you can't even call it rock'n'roll any more.
Something that rock'n'roll has in common with the kid that walks down the street — usually black — with a big ghetto blaster on his shoulders playing it too loud, is that everybody says, ‘What a nuisance…’
Well it is nuisance!
It should be a nuisance.
That's the crown of rock'n'roll, the thorn in the side of society — something like Gary Glitter's Rock And Roll Part Two which has total non-lyrics and is really primal.
‘Rock should not, or doesn't intend to, appeal to the intelligentsia, because your balls have nothing to do with your brains.
If you think about something too much, your dick will go away.
You should be able to separate the beast from the evolved man and treat each one differently.
We act civilised mostly, but we're still basically meat-eating predatory killers underneath it all, and we each have to deal with that.
‘All this type of modern music that we play, if you think back to when it all started, whether it's thrash, rap, disco, rock'n'roll, it all started with black people in slavery and poverty in the southern States, and about the only thing they could ever have a good time with was sex.
Then early black singers like Leadbelly would do songs about that, but say, ‘Baby, let me rock and roll you all night long…’ since that's what the term ‘rock and roll’means, pure and simple.
But what white kids did when they took that form of music was to quote white literature which is head stuff, and nothing to do with what's under your balls.
‘In my estimation the most perfect rock'n'roll band that ever existed, The Beatles, when they sat down and wrote lyrics, they were just throwing ideas around that really meant nothing, and we were the ones who, for instance, made out that Lucy In The Sky With Diamonds meant LSD.
Yes, they had talent, more than all of us put together, but that doesn't negate the fact that they weren't trying to be lyrically witty, which always sounds so contrived.
Words to the Beatles were just coincidental to the sounds, which really is what rock'n'roll is, and which is why the vocals tend to be mixed down.
I'm not sure that rock'n'roll should be anything more than joyous noise — maybe ultimately one that means nothing, but then so what…?’
The Beatles originally included soul songs in their set, and were not specifically rock'n'roll…
‘Yes, besides Chuck Berry and the others, but that's why they got it, that's why they understood generally, because they were so close to the music that was played by black people —not for radio airplay, but because that's what was in their hearts.
Then Tin Pan Alley moved in on the act and the soul was lost…’
It had to progress, though, as the ideas and inspirations moved around and developed…
‘I don't agree, and I'll tell you why: because there's always a new generation who finds those ideas fresh and new to them.
But it's not for everybody, that's for sure.
I would say that if you're sixty years old and looking for meaning in life you should not be listening to this kind of music.
Go and listen to classical music, which, incidentally, doesn't have any lyrics at all, so where's the meaning in that?
Where's the wittiness in classical music?’
It's melodic…
‘Exactly, but witty implies lyrical, doesn't it, and that's the problem.
Having read a lot of books does not make for good rock'n'roll lyrics — you end up with a band like XTC; you might like them, sure, but that doesn't make them rock'n'roll.
As a rough guide, the blacker it is, and the older it is, the closer it is to the source.
You have to remember that Americans only found this endemic American music in the '60s when they began listening to English groups, who were doing something really important, which was taking black music and making it louder.
What The Stones and The Animals and all the great bands that I grew up with did was to take black music, and although it was played by white kids, they didn't change the nature of the beast, and it worked.
Or it did until rock'n'roll started to get self-conscious, and the fashion industry took over.
‘That's when the beast started to change and became a sheep in wolf's clothing.
When rock'n'roll loses its fangs and stops being just a little bit dangerous, then it is over.
There has to be unhappiness in the status quo that it can complain about — football chants are probably about the closest you can get now, because there's nothing left to complain about nowadays.
It's no longer a voice of political disagreement even; everyone knows that the rain forests should be saved, we all agree that racism is bad, fascism is not popular, communism is over, we all agree that we should be kinder to each other…
There are no great ‘causes’ left — only volume.
Just turn it up and enjoy life…celebrate it.’
AT THE HEIGHT OF their infamy, Kiss were undeniably a massive world-wide attraction.
Now members of LA's rock ‘aristocracy’, they may be viewed in some quarters as an anachronism but no-one could deny that they can still draw the big crowds in a way that would make many a ‘hip’ band envious.
‘Work is my religion,’ Gene elaborates, ‘and getting up on stage, doing shows when I don't need the money is important.
To write and record songs and do world tours when I don't have to is important because that is my, and the band's, identity.
We're a working band, although if you look at the balance sheets, yes, we're royalty…’
Nowadays, though, only bassist Simmons and guitarist/vocalist Paul Stanley remain of the original be-costumed quartet, originals Paul ‘Ace’ Frehley and drummer Peter Criss having ‘retired’with alledged drink and drug-related problems.
Then, sadly, subsequent drummer Eric Carr succumbed to cancer last year.
But there's life in the old dogs yet, and the latest album, ‘Revenge’, finds the band in committed rock mode with a surprisingly hard-edged collection of songs.
The line-up now includes whizzkid guitarist Bruce Kulick and newcomer on drums Eric Singer who, amongst other credits, held down the stool in Gary Moore's ‘After The War’ band.
‘Revenge’ is well on the way to taking us to that point where we want to be,’explained the one-time axe-wielding, fire-breathing bassman.
‘We tried to keep our noses close to the ground — sometimes knowing too much is not good.
If we wanted to, we could write a safer form of music, and we have done in the past — ballads like Beth , or other more pop-related, radio-friendly attractive material.
We could sing nicer, too; we don't have to push our voices and rip them up, but it's just not so much fun.
‘That form of music definitely works best when it is kept simple, which doesn't, of course, mean that it's easy to do; being inventive within a restricted format is one of the hardest things to do.
Unfortunately, everything has to be simplified for Americans; music, films and suchlike all work best for Americans when simplified.
For instance, we mentioned England earlier: like it or not, England is Britain to most Americans.
When Americans see a band like U2, they assume they are English because they speak English.
It's not really fair, but it happens.
Wasn't the idea of the United States Of Europe put forward and discussed quite recently?
We'd understand that…’
When Kiss began, did you and Paul ever envisage the kind of lasting success you would go on to achieve?
‘Everybody dreams of success happening to them.
Dreaming is a foolish American pastime in particular, but dreaming big…
Only a place like that, for instance, could have produced the idea of Superman, this kind of man-God alien who comes to Earth, to America of course , puts on a red, white and blue colour scheme — disgusting, isn't it?
But you guys had your chance with Shakespeare, now it's the modern age, now it's our turn.’
But Shakespeare endures, while such contemporary hero myths are more transient…
‘Sure, but that doesn't matter.
In America, as long as you're having a good time right now, it's valid; if in the next century it's all forgotten, then that's okay too.
‘Enduring’ means nothing if you're having a rotten time now, so you guys love Shakespeare and in the meantime I can't get a good hot cup of coffee in this country.
(Interestingly enough, I couldn't get what I considered to be a good cup of coffee when I was in the States, so perhaps it's a dying art…
GK .)
‘But you're right; works such as Shakespeare have an absolute value well beyond their time.
It's also important in that context to remember that some art, by its nature, is fleeting.
Even if you go to a great party with some friends and it lasts only three hours, so what?
While you were there you had a ball, and then life goes on.
The idea that anything can last for ever is nonsense, and if that's what happens with Kiss, then fair enough; if it doesn't mean anything more to anyone than the time the band was functioning then that's also perfectly fine with me.’
But Kiss have certainly done well in an environment where longevity is not aspired to as a rule…
‘Almost twenty years for Kiss now, which isn't bad going.
Brief band lifespans are not limited to rock music, however.
‘Alternative’ bands, disco bands, quirky things like Yazz, Bazz, Biba, BooBoo — every six months there's a new disco track for the latest fashion model star to ‘sing’over.
They get a hit and…gone.
Even though I make fun of it, and it's not my favourite music, that doesn't mean that it's less valid than bands who last a long time, especially if it is enjoyed.
So if people want it to be there it should be there, no question.
While you can have filet mignon if you want, some would opt for the McDonald's hamburger, and that's their right.’
You do record production for other bands, and you did the original demos for Van Halen, which I hadn't realised until recently.
Apparently, you almost scared the band off the idea of a musical career by lecturing them on the evils of the business side of the industry…
‘I ‘discovered’ them back in the mid-'70s, playing in a club called Cinderella 2.
I did their first demos with them, and took the opportunity of telling them a few facts of life, saying that while it was nice to play guitar, if at the end of the line they were all broke then they were going to be very unhappy musicians who had missed their chance to be big, and so they had better take care of certain realities and do it right away.
‘Get yourself a good lawyer, and if somebody rips you off, punish them, and do it so hard that their ancestors hurt.’
It's not just about music — if that's all you want, then go play on some street corner and don't charge for it — it's a seriously commercialised venture and you can't afford to take that fact too lightly, especially when you're starting out.
In America, money is not a dirty word; it's a beautiful word.
Anything that's good is worth a lot of money, that's your gauge, and a good performance is worth a lot.
‘Answer me one question: why do the British have a stick up their asses about any local British band that makes it in America?
Why do you wish them bad?
It's so unkind, and is such an insult to your own people.
Americans get so ashamed about that kind of attitude.
What is wrong with you people?
I'll tell you…you're jealous, because they get a lot of money and you don't have any!
Shame!
Shame on you people!
Your flag is being taken to the top of the hill by bands like Def Leppard and you're back at home going, ‘Aaah…f**k 'em — they sold out.’
In America we'd be holding out banners for them in the streets of their home town.
You should be proud!
It's because your civilisation is in decline, and you want everyone to go down.
I just want me and my civilisation to keep climbing, ever upward…’
What do you see Kiss's role as being on the world scale?
‘Kiss's role is totally meaningless — absolutely devoid of any meaning whatsoever.
If there had been no Kiss, the world would be no better or no worse off than it is.
There's no great mystery of life that we are imparting, we have no ‘grand purpose’, no design.
Kiss is about as valid as a football game; it's a release, a chance for people to forget about their problems for a couple of hours, get together in some celebration and loose off some pent-up energy.
Nobody in this band holds their role above the old minstrels, or the court fools who used to offer diversion and try to get a smile.
The difference is we think ‘court fool’ on a worldwide basis…’
WITH REGARD TO EQUIPMENT, the normally shy and retiring Mr Simmons has some interesting and unusual opinions, particularly in relation to the recent debate about chrome versus brass jackplugs, and about people who demand fastidious and exacting details like ‘what amp settings does he use on any particular track, and what angle were the machine keys at?’
I dared to ask Gene about his extensive use of Pedulla basses (with their infamous lurid graphics) and his prototype be-mirrored BC Rich, affectionately named ‘The Punisher’.
‘How long have I used Pedullas?
I can honestly say I haven't a clue.’
Gene leans forward in order to emphasise his point.
‘Almost all instruments do exactly the same thing.
There are hardly any differences between any basses, or any guitars, in playing terms.
It's all bullshit.
Mostly musicians spend their time jerking off in front of others and guitar and bass-playing readers are basically fans of the idea of that, but the truth is that it's all individual — every neck on every guitar just has to feel a certain way.
Just like men and women, there are no real differences.
Everyone has the same equipment, and they can all do the same things: walk, talk, play music, and so on.
But, yes, I do use Pedulla basses, but only because the neck is comfortable for me.
In terms of sound it hardly matters, because once you plug in live, the real sound is brought out in the house — you go both direct and to the amp (racked Gallien-Krueger and Ampeg SVT heads through Hartke cabs in Gene's case ).
Some basses are a little better than others, but the truth is that by turning up the line level you can make it sound like anything you want.
So it's all bullshit.
If you're recording, plug it into the desk and the engineer can make anything sound good, so whether you use one pickup, two pickups, one amp, two amps, Marshall, Crate, anything.
Just turn it up and play.
‘Along those basic instrument guidelines, I've designed a bass for BC Rich called The Punisher, which I have on stage.
It's a straight-ahead good solid piece of wood, with a good pickup and four strings.
What's special about it?
Nothing!
It's got Gene Simmons written on it, it's got a cool name, and if it feels good when you play it, that's valid enough.
‘Ultimately, since we're dealing with an essentially distorted sound, I don't know what ‘sounds good’ means anyway — you're distorting the sound by overdriving the amp, so that is a contradiction in terms anyway.
It's semantics, and I know none of us are anti-semantic, are we — that's why we do what we do.
But if you know the difference between guitar sounds that you hear on the radio, for instance, then I would maintain that you know too much.
The masses don't — they just hear a guitar.
Sometimes you can't even tell if it is a guitar.
If you accept that distortion and volume are fine in themselves, leave it.
Whether it's AC/DC, Metallica or Kiss that are making guitar sounds you like, leave it; it's a favourite noise, like the hiss of a record needle on the vinyl before the song starts, which excites me with anticipation, even though the contemporary trend is for noise-free recording.
Now that is ironic in the world of rock'n'roll…'
If you know the difference between guitar sounds that you hear on the radio then I would maintain that you know too much
There are hardly any differences between any basses, or any guitars, in playing terms.
It's all bullshit
Get yourself a good lawyer, and if somebody rips you off, punish them, and do it so hard that their ancestors hurt
There are no great ‘causes’ left — only volume.
Just turn it up and enjoy life…celebrate i
competition REGISTER YOUR GUITARS FOR LIFE!
How many times have you read an interview with a musician where he or she says, ‘Yeah, that was my favourite guitar, but it got stolen, and I never found another like it’?
One of the major hazards of being a musician is having your gear ripped off.
Favourite guitars, expensive combos, trick rack systems — you can't watch them all the time, and they're so easy to lift.
It's happened to us all.
But what can you do?
Hope they turn up?
Even if they did, how would you prove they were yours?
Kept the receipts, have you?
It's this very difficulty of tracing musical gear which makes it so attractive to thieves.
Easy money, considering an incredible 95% of stolen property is never returned to its owners, even if found.
Joining the Property Register Service is one way of helping to fight this excessive tea-leavery.
Your equipment is registered on a national database, with details available to 51 police forces and over 500 used equipment dealers across the country.
Sooner or later, stolen gear will surface.
PRS are offering Guitarist readers some peace of mind from such potential turmoil in the form of 5 life memberships.
Normally, one year would cost £9.50, which ain't bad in itself, but you can add that up to a fair old amount for life.
Worthwhile, or what?
Ring the Guitarist Competition Hotline on 0891 100734 and answer these three criminally easy questions correctly ensures you're in with a shout.
And in all the excitement don't forget to leave your name, address and daytime telephone number.
So get to it and good luck.
Now, where did I leave that gui…
1.
The Stealer sounds like the sort of chap you should avoid, but this '70s blues/rock band sang about him anyway…
Which band?
2.
Daddy was a Bank Robber .
But which punk legends released this reggae-tinged single?
3.
Of course, all this illegal activity has its penalties.
Which recent Was (Not Was) album title concerned offspring incarceration?
This competition closes on 31st October 1992, when the winners will be drawn at random.
the small print
The Editor's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
All phone calls will be charged at 36p per minute (cheap rate) and 48p (at all other times).
ARACKNOPHOBIA Rocktron Utopia Rack There's no disguising the fact that the only real way to get that American super rack sound is with an American super rack…
Review by Eddie Allen.
Unfortunately, or fortunately, depending on your point of view, these towers of power usually seen gracing the backline of mega guitarists cost a severe amount of wonga.
The other problem is that, assuming a rack is what you want and you can scrape together the readies, what would you choose to put in it, and could you stand the hassle of working out how to put it together, including the MIDI side?
The potential nightmare of coupling three, four or more units to a foot-controller, then programming the pedals to recall the various patches from each unit in the correct order is, at the very least, daunting to most of us.
You could of course call on Messrs Bradshaw or Cornish to sort out the confusion, but they'll cost you all four limbs and a second mortgage.
So what do you do?
Well, you could get on the case of the Rocktron Utopia system, the first of which (in the UK, anyway) was gracing the Washburn stand at the British Music Fair and shortly afterwards took up temporary residence in the Guitarist studio.
The Utopia system is Rocktron's answer to the custom-built, component-based mega rack.
Yes, it costs a lot of money, but I think it's fair to say that that cost is within reach of the serious working player, and it could well be the answer for aspiring rock guitarists who need ‘that’ sound.
One thing's for certain, though: committing this kind of money on equipment is a serious business, so buying all the components from the same company makes sense from the back-up point of view, and as the hard work has been taken out of the design — ie. flightcase, patch cables, mains feeds etc. — it makes even more sense.
So what goes to make up the Utopia system?
To start with it's all housed in a 10U high flight case, foam mounted into a full flight roadcase complete with heavy duty detachable castors and doors.
Although the case is 10U the working units occupy only 7U of rack space, so there is room for expanding the system should the need arise.
The full caboodle is magnificent, but it does cause problems when it comes to transportation.
In a van, estate car or large hatchback it's okay, but it's too big to get into even a large saloon without a lot of hassle.
Maybe Rocktron should offer two options: the full road case or the smaller, more portable inner flightcase.
Still, as we all know, size isn't really important, and with the Utopia it's what's in the rack that matters.
Starting from the top, the first of the six units is Rocktron's Power Station.
This is a 1U mains distribution device providing power for the other units in the rack.
There are six 9 volt AC outputs and four 115/240 volt mains outputs.
Using the Power Station is the safest and neatest way to distribute the power to all the other units here.
In any rack system this type of device is an excellent idea.
The next unit down I would consider the heart of any system — the preamp.
In the Utopia Rocktron have used their Pro GAP v2.0 MIDI-programmable preamp, featuring their Virtual Tube Circuitry and fully programmable parameters including HUSH (to help keep the noise generated by high distortion levels under control).
I have to say that the Pro GAP wouldn't be my first choice in any rack system because each time I've used one I've been unable to rid it of that ‘overprocessed’ synthetic edge.
On the other hand, it's that L.A. sound, and that's what the Utopia is all about.
The Pro GAP is fed into a Rocktron 300G Compressor which, it's claimed, is specifically designed for guitar and bass rigs.
It has three simultaneous functions: compression, peak limiting and HUSH noise reduction.
The 300G adds variable amounts of compression and limiting and is connected to the Pro GAP's effects loop.
I've never been a fan of compressors for guitars, but in this case it makes quite a lot of difference when it comes to creating and controlling a guitar sound.
Under the 300G is a Pro Q programmable EQ unit.
While the Pro GAP contains its own quite flexible EQ section, by adding the Pro Q Rocktron have increased the overall tonal flexibility of the system.
It's MIDI controllable with stereo EQ and exciter, and again there's HUSH single-ended noise reduction.
The Pro Q really gives some interesting tonal variations to the sounds generated by the preamp but it does smack of overkill.
The question I'm asking myself is: should a really good preamp need any EQ reinforcement?
The next unit is the one Rocktron should be most proud of.
It's the Intellifex 24 bit digital processor, with 80 user memory locations and a total of 99 factory presets.
All the expected digital effects are there and up to six can be used simultaneously.
There's digital HUSH, stereo chorus or pitch shifting, delay, delay ducking, reverb and full mixing capability.
The Intellifex is fast becoming the industry standard for effects processors and there are some amazing effects to be programmed and recalled (via MIDI if you're so inclined).
Below the Intellifex is a blanking panel with a connection ‘map’ printed on the front.
This panel is disguising the cooling gap left between the Intellifex and the power stage of the Utopia system, Rocktron's Velocity 300 power amp.
This fan-cooled, solid state power amp can be set to work at any of the world's voltages, and fed into 4Ω offers 150 watts per channel.
It's the first commercially available amplifier to be based on ‘current feedback’ technology, which is supposed to provide high speed, wide bandwidth amplification.
It also has Rocktron's unique ‘Speaker Reactance Simulation’ circuitry which is quoted as ‘yeilding the much sought after sound of the most impressive tube amps″ without the reliability and maintenance problems.
Governing all this technology requires a fairly versatile foot controller and Rocktron are supplying the Utopia with their Midi Mate for this purpose.
The Midi Mate allows you to send up to three patch changes on three different channels and offers three different operational modes.
Mode 1 works as a straightforward bank and patch changer.
Mode 2 offers instant patch selection by pressing the actual patch number (hitting switch 3 and 6 gives patch 36), while Mode 3 can be used to switch on or off (via the ten preset switches) any patch parameter.
So there you have it, all the best technology Rocktron can muster in one rack.
It really looks something, and judging from the amount of saliva I have to keep wiping off the top, everyone else thinks so too.
But good looks ain't going to count for much if the sound's not up to much.
IN USE
I said earlier that if it's the American sound you're after then you won't be disappointed with the Utopia system.
Just plug in a couple of speakers and one mains socket and the whole thing springs to life.
All the programmable units in the rack come with special presets unique to Utopia, and a preset chart helps identify exactly what is going on and how to set the levels.
Hence the donkey work is taken out of learning how to set everything up.
The sounds produced by this rack are certainly impressive, although I must say that to try and get away from the overall processed sound was almost impossible.
I couldn't find a way round it and when someone came in and said, ‘that sounds great, but can you get me a pure sound where I can actually recognise what guitar is being played, whether it's clean or distorted?’
I had to admit defeat.
I will probably upset those nice Rocktron people here but I thought I'd experiment by using a different preamp in the system, just to see what happened.
So I plugged in Marshall's JMP-1 preamp and instantly the Utopia's sound crossed over the water, reinforcing my point about the preamp being the life and soul of any rack.
Linking the Pro GAP back up and checking through the rest of the sounds the Utopia had to offer, one thing became obvious: that the Intellifex is the real key to a lot of great sounds.
I have to say that whatever rack I was looking to put together I'd include one of these.
Scanning through the Utopia's 128 presets, the first thirty being exclusive to this system, Rocktron have tried to make them as varied as possible in order to demonstrate the rig's potential, and while most of them are usable there are a few which defy logic.
I would however suggest that if there's a sound you've heard emanating from the West Coast then it's probably here.
CONCLUSION
In conversation I've likened Rocktron's Utopia system to buying a modelling kit already assembled; you get the end result but without the fun of putting it together.
Of course I accept that one man's fun is another man's nightmare, and because of this more companies should think about creating ready-made racks for those who want them, or maybe just come up with designs and ideas for those who want to build their own.
I really enjoyed experimenting with the Utopia, although I would argue that while one company's products are undoubtedly the most compatible from the technical standpoint they might not be the best combination for sound — something hi-fi buffs have known for years.
One definition of Utopia is ‘any real or imaginary state considered to be perfect’.
Well, Rocktron's system might not be everyone's idea of perfection, but it's beautifully put together with state-of-the-art components, and as the first of a potential wave of ‘off the peg’ rack systems it's the one the rest will have to beat.
RRP: £3999.00 ex VAT
For further information contact 
Pearl Jam 1959 Golden Höfner Guitars in the style of this giant '50s offering from Höfner typify all that is beautiful and at the same time wildly ostentatious in guitar making…by Gibson Keddie.
The appearance in the Guitarist office of instruments of the Golden Höfner's type and vintage tends to provoke gasps of admiration somewhat mixed with horror.
Admiration for the quality of materials and hand craftsmanship, but horror often at the designers' sheer lack of restraint.
But then again, the Golden Höfner was the flagship of the company's electric hollow-bodied range between ‘59 and ‘62 and naturally became a platform for showing just what could be done.
This type of guitar was something of a German speciality, as though the builders, while acknowledging the burgeoning ‘beat boom’ market of the time, couldn't bring themselves to completely prostitute their art by simply cloning the famous electric guitars of America.
But whether Höfner would admit to it or not, the lead was surely taken from the USA, and Höfners were often referred to as the ‘Gibsons of Europe’, such was Kalamazoo's influence on Bubenreuth.
The company's infiltration of the UK market was accelerated by the migration of a variety of British musicians to the infamous German clubs of the time, where they would perform rock'n'roll covers for audiences consisting largely of US Forces personnel.
Although their American peers used mainly American guitars, these were expensive if available at all in Europe, which meant that home-grown lookalikes were snapped up by the hard-up young musos eager to perform — especially if they were reasonably playable in their own right.
Sometimes the derivative models achieved success through a particular artist holding on to their subaltern guitar long after they'd made it.
The most obvious example, of course, is Paul McCartney, who, being unable to afford a Fender bass, bought the now equally famous Höfner violin model instead.
His subsequent celebrity propelled the ‘Beatle Bass’ to commercial success far beyond that of its originator, Gibson's EB-1.
Bill Wyman's Framus Star bass is another example of a poor relation whose profile rocketed alongside the fame of its player.
The Golden Höfner (its actual catalogue name) was an export-only model, made for and imported by Selmer into the UK.
The Gibson influence on the guitar emanates from their concurrent range of jazz instruments, in particular the '50s Byrdland, Gibson's specially developed ‘exclusive’ hybrid of the ES350T and L5CES.
The overall appearance of the Golden is very similar, from the rounded lower horn to the distinctly thinline body (thin, that is, for a '50s archtop), along with bound f-holes and an ornate tailpiece.
The charm of the German guitars stems from the individually crafted touches and distinctly non-mass manufactured build quality.
The use of easily-obtained European woods helped to keep costs down and contributed to an individual and unique tone.
This guitar's overall colouring has obviously darkened with the passing of over three decades, and the lacquer is now finely cracked over the close-grained spruce top.
The f-holes indicate the true semi-acoustic nature of the instrument, while the main decorative features include the multiple body binding with its incredible pearloid purfling, and the wood on the sides and the back.
The back comprises two pieces of flame-patterned maple veneer that would have collectors going wild were it on the front of a similarly-aged Les Paul Standard.
The decorative ‘heartflower’ inlay at the base of the back is also simply superb.
In fact, the embossed, gold-plated tailpiece looks almost subdued in these surroundings.
Pickups are Höfner's ‘Super Response’ double-pole types, with their slightly ‘art deco’look; these were fitted to the early versions only, and were subsequently changed around 1961 to the DeLuxe versions, which resembled the generic American humbucker…
Höfner's distinctive ‘flick action’ console control panel is used here, with two rotary volume controls augmented by three slide selectors: rhythm/solo switch, bass on/off and treble on/off.
Some confusion exists as to the original scratchplate, and there may well have been two variations.
Some guitars had a clear perspex plate with an inscribed ‘Höfner’ logo, but this one is gold coloured, which, although certainly complementary and in keeping with the ‘Golden’aspect, does partially marr the f-holed symmetry of the guitar.
If you were expecting to find a neck something akin to a telegraph pole with one side levelled off, you'd be pleasantly surprised — this is an extremely comfortable and well-shaped laminate of mainly flamed maple.
Höfner were wont to wax lyrical about the new ‘Slendaneck’ feature of this guitar which gave you ‘the thinnest neck ever, with really fast playing action’.
It had the added advantage of an adjustable internal truss-rod, so things really were looking up…
The fretwork is good, and unusually consistent over the 22 fret range.
The fretboard itself looks busy, with mother-of-pearl flower position markers inlaid on marquetry panels into the gently cambered Grenadilla ebony fingerboard.
All this is set off in grandiose fashion by the wide pearl binding.
A zero fret sits in front of the large nut, then it's on to the real love-it-or-loathe-it Höfner feature: the headstock.
This offered another opportunity for the craftsmen to demonstrate their art, and they certainly weren't about to advocate restraint.
Continuing with the foliage theme, the actual headstock contouring was inspired by leaf shapes, and this is echoed in the floral pearl inlays and the pearl leaf-embossed truss rod cover.
The machineheads are little works of art in themselves: fully enclosed, the gold-plated casings are engraved and then topped off with patterned pearl machine keys.
It's all completely over the top, but nevertheless rather charming.
Playing this Golden Höfner is the real surprise, though, thanks to a praiseworthy action on the user-friendly neck, and (no doubt) this example's 10 gauge strings.
Action adjustment on the ebony bridge is via two ribbed height adjusting wheels.
The Höfner's acoustic tone is warm, but plugged in (despite the ‘flick-action’ controls) the facility to alter the sound is hardly comprehensive.
THE tone to use is with the bass selector switched in: the resulting mellow tone is classic, full-bodied jazz.
We contacted renowned Höfner user and one of the fathers of popular British guitar, Bert Weedon, to give us his thoughts on the instrument.
Bert was full of praise for the quality of craftsmanship on the example which he had when they first came out (he was one of the six guitarists on the committee involved in the design of Höfner's ‘Committee’ guitar), and told us that he had used one for a couple of his hits —Big Beat Boogie and Sorry Robbie …
Incidentally, Bert's Golden Höfner was number 13, and the one here, which belongs to Höfner aficionado Gordon Giltrap, has number 16 on its label…
It's lasted well, too.
The lighter strings obviously play their part in sustaining the instrument's longevity by placing less strain on the guitar, especially at that infamous Höfner neck/body join.
(The animal-based glue dries out over the years and like many a good duo, the two eventually split up to go their separate ways.)
Overlooking details like the visual incongruity of the rectangular '50s radio-set control panel set into the smooth, undulating curves of the Golden, and indeed the general decorative overkill, this is a lovely guitar, with an uncanny ability to impress and delight.
And that is a fitting testimony to the era…
In the meantime, many thanks to Gordon Giltrap for the loan of this lovely guitar.
DR ROBERT Answers Your Queries The big question this month is sound: it's muffled; it's too directional; it oscillates or it's just not quite bluesy enough…
Answers by Robbie Gladwell.
DODGY DEFINITION?
Dear Doctor I own a Rockman XPR processor and an ADA power amp running through a Gallien-Krueger 2x12 Celestion cab.
At fairly quiet volumes I love the processed distortion sounds, but find that when I crank the volume up the sound becomes more brittle, with less definition between fast-picked notes.
A friend of mine suggests this is because my system is all transistor rather than valves, but the processor and power amp both sound fine when the volume of each is turned up with the volume of the other turned down.
My problem, therefore, would perhaps appear to lie with my speakers, but the G-K cost a fortune so I would be surprised if it were at fault.
What do you think?
Would my system sound better at high volume with a valve pre or power amp?
→ Your system would not necessarily sound better with a valve preamp or power amp.
I do not think that the speakers are totally to blame for the lack of picked note definition either.
Most amplifier/speaker setups begin to sound different as the volume increases.
Also, if your picking technique is less than perfect this could add to the problem.
The main reason for the lack of definition is that the response of the amp and speakers changes with an increase in volume.
As the preamp, power amp and speakers reach saturation point (the point of maximum gain) there is less attack and the sound becomes compressed due to the lack of available headroom.
The speakers also generate distortion which adds to the harmonic content, or crunch, but not to the clarity of individual notes.
To clean the sound up and increase the power headroom you require a higher-powered power amp.
This could be valve or transistor.
My personal preference is for valve amps as the sound obtained is generally warmer, but the transistor amps offer a better power/weight ratio, not to mention the cost factor!
CAB CONUNDRUM
Dear Doctor After five years of reading your informative column, saving me immeasurable instances of possible musi-technical tension, a situation has newly presented itself to me that I cannot recollect as being covered before.
I run a Marshall JCM900 Dual Reverb 100 watt head into a Marshall 4x12 angled classic cabinet utilising Marshall/Celestion G21 25 watt reissue speakers.
Mostly I play with the clean channel on full crunch and the lead channel on 16.
My predicament is this: at full band rehearsal volume — irrespective of room size — as one moves either side of the cab it is difficult to hear oneself properly.
Yet, equally, right close up in front of the cab the sound is muffled and I cannot hear myself accurately.
When I stand in the direct path, say three yards away, I prevent projections of the sound from going any further, though this is a good position for myself to hear ‘my sound’.
My guitar, by the way, is a Gibson Les Paul Standard played direct into the amp.
Could you tell me whether the problem is down to the type of speakers employed — maybe producing too soft a sound wave with little strength of travel — and whether I would get better projection through a standard model 1960 Marshall cabinet rated at 300 watts RMS?
Or is the situation down to other factors?
Yours presently band enemy number one,
→ Just to set your mind at rest, Phil, I'll start by telling you that there is nothing wrong with your equipment; the situation is definitely down to other factors.
Because treble frequencies are directional and bass frequencies are not, standing in front of a loudspeaker cabinet always gives a brighter sound.
Standing to one side, the sound is muffled and boomy.
Cabinets that are of the infinite baffle, or closed back design, such as the Marshall 4x12 do suffer from this minor, but annoying problem.
Open back designs, like most combos, sound slightly brighter off axis but suffer from lack of bass.
The brighter sound is due partly to reflected sound from the back of the cabinet, plus bass frequency phase cancellation due to the reduced speaker baffle area.
The best compromise is the partially open backed cabinet, similar to the Mesa Boogie 2x12 and 4x12 design.
This system encloses one speaker, generally the bottom one, but leaves the other speaker open (the 2x12 cab) at the back.
Other cabinet designs keep the closed back to retain the bass but introduce a multi-angled baffle to reduce the ‘beaming’ effect and increase high frequency dispersion.
The latest version of this design is made by Trace Elliot.
CRYING WOLF
Dear Doctor I own a Tokai TST-50 Strat copy and up until a few months ago I couldn't fault its sound or setup.
Now, however, it seems to have developed an annoying problem.
Every time I hit certain notes on the high E string (top B for example) an unpleasant oscillation affects the note.
It isn't my amplifier, as I have tried this with an SG and it wasn't effected.
It isn't the string as I have changed it several times.
Please help me, as the problem is ruining my feeble efforts at being Clapton, Hendrix, Green and Moore all rolled into one!
→ The string oscillation is probably due to pickups being set too close to the strings.
If your playing action is also very low the resultant sound will be quite horrible!
This discordant sound is caused by the pickup magnets pulling the strings downwards, which produces wolf notes, or false harmonics, that are not in tune with the ‘speaking’ length of the string.
The first thing to check is the action height.
If the E top string appears to be set lower than usual, it may be that the saddle height adjusting screws are working loose due to vibration when you are playing.
If so, reset the action and check for your oscillation.
The saddle screws can be held in place with a tiny dab of superglue applied with a pin — don't worry, the glue will not fix them permanently.
It would be wise to check the pickup height as well.
To do this properly you need to hold the strings down at the first fret and measure from the top of the pickup polepiece to the underside of the strings.
I consider the ideal clearance to be around 1.5 or 2mm on the treble side, and 2.5 or 3.5mm on the bass side.
The further away the pickups are from the strings the less likely you are to experience wolf notes.
The measurements I have given are only a rough guide, so feel free to experiment until you find a setting that suits your sound and playing style.
BLUES TONE BLUES
Dear Doctor I wonder if you could help me with a problem with my guitar sounds.
I like to hear three basic sounds from my guitar: clean, a subtle bluesy-crunch and a more distorted overdrive.
My present amplifier is a 4–5 year old Peavey Triumph 120 combo with fan cooled valves.
It gives me a good bright clean sound at loud volumes and a good overdrive sound at most volumes.
But it doesn't give me a bitey-bluesy sound that a valve amp ought to have when just pushed into distortion.
The problem is both the ‘Crunch’ and ‘Ultra’channels have the same over-processed sound, only the degree of filtration differs between the two.
It just doesn't work for me, even with the filter turned down.
The clean channel is too clean, and beyond a certain volume (which is painful!) the sounds starts to break up into a rough distortion (presumably the point at which the speaker starts to flap).
I therefore need a different sound somewhere between the two.
Could you comment on my own ideas to remedy this or perhaps suggest others?
1)
Buy a second hand valve head (around 50 watts) that would sit on top of my Peavey using the speaker in the Peavey cabinet and switch between the two amplifiers depending upon what sound I wanted.
I would need to make a two-into-one jack socket for the speaker — would this cause problems?
Can you suggest any amp heads?
If the amp head were not connected to the speaker when switched on would it damage the amp?
2)
Use the clean channel but remove the fan cooling the output valves (it already makes a rattling noise!) so that the valves are hotter and ‘clip’ at lower volumes.
Would it work?
Is this safe?
3)
Buy a fuzz box.
I have tried the new Marshall Bluesbreaker FX pedal but this did not sound like a real valve amp just starting to distort.
4)
Replace the 12AX7-ECC83 valve in the preamp stage that drives the overdrive channels (Crunch and Ultra) with a valve that is brighter and cleaner.
Can you suggest any replacement valves?
Is there an amplifier already on the market (for less than about a grand) that would offer all three sounds?
Getting the best from all three sounds is not going to be easy or cheap.
I suspect that many versatile pickers out there may be interested to know the solution to what must be a common problem.
→ Dealing with your ideas in order, buying a secondhand valve amp to use with your existing combo speaker would not work because of the complex switching required to bypass the amplifiers into dummy loads (a valve amp cannot be left on without the speaker or a dummy load in circuit) as well as input routing to both amps.
These functions cannot be combined to operate from one switch, and the cost of custom built electronic switching would be prohibitive.
Removing the cooling fan will not produce the answer either.
The heat may shorten the life of the valve and other components, and in any case, no improvement in sound quality will be noticeable with the fan disconnected.
You could experiment with a few different distortion pedals.
There may be something out there that will do the job (I'd personally recommend you try the Sans-Amp, though it is quite expensive, or the Hollis GX-7, which is not dissimilar but costs much less).
Because of the design of your Peavey amp, changing the preamp valve for a different type will not increase the brightness, or clean it up any more than it is already.
The best solution is to have two different amps — I don't think that one amp alone can ever provide all the sounds you ever need, and people who use Dumbles and Soldanos for their dirty sound will often prefer a Fender Twin for clean.
You could of course opt for the new Marshall JMP-1 MIDI preamp, which would almost certainly do the job; I could equally recommend Boogie's TriAxis, but that breaches your £1,000 ceiling.
For the bluesy sound that you are after, an old Marshall 50 with a 4x12 would be the definite answer.
The inputs of the two amps could be switched with a commercially available A/B switching box.
SWEET AND TENDER HOOLIGAN Bob Mould In the '80s Bob Mould led the line in Hüsker Dü and frightened pop music to within an inch of its life.
Now at the helm of Sugar, he's in dire danger of finishing the job with a barrage of bittersweet songwriting and fretful fretwork.
Danny Eccleston experiences the Sugar rush…
Let me relate to you a fable.
Before Bob Mould happened to the world of American rock'n'roll there were two nations.
There was the sunny realm of Perfect Pop, where The Monkees reigned as benevolent despots, where there was sugar in every pie, where everybody listened to ‘Help’ and smiled a lot.
It was nice, but maybe it was a little too nice.
Then there was the grim, rather more real world of Hardcore Punk, where Black Flag and The Minutemen ruled in tandem, told everyone how crap and bleak everything was and pumped ear-damaging noise pollution into the leaden skies.
It was a stirring place to visit but maybe you wouldn't want to live there.
Anyway, here arose Bob Mould and his Hüsker Dü cohorts who, feeling somewhat constrained by the borders of Hardcore Punk, kicked over the checkpoints and ran amok in the pleasant valleys of Perfect Pop, put its weedy, grinning aristocracy to the sword and stole all their clothes.
To the crime of pillage they added rape and the fruits of those violent couplings were the likes of Dinosaur Jr, Pixies and, yep, Nirvana.
As you can see, it's difficult to avoid mythologising Bob Mould's contribution to guitar rock.
With Minneapolitan marvels Hüsker Dü, he mixed hardcore with classic '60s pop and produced a music of rare power and emotional depth.
Though never on the best-sellers list, Dü waxings remain at the front of many a guitarist's record collection, and a whole new wave of bands couldn't conceive of life without a copy of ‘New Day Rising’.
Then came the Hüskers split and what have been rather puzzlingly referred to as ‘the wilderness years’.
Years marked by two solo albums (‘Workbook’ and ‘Black Sheets Of Rain') full of dark thoughts and lower key, though rather more complex, musical milieus.
Now Bob's back with a proper band, Sugar, and there's a healthy, back-to-basics feel to the whole affair.
Asked what Sugar means to them, soft-spoken drummer Malcolm Travis acquires an extra intensity while bassist David Barbe simply buzzes .
Bob Mould swells with pride.
Sugar are a king hell rock band and I think they know it.
‘I was getting a bit discouraged with the direction of the people I was working with on ‘Black Sheets Of Rain',’ confides Bob.
‘Don't get me wrong; I think ‘Workbook’ and ‘Black Sheets’are both great records — Workbook I think more so.
It's just a matter of finding the right people to work with.
This makes perfect sense for right now — it's just what the doctor ordered for all of us.’
‘Copper Blue’, the Sugar debut currently wowing the critical establishment from The Guardian to Kerrang!, is Bob's poppiest outing since Hüsker Dü's ‘Flip Your Wig’.
And with ‘sugar''s sweet, almost bubblegum connotations, the whole thing smacks of a man who's fallen back in love with pop music.
True?
‘Well,’ shrugs Bob, ‘this album's the good Sugar; the next one will be the bad Sugar…the unrefined.
The next one's a real crazy thing.
This one's pretty disciplined, pretty much a real pop record: up-tempo, a real happy thing.
‘Lyrically, the new album is much darker.
It's a lot more thematic, I think.
I guess we'll know, by early March when it's out, what it's really about.
‘Copper Blue’ has a more upbeat fictional stories —Man On The Moon is almost like a limerick or something from a children's book — but on the other hand there's something like The Slim , which might be the harshest thing I've ever written.
I think there's a better balance this time.
It's not so introspective, not so downtrodden as the other stuff.’
‘Copper Blue’ seems also to have taken on board the recent contributions of Bob's spiritual children.
For instance, there's the My Bloody Valentine reference in Changes ’ outro, and A Good Idea , while it's not exactly a Pixies song…
Bob guffaws: ‘It might as well be a Pixies song!
Naaah, it's a tribute to the Pixies, definitely.
I just didn't know it was as much of a tribute as it was until I was told…rather abruptly!
I just hope I don't get sued!’
Worry not, Bob, they wouldn't have a leg to stand on…
‘Yeah, I suppose it works both ways…
But I wanted Black Francis to come in and work on that track.
They're one of my favourite bands, and very underrated in the US.’
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT A three-piece isn't there.
Something almost mystically, er,right , about guitar, bass and drums and nothing else.
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, The Jam, Nirvana, Hüsker Dü: they've all had that peculiar chemistry…
And now there's Sugar.
‘A three piece really boils it down to the core,’ muses Bob.
‘I mean, keyboards are great, cellos are great, accordians are cool, second guitarists are fun.
That's nice, but at the end of the day what is the foundation of pop music?
Guitar, bass, drums and vocals.
This material's really direct, so why add any more coloration?
It's nice in the studio to have a few things here and there, but live, that's what it hangs on.’
But with Bob's vinyl guitar work concealing so many intricacies beneath its initial, power-chordal attack, mustn't it be difficult for one man to recreate on stage?
‘Well,’ Bob explains, ‘with multiple guitar tracks on a record, it gives me more options.
I can pick and choose what I play live, which keeps my role in the band interesting.
The fact that I might choose to play something pretty much as a rhythm part one night will suggest something musically to these guys.
Whereas if I start doing all the crazy embellishments instead, everyone is going to have to react.
It's like if David starts playing melody lines on the bass instead of laying the foundation down then I'm going to have to switch what I'm doing — that's the fun part of it.
And that's the beauty of the three piece — the interaction.
When you have four or five people you have a very set arrangement — like, he's playing rhythm and you're playing lead, so-and-so's playing the backbeat and thingy's holding down the chord patterns.
But with a trio there's the space for the dynamics, and you can be much quicker to react to what's going on than, say, The Beautiful South or somethin' — like where there's nineteen people and they all look like they're playing off charts…’
That Bob Mould six-string assault is one which must have encouraged more than one listener to pick up a guitar.
For a start, one of Bob's favourite English bands is Swervedriver, whose early songs boasted a more than passing Dü influence.
But what, in the beginning, inspired Bob himself?
‘Well, I was surrounded by music from birth, practically.
I have a memory of walking up the street in this small farm town in up-state New York and buying The Monkees first record when I was five or six years old.
I remember listening to all the music that was around at that time and understanding it with a naivety which I wish I still had sometimes, putting a band together when I was nine or ten and playing the talent show at grade school, writing songs and still having the godawful things around the house.
And then dropping out of it when I was twelve or thirteen, getting sidetracked by hormonal changes and the need to, like, butt heads with people out on the grass for a while…
Sports in general.
Then I remember getting the Ramones album when I'd just turned sixteen.
That gave me the same charge as I remembered when I was a little kid and could memorise every record I had, who the publishing company was, how long the song was and what label it was on.
At that point I knew it was a life choice.’
And finding himself in the musical cauldron that was Minneapolis at the turn of the '80s must have helped…
‘Well, there are a lot of magnets like that in the States: Seattle, Boston, Athens, Minneapolis, Austin, Texas…
Places where there's lots of Universities, places where there's lots of cheap food, cheap housing.
A lot of clubs, a lot of places that show foreign films, places where you can get fanzines cheap — those are the places.
Lawrence, Kansas, Eugene, Oregon.
The thing with Minneapolis was that everyone was bored to tears, so we just made a scene.’
But was it a life choice that Bob ever regretted?
Has he ever had doubts?
‘I had them briefly,’ intones Bob, suddenly sombre.
‘It's a horrific feeling.
Like, right after the Hüskers broke up I had so much I wanted to say musically and doubted that anyone would ever want to hear it.
That group, that sound, that one thing — I thought that nothing else could ever be accepted.
And there was a point where I was going to look for a job, drift off and forget about it.
That lasted for a couple of weeks and it was a very scary moment — January or February of 1988.
I think a lot of it was severe stress and exhaustion: I was 27 years old and I'd been on the road for about ten years of my life and that band was just so much bigger in people's minds than it was in reality.
So you wonder whether you're ever going to get another chance.
But, as I said, that only lasted for a couple of weeks, then you write something like Brazilia Crossed With Trenton (from ‘Workbook ’) and you say, well  f**k Hüsker Dü and  f**k anyone else who doesn't like it…
Not in an egotistical way but it's just a moment of reaffirmation…
Like, I'll be back!’
You can imagine the frustration: journalists unhealthily obsessed with past glories; audiences unprepared to let the past die its natural death.
Are Sugar ever pestered to play the old, old songs?
‘Not that old…’
Bob sounds understandably relieved.
‘I occasionally hear a very feeble, ‘See A Little Light.’
But I always give credit to the audience.
The audience are coming to these shows knowing fully that they should be prepared to deal with the present and the future.
You can't live in the past; you can't deny it, but you can't live in it.
You can't say that it's not helping bring people to the Sugar shows but after one show I hope they'll forget about everything else.
People will realise it's a band, with three equal members.’
TIME FOR A BIT OF FUN, and we'd better involve the whole band in this one.
I get to put on my Sue Lawley wig, and Sugar get to tell me their Desert Island Discs.
So here's your starter for eight…
‘That's a tough call,’ whistles bassist Barbe.
‘I know I'd have to include ‘Double Nickels And A Dime’, by The Minutemen.
But there's so much great music out there that it would be hard to narrow it down.
When you say that, there's immediately a flood of records that I think about that are all so unbelievably unrelated to one another…’
That's the thing about living in Britain.
Desert Island Discs has permeated the national psyche to such an extent, people start compiling their own list almost as soon as they've bought their first LP…
‘I've got a list.’
says Bob.
‘I'd probably say ‘Revolver’.
I'd probably say The Byrds' ‘Younger Than Yesterday’; Neil Young, ‘Everybody Knows This Is Nowhere’; the first Buzzcocks album; the first Diodes album; Throbbing Gristle, ‘DOA: The Third & Final Report’; My Bloody Valentine, ‘Loveless’; probably ‘Doolittle’ by the Pixies.
And if I were to pick one of my own, it would be either ‘Zen Arcade’ or ‘Workbook’.'
David approves: ‘That's a good eight.
I could go with any of those that Bob had, but I'd have to add: ‘Double Nickels…’;
Gang of Four, ‘Entertainment’; ‘Meat Puppets 2’; Slint, ‘Spiderland’; the first Scratch Acid record; Miles Davis, ‘Kind Of Blue’…
That's six…
If Bob's taking ‘Zen Arcade’ then I won't need that, but I might need a shot of ‘Metal Circus’— that's the one that always got me charged up…’
‘I'll go along with those,’ nods Malcolm, ‘but I'd also take ‘Blonde On Blonde’, by Bob Dylan…’
‘Ooh yeah!’ resumes David.
‘I might have to stick ‘Highway 61’ or ‘Bring It All Back Home’on there.
And, although I might get things thrown at me by my band mates, I'd really have to take ‘Exile On Main Street’ or ‘Physical Graffiti’— a couple of rock classics from my youth.’
‘…
Or Electric Ladyland,’ adds Bob.
‘And ‘The Who Sell Out’ would be a nice one…’
‘Well,’ concludes David, ‘you got more than a quick response to that one!
We each got our prime eight and our peripheral…fifty!’
Right, so which guitar players would the band invite to share a Bounty bar on their island retreat?
Considerations of affability and personal hygiene need not apply…
‘You mean for the Desert Island All Star Jam Band?’ asks Bob.
‘Well, Townshend, McGuinn, Richard Thompson…
Probably — though it depends on which side of the Buzzcocks fence you fall — either Shelley or Diggle.
I guess it would be Diggle.
Of other contemporary people, I'd say Craig Ginn, the Black Flag guitarist, for the sheer audacity to be that nerve-wracking.
Kevin Shields (of My Bloody Valentine ) would definitely be there.
There's some good players out there.’
And now it's David's turn…
‘Of the bass players, Stephen Hanley (The Fall ) would have to be my number one man.
Mike Watt (The Minutemen and Firehose ) must be on the list.
The pre-'69 Paul McCartney is definitely overlooked as a bass player.
You know, he's railed against for being a schmaltzy pop grandpa, but the fact is all his Beatles bass playing is pretty incredible.
It's different from anyone else's bass playing ever.
To me, well, John Entwistle's great but no-one else has provided such fluid, simple counter-melodies…’
Bob's respect for Richard Thompson might come as an initial surprise but, given some thought, it begins to make sense.
Whatever the volume, Bob's songs have always had an almost nostalgic, folky edge, a fact not lost on Crosby, Stills & Nash, who unsuccessfully applied to have Bob Mould produce their most recent LP.
‘A lot of it comes through the Byrds,’ reflects Bob ‘and, though I wasn't, like, a big fan of theirs, The Band.
Some things from Neil Young, possibly: the idea of asking yourself whether the song is good enough on acoustic guitar and voice to cut it before you start blowing it out at 125 decibels.
There's a lot of traditional Celtic music, a lot of Appalachian music from the depression era — just really amazing, simple stuff that really got its point across.
‘The Richard thing is funny.
I knew nothing about that deal until I played some recent demos of the things that eventually became ‘Workbook’.
Someone said, ‘Have you ever heard Richard Thompson?’
I'm like, ‘I know who he is but I've never listened to him.’
‘You should,’ they said.
‘There's a scary resemblance.'’
After the electric blood and guts of Hüsker Dü, the acoustic work on ‘Workbook’ was something of a revelation…
‘I think the level of playing on that shocked everybody .
There was some really special guitar stuff on that which is now…really loud again!’
SUGAR CERTAINLY ARE LOUD, and besides some reinvigorated guitar mangling, Bob's back to singing at top holler.
More than anything, it's what makes him unique: this ability to combine a hoarse moral anger at the way the world is turning with the basic confusion shared by us all.
As he's said of his ill-fated time at Virgin Records, ‘I had to keep telling people they're not going to make me into the next Sting.’
This bear of a man clearly has no time for the smug certainties peddled by the top pop politicos…
‘It's time for a change.
The status quo has been the status quo for too long…
And entertainment as fantasy is not acceptable, though I don't think everyone has to go to the extremes of U2 or Jimmy Somerville, or whoever it is or whatever their politics.
I don't feel that music is the most appropriate forum for social change because frankly I don't think my opinions are valid for everyone, so I wouldn't want my opinions echoed by hundreds of thousands of people buying T-shirts with my name on them.
That's a little too Third Reich-ish for me.
But there's nothing wrong with challenging people on a personal level and letting them make the choices…’
It's a heartening thought: he might give us a hard time but, at root, Bob is on our side…
BOB MOULD
Workbook (LP)— Virgin 1989
Black Sheets Of Rain — Virgin 1990
SUGAR
Copper Blue (LP)— Creation 1992
EQUIPMENT
Bob : ‘I use 1987 & 1988 Fender Strats — American Standards — what they call the Strat Plus.
I basically leave them stock, except for the lead pickup, where I go with a Lace Sensor Super Lead.
I also put on the real Sperzel locking tuning pegs as opposed to the fake ones that Fender are making now.
I've been using the Strats for four or five years; it's nice to have that more defined sound, and more variety of tone than the Ibanez and Gibsons I used to use.
In Hüsker Dü I was using Ibanez Flying Vees — the Rocket Roll Junior was the exact name, 1975 issue.
When I find a guitar I like I'll just buy multiples of that exact one!
The acoustic I use is a Yamaha APX12 — a stereo acoustic twelve-string.
Strings on the electric are D'Addario Excels, and I use Jim Dunlop 46mm picks.
Processing is: two Fender Concerts — the 1x12 all-in-ones —; two Roland JC120s; Marshall 4x12s — all with Celestions; MXR Distortion Plus; TC Boost Pedal and a Roland SDE3000 Digital Delay.’
David : ‘I have a Fender Precision ‘88 with EMG Selects in it.
Smith Compressors light gauge are the strings of choice.
Picks: either a Tortex 74 or a Clayton 74–77.
Claytons are my favourites but I can't find them that often so I usually have to go with the Tortex.
Amplification is one GK 100RB head through eight 10″ speakers in one 4x10 GK cabinet and one 4x10 Mesa Boogie cabinet.
I also have an ‘82 Rick 4001 that I don't use very much any more — that was my first bass.’
SELECT DISCOGRAPHY
HÜSKER DÜ
Land Speed Record (LP)— SST
Metal Circus (mini-LP)— SST 1983
Zen Arcade (double LP)— SST 1984
Eight Miles High (single)— SST 1984
New Day Rising (LP)— SST 1985
Flip Your Wig (LP)— SST 1985
Candy Apple Grey (LP)— Warners 1986
Warehouse: Songs & Stories (LP)— Warners 1987
Also, if you can find their live Ticket To Ride (NME giveaway EP) you're in for a treat.
BLACK VELVET Rivera S120 Stack Given that the guitar world seems to have voted with its feet and demonstrated a fondness for valves which to the average electronics engineer defies reason, where else is there left for amp designers to go…?
Review by David Mead.
Paul Rivera started tinkering with amps when he was only eleven years old, inspired by the sounds of the bands of the '60s.
Since then, he has acted as consultant to many of the biggest amp manufacturers in the world.
Some of the finest from Fender started life under his watchful gaze and some of the baddest Boogies received a tweak here and there.
In 1985, Paul founded his own company in order to develop his own ideas regarding how a high-end valve amp should look and sound.
CONSTRUCTION
Rivera's latest addition to the designer amp market features two independent preamp sections fed into a stereo power amp.
Of the fifteen rotary controls that adorn the S120's front panel, all except one is dual function.
Starting from the far left, there are two inputs for either high or low output guitars, followed by the controls for channel one.
On this amp, Ch.1 is the lead channel and the standard volume, treble, middle, bass and master volume controls are also given the secondary tasks of channel select, gain 1, gain 2 and a notch shift.
For the uninitiated, a notch shift is a device which interacts with the mid-range response of the amplifier, in this case at either 250 or 550Hz, offering greater control over a particular frequency band.
Next in line are the treble, middle and bass controls for channel two; this time they double as a bright control, another notch filter, a contour control — to add warmth at low volume levels — and Rivera's own trademarked Ninja Boost circuit.
This can be added to offer ‘crunch rhythm’ sounds at low levels.
Moving on, we have the reverb control, followed by the two ‘Slavemaster’ rotaries.
This feature is probably best described in terms of the effect that it has rather than how that effect is produced in technical terms.
Many master volume amps can give a fair simulation of flat out response at reasonable output levels by overloading the preamp.
But this usually means the power amp is hardly ticking over in and so the resulting distortion is rarely fully representative of what the amp can do at full throttle.
The Slavemaster gets round this problem with some devious circuitry to produce a balancing act between pre and power amps, resulting in a more controlled, authentic effect.
The Slavemaster also has a dual identity as a second, independent effects loop.
The S120 has its own stereo chorus which is dealt with by the remaining two rotaries on the front panel, the second of which doubles as a presence control.
Next in line is a tri-function rocker switch to switch between high power, low power or standby modes.
Finally, the on/off switch, which thankfully has only the one task to perform.
The back panel has outputs for the effects loops, speaker outputs and two separate triode/pentode switches.
The latter offer yet another way of affecting the output power of the S120; the amount of variation available means that the amp is capable of offering anything from a humble 8 watts per channel to a fairly mighty 60 watts per side.
IN USE
As you will have already guessed, flexibility is the Rivera's aim, both in terms of power output and tonal variation.
Often such complex layouts lead to immediate confusion, but the manual gets you off the ground with some helpful suggested settings.
Switching on leads you straight to Channel 2.
It would probably be inaccurate to describe this as a clean channel as such, because that isn't really the thinking behind the amplifier at all.
What we have in channel two is a sort of Fender Twin type of response with the facility to drive it hard at almost any volume.
Using guitars equipped in turn with single coils and humbuckers and referring to the handbook's suggested settings for guidance, I was able to access some excellently chunky rhythm sounds and quite respectable non-gothic lead tones into the bargain.
All the tone controls interact with each other and so, after a while, achieving your desired sound becomes a matter of common sense.
I found that I could quickly discard the handbook in favour of striking out on my own and was quite satisfied with the results.
This channel is indeed Fender-like in character: I found everything from vintage Bassman to modern Twin with the least amount of fiddling about.
Channel 1 has more of the Boogie about it.
Some clean sounds are available, but all the while you feel that there's a beast lurking within, and that beast is let loose upon switching in either of the two gain controls.
Each exhibits a different character and, if used together, they interact to provide most of the popular metal-mania types of effect.
I could go on about singing harmonics and endless sustain, but just take it from me that this amp covers the whole guitar tone palette from clean to mega-dirt with considerable ease.
The Slavemaster circuit seems to flatten out or compress the signal in a manner comparable to that of an amplifier at maximum volume.
Sometimes I found that it was better left off, but equally it could often provide the missing element in certain sounds.
Obviously, experimentation is going to yield better and better results, but few guitar players would find much trouble extracting a workable sound in a matter of minutes.
The stereo chorus adds some colour to both clean and heavily distorted modes, but seems to thin out the tone in some instances, so use with care.
All the main features (gain, chorus and so on) are footswitchable via Rivera's own dedicated FS units and you would require both FS-1 and 3 for total control as these would allow you to switch between the two channels, preset for, say, clean and dirty, and offer the option of the Ninja Boost and Slavemaster to crunch things up even more.
But of course, you want to know how loud the S120 is, don't you?
I could probably give you the best idea by saying that I conducted most of my tests at an output rating of only 8 watts per channel and that there was sufficient volume to overwhelm a large mammal.
At full whack, I would guess that the Rivera exhibits some very unsociable tendencies indeed.
C-112 SPEAKER CABS
Rivera's obsession with variety continues with the cabinets.
The distributors, Harman Audio, tell me that virtually every type of speaker is available, with either open or sealed back options.
The review model is the standard, no-frills version and although the speaker cabinets are quite a size for single twelves, they'll guarantee a significant amount of stereo spread.
After all, there is no imperative to actually stack the things — you can always lay them side by side.
The whole stack is covered with a tough Nyflex carpet, which should wear well under pro road stress as long as you can convince your roadcrew to hoover it once in a while.
The front grille is heavy-duty metal and lends the entire rig a very military personality; it looks like an efficient machine from the outset.
As far as overall weight is concerned, it's surprisingly manageable and its size puts it into the larger car boot category for transport.
CONCLUSION
Many players that I know work within fairly narrow parameters to achieve their sound.
They need the minimum of tonal variation in order to find this sound from venue to venue and would give a wide birth to any amplifier that offered any more than they think they need, no doubt fearing the onset of option anxiety.
However, an equal number of players are working in situations were an ability to adapt to different musical landscapes enhances their earning power considerably, and for them this type of rig is a Godsend.
Carrying an S120 is like having at least two very adaptable amplifiers with you at all times, in stereo.
Portability is a key factor and in that respect the S120 scores significantly, too.
Paul Rivera has attempted to create an amp for all playing seasons and, by George, I think he's done it.
RRP:
S120 Amp top £1380
C112 cabs £262 each
FS-1 £64
FS-3 £64
For further information please contact 
SOUL DISTRIBUTOR Robert Cray Two years down the line from the crash that shocked the music world, rhythm'n'blues trouper Robert Cray remembers Stevie Ray Vaughan, explains his new stripped-down sound and chooses his ultimate party band…
Interview by Rick Batey.
‘We left that gig that night by car,’ Robert recalls.
‘We weren't in helicopters ourselves — that was just Steve's band and Eric's band, because they were going straight back to Chicago.
We all ended up staying at this inn about five miles down the road, and in the morning I was woken up really early by a phone call from Andrew Love, one of the Memphis Horns, who told me there'd been an accident, and he was just checking to see if I was in my room.
Nobody knew where anyone was, and there were rumours flying about all over the place.
So I turned on the TV to find the news, but they hadn't found out who had been on board yet
‘Everybody was just completely shook, all the musicians, all the crew, and it's been pretty much that way ever since — everybody's still shook.
That whole day was just a wreck.
And, you know, we all lost a good friend; I'd had such a great time over those last two days working with him and with Eric, and I think about that time quite a bit.
I really miss him.
‘And Steve had been playing so good at that point in his life.
On the night of the crash, I heard him and Eric backstage, all joking and saying, ‘You're the best!’
‘No,you're the best!’
‘No — I insist…’
All laughing, all having a real good time…
‘And so when something like that happens, it makes you think about it all, about the dangers, about all the travelling you do as a musician.
You're out here all the time.
But I'll tell you one thing…’
Cray takes a deep breath.
‘I've never been in a helicopter, and now I probably never will.
I've always travelled around by road, and I'll keep it that way.
But what can you do?
Playing music is what I love — and I want to do it for as long as possible.’
After nearly two decades of hard work, Robert Cray has earned himself a place alongside the blues aristocracy.
According to Eric Clapton, he's the finest touch player in the world; John Lee Hooker called him ‘the man with no ego’.
Steve Cropper says that Robert Cray and Bonnie Raitt are the only two artists in recent years that he's watched from the audience — which is either a massive compliment, or an indication of the number of gigs our Steve attends these days.
But Cray's music has always shown the influence of more forms than the urban twelve-bar.
Born in 1953 in Fort Benning, Georgia — his father was an Army man — young Robert grew up in Eugene, Oregon, listening to his parent's jazz, soul and blues records: Sam Cooke, Ray Charles, B.B. King and Miles Davis.
Inspired by the arrival of The Beatles to play the guitar, he bought a cheap Harmony electric and a Kalamazoo amp and dabbled for a few years before joining a high school covers band, playing soul, rock and a good deal of Hendrix.
Then he discovered the blues — Magic Sam, Buddy Guy, '50s B.B. King and T-Bone Walker — and never looked back.
The first version of the Robert Cray band came together in 1974, and slowly built a following around America's North West coast.
Their first album, 1980's ‘Who's Been Talking’ did badly, due to record company finance problems, and it wasn't until the second LP, ‘Bad Influence’, that the praise started pouring in.
That year they scooped every award in sight and played the most prestigious festivals, and the world at large began to recognise the Cray Band sound: no histrionics or wailing feedback, just tight soul grooves linked with Robert's excellent vocals, his distinctive guitar style and his thin, poppy trademark Stratocaster tone.
‘I Was Warned’ is the new album from Robert Cray, and there are some marked changes in feel and arrangements from the last, ‘Midnight Stroll’, which was a lusher affair, heavily featuring the talents of The Memphis Horns.
‘I Was Warned’ is a much sparser album all round, relying less on overlayered richness and more on tight, interlocking guitar parts.
Robert explains how it came together…
‘We made a conscious decision not to use the horn section this time around, so we could have more space for the guitar.
So the problem was to come up with the right kind of songs which would still act as vehicles for the guitar — because, basically, the song itself is the most important thing.
‘So what we did was to take a couple of months for everybody in the band to write songs, and to rehearse everything.
We didn't have any definite, set plans as to what we wanted to do with the record.
Everybody came up with some stuff individually, and some people worked with people on the outside.
For instance, Jim Pugh, our keyboard player, wrote three songs on the album, two with our producer Dennis Walker, and one with a friend I'd never met before.
Tim Kaihatsu wrote quite a lot— in fact, he was the one who came up with the most material.
I myself wrote about five songs, four with Dennis Walker, and one with Steve Cropper.
‘The Steve Cropper connection came about because he and I got a chance to get reacquainted with one another down in Seville at the Guitar Legends concerts.
He suggested that we should get together and do some writing, so I said yes — I mean, who wouldn't?!
So before we separated he gave me a working title for a song, and told me he wanted me to finish it by the next time he saw me.
Anyway, he turned up at my house sometime later and, sure enough, I hadn't finished it — so we sat down and did it together, along with a few others while we were in the mood.’
Talking about Steve Cropper, the king of soul guitar, is a nice lead into discussing Cray's own attitude towards rhythm playing — an aspect of his style that's as well worth a good hard listen as his solo work.
‘Rhythm guitar is difficult to talk about,’ Robert admits.
‘It might seem obvious to say it, but the essential thing is to listen real hard to what the band is doing!
The way I think of the band is kind of like puzzle pieces; to me the secret of an effective arrangement is not for everyone to push towards the same kind of sound, but for everyone to play something that's contrasting but interlocking, so that when you listen to the song, all the pieces fall into place around each other.
‘As for rhythm guitar influences, I can't think of many better ones than the Stax/Volt records with Steve Cropper and Booker T & The MGs.
I've always been a huge fan of the whole Memphis sound — as I guess everybody has figured by now!— but the thing about the Stax band was that everything they did was totally minimal, but it slotted together to make something really strong.
It makes you realise that you don't have to say too much; a little is enough.
‘I've always admired the way Steve handles his playing on a lot of the old Stax ballads — the way he does those really simple, pretty fills, and the way he uses the tremolo on the amplifier — I'm just a sucker for all that kind of stuff.
And then there's the way that Steve played right on the on-beat, in contrast to the rhythm section, which always fell way back behind the beat — that's part of the reason it all worked so well.’
Cray's most notable lead-playing highpoint on ‘I Was Warned’ comes at the end of the seven-minute title track, possibly the most emotive solo he's yet put on tape.
‘Ah, that was a really strange situation,’ he remembers.
‘I was supposed to be playing rhythm at the time, but I decided to play a solo on the spur of the moment.
I had the amplifier turned up pretty loud, but it was covered with all these cloths and baffles which gave a really dirty, muffled sound.
Thinking back on it, I should have used the amp like that for some of the other songs too, because it really worked…
‘I think a lot of what happens when you play solos has to do with what you've been listening to lately.
I had been listening to a lot of songs in very different styles, quite consciously, to try to get a little more inspiration for when we went into the studio.
We'd all been listening to things like reggae and Spanish music, and when we got together to rehearse, we'd be playing all kinds of crazy stuff before we settled down to get serious.’
Robert Cray always seems such a thinking guitarist.
Sometimes it's as if he's constantly rejecting the first idea that comes into his mind, and plays the second instead.
True?
‘Yeah, that's pretty accurate,’ grins Robert.
‘I mean, I do try to think about what to do; I don't like to fall back on what comes automatically.
It's something that everybody should be aware of all the time, and I do see a lot of guitarists who really let themselves down by just falling back and letting the obvious happen.
But besides that there's a lot of other influences that come into it, and you mustn't ever forget that it's a song you're playing — to me, that has absolutely everything to do with what notes you're playing.
‘But I do feel I'm still learning on the guitar.
I mean, as a guitar player you always tend to listen to other guitar players, and you can spend a lifetime just doing that, but once you start translating from other instruments, then that's a whole other thing.
You know how guitar players always say to listen to saxophone?
Well, me and Andrew Love were talking backstage the other day, listening to our drummer and keyboard player having a jam out front, and I was humming this made-up saxophone solo, and he was going, ‘Oh, God — if you were a sax player, watch out!’
So of course I said how much I'd like to be able to play my guitar like a saxophone, and he said, ‘Yeah — and vice versa.’
He actually wants to play sax like a guitar!
Of course, you can't think exactly like a keyboard or a sax player would when you're playing the guitar — the instrument will always shape the way you think to some extent.
But you can still bear those things in mind, just a little bit, and if you do that then there's no way you could stop learning on the guitar.’
With the recent mainstream success of a number of blues albums — John Lee Hooker's, for instance, and Gary Moore's — has there been any let-up in the record company pressure on Robert Cray to widen his commercial appeal?
‘Well, I know that a lot of musicians have that kind of pressure put on them, but I've never really gotten any bullshit from anybody about what to do.
We were playing for a long time before we ever had a deal, and when we eventually got signed by a big company, they pretty much took us for what we were.
Of course, record companies are always going to want you to have a hit, but as far as what we do, they just have to look at our albums and try to pick out something they can exploit that way, after the event, as compared to trying to make us sit down and write a hit.
I think that if we ever tried that, it would ruin our band.
‘So there's not much pressure from that direction.
There's always the pressure of playing, of course, and the dangers of being on the road and playing the songs night after night — it's all too easy to fall into some kind of rut.
So you try to leave the songs a little bit open, or you change the set list and give yourself something fresh and new for the evening — anything that's possible to try to avoid getting bored!
And we always try to get together for a while in the same room before we play a concert, just to make sure we have a talk and a laugh.
The important thing is that we go onstage feeling like a unit, rather than a bunch of individuals who happen to be playing in the same key.’
Cray still takes the simple approach to getting a good sound.
His main amp is a blackface pre-CBS Fender Super Reverb with four 10″ speakers, sometimes augmented by a Twin Reverb.
He moved over a long time ago from playing an SG Standard and an ES-345 when he found his beloved fixed-bridge ‘64 Stratocaster, which is standard apart from an extra treble-boost toggle switch.
It was this guitar along with another ‘58 maple neck Strat which he handed to the Fender Custom Shop to form the basis of the Robert Cray Strat.
‘It's actually been available to the public for quite a while, but they've only just started to do a big push on it,’ explains Robert.
‘It's got a hard-tail, like my ‘64, so the strings go straight through to the back of the body.
Mine doesn't have Lace Sensors on it, although I do have one guitar with those on; my model has pickups just like on the Stevie Ray Vaughan one, and they become a little more powerful as you go towards the bridge.
I've got three of them, all in different colours, and it's nice because they all play just that little bit different.’
As the 1990s draw on, an era of the blues is coming to an end.
John Lee Hooker won't be with us forever, however much we'd like him to be.
B.B. King is going strong, as are Albert Collins and Albert King.
Otis Rush is still here, even if his talents are diminished, while Buddy Guy seems, if anything, to be playing younger and wilder every year.
But it's strange to think that the day's not so far away when players like Robert Cray, Bonnie Raitt and Jimmie Vaughan, for so long representatives of the new American blues generation, will themselves be looked on as the elders of the blues.
‘Well, if people still just think about me in time to come, that'll be wonderful,’ says Robert.
‘If you're out here playing music, I think that's the most important thing that anybody can ask.
I mean, I look at John Lee Hooker, he's still smiling, he's having a good time just doing it.
It's great to see those guys out here, giving pleasure and enjoying themselves at the same time.
I've got to admit, I want to be able to do that too!’
Imagine you're throwing a party, and you can have any musicians, past or present, along to play for the night — who would you choose?
‘Oh, boy.
Well, Howlin' Wolf's gotta be there.
Muddy Waters gotta be there as well.
Other guitarists — Buddy Guy, Hubert Sumlin, Otis Rush, Albert King, Albert Collins, T-Bone Walker, Eric Clapton.
On vocals, I'll have Otis Redding and O.V. Wright.
Drums, I'll have Fred Below and Al Jackson.
Saxophone and keyboards — Charlie Parker and Theolonius Monk, maybe Bud Powell.
On bass, let's see…
I'll have Duck Dunn, for sure, and the crazy guy who played with Buddy Guy and Junior Wells on the Delmark records…what was his name?
Jack Myers!
I gotta have Jack Myers…’
With that many people playing, it sounds like there'll be no room for anyone to come in and listen.
‘Yeah!
You're probably right!’
Cray cracks up.
‘But on the other hand, so what?’
I think of the band like puzzle pieces, all falling into place around each other Everything the Stax band did was minimal, but it slotted together.
You don't have to say too much; a little is enough
The song you're playing has everything to do with the notes you're playing
SUNKEN TREASURE Rickenbacker 650A Atlantis While it would be unfair to call this guitar a compromise on the part of Rickenbacker, the 650 is nevertheless a departure.
But, as usual, it's all done in the best possible taste…
Review by Neville Marten.
Rickenbacker, who incidentally celebrate their 60th anniversary this year, are not known for their impetuosity when it comes to new guitar and bass designs.
Their instruments offer tradition, integrity and respectability, although we should remember how radical their models were when first introduced, for the most part decades ago.
CONSTRUCTION
So what's different about the Atlantis?
Well, to the casual observer, very little; it's a fairly straightforward 600 body style with what looks like standardish Rick hardware, the usual through neck construction and headstock design…
But hang on, the fingerboard's maple where we'd expect African rosewood, and it looks wider.
The body's centre section is maple too, and you'd not normally see that because traditionally it's been painted over; and the bridge is different, more solid-looking; and the pickups…etc., etc…
You see the plan, of course; Rickenbacker's aim here is to cunningly disguise some serious modernisation within an established design, and in doing so retain the instrument's and the company's character and identity.
There are actually two 650 guitars: this one, the 650A Atlantis, and the slightly more expensive 650E Excalibur, which features the same through maple neck, but with headstock and body wings of African vermilion, and gold plated parts all round.
The 600's usual thinline profile (body thickness of 1″) has been retained on the Atlantis, but the bridge is lower than is usual for a Rick and the pickups have been countersunk to accommodate a lower playing action across the body.
As the through neck naturally runs parallel to the body, the bridge and pickups all sit square, too, making for a concise and geometrically consistent look and feel.
The guitar's overall finish is faultless: the vintage turquoise body and clear lacquered neck set a standard that many manufacturers would love to emulate.
The hardware is equally flawless, with the highest quality chrome plating covering everything.
The new bridge is elegantly designed, with each saddle running in neatly milled channels for accuracy of alignment when adjusting for either height or intonation.
I'm not usually keen on roller saddles but these are rattle-free and don't inhibit sustain at all.
NECK
As mentioned, the 650's neck is wider than the company's usual 1″, this time echoing Gibson's most popular models at 1″.
What remains the same is Rickenbacker's liking for parallel neck depth, and this one measures more or less ″ from the first fret to the 17th.
The maple fingerboard is Ricky's standard, rather deep affair, beneath which lie a pair of truss rods.
These are accessible from under the famous scimitar truss rod cover/logo plate, and are reputed to obviate any kind of neck warp or twist.
Opinions differ in the office about the appearance of the through neck.
Some think it looks a bit '70s but I disagree; if it were sandwiched with mahogany, maybe, but for me the maple just adds a nice touch of detail.
The large headstock, with its shallow pitch, looks quite in keeping and the mini-Schaller machineheads help lend an up-market air.
IN USE
The guitar was very well set up and proved comfortable and easy to play from the off.
The lacquered fingerboard felt to me like those few maple-boarded Les Pauls that Gibson made during the late '70s/early '80s.
It's smooth and fluid, the flattish radius ensuring that action height will not be compromised and choking should not be a problem.
Rickenbacker have simplified the electrics on the 650, dispensing with the fifth knob, the pickup blend control.
Here, tone and volume controls for each pickup are augmented by a three-way toggle selector.
It would all be very simple and straightforward, except that they've chosen to position the pots in an unfamiliar, and I think confusing, configuration.
Sorry to keep bringing Gibson into the story, but their layout which sites the treble controls towards the guitar's rim and the bass controls nearer the pickups, with volumes forwards and tones rearwards, makes the most sense.
But not only have Rickenbacker rotated the whole layout one notch (front pickup controls forwards and back pickup controls rearwards), but the volumes are the two pots furthest away from the player's hands while the tone controls sit closest to you.
I'm afraid I'd have to rewire this guitar in a more commonsense manner, so the toggle switch points towards the set of controls in use (that's the key, I think), and also so that the volumes sit fore and the tones aft, the way Gibsons and Fenders do.
When you plug in a Ricky you expect certain things — not too much power but tons of friendly jangle and loads of character.
Tonally the Atlantis is a different kettle of fish from any Rick I've ever played before.
First of all there's power, and quite a lot of middle, too, and with this one you actually want to press the amp's distortion button…!
It's very difficult to describe sounds, but the humbuckers fitted to this guitar exhibit real tone.
Clean, the front pickup is warm but clear, something perhaps between a Strat and a Gretsch, while the treble unit puts out what might be described as a more cultured version of a PAF.
Both pickups on together produces a gorgeous rhythm sound, slightly Stratty, slightly Gretschy (great for rockabilly) and with a hint of Peter Green, too.
Jump on the channel switch and the Atlantis drops a gear and transmutes into the meanest, screamiest Rick you've ever heard.
Again, it's hard to describe the tones, but imagine this treble pickup as a cross between a Strat and a Les Paul and you're getting the idea, and the same could probably be said of the front humbucker.
You'll notice I haven't actually mentioned Rickenbacker in this tonal roundup.
Well, of course there's Rick there, but more as a discreet colouration than as a basic tone.
But whatever the ingredients the recipe works, and the proof of the pudding, as they say, has been in the eating…
CONCLUSION
This guitar has proved to be a favourite of everyone here.
Its one wart, if you could call it that, is its oddball control layout.
I can understand the designers' reasoning, in that the knobs for the front pickup are to the front, and so on, but consciously or subconsciously, guitarists work from the selector switch, and my feeling is that that should point towards the pickup controls currently in use.
And if the controls were to be positioned as on the 650, the volumes, not the tones, should really be at the top.
Like I said, if this guitar were mine I'd rewire it like an ES335.
However, the Atlantis's plus points are manifold, far outweighing this single flaw.
Its styling is elegant and distinctive, the craftsmanship is superb, it offers a host of quality tones and of course it's an individual, a clone of no other company's instrument.
Like I said at the beginning, Rickenbacker don't churn designs out lightly; the Atlantis and Excalibur are the result of careful consideration, and if you're looking for a guitar that's not only brimming with personality but is eminently playable in just about any style, I'd suggest you check this one out, fast…
RRP: £749.00 inc case
Excalibur version: £866.00 inc case
Left-handers available.
For further information please contact 
THE NEXT GENERATION…
Roland GR-1 Guitar Synth The popular image of guitar synthesis is that of a tired old dog people have long since stopped throwing sticks for.
But this view could well be challenged by a new offering from Roland…
Review by David Mead.
Well, you have to admit that the guitar synth's technological lustre has certainly been dulled in the face of the guitar world's continuing ambivalence.
Roland seem to be almost alone in their grim resolve to produce a usable, glitch-free machine that will coax the average guitarist through that door marked MIDI.
But the GR-1's predecessor, the GR-50, may have been too complex an answer to the guitar synth dilemma, being notoriously awkward to program and none too performance-friendly into the bargain.
Which is why this latest model is so clever, cunningly disguised as it is to resemble a foot-controlled multi-effect processor — possibly the only avenue of hi-tech guitarists have proved particularly willing to tread.
CONSTRUCTION
It must be said before we proceed further that this model is so new that no handbook was available to me at the time of writing.
Which could be seen as a good thing; after all, in the eyes of sceptical guitarists the GR-1 could stand or fall on its immediate user-friendly appeal.
My only unfair advantage was a basic understanding of my own GR-50.
The GR-1 measures approx 16″ long by 10½″ wide.
In the manner of floor-mounted processors worldwide, it's vaguely wedge-shaped and slopes from around 3″ to only 1″ thick.
It is made from heavy-duty plastic, which should protect it from all but the psychotically over-enthusiastic synthesist.
There are six footswitches on the lower front panel and a collection of both push button and rotary controls on the upper, surrounding a large LED display.
All of these controls are multi-function and so I will withold all attempts at explanation until we turn the machine on!
As for the rear of the unit, there are sockets for connection first to the external mains adaptor and then MIDI out and in (but not thru, surprisingly), then sockets for for the GK-2 synth controller, optional expression pedals EV-5 or DP-2, guitar send and return (to allow connection to an external guitar processor, affecting only the guitar sound) and finally a pair of synth out jacks and a headphone output.
When I reviewed the GR-50 back in December ‘91, I went into some detail regarding the fitting of the GK-2 pickup to the guitar of your choosing.
All the points covered then, both for and against, still apply now, as this unit remains unchanged.
Switching the GR-1 on, the first thing you see is the LED telling you that it is indeed a Roland Guitar Synth.
This tendency toward self-identification seems to be the norm for all the modern multi-processors and I must say I see little point; if you don't know what unit it is already…
In any case, the name of the game here seems to be performance-friendly and so you are immediately in at the sharp end with patch number 11.
This is actually patch group 1, bank 1 — not eleven, as I first thought.
Stepping on footswitches 2–4 gives you another three patches in bank 1.1.
Then you must switch up, using the pedals marked ‘patch bank up’ and ‘down’, to bank 1.2, 1.3 and so on up to 1.8.
There are two patch groups on the synth, with eight groups of four patches stored in each, offering a performance array of 64 sounds.
These are drawn from a residual 200 presets.
All patches identify themselves by name, like ‘Vibes’ or ‘Syn Horn’and not surprisingly these patches dish out realistic vibes and synth horn sounds.
This is one of the very basic differences between the GR-1 and its predecessor.
In this machine, all the sounds are digital samples.
In the GR-50, you had a mixture of PCM samples and ordinary analogue synthesis, all cleverly embroidered together to form the basis for Roland's LA synthesis.
So one positive step up for the GR-1, therefore, is quality of sound.
What it may have sacrificed along the way is the user's ability to create new sounds from scratch, though you can still edit existing ones.
Still, I must say once again creating new sounds on the GR-50 was a real chamber of horrors, the major frustration being the multi-function control panel and hidden menu regime with the lack of any real-time rotary control.
Guitarists like knobs, dammit!
Happily, this is a fact that Roland have recognised and have provided such on the GR-1 in abundance.
So, if we start off with one of the string patches, I'll see if I can guide you through the editing process.
To begin with, almost all patches are a combination of two preset sounds.
In this case, they could be a subtle blend of two different string sounds in order to present a specific effect.
The first thing you can alter is the GR's inbuilt chorus and reverb.
Both of these will already be present in the patch to some degree, but if you want more reverb, for instance, this is simply a case of playing with the reverb ‘level’ and ‘time’controls.
Once you have done so, the word ‘play’ flashes in the display to let you know that a parameter has been changed.
You have similar control over basic filter, attack, decay and release envelope characteristics, the balance between the two presets and so on,all on rotary controls.
You will see that already it is possible to effect a considerable amount of customisation to what was a factory preset.
The S1 and S2 buttons on the GK-2 controller can be used to reassign the footswitches to hold, pitch up or pitch down an octave, control signal modulation or to start or stop the in-built sequencer (of which more later).
These controls offer some added control over the sound during performance.
It is also possible to assign different patches to sets of strings, allowing you to mix and match a piano on strings 1 to 4 and double bass on 5 and 6, for instance.
This all calls for a fundamental re-think of your playing style, but one that is not impossible to master in just a short while.
With the decision to include a four track sequencer on the GR-1, the implications are manifold.
True, four track is a mite limiting, but I imagine that live performance was again uppermost in Roland's mind here.
The way the sequencer has been set up is to allow three voices and one drum track to be laid down and then used as a backing for either the regular guitar sound or another synth sound.
So, the GR-1 could be quite a powerful (and reasonably portable) arranger's tool, too.
IN USE
The principal topic of conversation amongst guitar synth enthusiasts tends to be ‘tracking’.
You are probably aware that Roland use a pitch-to-voltage system for their guitar synths.
This means that the ‘brain' of the synth has to have a certain amount of waveform information from the guitar before it can determine an actual pitch and synthesise that information accordingly.
That procedure takes time.
Not a great deal of time, ‘tis true, but enough to produce a slight delay between picking the string and hearing a note.
Many other factors can intercede here and produce corrupted information which confuses the synth and produces a ‘glitch’: a bad note or, worse still, no note at all.
Obviously, this factor alone governs a guitar synth's overall usefulness as a serious music tool, and I'm happy to report a significant improvement here.
The slight time delay is still there (really, we're talking a few 1000ths of a second) but the tracking is quite a lot better.
I know this because these machines have a high curiosity factor with guitarists, and although I'm used to my GR-50, many players who have been eager to try it have fallen foul of mis-tracking.
Not so with the GR-1; all of us here have sat and played it and no-one has had too much difficulty adjusting to the GR's demands in a very short space of time.
As for the sounds themselves, there are many here which I considered serious omissions from the GR-50.
There is a grand piano, which is excellent, an electric sitar which is more than an okay Coral, a banjo that actually sounds like a banjo and a really good rock bass.
Some of the brass sounds are good, some fall short.
There are (thankfully) fewer ‘guitar’ sounds this time and quite a few spacey ‘pads’.
Apparently, most of the sounds on the GR-1 are unique and not based on another synth from the Roland range.
Further sounds will be made available on library cards at a later date.
CONCLUSION
I expect it must be obvious that a serious, in-depth review of this instrument would take many more pages than are available here.
I have been able to offer only a summary of the GR-1's facilities, knowing that the curious amongst you will want to seek one out and demand a ‘hands on’ demo at your leisure.
Any guitar synth is difficult to sum up, because you inevitably have to deal with the wider question of guitar-based synthesis in doing so.
But, if I can take it (given you've stuck with me so far) that I'm preaching to the converted, then let me say that I think the GR-1 is a vast improvement on the GR-50 in terms of sound and ease of approach.
As an introduction to guitar synthesis it is a dream, because of its immediacy.
But I have a sneaking feeling that in another five years' time I'll be reviewing the GR-100 and that will be the one …
RRP:
Roland GR-1 £895.00
Roland GK-2 £135.00
For further information please contact 
FRETBUZZ
MATTHEW SWEET A man with cool songs, cool influences and some even cooler friends…
Filled with windswept harmonies, stripped, emotional guitar playing and the kind of plaintive, country-tinged songs that niggle you from here to the grave, the latest offering from Nebraska-born songwriter Matthew Sweet will win the favour of anyone whose tastes lie somewhere north of Gram Parsons, south of The Beatles, east of CSN&Y and west of the Pixies.
The album, ‘Girlfriend’, is saved from being one of those embarrassingly wimpy singer/songwriter affairs firstly by Sweet's own humour and taste and secondly by the presence of some of the hippest musos in New York: Television's famed guitarist Richard Lloyd, kd lang's imaginative pedal steel player Greg Leisz, Lou Reed's old skinbasher Fred Maher (also producing) and last, but not least, that elusive and exclusive Fender bender Mr. Robert Quine.
Sweet and Quine both played guitar for Lloyd Cole back in 1990 — Sweet live, and Quine live and on the record — but while Lloyd Cole kept Quine on a leash, refining his parts and cutting and reconstructing his solos, Sweet just tosses him the keys and lets him rip.
‘It's strange, this whole lead guitar business,’ muses the affable Mr. Sweet.
‘The music I listened to when I was growing up was mainly what you'd call the ‘British new wave invasion’— the Buzzcocks, Generation X, early XTC, Elvis Costello.
And the one thing that myself and my friends all absolutely hated was guitar solos!
It took me a long time to accept solos at all, and to this day there are still so few lead players that I really like.
‘Anyway, when I went on to high school, I moved over to '70s American stuff — Television, The dB's, Richard Hell And The Voidoids, Alex Chilton and Big Star.
Then after that, when I started writing more songs, people were saying ‘Oh, that song of yours sounds like so-and-so,’ which made me dig back to find out what they were talking about, back to music like The Beach Boys, The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, The Velvet Underground, Jimi Hendrix, Neil Young.
It's weird because writing is a pretty spontaneous thing for me, but people seem to imagine after hearing the album that I'm some real craftsman or pop musicologist or something.
That makes me laugh, because once I've written a song then I don't tend to work on it too much — I'm too lazy, basically.
‘But Robert Quine is perfect for my stuff, because he loves bands like The Byrds, and just pop music in general.
This album was actually recorded back in 1990, just after we'd played with Lloyd Cole, so we'd got to know each other pretty well.
He can seem a little wild to some people, but we seem to have a way of connecting and there's hardly any friction between us.
We also found ourselves together in the middle of the LA riots — two days of mayhem without a cop in sight — so I guess that brought us closer together!
And he was incredibly supportive during the year I was struggling to get this record released — more of a help than most of my friends.’
One of Quine's highpoints on the record comes on Don't Go , where he matches the despairing vocal with a stumbling, tongue-tied guitar line that breaks down continually into agonised microphonic feedback.
‘I asked him to play the most tortured, painful lead possible — the most horrible thing he could come up with!’ laughs Matthew.
‘He reacts really well to that kind of direction; he's a very emotionally sensitive person anyway, and he's just great at enhancing and underscoring the lyrics.
‘We managed to keep a live feel to the record firstly by not using any click tracks; we recorded drums and acoustic rhythm guitar together to start each song off.
And then, after I'd done some electric rhythm and the bass and so on, we'd bring in the lead player to do two or three whole takes, and then we'd pick the best one and use it, mistakes and all.
I figured it was the best way to keep the interaction between the guitar and the lyrics, which is the whole point for me.
I love playing lead myself, but once you've heard what Lloyd and Quine can do, there's no way you can't use it!
I guess I've been lucky in finding people whose playing I love and who I don't have to tell what to do.’
No slouch on the guitar himself, Matthew has recently expanded his working instrument collection…
‘I've been using a Les Paul Gold Top for a long time — a ‘59 reissue with P-90s — but I've got this unfortunate habit of getting pissed off onstage and tossing the odd guitar, so rather than risk the Gold Top any more I've bought one of these new Hamers, which is styled after a '50s Les Paul Special.
It's pretty good.
For acoustics I'm playing mainly Gibson reissues; I've got a Hummingbird, which is great, and a J-185, which is like a small blonde Everly Brothers-style guitar.
‘I've also been playing these new Chandler guitars.
One's called the Austin Special, and it's really cool-looking with three hotted-up Danelectro-style lipstick tube pickups that you can either run as single-coils for that crinkly kind of clarity, or put them together for a humbucking sound.
The second one's called the 555, which looks a bit like a Rickenbacker but with three little Firebird pickups and this wide, flat, Gibson-feeling sort of neck.
It's certainly not a guitar for everybody, and at about $1,200 it's not cheap either, but I love it.
The whole guitar has this amazing resonance and a really dark, murky, '60s kind of sound.
‘I use two amps on stage, switching between the two: a Marshall, which is set quite low but with a good, meaty kind of sound, and a reissue Fender blackface Twin Reverb set up with a cleaner sound and vibrato if I want it.
I've also been collecting a whole load of old Electro-Harmonix pedals while I've been on the road in the States, and they just sound so amazing compared to all these digital pedals!
I've got a Small Stone phaser, a really old silver-coloured Big Muff fuzzbox, and a truly weird thing called The Zipper, which is like an early touch-wah.
‘So if you want to hear the most wretched sound ever invented, just look out for the next album…!’
RB 
ROBBEN FORD It's a case of ‘any colour you like as long as it's blues’ on this astounding musician's new album…
Breaking away from a career as sideman can be a daunting task.
Those few yards from side to centre stage are strewn with obstacles and few are able to complete the journey unscathed.
Album releases are hindered by the artist's lack of independent celebrity and the skid row of budget-bin city is often the final resting place for many recordings that deserve much, much better.
Happily, Robben Ford's ‘88 release for Warner Bros Talk To Your Daughter saw him cross successfully into the limelight.
Having played with such artists as Miles Davis, George Harrison and Joni Mitchell, Robben's playing had already attracted the attention of the guitar cognoscenti.
But, despite being Grammy nominated and highly revered, the album is now only available in Britain as a costly import, and so fans of Robben's superb jazz-tinted blues style will take heart in the fact that another release is imminent.
Called ‘Robben Ford & Blue Line’(GRS 11022), it looks likely to gain him the even higher profile as a soloist he so richly deserves.
I talked to him after a recent gig in Manchester (which saw Robben playing with Roscoe Beck on bass and drummer Tom Brechtlien) and asked him about his new album.
‘It's on Stretch Records, which is a label set up by Chick Corea, and distributed in Europe by BMG.
It's definitely a blues record, and most of it features my own compositions.
The opening tune is an instrumental called The Brother and we also do a John Hiatt composition called Real Man .
Six out of nine tunes are vocal with three instrumentals.
‘My brother, Mark, is on one song which we had cut a while ago and it wound up going on the record because it was such a good demo.’
I've heard similar things about ‘Talk To Your Daughter’, where the original demos of some tracks ended up on the final recording.
‘We didn't cut them to be demos.
We used them as demos but we cut them to be the real thing.’
But in the end, the whole of side one and Revelation from side two of ‘Talk To Your Daughter’ were culled from demos which Robben cut for the record company.
As far as instruments go, Robben seems to be the sole endorser of the Fender Esprit guitar…
‘Yes, although it is now called the Robben Ford Signature series.
It's the same guitar, but initially it was released in 1982 and nobody cared for it.
They were built with me in mind and I liked them and got a couple from Fender.
After the ‘Talk to Your Daughter’ album came out, people started getting interested and so they started making the guitar again and people started buying it!’
The Esprit is a twin humbucker guitar, a departure from the norm for Fender; while they are justly famed for their single coil pickups, their humbuckers have always struck me as a little tame…
‘Well you know, the new Fender pickups, since they started remaking this guitar, are actually really good.
The original pickups, I didn't care for (they were actually Schaller pickups — Ed).
Right now I'm using a Seymour Duncan ‘59 in the bass position and an old Gibson PAF, which is a really great pickup, in the treble.
‘Plus, I'm using a Marshall 4x12 cabinet now as my main cabinet.
I used to use a 2x12 EV, but I've been really enjoying the dispersion of the Marshall.’
Is Robben still an advocate of Howard Dumble amplifiers?
‘Yes, absolutely.
I also use a Fender Twin just for extra spread.
It's not really stereo; it's the same signal coming through, but it just broadens the sound.
I use the TC Electronics 2290 for chorus and delay and I've been using a PCM 70 for reverb, but I just got this new reverb from Real Tube.’
How does Robben feel about the current interest in blues?
‘Well, it's an interesting question.
Obviously Stevie Ray Vaughan, the Thunderbirds and Robert Cray are the people who really got exposed and people started hearing the blues that way, although the Paul Butterfield Blues Band was my first exposure.
But there does seem to be a resurgence of it, particularly in Europe — I wouldn't say so much in the United States.
I say this largely because of what is going on with the black blues artists, like Albert King, BB King, Albert Collins.
They've been touring and doing the same thing for forty, fifty years and nothing has changed for them, and so I don't think it's a real resurgence in the US, but it's great to see it happening over here.’
In 1986, Robben played guitar for Miles Davis, whom he had often cited as his greatest influence.
I asked him what was his most enduring memory of Miles.
‘His music, obviously.
He is my number one musical icon.
He has been the most inspiring of any artist that I've ever been exposed to one way or another.
His endurance and his longevity are particularly inspiring.
He kept on making that great music and playing great up until he passed away.
He could walk out and just be so good and that is probably the thing that most impressed me about him.
‘I liked the way that, we'd be on the bandstand playing and he'd just be walking around and playing and just look at you and kind of tip his head, you'd play and then he'd start playing when he wanted you to stop!
‘The very first night I played with him, he's up there blowing and he walks over to me and says, ‘Play somethin', Robben.’
That was the coolest thing and I love that memory of him.
It's really great to be able to play with your icon, your main cat.
It felt like I was being christened, y'know.
It felt like he was saying, ‘You're okay, you're a good musician,’ and that kind of engendered some confidence in me…’
Two REH videos are available for those intrepid explorers among you who are eager to delve into the Robben Ford style and playing philosophy.
The first,Playin' the Blues , concerns itself with Robben's usage of scales, chords and comping patterns within the blues format.
The second,Blues and Beyond , takes over where the first leaves off and plunges deeper into the chromatic tones and chord substitutions Robben uses in his playing, and highlights two tracks from his ‘Talk to You Daughter’ album,Nothin' But The Blues and Revelation .
The videos are available through IMP and retail at around £30 each.
DM 
LEMMY Britain's ex-pat Bass Bomber on Motorhead's new album and the best pubs in LA…
With a career spanning seventeen years and almost as many albums, it's hard to deny that Motorhead have earned a bit of a breather, but those that feared the sun and the swimming pools of their self-imposed LA exile might dilute the band's full-on thrust can finally rest easy.
Lemmy's move to comfier Californian climes has lent the band, if anything, a new lease of life.
And their latest offering, ‘March Or Die’ contains a few surprises.
The first is the absence of drummer Phil ‘Philthy Animal’ Taylor (who, it appears, has left the band for good), to be replaced by ex-Dokken, King Diamond and WWIII skinsman Mikkey Dee.
The second and third are guest appearances by Ozzy Osbourne, duetting with Lemmy on the ballad Ain't No Nice Guy , and Slash, who handles the solo work on the same track as well as sharing the job with Wurzel and Zoom on You'd Better Run .
‘We didn't invite them,’ Lemmy points out.
‘They asked to be on it and it's not going to do us any harm to have Slash and Ozzy on the new album, is it?
Slash did his bit in two takes and Ozzy did his stuff in three.’
Since Lemmy's move to LA, Motorhead's fortunes seem to have taken a turn for the better.
‘I just thought Britain was getting like a treadmill, and that if I was on the spot in the States I'd be able to chivvy them around a bit more.
I'm sure that if I was still living in England we wouldn't have got the push that we had on the last album and we wouldn't have got nominated for a Grammy.
In fact, if I hadn't been living here I doubt they would have noticed us at all!
And we were also tired of getting robbed!
The other thing was we don't seem to be able to keep a manager for very long without eating them — they start to shake and have nervous breakdowns.
But we've got a decent geezer now.’
So Lemmy's taken to America, but how did the Americans take to Lemmy?
‘No problem!
There's a lot of English people in LA and there's no end of English pubs — the Union Arms in Santa Monica and the Cat & Fiddle, all kinds of English boozers.
Tim Gardener from Ashton, Gardener & Dyke runs the Cat & Fiddle — he's been over there for years.
But it's the same as England, really; some of them can handle me and some of them can't.
I have nothing to do with the LA lifestyle; I don't go to ‘the party’— you know, the one that's always going on somewhere.
I prefer one-on-one parties, hands-on experience parties — encounter groups without the group.’
Later this year the band are returning to London.
Is that something Lemmy is looking forward to?
‘Yeah, we're doing the 23rd December at Hammersmith.
It's two years since we've done it so we've got two years’ worth of playing and they've got two years' worth of applause.’
Sounds like good news for Motorhead fans, the hardcore of which still avidly follow the band…
‘Those fans who stayed with us through all the shit are really great, but the general rank and file sort of faded away rather quick.
Having said that, I don't blame them because ‘Ironfist’ wasn't the greatest album it could have been and ‘Another Perfect Day’, well, I've been thinking about that and I'm sure it wasn't just the album…’
So ‘March Or Die’ saw the departure of Phil Taylor and the arrival of Mikkey Dee, but did Philthy jump or was he pushed?
‘Well, we pushed him and then he jumped, I think.
He was jumping already so we just tripped and fell on him.
Listen, I know that guy better than his family does, so let's just say he's gone and good luck.’
Does the change of lineup come with a resurgence in enthusiasm for the new Motorhead?
‘Not really, because we wrote the songs before Phil left and it isn't our new drummer on the album, apart from one track; it's a mystery subscriber on the other tracks.’
Although the location and drummer have changed, ‘March Or Die’ is still very much Motorhead's own distinctive sound.
‘I've still got the Rick and use the same stacks I had with Hawkwind; I won't change them.
I've got JMP Super Bass IIs, although, with the way I play, I wouldn't notice any difference in sound between America and Britain.
If I did, I'd just put another amp up.
I haven't gone for the rack thing because if they can get that lot in a rack then go ahead!
They're really into all that here, but if it breaks down, boy you're in trouble; you can't busk that, especially if your ring modulator packs up and that cancels out your whoop pedal and all that.
They're using all this technology now to get the same sounds we used to get by turning up until it distorted.
I mean, look at what Hendrix had for pedals — just a Fuzz Face and a great big stack of Marshalls.
He just turned it up and he could make the thing do anything he liked: make toast or take the dog for a walk, answer the door…he could do anything with it.’
One thing America has done for Lemmy is to afford him the chance to fulfil an ambition…
‘I've started collecting Gibsons: all the guitars I wanted when I was a guitarist.
I've got a ‘74 reissue of a 1955 Les Paul Special and a white SG Custom with 3 pickups, which is beautiful.
It cost me six hundred bucks — three hundred pounds!— makes you want to vomit on your parents doesn't it!
I paid the same price for the Les Paul Special.
I've also got an Explorer which cost me four hundred bucks — mind you, there's no case with that.
I also bought a Gibson Sonex that's been doctored; they're not supposed to be very good, but this one sounds great.
I do feel a bit guilty though, having nice guitars sitting in a closet; they should be out there howling.’
In summing up the band and its line-up changes, the new album and his move to California, Lemmy quotes a line from Motorhead's last ballad: ‘Everything changes, it all stays the same, everyone guilty but no one to blame…’
But surely he must have the mandatory LA tan by now?
‘No, I've got an English tan — you know, V neck and cuffs…’
EA 
Jim Lampi MIDI madness with the Chapman Stick supremo…
Though perhaps outrun in the fame stakes by the likes of Nick Beggs and Alphonso Johnson, Californian Chapman Stick virtuoso Jim Lampi is doing more than most to push back the frontiers of his instrument, in partnership with the latest in high technology.
The incredible washes of sound evident on his debut album ‘TV Weather’(Zok Records via Rio/Polygram) were conjured via Om three-dimensional sound staging with Francinstein digital/analogue sound imaging, but the latest technological hurdle he has chosen to face is that of MIDI.
Lampi is now using both IVL Guitar-To-MIDI Interface courtesy Stick Enterprises and a GRIS Touchboard MIDI Interface to add atmospheric colour to his fluid Stick lines.
Recent shows at Ronnie Scott's saw blistering fretwork augmented by some snazzy digital sounds.
After 14 years, the former fire-fighter, architecture graduate and saxophonist has lost none of his initial zeal for the Chapman Stick.
‘Well, I'm still using the standard setup: five strings on the treble, five strings on the bass and a range of five and a quarter octaves.
It's almost a piano but with a MIDI pickup on five of the high strings.
This has adjustable truss rods and the action is new and improved.
The new wood models are more refined and there's also a 12-string model which has got a monstrous range.’
Of course seeing Lampi playing the Stick is akin to watching someone play a strapped-on portable piano; his fingers tap the strings almost like Stanley Jordan.
As Lampi enthuses: ‘It's not a modified guitar.
I've got natural sound and MIDI so I can add MIDI to the natural sound.
Chapman also has a 10 String MIDI-only guitar.
On this model I get the best of both worlds and yet, for me, the sound of the stick itself is more unique than any MIDI sounds I've ever heard.’
Lampi's interest in exotic Eastern sounds (witness The Promise on ‘TV Weather’) is to be extended quite considerably by the use of MIDI.
The Stick's stereo facility in two tuning groups — CDGAE (bass) and F£BEAD (treble)— seems made to exploit the avenues synths and samplers have to offer.
‘I'm not interested in MIDI to generate more guitar sounds,’ affirms Lampi.
‘At present I use a cheap old Yamaha TXAIZ for horn sections and baritone saxes.
I've had this for five years.
I like the idea of the Korg AD.
My interest in MIDI is to create great original sounds whether they be on samplers or synthesisers.
I mean, what's the use of copying other peoples’ sounds?
That way you can always tell when an album has been made — like there's the DX7 sound from around 1985 or the Ensoniq sound.
Now, Joe Zawinul: he developed his own sound and used it to perfection.
That's what I want.’
And maybe that's why Lampi dazzles us these days with a solo encore of Weather Report's famous Birdland groove.
And those who catch Lampi on occasional dates will marvel at the mixture of gut-wrenching string sounds and high-pitched synthesised treatments.
‘With The Grid you can plug the stick into any synth.
You see, anybody that uses MIDI writes with a piano.
Guitars that have been MIDI'ed don't really branch away from a guitar player's technique.
They may create some interesting ideas for soloing but in terms of composition the keyboard still controls everything.
The Stick has got the same range as the piano and I can jump four octaves with one hand.
And then add MIDI to that and you can see the difference.’
John McLaughlin often felt that guitar controllers lacked spontaneous reaction to attack, something that Lampi doesn't have to worry about (though McLaughlin's new Photon system seems to work quite well over a range of sounds).
‘You can be vicious with the Stick,’ Lampi agrees.
‘I can use distorted sounds; particularly when I'm playing with drummers I can whack it up really good and hard.
On the album, because of the studio, I had to pull it back a bit, but on the road in Europe and the States I can get up to these big, massive sounds.’
Lampi has known Emmett Chapman since he started playing music, and sees himself as the Stick's embassador.
‘In the long-run I'd like to be looked on as a composer rather than a stick player.
Writing music, the bottom line is that it's a stringed instrument but rhythmically you are playing a keyboard.
And of course you can barre this easily — power chords in 5 octaves, distorted bass.
And it may seem strange, but it's very difficult to be a good composer on the guitar; rhythmically you are often stuck and you can't play a lot of counterpoint rhythms.
It's difficult to hear chords in different ways and impossible on the the normal guitar to do piano-type chords.’
Lampi used to jam in the Californian Bay Area with that great Windham Hill guitarist Michael Hedges.
He even took lessons from jazz virtuoso Tuck Andress (famous in The States for his re-interpretation of Hendrix's Castles Made Of Sand and Little Wing ).
Now he's looking forward to extending the Chapman Stick with MIDI.
‘The sounds I program are the natural Stick sounds with synthesised coloration for atmospherics.
What I want to do is get to play in a band situation so I can sit back and solo like a horn player again, using the MIDI.
At present I'm still working like a pianist controlling a small group and that means I constantly have to keep my mind on what's holding the song together as I play.
I'm looking forward to playing with a rhythm section again.’
MP 
Jim Lampi's live setup: Stick Enterprises IVL Guitar-To-MIDI interface.
GRID Touchboard MIDI Interface.
Yamaha FM Tone Generator TXA1Z Synth.
Yamaha FX500B/FX500 for EQ/Compression.
Midiverb vocal enhancer.
Boss Volume pedal for synth interfacing.
Seck 62 Mixer.
EX-RATED Ibanez EX370 Many years ago, Ibanez were almost indistinguishable from the other Japanese manufacturers churning out Gibson Les Paul copies by the truckload.
How things have changed…
Review by David Mead.
There is no doubt that Ibanez's current high profile is down to a marketing policy which borders on genius.
The recent past saw them almost there with models like the Blazer and the RG440.
But then they discontinued their entire range almost overnight to concentrate on the RG540 and JEM series, having worked hard to establish some of the world's finest players as endorsees.
With names like Joe Satriani, Steve Vai, Paul Gilbert and jazzers Joe Pass and George Benson using your product, how can you go wrong?
Since that time the company have introduced many variations on the 540 range and a few new models along the way.
But, up until now, they have offered nothing for the budget or ‘entry level’ guitar market.
The EX range is still comparatively new and represents a low-cost entrée into the now legendary Ibanez marque.
CONSTRUCTION
The first thing to strike me about the EX was that Ibanez have chosen to reduce the size of their name on the headstock from its usual HI THERE! status to a very modestly-sized logo that would almost certainly not get served in my local.
The whole question of product confidence enters the equation here — after all, if you've got it, flaunt it…but if not…
The EX's full title is EX370FMTR — simply trips off the tongue, doesn't it?
The FM part refers to the flame maple veneer, which sits atop a four-piece alder body with a Transparent Red (you guessed it) finish.
The whole effect is a very attractive one and appears to have been expertly carried out.
There are a couple of blemishes on the maple which look like black drips from where the pickup cavities have been painted, which is a little careless, but luckily these are not too noticeable sitting as they do underneath the player's right arm during use.
The neck is the customary maple with the headstock scarf-jointed behind the first fret.
The scarfing is very subtle and follows the natural grain of the wood almost perfectly, but I think it may be a little low down for the strengthening job it was designed to fulfil.
This manner of headstock-grafting was originated to serve a dual purpose: that of timber saving and to adjust the grain of the wood to run straight when employing a pitched-back headstock.
Manufacturers have to be sure that both causes are served at once, and here I think Ibanez have leant towards conservation rather than preservation.
Unfortunately, the nut is cut too high, which turns quick chord changes in the first position into a 400m hurdles race.
However, on a positive note, the locking nut on the EX eschews the twin bolts through the neck that even the top-of-range Ibanez guitars have, which has always seemed an invitation to ‘tear along the dotted headstock’.
Back at the body end, the contouring and cutaways are in keeping with Ibanez's lean and mean approach, with easy access to the top frets.
The heel is unchamfered, which means there is a sizeable lump of wood in your hand at the top of the neck, but not so much that it seriously hazards navigation on the high Ds.
The tremolo is a licensed Floyd, very close to Ibanez's ‘Edge’ system; it's finished in gold, as are the no-name machine heads, and they match the finish on the guitar perfectly.
Pickups are two EX humbuckers and a single coil, all running through the customary five-position switch with single volume and tone controls.
On the neckplate, Ibanez have stated the guitar's country of origin as being Korea.
Now this, as far as I am aware, is a first.
It is normal mode of practice to put any old thing on the plate (a company's US headquarters is quite normal) and then a detachable sticker on the neck giving the real story, thus encouraging the sort of‘Made in the USA’ guitar snobbery that continues to exist.
Ibanez have obviously not forgotten that once the ‘made in Japan’ tag was considered a stigma and have given their Korean counterparts a chance to bask in the glory they deserve.
The fingerboard is rosewood, with 22 chunky-ish frets and triangular, plastic position markers.
Incidentally, I trust that the fretwire used is up to scratch; I've recently seen a few Korean guitars with very soft fretwire which would probably need a re-fret after only a short time.
The neck has been bound quite well, although the fret end-filing has left a few untidy marks along the way.
IN USE
The action on the EX is quite low and there is a tendency for some notes to buzz when plucked hard.
But fretbuzz is a very subjective thing; I've met a number of players who will sacrifice all for a low playing action and are quite happy to put up with extraneous noises that others would run a mile to avoid.
I must admit to being pleasantly surprised on putting the EX through an amp.
Knowing that pickups are one of the first corners to be cut in budget guitars, I expected tameness if not lameness from the EX.
Wrong!
These pickups have plenty of bite and it's good to see that Ibanez have kept their sensible switching system at this end of the range.
On positions two and four on the five-way, the humbuckers are coil-tapped, which offers all the popular guitar tones with the minimum amount of fuss.
The bridge humbucker has been designed to give a very hot response indeed, and I found that even the centre single coil kicked the amp quite nicely.
Everything about the EX is comfortable and works well.
The trem performs all the current tricks, although it did suffer a little from tuning instability at first.
CONCLUSION
What can I say?
Ibanez seem to have taken another daring step in their continuing success story and come up trumps once again.
If the quality I see here is truly representative of all the EX models, then I would certainly recommend them to anyone wanting to buy into the Ibanez range at a reasonable price.
RRP: £329.00
No left-handers available.
Further details available from 
MAKING TRACKS This month's Making Tracks goes behind the closed doors of the record industry for an intriguing glimpse inside the minds of the A&R men and women of the business, those people on whose whim your musical career could stand or fall…
By Marc Nohr.
THE GATEKEEPERS The Mysteries of A&R
Picture this: I'm sitting in the plush office of a record company A&R Director.
He swings in his executive leather chair, fingering the keys to his new BMW.
On his desk, a portable phone and an A4 Filofax; to his right a hi-fi system resembling a Richard Rogers building; to his left, a waste disposal unit…for demo tapes.
His secretary calls on an internal phone.
A young artist is waiting in reception, claiming he has an appointment.
‘Tell him to come back this afternoon, or tomorrow — or next week…or something .
I'm busy being interviewed by a journalist,’ the A&R man snorts dismissively.
He resumes his inventory of all the hit acts he's signed and the propositions he's declined from budding Madonnas wanting to sleep their way to the top.
I bring up the subject of music.
‘Music?’ his eyes glitter with delight.
‘F*** music, let's make money.’
He falls off his chair in paroxysms of laughter, pointing to the gallery of gold discs that adorn his office wall.
Fact or fiction?
Probably a bit of both.
But it's a fitting caricature of the way A&R departments are perceived by most aspiring musicians.
Indeed, from the outside there can be few aspects of the music business surrounded by such an aura of myth.
It's not difficult to see why.
The A&R man is the point of entry to a world of fame and riches.
Once the ink has dried on the contract, the whole music business machinery moves into gear, thrusting the artist into the public eye.
Consequently, the world inhabited by these gate-keepers abounds with stories of promises made and broken, dreams fulfilled and shattered.
As a profession A&R is as precarious as politics, with reputations lost just as quickly as they're won.
As a business it's as circumscribed as any other, with A&R departments answerable to what Jeff Young describes as ‘men in grey suits’ shouting, ‘Bottom line!
Bottom line!’.
Young is the recently appointed A&R Director of MCA Records.
It's an unmentionably early hour of the morning and we're sitting in his Soho office, feasting on take-away toast and cappuccino.
Dressed in American-style sweatshirt and jeans, Young chomps and chats with great enthusiasm.
His days as a Radio 1 DJ are now firmly behind him, but he still likes to trade in extravagant language.
‘Coalminers ' wives get paid danger money,’ he explains.
‘I get paid grief money.’
What kind of money are we talking about?
‘Well that depends on who you are,’ he generalises.
‘Scouts can earn between ten or fifteen grand, with a company car thrown in.
A good A&R Manager can earn sixty or seventy grand, whilst successful A&R Directors can earn upwards of a hundred grand and considerably more if they've been doing it for a while.’
Young continues his ‘Beginners’ Guide to A&R'…
‘The normal structure of an A&R department is Director, Manager, Scout.
The Scouts scout, the Managers each have their own bunch of artists and the Director runs the team.
At MCA, like elsewhere, there's a weekly A&R meeting where we discuss the progress of acts we've signed, we play new tapes and also screen what other companies are looking at.’
‘Screen?’— it sounds like industrial espionage.
‘There's nothing underhand about it; it's just a question of having the chance to say no.
There's nothing worse than learning that an act has been signed somewhere else and you never even got a chance to hear them.
That's when the fur really flies,’ he explains, his hands mimicking flying fur.
Annie Roseberry claims not to worry about what other companies are up to.
She's Vice-President of A&R at the American company, Elektra, and heads their A&R operations in this country.
‘I'm pretty laid back,’ she explains, slumbering in her chair.
Her angular face evinces an occasional smile.
‘A lot of people get really worried about what other people are doing.
I don't care.
They can do whatever they want.’
Roseberry runs a smaller outfit than Jeff Young's, with a modest roster of artists, so the system is a little different to that of the bigger record companies.
She works closely with a single A&R Manager and writes weekly reports on everything he sees and hears — which includes the few dozen tapes arriving at Elektra's offices every week.
‘They all get listened to,’ she insists.
‘They're logged into a book just in case someone calls up’.
At CBS, where she worked for eight years, she remembers up to a hundred tapes pouring into the office each week.
‘In most record companies, it's the junior members of staff who listen to the tapes and then refer them upwards.
It's the same here, but they do all get listened to and they get a reply.
One or two are followed up, but 99% are just not good enough.’
Jeff Young agrees.
‘I've never signed a band on the basis of an unsolicited tape.’
EMI's senior A&R Manager, Dave Ambrose, adds his voice to the chorus.
His department receives ‘loads of unsolicited tapes, but they are generally very poor.
You know, the kid who's played it to his best friend who tells him it's great.’
Norman Jay, at Phonogram's Talkin' Loud, is adamant that sending tapes willy-nilly is a loser's game.
‘Sometimes, I might follow up a tape with a phone call.
But in the end, it's usually not what I'm looking for.’
This, of course, is of little comfort to the many thousands of aspiring musicians for whom sending in tapes seems like the only way to alert record companies to their music.
But Jay has some pearls of wisdom to offer.
‘If some mad rock'n'roll kid sends me a tape, he's got it all wrong.’
‘Rock'n'roll’, in case you had any doubts, is not Jay's bag.
‘I tell kids to do some research, find the label that's doing the stuff you do, a label that's sympathetic.
Don't just come to us because we can put your record out.
That's what knobs off the A&R man and makes him say, ‘I don't want to know’.'
He pauses, screws up his face and scratches his chin.
‘You know, I really think the direct approach is just wrong.
You need to engineer a situation where the A&R man comes to you.
Create a noise, and they'll come to you; they'll want to give you money.’
Jay returns to the ‘knob’ theme…
‘If you go cap in hand, they'll want to knob you off.’
Garrulous and expansive, Mick Clarke is firmly ensconced in a modest terraced house in West London where he is A&R Director of Virgin's 10 Records.
‘I remember the days,’ he recalls with an air of maturity which seems strangely at odds with his T-shirt and shorts, ‘I remember the days at Virgin when we had to see three people in the morning and three people in the afternoon, straight off the street.
They'd bring their tapes or their guitars and every day I'd have to sit and listen to music I didn't understand, music I hated, which is crazy.
I found myself in the ludicrous position of having to judge music I wasn't in a position to judge.
So I'd tell people that I shouldn't really be listening to them, and they'd get quite upset…
I was abused and almost attacked once.’
So we can take it that Mick is none too keen on an open door policy at 10 Records?
‘It's not that,’.
he replies in descending tones.
‘I understand that people have high hopes for their tapes and I do try to see people who really believe in their stuff and who try to convince me it's something I will want to hear.
But A&R is not just about sitting round listening to tapes.
Signing a band is just the start of it; you then have to develop the artists, decide on studios, producers, what track to release and what strategy to pursue.’
You might expect Ashley Newton to agree with Clarke.
After all, they are both on the same side.
Newton is head of A&R and joint MD at Circa Records, which has recently assumed responsibility for all of Virgin's subsidiary labels.
Newton's office looks like something straight out of the Conran shop.
And Newton himself exudes the confidence of someone who has just had a shave and put on a fresh shirt.
‘When I was at Island we had open days consisting of a succession of 40 minute meetings.
It's important to make your company accessible.
But an open door policy is simply not cost-effective — to have two or three staff spending all their time in meetings with bands, most of whom will not be appropriate.’
Like the rest of his peers, Newton's signings have come through his own personal network.
‘You simply can't ignore people you know who are tuned into what you want.
It's a pre-existing filtering process.’
So where does that leave the up-and-coming artist?
Dave Ambrose waxes philosophical.
‘There is no easy way.
It's a bitch, but that's the way it is.
Even so, if a band is good they will be signed.’
Do you you really think so?
‘Yes, if they play the right clubs, they will be heard.
A&R people are sharper and more aggressive than they used to be.
They are out there.’
Jeff Young is also confident that not too many acts slip through the net cast by his department.
‘What tends to happen,’ he explains, ‘is that bands which are good have also got a bit more wit and charm than the regular outfit.
Sometimes you may miss one but anyone who writes good songs will eventually come across someone who can help them — like a lawyer, a DJ or a producer.
Alternatively, they create a stir at a local level.
It's not easy to keep secrets.
We have a network of contacts across the country, and if we don't find the bands, we'll follow up on someone who has.’
A&R departments habitually shadow each other according to John Giacobbi, former BMG lawyer and now head of Entertainment Law Associates.
‘A&R departments are very narrow-minded’, he opines.
‘They're more worried about job security than anything else, so they won't take risks.
They follow each other with a lemming-like fervour.
But those who do take the risks often reap the rewards.’
He cites the example of The Gipsy Kings.
‘Nobody would take their first album.
Nobody wanted to stick their neck out.’
Other artists, like Terence Trent D'Arby, also come to mind.
Giacobbi's observations certainly apply to the bigger record companies where corporate paranoia is rife and it can be difficult to get something new or different through the system.
Smaller companies, however, often succeed because they are novel or distinctive.
Their reflexes also tend to be quicker, with decision-making resting in the hands of one person.
So it's the smaller independent companies who are now the crown jewels in many a major label's portfolio.
The majors have swept up the independents in licensing deals, or in Norman Jay's case, have started to employ a new breed of A&R man…
DJs with their ears to the ground.
‘The majors were like lumbering giants,’ Jay explains.
‘They wanted a part of the thriving cottage industry.
That's why I was head-hunted — in the hope I could do the same for them.’
This cottage industry, according to Jay, originated because kids (as he calls them) were alienated from the corporations.
‘Now you can't say that talent is being suffocated any more.
Many of the kids who are out there making music don't necessarily want a record deal.
They can press up their own records and sell them through local shops and radio.
They have less overheads, more knowledge of their local market and can achieve sales in the thousands.’
Nevertheless, these kids still approach the major record companies in search of greater fame and fortune than they could ever hope to achieve by themselves.
And it's the same kids who are complaining that the A&R system is not working for them, that A&R men don't understand.
Jay concedes the point.
‘I know.
I viewed A&R men the same way and when I met them I realised that they knew even less than I thought they knew.
But,’ Jay teeters on the brink of a revelation, ‘the A&R man doesn't have to know about your music; he has to know how the system works, how to get your material through the system.
You don't know that — he does.
He knows what budget he has got, when the record will be released and how…
It's got little to do with art.’
Jay comes from a different end of the spectrum to Dave Ambrose, but the two both like to talk nuts and bolts.
‘A good A&R man,’ Ambrose argues, ‘should not be a ‘muso’because that leads to musical snobbery.
A musical snob can miss the fact that people may actually want to buy a certain kind of thing.’
You mean miss out on the money?
‘Yes, that too.’
Thus speaks a man who has made his reputation in the pop genre.
But many of the A&R moguls interviewed here would be quick to disagree.
Mick Clarke, for instance, identifies two types of A&R folk.
‘The first,’ he explains, ‘sign acts that other people will like.
And the second, which includes me, sign acts they like.
I was, and still am, a musical snob.’
There is almost a temptation to accept Clarke's distinction.
But life is not that simple.
Sure, there are some A&R departments who seem to look at the money making potential first and last, and others with more artistic temperaments.
But A&R people do not stay A&R people for very long if they don't have an eye on both money and art simultaneously.
With the characteristic shrewdness of a former student of Chris Blackwell at Island, Ashley Newton finds a maxim to resolve the dilemma: ‘there is no necessary contradiction between commercialism and quality’.
Norman Jay is looking to discover ‘the fine line between putting out records I like and hoping they're what the public want.’
Even so, Jeff Young's men in grey suits screaming ‘bottom line!’ are never far from view.
‘That's why I talk straight to aspiring artists,’ Jay reveals.
‘I can explain what resources I've got and what I can do with those resources — which includes looking after the bands I already have on board.’
If that does not suffice, he offers some unconventional advice…
‘I say to kids, go down to the high street bank, see the bank manager and find out whether he'll lend you the fifty grand you need to make this record.
If he won't, then why the hell should we?
We only have so much money.’
According to Paul Morgan, ‘that happens more with the smaller labels.
Within reason,’ he explains, ‘I can sign as I please.
Decisions obviously have to go through the A&R Director, but I don't have accountants breathing down my neck’.
Accountants aside, what criteria does Ambrose apply when considering whether to sign an artist?
His response is really quite scientific.
Or is it?
‘The first criterion is whether they can sing.
Though it doesn't matter so much here, it's important in the USA because they take their music much more seriously.
The second is songwriting — although sometimes the odd band are not natural songwriters (…like U2) but they still sound fantastic.
Thirdly, attitude.
I like a bit of subversion — something that makes waves — although artists always smooth out in the end.’
Whilst I can readily see the subversion in a band like the Sex Pistols (whom Ambrose signed to EMI Publishing), what about Sigue Sigue Sputnik?
There was a fast buck if ever I saw one…
Ambrose replies in their defence.
‘They promised change, something new.
They were also one of the first bands to sample.’
Faced with the same question, Jay offers a physical analogy — or three.
‘If someone approaches me with a song, it's gotta hit me in the face.
It's gotta make me jump up and down and make me want to knock walls down to secure a deal.’
Jay, however, is less forthcoming when it comes to defining exactly what it is he and his colleagues at Talkin' Loud are looking for.
‘We know it when we see it’.
Mick Clarke's criteria are quite straightforward…
‘I sign stuff that I think is great and I don't give a shit what anybody else thinks.’
Even so, Clarke concedes that every A&R man would probably give that image of himself.
Songs are the starting point for Jeff Young.
‘A good song means something with a good hook and a good melody that you can remember.
Like it or not, ‘I Should Be So Lucky’ was a great song.
And if you like the songs, you may go see the band, unless it's a club thing or a one-off single.
Sometimes you might sign someone off a vibe — like Thousand Yard Stare.
They were a ball of energy — no tunes but a great vibey little turn.’
Vibey little turn?
You can tell he used to be a Radio 1 DJ.
Anyway, he continues…
‘Occasionally, however, you have to do your job, which is to provide the company with hits.
And that may sometimes involve signing someone you don't necessarily like.
But that's part of A&R — recognising that a group are going to be huge, biting the bullet and saying, ‘hey-ho…this is hits!'’
In the main, however, Young sees his job as finding ‘good’ acts.
Roughly translated, this means acts which have good attributes for their area of the market.
‘Take Marc Almond, for example.
He was never going to be Pavarotti, but there was something about him that made him great.’
Young has other criteria too.
‘Money isn't everything,’ he suggests.
‘Sometimes you might want to sign an act for chart profile or just credibility.’
Annie Roseberry lists her criteria with characteristic conviction.
‘I look for artists of exceptional talent, artists who are totally unique, irrespective of genre — and that's always been my A&R policy.
It's also important that you get on with people, that they're like-minded.
Basically, the things I've been involved in have always been different and I've been lucky.
But I think I have an ear for talent.’
Roseberry's musical background might go some way to explaining her ‘good ear’ as well as her sympathy for musicians trying to catch the attention of A&R departments.
…I feel very sorry for musicians,’ she pauses, ‘depending on my mood.
You have to have tact.
It's hard to tell people not to give up their day jobs — but a lot of the time that's exactly what you mean.’
Mick Clarke is not a musician…
‘I'm the world's worst pub singer,’ he concedes, but he shares Roseberry's compassion.
‘A&R men get a lot of stick and quite rightly.
It's the entertainment business and they have a lot of power which they can, and do, abuse.’
Clarke's harsh words will no doubt have resonance for many aspiring musicians to whom A&R is a common term of abuse, synonymous with unanswered telephone calls, unkept appointments and broken promises.
There surely are some people in A&R who wouldn't recognise talent if it hit them squarely between the eyes and others inebriated on their own power.
Equally, there are those who conduct their affairs with imagination and equanimity.
As Ashley Newton suggests, ‘You just can't generalise about A&R men.
There are all sorts of individuals with different styles and temperaments.’
All the same, it remains a business shrouded in misconceptions.
From the musicians point of view, the misconception often derives from an over-idealised vision.
A vision that A&R exists simply to recognise and reward talent.
In reality, few art forms are immune from the twin forces of politics and finance, and music certainly is not one of them.
In Norman Jay's words, ‘The record business is like any other business; it's there to sell product and make money…’
There's nothing worse than learning that an act has been signed somewhere else and you never even got a chance to hear them
They do all get listened to and they get a reply.
One or two are followed up, but 99% are just not good enough
I found myself in the ludicrous position of having to judge music I wasn't in a position to judge
What tends to happen is that bands which are good have also got a bit more wit and charm than the regular outfit
A good A&R man should not be a ‘muso’ because that leads to musical snobbery.
A musical snob can miss the fact that people may actually want to buy a certain kind of thing
A&R is a common term of abuse, synonymous with unanswered telephone calls, unkept appointments and broken promises
FeedBack Your Letters To The Editor
Amplify your views via 
ALRIGHT, SQUIER?
Dear Guitarist
My eldest son decided that he would like an electric guitar and amplifier for his 12th birthday.
As a non-musician who has been an avid devotee of rock music for 25 years, I was delighted with his decision and bought some guitar magazines, including your excellent publication, to get some idea of the cost involved.
It was not difficult to choose the Squier Hank Marvin guitar after reading the review in your March edition, and off we went to our local dealer to purchase this product.
However, disappointment set in when we ventured home to find that the packaging contained a guitar, a separate tremolo and guarantee which was to be mailed to the USA.
There was no lead to connect to the amplifier and no instruction booklet!
We contacted the dealer, who informed us that although cheaper guitars were sold with these items, the Fender Squier guitars were not.
I wrote to Fender at the Arbiter Group PLC enclosing a blank cheque and requesting a lead and an instruction booklet, but received a short note by return informing us that leads had to be purchased through their dealer network and instruction booklets were not supplied with this guitar.
Now, both my son and I are currently non-musicians who are keen to learn, but we don't know what effect the three knobs and the sliding lever have on the front of the instrument.
We don't know how to change the strings and my son hasn't got a clue who Hank Marvin is!
I would have thought that a large company like Fender could supply this information with their products as a matter of course, together with technical specifications and notes on the safe usage of this product — after all, I seem to recall several musicians being electrocuted when playing their electric guitars.
Last week I spent £20 on an electric kettle, which included a mains-connecting lead and comprehensive information regarding operation, safety procedures, a fault-finding guide and details of their other products.
It seems strange that I can spend ten times as much on a Fender product and be provided with none of this!
When it comes to trade-in time, I think we'll be looking at Gibson, Ibanez, Yamaha and the other competitors, excellent product though the Squier Hank Marvin is.
(You'll find it gets even better when you plug it in — Ed.)
→ I'm afraid that you are quite likely to find that many guitar manufacturers provide very little in terms of manuals with their instruments, Richard.
But I'm sure that the shop where you bought the guitar would be only too pleased to run through its essential workings with you, if there is anything which remains unclear.
On the subject of safety, don't worry; most cases of electrocution by guitar have been down to abusage rather than usage.
Good luck!
JACK GOLDER
Dear Guitarist
It was with much regret that I learned of the sad passing of Jack Golder (Shergold guitars) on 9th April ‘92, via the obituary published in your June issue.
It came as a shock as I had visited Jack two weeks earlier, having travelled down to Shergold Guitars in Romford to collect my Burns Marvin after Jack had refurbished it for me.
The man was a lively orator to the end, and an expert in his field.
He pointed out my Marvin as being a prototype he had made in 1964, and said how the beech neck on my model was later fitted with a trim, and how the position of the 3-way selector switch was altered from vertical to horizontal following a request from Hank himself, knowledge that had hitherto been unknown to me.
I treasure the photographs I took of Jack, and following its refurbishment the instrument sounds as good as the day he fashioned it all those years ago — a credit to the man and fitting epitaph to his expertise.
OLLIE HALSALL
Dear Guitarist
In the overall scheme of things, there are two albums which anyone who imagines they can play the guitar should hear.
One is ‘Are You Experienced’, the other is ‘Hold Your Fire’ by Patto (1971).
The guitarist was Peter ‘Ollie’ Halsall who, sadly, died a few weeks ago.
It is regrettable that your esteemed publication never got round to featuring him in his lifetime; perhaps you could put the record straight now.
What we should remember is that, using a white 1967 Gibson SG Custom (converted to suit his left-handed playing) Ollie actually invented the hammered-on, four finger runs we all take for granted today.
He developed this style in 1967 at Butlins (!) after strapping the guitar high up on his chest, out of necessity to alternate with playing the vibraphone (his first instrument).
This position virtually dictates a classical approach.
In 1971 and 1972 Halsall was the ‘guitarist's guitarist’ and many top names could be spotted standing open-mouthed in amazement amongst pub and club audiences.
He was, undoubtedly, the fastest player in the world and, more importantly, the most innovative, inventive and humourous.
The thing is, he was still playing, just as well, if not better, right up to the present (European and UK tour with Kevin Ayers band).
There are some absolute gems of solos scattered over Ayer's albums of the last 15 years — check out ‘Falling Up’ or ‘As Close As You Think’for the most recent.
We hear and read so much about the current crop of virtuosi, and the little credit given to the '60s and '70s innovators tends to be nostalgic and somewhat patronising.
I'm afraid the fact is that we had the finest guitarist in the world and we didn't recognise it.
I just dare anyone to transcribe the solos on Give It All Away — from ‘Hold Your Fire’ or Say What You Want from Michael D'Alberquerque's ‘Stalking The Sleeper’.
Ollie's final offering looks destined to be, typically, as an uncredited sideman on Ayers' ‘Still Life With Guitar’ on which he contributes one electric solo on the opening track and some acoustic bits and pieces including a self-penned instrumental.
Not an ideal epitaph but, ironically, rather fitting.
→ The news of Ollie Halsall's death reached us only recently and it is indeed sad that we have never run a feature on him.
Your letter stands as an eloquent obituary to a fine guitarist who I'm sure will be missed by all of us.
BLAZER TRAIL
Dear Guitarist
I recently purchased an Ibanez Blazer series guitar.
I would be grateful if you could tell me anything about the guitar.
The only information I can gather is that it is a custom guitar made in Japan, the serial number is B820170, the body and neck are made from maple, and it has a black scratchplate and three single coil pickups.
It also incorporates a gold bridge unit and volume/tone controls with Ibanez ‘Smooth Tuner II’ machineheads.
I paid £130 when I bought it second hand and would like to know if this is its true value.
→ Ibanez made Blazers between 1980–82 at the Fuji factory in Japan and the serial number would indicate that yours is from ‘82.
Basically, they were very good quality Fender Strat derivatives, available in most popular pickup combinations.
The price you paid for yours would sound about right.
BOSS GUITAR
Dear Guitarist
I'm writing with regard to a letter from Andy Mitchell from Ashington (Aug ‘92), who was looking for help in the preamp/processor direction, and was looking for the Eddie Van Halen, Brian May and the Nuno Bettencourt sounds for his processor.
I've also recently purchased an effects processor (BOSS SE50) and as most of the patches for the guitar were boring, I started experimenting with some of my own.
I'm also a big fan of the three guitarists mentioned above, and have given you what I think is a good Nuno Bettencourt sound on my processor…
Compressor: Sustain 30, Attack 65, Level 70.
Distortion: Turbo off, Drive 100, Level 45.
EQ: Low +4dB, Mid freq 4kHz, Mid +12dB, High +12dB, Level +10dB.
Noise Suppressor: Threshold 10 (or higher according to guitar and pickup used), Release 60 (see above), Level 100.
Reverb: Rev time 1.2s, Pre dly 12ms, LP filter thru, Level 20.
Line Driver: Mode 2.
Master: Level 65.
I find this also works well for Dave ‘The Snake’ Sabo stuff and as they both use ADA preamps, this would work for other heavy ADA type sounds.
I would also like to know how to get the Van Halen and Brian May sounds, and also the type of sound used on the first Extreme album, during the songs Watching, Waiting and Mutha as the distortion on both sounds smoother and less buzzy.
NOT!
THE RACK
Dear Guitarist
Regarding the letter in August requesting sounds for multi-effect processors.
Six months ago I would have loved to get some new sounds for my new rack from your magazine.
Having spent that time programming some sounds I feel proud of, I'm not so sure.
Two things enable you to create good programs: knowing what the sounds you hear are made up of and knowing how your rack works.
Collecting sounds from recordings or your head and asking yourself if they're warm or bright, distorted or not and what sort of delay or reverb they have.
Then get to know your effects individually.
Clear all the effects and try out the EQ, sweep the mid-frequencies and listen to how it changes the character of your instrument.
Get fluent with each effect — try too many at once and you'll lose touch with what's doing what.
Then see how they interact.
Editing a program you like is fine if you know what you're doing but it's too easy to spend hours fiddling with the EQ to get the distortion to sound just so, when getting the right room size is the element that makes the sound.
Let's not end up like the keyboard players who have to call in programmers.
Take advantage of the technology; don't let it take advantage of us.
Another small point: why doesn't someone make replacement bridge pieces for Strat bridges, for example, that have pickups built in (as in the Shadow)?
I'd love to add some acoustic sound into the mix with my MIDI guitar.
With all the solid-body acoustics for sale there must be a big market.
TRUSSED UP
Dear Guitarist
A few days ago I received some news which I think should be shared with all Warwick Bass owners.
My Warwick is currently being serviced by a luthier in Holbury who tells me that the truss rod needs replacing because it is beginning to shear.
Apparently, up until quite recently all Warwick basses were made with aluminium truss rods which obviously are not as strong as steel ones and are liable to break after being adjusted a few times.
Once broken, they can only be removed by cutting through the fingerboard, a painful and delicate process which I for one would not want to see.
The luthier, Tony Rockett attempted to track down a new steel rod for my bass, only to discover that nobody in this country supplies Warwick spares.
After being shunted from the Bass Centre to Zildjian to Sound Control in Scotland (the present dealers) he was given the number of Warwick in Germany.
At this point he said, quite rightly, ‘Sod this for a lark!’ and is now planning to have a batch of tensile steel rods made up by a colleague who owns an engineering firm.
I find it appalling that Warwick, who are now well established in this country, are not apparently concerned with after sales service to the extent that it is at the moment impossible to get spare parts without sending off to Germany.
I believe Warwick changed over to using steel truss rods about eight or nine months ago but I would urge owners to have their basses checked as soon as possible, and would appreciate some kind of response from Warwick as to the precise situation.
→ As Warwick are without an official distributor in the UK at present, we contacted the company for their comments.
They say the distributorship situation will be resolved soon, ensuring that not only the basses but the new Wamp bass amps, and of course, the associated spares will be available in the UK.
In the meantime, Dr Robert's locum says Warwick truss rods were indeed made from aluminium, and the problems mentioned in John's letter stem from a particular quirk concerning the dual-action system on these basses.
When making alignment adjustments, Warwick users occasionally tend to over-tighten the rod in order to make the neck as straight as possible.
Aluminium, though usefully strong and light, is not very resilient to the resulting shear forces from this situation, so don't overdo it with the adjustment; if it shears, then it is down to major surgery to remove it.
To get more adjustment, the trick is to slacken the truss rod right off, then turn the bass upside down, and, gently tapping the headstock on a flat surface if necessary, drop the truss rod out.
After turning it through 180 degrees, re-install it to give increased adjustment capability in the required direction.
I personally wouldn't regard having to contact Germany for spares as the end of the world, and have always found Warwick to be extremely helpful in such circumstances.
Write to them at PO Box 50, D-8557, Eggolsheim, Germany, for spares or info.
The equally helpful Bass Centre (071 265 1567) say that they carry suitable spares and can organise remedies for such ailments, too, so nil desperandum,Warwickists…
PHOTON ENQUIRY
Dear Guitarist
Can you give me any information, including availability and cost, of the Photon guitar synthesiser which is used to great effect by John McLauglin but which I have never seen advertised.
I was impressed with the apparent lack of gadgetry on John's nylon acoustic guitar and would like to achieve similar access to MIDI with my Martin D19 without damage and ugly black boxes etc.
If the Photon option is unrealistic on a budget can you suggest any other way I can access MIDI functionality with my acoustic.
I have a Roland U220 which would give me the sounds I want although I know it would not give me the great note-sequence loops which McLaughlin uses so beautifully.
→ The Photon MIDI converter uses infra-red optical technology and promises accurate tracking and fast implementation for use with nylon or steel strung guitars.
We don't know of a UK distributor, but Photon is available in the USA via Phi Technologies, Box 100087, Nashville, TN 37210.
ARE YOU BEING SERVED?
Dear Guitarist
I feel compelled to write after spending almost two annoying and frustrating hours browsing round music shops in the ‘World Famous Tin Pan Alley’(unfortunately there's no sarcasm key on this word processor), otherwise known as Denmark Street in London.
I know we as a nation are not renowned for our ability to serve but the general level of indifference, apathy and downright rudeness I encountered made even me, a cynical bastard at the best of times, wince.
In one shop I virtually had to drag a sales assistant away from his pressing chat with a colleague to help me.
Then it transpired the guitar I wanted to try didn't have a tremolo bar so he went off to find one.
After five minutes patiently waiting I noticed that he had been distracted on his way back by a friend behind the counter.
‘Er…sorry mate…
Couldn't find it,’ was his eloquent reply.
In another store one sales assistant stopped short of calling me stupid when I commented that a certain guitar wasn't to my taste and a bit cheap-looking.
‘Well you'll have to change your attitude a bit,’ was his verdict, and I thought taste was meant to be subjective?
I could go on but I'm sure you've got the drift and I'm sure fellow readers have been there before.
It pains me to say it but the difference in attitude between guitar shops and their staff here and in the USA is like night and day.
I have been given free catalogues, invited to try any guitar I wished — not just the cheapo imports either but vintage stuff too — actually got useful information from people who, without exception, seem to be knowledgeable and often talented players, and generally made to feel welcome.
I mean, I ended up staying a month at some bloke's house after I went in for a pack of strings!
(Now that's what I call after sales service!— Ed.)
Okay, so the motives for such friendliness are often just dollars and cents, but at least they treat you like they care.
To cut a long story short, next time music retailers start moaning about the recession why don't they take a good look in the mirror and ask themselves who actually feeds them?
You shouldn't be surprised by good service; you should expect it.
→ We receive quite a few letters from people who have suffered from the indifferent attitude which seems to prevail in many music shops.
It's difficult to know exactly where to lay the blame.
Lack of training?
Bad management?
Both could be contributory factors.
The one thing that remains within your control is to take your business elsewhere; if the tills stop ringing in the shops responsible, maybe things will change…
SOUND PRINCIPLES
Dear Guitarist
Well, well, well you've finally done it; you've actually forced a letter out of me.
Over the last few months I've read with some considerable interest and humour all the back-biting and jibing from the Pittman and Peavey camps.
Although it's been quite humorous in part I find it also rather sad.
With the recent review of the Carlton combo it seems to many of us out here that you've started to wake up.
Manufacturers will sell us fresh air if they can make money out of it — the new Scoop guitar is a point in fact.
And now we have the solid-state valve complete with LED to give us that warm glowing feeling!
It may be that the amp sounds okay but do they really need an LED for goodness sake?
I despair, I really do.
I mentioned the review to a friend of mine who was convinced it was an April fool joke.
We are customers of a massive industry trying to make money and I understand that for some it's just staying in business that counts.
As fashion dictates what a lot of the manufacturers make and then try and sell to Joe Public, I suppose we're all guilty of fuelling this aspect of guitar/amp and gadget marketing.
I for one have formal qualifications in electronics and know when the wool's being pulled, but others don't and that's your job.
But how about coming clean?
The Smooth Tube does not have to be in a lookalike packet and neither does it need an LED.
What we have here is the ‘King's new clothes syndrome’ yet again.
Come on guys, get responsible: this is not the first time the strong smell of bullshit has wafted through the air.
Time and time again your average punter gets ripped off by some incompetent half-wit whose main aim seems to be to sell as many boxes as he or she can.
We have to be able to trust someone out there, don't we?
→ I don't think that our look at the Carlton Combo was anything other than a fair, unbiased review of a new product which just happens to incorporate a different technology along the way.
We are certainly not going to damn a feature such as the Smooth Tube for being gimmicky just because it is non-traditional.
The bottom line is, does the amp work?
Does it sound good?
After that, it is up to the individual to judge for himself.
LEVIN LOVER
Dear Guitarist
I am prompted to write after reading Rick Batey's article on the Martin factory and its historian Mike Longworth.
It is fairly well known that Martin bought the Swedish Levin Guitar factory in the 1970s and that Levin had ceased trading by the end of that decade.
The big Levin ‘Goliath’ is thought by many to be equal to Martin's Dreadnought in sweetness, tonality, power and playability, possessing its own ‘voice’and with volume to spare.
At a time when Martins were judged by musicians to be rather leaden and toneless, their takeover of Levin would appear to be a feature of commercial paranoia, since the Goliath series were made from beautifully matched woods, had enviable straight spruce tops, bound necks and a high standard of finish.
Maybe it's the fact that the Goliath retailed at around £60 with a plywood case that made its demise inevitable, even without the attentions of C.F.Martin.
Now that pre-Martin Levins are being rediscovered, as are their players (Folk Roots' top 30 features two re-released CDs of the Incredible String Band's early albums), Goliaths are presently pushing a £500 asking price and will certainly appreciate as the woods from which they were crafted disappear and their distinct acoustic tone becomes more eagerly sought by the Washburn weary and the Takamine troubadours.
The Guitar Guru's Guide tells us Levin made archtops and a cutaway model; the Ultimate Guitar Book only adds to the enigma by adding nothing new.
I wonder if any of your staff have anything further on this marque, known in the USA as ‘Goya’.
I have often wondered if Levin made a 12-string guitar and if so, where I could lay my hands on one.
→ We've drawn a blank on the Levin front, I'm afraid, Mick.
If anyone has any information that could help, we'll be glad to pass it on.
INDEPENDENTS DAZE
Dear Guitarist
Your August issue was the first of your magazines I have read in three years or so and what an improvement!
I remember abandoning the magazine then as increasing attention was paid to '60s guitar heroes, MOR supergroups and ultra-fast heavy metal people with ever more widdly names.
But August ‘92, the sun shining in London and who should I find in your pages?
Guy Chadwick!
The Stairs!
Amazing!
I read the letters page and find out you have interviewed Carter USM!
Outrageous!
Who else have I missed?
I have nothing against yesterday's guitar heroes, indeed it was the Iommi article that caused me to buy your magazine again, but whoever it was in your office who opened up a copy of NME and stuck a pin in it should be encouraged to do so again.
After the Chadwick interview it seems only fair to suggest a double interview with Terry Bickers and Bic Hayes from the awe-inspiring Levitation…
And how can you have missed the influence of Bob Mould, ex of Hüsker Dü, or the Butthole Surfers or the Pixies?
And, seeing as we've skipped the Atlantic, let's see some of the Seattle bands making waves over here…
This music is indeed the food of love and such coverage shall bear the most exceptional fruit, especially for your sales figures.
→ It seems to me, Dave, that you've been labouring under a bit of a misapprehension.
Our interview policy excludes no-one, and our pages have never been dominated by any one style.
Jazzers, thrashers, funkers and bluesers have always co-existed with (your own preference, it would seem)‘alternative’ rock guitarists.
Since the beginning of your self-imposed exile we've spoken to: Throwing Muses, Carter, The Wedding Present, The Icicle Works, That Petrol Emotion, Terry Bickers (July ‘91 —four pages , dishing all the dirt on The House Of Love MkI), Ocean Colour Scene, Spiritualised, Green On Red, The Pale Saints, Senseless Things, Lush, The Boo Radleys, The Blue Aeroplanes, The Happy Mondays, REM, Curve…
The list goes on.
Neither is this the sort of token, news-style coverage offered by some other magazines.
When you see a band's name on our cover you know they'll get at least a page, and usually a great deal more.
On a different point, you'd do well not to dismiss the guitarists of the sixties and seventies quite so readily.
Apart from their continuing relevance in their own right, players like Richard Thompson, Pete Townshend, Mick Ronson, Roger McGuinn, Robert Quine and Tom Verlaine are the ‘indie’ guitar hero's guitar heroes, and as such demand your attention.
We keep an open mind, so why don't you?
But who exactly is this ‘Bob Mould’ character of whom you speak?
techniques
PHIL HILBORNE Solo Analysis TEARS IN THE RAIN — JOE SATRIANI
Scales
This solo uses one scale type throughout:
A Harmonic minor scale 
Performance Notes
1)
This transcription contains the whole of the solo acoustic track Tears In The Rain .
This piece essentially consists of a series of arpeggios derived from the A harmonic minor scale, and it's a very good example of Joe's inventive approach to scale harmonisation and chordal voice-leading.
2)
Technically, this one can be played using either pick or fingerstyle, although I think that Joe used a pick on the record.
3)
The phrasing in this piece should be treated freely throughout.
Listen to the track and you can hear the way Joe speeds up, slows down and pauses here and there.
All this goes towards making the tune a musical, rather than purely mechanical, exercise.
4)
In bars 11–12, the root note of the Am add 11 chord should be played not at the 7th fret of the D string, as in the start of the piece, but as an open A string.
5)
The best way to approach any chord changes you might find difficult is to avoid attempting to fully trigger each chord before starting to pick the notes.
Instead, place your fingers on each note in the order that you intend to pick them; in other words, the full voicing of each chord will only be complete as you play the final, highest note.
6)
This solo was played on a Gibson Chet Atkins nylon-strung guitar, make unknown, and was probably recorded by using a combination of mic and DI signal.
My thanks for suggesting this month's solo go to Mr. B. Searles from Cork in Ireland.
A couple of sets of Scalar strings, courtesy of Selectron, will be winging their way to you soon!
Taken from Joe Satriani album ‘The Extremist’.
Reproduced by kind permission of Sony Music Publishing, 17/19 Soho Square, London, W1V 6HE.
HILBORNE'S Rock Guitar DOUBLE STOPS PART II
This month we're looking further into playing applications for double stops.
All the examples continue the work we began last month by featuring double stops that have been derived from chords.
Example 1 shows an idea centered around an A dominant chord.
In this, the double stops are a mixture of chord tones (from A7 — A, C♯, E, G), extensions to the chord (♭3, 6th, 4th etc.) and chromatically approached chord tones.
After you've played through this example, make sure that you understand both how and why it works by comparing the notes in the phrase to the key centre of A. To make this really easy, I have written the numbers of the intervals involved underneath the tablature notation!
Example 2 deals with an approach to playing static double stops over chord changes.
Again, to do this effectively you need to think of how the intervals relate to the accompanying harmony.
In the example I've shown a simple three chord B dorian progression (Bm, A, E) with each of the chords followed by a couple of double stops.
The best way to hear this example is to tape the chords, and then to play the double stops against them.
After you have played through this example, it's essential that you follow up by experimenting with other chord and interval types.
This technique of thinking of how the notes relate to chords is an extremely important improvising and compositional skill, and you'll find that perseverance produces results that are well worth the effort.
Examples 3, 4 and 5 show three different two-hand tapping approaches.
Example 3 is a phrase played in 4ths.
The tapping should be performed with the ball , not the tip, of whichever right-hand finger you find most comfortable.
Then, experiment with other intervals on all of the remaining pairs of strings.
Sounds good, doesn't it?
Who needs a harmoniser?
Examples 4 and 5 both feature tapping applied to a basic I-IV-II-III progression in the key of C: that is, Cmaj7, Fmaj7, Dm7 and Em7.
The first approach, shown in 4, arpeggiates the progression using a combination of left hand only hammer-ons and right hand taps.
Example 5, meanwhile, uses tapped and left-hand only double stops.
Be warned; as you play through these examples you may get some ‘back-ring’ from the strings below your fretting hand.
If you do, then you may wish to dampen the open strings by wrapping a cloth or a piece of elastic around the neck, close to the nut.
As always, don't forget to experiment with your own ideas, and try to work what you've learned into your own playing style.
Good luck, and see you next month…
MICHAEL FATH Technique As A Result Of Harmony THE SUSPENDED SECOND
A suspended second (or ‘sus 2’) chord is one in which the major or minor 3rd is replaced by the second to create a more unfinished, open, suspended feel.
Example 1 gives you three inversions of an Asus2 (A 1st, B 2nd and E 5th).
Examples 2 and 3 are barre forms of the same Asus2.
(Note that an Asus2 has the note A as the root, B as the second and E as the fifth; an Esus4 chord, on the other hand, has E as the root, A as the sus4 and B as the fifth.)
Example 4 comprises three inversions of Asus2 in a more open, or ‘spread’ triad arrangement.
These notes should be picked with a hybrid picking technique.
Example 5 is an arpeggio of an Asus2 chord, played with a sweep technique, that covers a full two octaves.
Example 6 is another arpeggio that utilises sweep techniques, but this time in conjunction with tapping.
If you run into any confusion, remember that your upstroke will occur on the B string on the descent.
To sum up, suspensions can be a whole lot of fun.
Anywhere you have a major or minor triad, practise turning them into sus2 chords by the formula outlined here.
Guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix, Alex Lifeson and many others would often use these kinds of substitutions to create their own distinctive sounds.
Just try using them instead of your regular chords wherever you feel like it, and you might be pleasantly surprised.
Remember — if it sounds right, it is right!
GERRY HOGAN Rockabilly'n'Country Licks MORE RACING WITH THE DEVIL
This month we've got the second of Cliff Gallup's exciting solos from Race With The Devil , recorded in 1956, when he was a member of Eugene Vincent Craddock's Blue Caps (yes, that's Gene Vincent!)
Incidentally, if you're stuck without a copy of this song, it's available on a CD released in 1988, a compilation of some twenty or so of Gene's recorded tracks in the ‘Rock And Roll Masters’ series from EMI Records, catalogue number CDP 7903282.
The sleeve notes (if they're still called that in the compact disc age) give some useful information about the personnel used during the recording sessions.
I was particularly interested to learn that Buck Owens played rhythm guitar on two tracks,Lotta Lovin ’ and Rollin' Danny .
These were recorded at the Capitol Tower in Hollywood, where Buck was a session guitarist prior to the blossoming of his own career in the early '60s.
The first solo, tabbed last month, was in the key of E. This second solo takes off in the key of F, although the two-note pickup is played over the last beat of the final bar of E.
Playing hints:
1)
If you stick to a four-string, F-chord position with your fretting hand, you won't go far wrong for most of the solo.
2)
In bar 3, Cliff moves to fret 13 for an F note an octave up.
He misses it the first time, but I've written it exactly like he played it, because it doesn't really sound too bad!
Use finger 3 or 4 for these two notes up the neck.
3)
As in all previous Cliff Gallup tabs we've covered, you'll notice how he ‘bends into’ many notes from below, using his tremolo arm.
If you haven't got a tremolo arm fitted on your guitar, then you can simulate the effect by playing one fret down and using a normal ‘bend up’ into the required note.
The only exception here is the bend-up to the C note at the end of bar 4; if you don't have a tremolo, play a B note at fret 4 on the third string, and bend that up.
Mind you, the two-note, fifth-interval bends in bars 5, 6 and 7 are definitely not easy to simulate without a tremolo arm, so the best of luck to you!
For the next month or two we'll be giving Cliff a bit of a rest.
Instead, I'll be taking up the ideas of Mr. Peter A. Fletcher and others for some more modern rock'n'roll and country licks.
See you then…
ALAN LIMBRICK Pentatonics INTERVAL SKIPS
This month we're going to look at another useful way of practising Pentatonic scales using ‘interval skips’.
If you play each note of the Pentatonic scale followed by a note a third higher (when ascending) or a third lower (when descending), what you are in fact doing is playing ‘third interval skips’.
Or, to put it another way, you're playing every other note in the scale.
For example, if we take an A Minor Pentatonic (which comprises the notes A, C, D, E and G), then the ascending third interval skips are A-D, C-E, D-G, E-A and G-C, while the descending equivalents are A-E, G-D, E-C, D-A and C-G.
So, try practising spelling out each of the five Pentatonic scale patterns in A minor using third interval skips.
Play up and down each scale pattern covering all six strings as in Example 1.
It's best to try to memorise all this in small sections — say, six to eight notes at a time — until you can play each complete scale pattern ascending and descending in thirds in time with a metronome.
Now, if you look at Example 2, you'll see that I've written out the same scale pattern in thirds.
The difference is that this time I want you to play each third as a two-note chord, or ‘diad’.
Now you should be able to see that playing Pentatonic scales in thirds actually produces a situation where four out of the five notes of the scale produce perfect 4th intervals.
In A Minor Pentatonic, the exception is C-E, which gives you a major third in place of a fourth.
Your assignment for this month is, firstly, to practise all five shapes in third interval skips as in Example 1, and secondly to practise all five shapes in fourths as in the following Examples 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.
Next month we'll take a look at various riffs and melodies using Pentatonic scales in fourths — so see you then.
ADRIAN INGRAM From Rock to Jazz IMPROVISING THROUGH THE CHANGES IV: CHROMATIC APPROACH NOTES
In our previous ‘From Rock to Jazz’ column, we found out how common notes can be used to create melodic lines which outline different chords, by suggestion, and connect different chords, by intervallic interchange.
Now, a number of notes will be common to two adjacent chords.
However, it's the notes in the former chord which by intervallic interchange become chromatic notes in the latter chord, and it's this approach which produces the most effective results.
As we've said before, one of the basic ingredients of jazz improvisation is the manipulation of tension and release, thereby adding interest to a melodic line.
So, it's strongly recommended that you cultivate the use of chromatic notes which resolve to diatonic ones, both scalic and chordal.
Because chromatic notes have this power to create tension as they approach points of resolution, they are frequently used by improvisors to highlight the transition between two adjacent chords.
You only have to study the improvisations of musicians like Charlie Parker, Clifford Brown and John Coltrane to discover an abundance of chromatic tension and resolution points.
Using the intervallic interchange exercise from last month's article — Gmaj7 to Ebmaj7th — I have written out four short melodic phrases which make use of chromatic approach notes as a means of connecting this single chord change.
In Examples 1 and 2, the 3rd in G major (B) is treated as the ♯5th in Eb.
This then resolves by dropping a semitone down, from B to Bb, to become the 5th in Eb.
In Examples 3 and 4, the 6th in G major — the note E — falls by a semitone to become the root of Ebmaj7th.
JOHN CURRIE Bass Analysis SIMPLY SHAUN
Since the interview with Shaun Ward in the April ‘92 issue, and the recent huge success of Simply Red's ‘Stars’ album and tour, I expected (and thankfully received!) a fair few requests for a closer examination of Shaun's playing.
The lucky winner of this month's set of Elite strings is Trevor Raggatt of Egham, who picked out She's Got It Bad from ‘Stars’ as being worthy of analysis, although there's plenty of other good stuff to choose from (the straight funk of Thrill Me and Freedom , the reggae groove of Model , the relative simplicity of Babies and the very Jamerson-influenced bass on Fall ).
The whole feel of the song She's Got It Bad is very obviously a nod in James Brown's direction, and Shaun's bassline is a vital part of this.
On most of the album Shaun puts his fingerstyle technique to good use on his Warwick five-string, but this track sounds to me suspiciously like he's using his ‘68 Fender Jazz Bass with both pickups full on.
That's what I would use, anyway!
Notes
1)
The chord types here are basically dominant sevenths (root, major 3rd, 5th and ♭7th) and Shaun goes for notes from the corresponding mixolydian mode in each case.
For example, E7 (E, G♯, B, D) will have E mixolydian (E, F♯, G♯, A, B, C♯, D) on the relevant mode.
Note the tension produced by holding on to the passing note of A♯ in bars 12 and 16, and the ‘heavy’ sound of the minor 3rd (G natural) against the E7 chord in bar 18, anticipating the ♭7th of the A7 to follow.
2)
From bar 11 to bar 18 we have one definite, set groove, then the pattern changes for the A7, E7 and G7 chords to a principal phrase containing root, ♭7th, 4th and 5th.
For example, in the A7 section the bassline uses the notes A, G, D and E.
3)
If you can get hold of a copy of the record, check out the last section of the song and see how the whole sequence is moved up a fourth, becoming A7, D7, G7 and C7, into the fade of A7 and D7.
See you later…
SHE'S GOT IT BAD
© 1991, reproduced by kind permission of So What Ltd/EMI Songs Ltd, London, WC2H 0EA.
SING A SONG
© 1975, EMI Blackwood Music Inc, USA.
Reproduced by kind permission of EMI Songs Ltd, London, WC2H 0EA.
JOE HUBBARD'S Bass On Top DEVELOPMENT OF A GROOVE — PART V
After exploring last month's triplet combinations, you'll now be aware that there are several ways to apply the shuffle groove.
Many players totally ignore the triplet subdivision approach, and end up developing their sense of time only in relation to eighths and sixteenth grooves.
Though I didn't cover it last month, the triplet subdivision can apply to ballads.
With ballads, it's important to find the right balance between simplicity and activity.
If a line is too basic and lacks interest, you run the risk of becoming boring; if your playing is too busy, on the other hand, you're in danger of forgetting that you're accompanying rather than soloing.
The great thing about subdividing in triplets during ballads is that your fills won't get in the way of anything else.
Also, keeping the sound of the triplet in mind while playing will help prevent your dragging the tempo while playing ordinary whole and half notes.
But ultimately, when playing any groove, never lose sight of the song, and try to add an expression of joy and celebration to what you are playing.
I'm going to leave you with four grooves that include some of the triplet applications we've been taking about.
Groove 1 is an excerpt from Donald Fagen's track Ruby Baby played by Anthony Jackson.
This groove is played with a swing eighth note feel — great line, great track, great album.
Groove 2 is a Yellowjackets track called Monmouth College Fight Song .
This has an uptempo, hard-driving type of quarter note triplet feel.
This feel works great for rock shuffles.
Groove 3 is from a Mike Stern track called Loose Ends off his ‘Jigsaw’ album.
The rhythm section of Jeff Andrews and Dennis Chambers are just killin' this tune; it's a half time triplet groove, and be sure to practise this in all keys.
Groove 4 is a James Jamerson bass line that wasn't in the Jamerson book.
It's a great melodic motif that moves through a I-VI-II-V progression — a serious R&B ballad.
A good way of practising would be to take all these examples through all the keys.
Along with all these grooves I've written some accompanying drum machine patterns, but do try to get together with a real drummer or, better still, a number of different drummers.
It'll do wonders for your sense of cooperation and teamwork!
TONY MUSCHAMP'S Bass Space THE HARMONIC MINOR
Over the last few issues we've been focusing on minor scales and their application.
In this month's article, I'd like to concentrate on the harmony relating to the harmonic minor scale.
First of all, let's review the construction of this scale…
This scale is a little unusual-sounding, due to the 5th, 6th, 7th and octave intervals.
This harmonic minor scale plays a major role within western music, and there are a number of useful things which are derived from it.
Let's take a look at the scale harmonised in triads…
Try practising this one slowly at first, and then gradually increase your metronome setting, playing this exercise both horizontally and vertically.
Ideally, you'll try to absorb all the information here by applying it to all keys.
In addition, you'll find this exercise is good for your alternate plucking and for building up both your left and right hand techniques.
Finally, let's look at the harmonic minor scale harmonised in seventh chords…
This example is pretty hard to learn by heart and the fingering isn't easy either, so be patient, and take it slowly.
Try to memorise the harmony that these two exercises create: that is, in triads, the minor, diminished, augmented, minor, major, major and diminished; and in seventh chords the minor, the major 7th, the minor 7b5, the major 7♯5, the minor 7, the dominant 7, the major 7 and the diminished 7.
The best thing would be for you to write out all the harmonies, in every key, making sure that you put in all the correct sharps and flats.
This is quite a challenging assignment, but you'll find it worth the effort.
The only real way to improve your playing and your musicianship is to take on things that you find difficult.
So, ‘til later, happy practising!
ESMOND SELWYN Jazz Techniques CHORD CONCEPTS
In this month's column we're taking a close look at jazz chord concepts.
A feature of the jazz chord is that it is often conceived as a small and highly mobile unit.
Unlike basic chords and barre chords — usually cumbersome, and full of note duplication — the jazz chord can be small and yet densely packed with information.
To illustrate this, here's a II/V sequence down a cycle of 4ths, dealing with one string set at a time.
This should have the effect of making you more register-conscious (as if you were playing a piano) when dealing with chords, and it should also help to demystify those hazy lower-string regions which all too many guitarists are inclined to avoid.
Make sure that you play each chord as a single unit, and don't drag the plectrum; also make sure that the right hand is in control at all times, especially on the middle and lower regions.
And what are the applications of this sort of progression?
Absolutely endless!
Introductions, endings, interludes, modulations and, above all, expanded reference!
Once you feel on top of this example sequence, experiment and find your own applications.